WT03-B05-1IA087-000634-B037-294http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it04.html 205.156.212.5 19970122024535 text/html 171634HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:43:16 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:28 GMTContent-length: 171446Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it04.html Sample Issue Copyright THE EXPORTER via NewsNet January 1, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES NOBODY ASKED ME BUT Governments Have Lost Control of International Trade (544 words) Europe 1992: Direction (800 words) REGULATORY UPDATE Relaxing Export Controls (1044 words) 1992 and Technology Transfer (985 words) Background (1378 words) National Institute of Standards (527 words) Antiboycott Provision (108 words) Texas Exporter Penalized (141 words) Mitsubishi Subsidiary (340 words) Massachusetts Interior Designer and Purchaser (124 words) New Jersey Subsidiary of Korean Firm (124 words) California Manufacturer and Its Foreign Sales Office (157 words) Virginia Bank (101 words) Illinois Bank (255 words) TRADE FINANCE A Survey of Export Finance Services (1460 words) The Roundtable On Credit Conditions (528 words) Ivory Coast (1671 words) EXPORT DEVELOPMENT State Export Development Agencies (1057 words) Export Development, Southern-Style (254 words) The Services Trade Deficit (805 words) Governors Create Export Database (259 words) New for Exporters (81 words) Country Forecasts (110 words) EDI Handbook - Europe (56 words) International Credit Management (66 words) Logistics Software (63 words) Marketing in Spain (57 words) White Paper on Japanese Trade (71 words) Seminars (75 words) Third Party Logistics (124 words) Transportation Marketing (125 words) World Trade Institute: Upcoming Events (140 words) Services (87 words) Online Trade Info (79 words) Soviet Translation Services (91 words) Trade Shows (68 words) Export '90, Seattle (163 words) Expo Tech '90 (84 words) Freight '90 (67 words) COMPUTERIZATION EDIA - 21st Conference (1007 words) EDI and Third Party Managers (618 words) EDI Standards (183 words) 1992 Technical Help To Exporters (519 words) Standards Europe (335 words) Standards Development In The European Community (1092 words) International Standardization and EC 1992 (163 words) Transparency of EC Commission and CEN/CENELEC (223 words) Testing and Certification (897 words) 1992 Center in the U.S. (315 words) MARKETS AND MARKETING Predex Forecast (598 words) Political Risk Letter (706 words) Bulgaria-Slow Economic Reform (169 words) Brazil-Collor Slight Favorite (176 words) China-Business Conditions Decline (238 words) Shipping Regulations (380 words) The Impact of the 1984 Act on the International Shipping Industry (813 words) Industry Views on the 1984 Shipping Act (888 words) Summaries of Supplementary Reports (608 words) CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Governments Have Lost Control of International TradeInternational trade is growing twice as fast as mostcountries domestic GNP. Eastern Europe is rapidly movingtoward a market economy. Communications networks are therailroads of the future; allowing value-added transactions tomove across borders unmeasured, and unrecorded.Commerce Secretary Mosbacher has initiated a major policychange to reduce the disincentives to export, created by anexport control policy which is out of touch with commercialreality.  It is not a criticism that the change will be toolittle too late, but the commercial reality is that theEuropean firms investing in Eastern Europe are not going tocompete in the marketplace with one hand tied behind theirback because of outdated concepts of export and technologytransfer controls.  Nor are they going to wait around for theUS government to give them permission.Unless something changes Eastern Europe's direction (liketanks in Tiananmen Square), economic activity will increase.Eastern European countries are restricting exports ofsubsidized consumer goods because it pays for an individualto drive across a border to sell the goods for hard currency.Small frequent export transactions are taking place becausehuman capital is available, even if financial capital is inshort supply.To illustrate the amazing pace of change in Eastern Europe,please note the following message from the new leadership inEast Germany (as quoted in a recent article by Craig Whitneyof the New York Times).  According to Mr. Gregory Gysi, thenew head of the East German Communist Party:"I have never been in America in my life, but I think it is acountry that should not give up its responsibility forEurope.  If the continued independence of the GermanDemocratic Republic is in the interests of stability inEurope, then you should think about whether you want to leavehelp for the G.D.R. up to a single neighbor country, andthereby create dependency, or whether it wouldn't be betterto share the responsibility, to prevent the re-emergence ofGreater Germany,"Referring to the possibility of unification, he added: "Butif so, then it should happen quickly-and simply."Last June, 80 Socialist parties from around the world votedin conference to reject socialism and adopt a system based onmarket forces.  And barely six months later, the head of theEast German Communist party calls on the US to help completethe post war process. The appeal of Eastern Europe is thatthey want to buy what we have to sell, and despite a shortageof hard currency they will take the necessary steps,including mass emigration to obtain it.Correction: The SED filing minimum will go to $2,500 when thefinal rule is published in the Federal Register.Our early information that the process of comments wasexpected to be complete by January 1 was incorrect. Look fora final rule with implementation at the earliest April1st.  In the meantime, all export shipments where oneSchedule B number has a value greater than $1,500 requiresthe filing of a completed Shipper's Export Declaration.Housekeeping: Federal Register Notices usually appearingmonthly will reappear next month. "More than You Ever Wantedto Know About Letters of Credit" is also scheduled toreappear next month.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Europe 1992: DirectionAdvisory Committee ReportThe following is an abstract of the executive summary of theEurope 1992 report of the Advisory Committee for Trade Policyand Negotiations (ACTPN).Executive SummaryThe European Community's program to create a single,integrated market by the end of 1992 promises substantialbenefits to U.S. companies.  The program also presentsimportant challenges to the international trading systemwhose current rules do not adequately address the intenselycompetitive conditions of global markets.  The U.S.government and the private sector have an interest in meetingthese challenges by seeking solutions to issues that nowserve to increase bilateral trade tensions.The Advisory Committee for Trade Policy and Negotiations(ACTPN) has identified six such issues in which the U.S. hasa significant interest in influencing the direction ofchange.  The ACTPN has also recommended actions the U.S.government and the private sector need to take to addresscurrent bilateral concerns.  In brief, the issues andrecommendations are:Rules of Origin-The U.S. government needs to continue toapply pressure on the EC to provide greater transparency,clarity, and predictability in Community rule-making andadministration; to eliminate the use of local content insettlements of antidumping charges; and to support the U.S.goal within the Uruguay Round to reach a multilateraldiscipline governing the rules of origin.The private sector needs to build support among U.S.companies for a harmonized system for determining origin; andto establish a dialogue with companies in Europe aimed atreducing the mutual reliance on trade law to restrict marketaccess.Public Procurement-The U.S. government needs to press the ECto extend fully competitive procedures for suppliers of non-EC products; to seek time limits and conditions under which aMember State may use "industrial adaptation" to postponemarket-opening changes; to allocate additional resources tothe GATT government procurement negotiations on the excludedsectors; and to use the renegotiation of bilateral defenseagreements with the EC as leverage to achieve access to theCommunity's largest areas of government procurement.The private sector needs to press for the formulation andacceptance of an effective remedies proposal providingprotection for injured suppliers; and to seek to influencethe ways in which procuring entities in Europe apply the 50%value-added requirement and establish criteria for qualifyingand selecting suppliers, for evaluating bids, and for usingstandards other than European standards.Product Standards, Testing and Certification-The U.S.government needs to formalize ad clarify recent agreementsreached with the European standards-setting organizations toprovide effective access for U.S. companies; to support thecommitment made by the EC that it will adopt internationalstandards wherever possible, rather than developingspecifically European standards; and to press for workablestructures in the EC and in the U.S. that will facilitate themutual recognition of test data and certification procedures.The private sector needs to establish communications withEuropean subsidiaries, partners, distributors and customersto keep abreast of standards-related developments in theCommunity; and to participate more actively in theinternational standards-setting process.Technology Transfer-The U.S. government needs to assign thehighest priority to streamlining the list of multilaterally-controlled products and technologies; to adopt standards forresolving domestic jurisdictional disputes over the controlof goods and technology having both military and commercialapplications; to press the EC to indicate how it will ensurea common standard of enforcement among the twelve MemberStates; and to undertake a comprehensive review of U.S.foreign policy controls to identify areas of unnecessaryduplication and inconsistency that encourage foreign firms todesign-out U.S. products and technology.The private sector needs to provide advice to the U.S.government on streamlining the control list; and to supportefforts to redirect current U.S. export control policy toaddress changing technologies and East-West relations.Local Content-The U.S. government needs to consult with theEC and the Member States to ensure that the recently enactedbroadcasting directive is implemented in a flexible, non-binding way.The private sector needs to monitor developments in theMember States, and to support the European groups opposed tothe introduction or strengthening of existing nationalquotas.Reciprocity-The U.S. government needs to continue its strongsupport for the compromise language contained in the proposedSecond Banking Directive; and to monitor the EC's progress inmaking similar changes in the draft directives on insuranceand investment services.The report was adopted unanimously by ACTPN and representsthe consensus view of a broad spectrum of U.S.  industry andlabor.  It was submitted to Carla A. Hills, U.S.  TradeRepresentative by James D.  Robinson III, ACTPN Chairman, andChairman and CEO of American Express Company; and Lawrence A.Bosidy, Chairman of the ACTPN Task Force, and Vice Chairmanof the Board General Electric Company.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Relaxing Export ControlsA New Mosbacher InitiativeCommerce Secretary Mosbacher has gone on record saying thatthere will be a "signifigant shortening" of the list ofcommercially controlled items before the next Cocom meetingin April. In an interview on the American Intereststelevison show, Mr. Mosbacher said that "...we need to finishour review, internally, in the US, get our groups together,and see where we stand, going into Cocom together."It has been observed that the other members of Cocom usuallyfollow the US lead in relaxing Cocom controls. It should beremembered that last spring the official policy of Cocom wasannounced as higher walls around fewer products. The delayin implementing this policy position seems to come from adispute over which should come first, the higher walls orfewer products.The difference this year is the potential reunification ofGermany.Following a meeting with his counterparts from East Germany,Mr. Helmut Haussmann, the West German Economics Minister,called for a relaxation of rules on East-West transfer oftechnology to help give trade and industry cooperationbetween East and West Germany "new perspectives". While thismay appear to be simply a German question, it raises theissue of the viability of Cocom itself under the radicalrestructuring of Eastern Europe.Following the discussions, both East and West Germans werereportedly satisfied with the talks which covered areas ofgreater cooperation in medical technology, electronic controlsystems, energy, and environmental technology. David Marshwriting from East Berlin in the Financial Times said that"Legal changes are expected to be made by both countries bynext February to allow joint ventures and to protect WestGerman investments in East Germany." In response to questionsabout Cocom controls Mr. Hausman said that some rulesaffecting areas like telecommunications and machine tools are"senseless".The Cocom process relies upon each member country enforcingthe agreed upon rules within its own borders.  President Bushhas acknowledged that the US "should and will review" theCocom process. Secretary of State Baker has said that "weshould rationalize the system to the extent that things thatare to some extent (italics added- ed.) available off theshelf should not be locked up."  Deputy Secretary of StateEagleburger is reported to have said that some dual usetechnologies will no longer require prior approval, and that"we understand that CoCom has to change."Change first requires policy agreement, then implementation.Two industry supported groups, looking at the process ofchange from different perspectives have identifiedessentially the same priorities and problems. (See thefollowing two articles.) The problem has been identified, andfor the most part the solution has been identified.Before exporters see an actual reduction in the need toobtain an export license, three obstacles remain:1.  The Defense Department has not yet announced itsposition, and with the rapid changes taking place in thewhole structure of European defense it is not clear when theywill have a new policy position.2.  Writing new regulations, creating new lists, implementingchange takes time both in initiating the change, and thengoing through the interagency review process.  Remember thatthe process of shortening the list was also last year'spriority.3.  Congress is about to re-authorize the ExportAdministration Act. The National Academy of Sciences is dueto present another report. That which does not get done byJune is likely to have Congressional input by September,further delaying the actual publication of new rules in theFederal Register.The difference, this year, is Eastern Europe and WesternEurope's integration.  Viscount Etienne Davignon, former ECCommissioner of Industry, and current head of the EuropeanRoundtable of Industrialists recently pointed out that Cocomwas a "procedure" which is not legally binding. As events inEurope become clear, however, the procedure should be madesimpler and should become the "joint responsibility legallyof the EC" to reassure the US that Europeans are complyingwith export controls.  While an interesting solution, theproblem is that the EC and Efta are currently re-negotiatingtheir trading relationship in light of 1992; a process whichis seen as the model for the EEC and Eastern Europe to enjoytrade relations without full political relations.The final text of the 12/15/89 NATO meeting ministerialcommunique states : "In this regard, we support the progressof rationalising existing export controls through a co-ordinated approach that allows greater support for reform inthe East, and for Western investment in those countries whileprotecting our security interests."  US Secretary of StateBaker was the US representative at those talks.  AgricultureSecretary Yeutter, returning from a fact finding mission toEastern Europe, said that a process of building adistribution infrastructure was necessary before foreigndirect investment would reap its full benefits.Commerce Secretary calls for case by case evaluation ofhigher tech sales to Eastern Europe; Soviets on hold.When asked about the proposed sale of five very high-poweredControl Data Computers for contolling nuclear power plants onNBC News, "Meet the Press" Commerce Secretary Mosbacher saidthat they will "have to look at each item on a case-by-casebasis."  On a follow up question, Mr. Mosbacher said "but letme say that we released middle technology, and we're going tolook to see whether it should go any higher than that.Eastern European countries, yes. Soviet Union, would have tobe very careful."In terms of specific direction for high-tech exports,Secretary Mosbacher said "I think we will, particularly withthe Eastern European countries starting with Poland andHungary, open the door for higher technology as long as ournational security is protected.  We're willing to do it withthem because they have told us that they will protect us andgive us the opportunity to review (on site-ed.) what they'redoing with the higher-tech items."On a very practical note, one knowledgeable observercommented that with all those East Germans walking back andforth across the border to West Berlin every day, did anybodyreally think that all the packages they were carrying werebeing inspected?  Defense Department policy notwithstanding,soldiers at the border are also writing policy.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 19901992 and Technology TransferRecommendationsRecommendations on U.S. technology transfer policy by theAdvisory Committee for Trade Policy and Negotiations (ACTPN)to the U.S. Trade Representative.The removal of EC internal frontiers increases the pressureon the U.S. to accelerate efforts within Cocom toward thedevelopment of common standards for national export controlsystems.  To accomplish this goal, the U.S. will first haveto reduce the range products and technologies it currentlyrestricts, and further curtail its efforts to controlreexports of U.S.-origin goods and technology from MemberStates, whether for reasons of national security or foreignpolicy.The danger is that, if the U.S. does not move rapidly enoughand cannot find common ground through Cocom then Europeantolerance for U.S. export control policy may diminish furtherin the context of a large, integrated market.  Were this tohappen it would likely increase European reluctance toincorporate U.S. components in defense and high technologyproducts and undercut the ability of U.S. companies toconduct cooperative research.  U.S. companies might then beencouraged to conduct their R&D and production in Europe inorder to participate in EC and global markets.  Europeancompanies with U.S. subsidiaries would also be discouragedfrom conducting R&D in the U.S.Thus, export control policies intended to safeguard the U.S.could serve to weaken its technological lead.The ACTPN therefore recommends that the U.S. government:Assign the highest priority to streamlining the Cocom controllist.  The list needs to include only those items which areof critical military importance to the USSR and its allies,and are not available from non-Cocom sources.  This actionwould assure the continued viability of the multilateralcontrol system and gain broad acceptance within Cocom of theminimum necessary standards for national controls.  Seriouseffort toward a significant rationalization of the controllist and removal of U.S.  unilateral controls will require ahigh-level Administration policy initiative to assignpriority for action and overcome entrenched resistance withinU.S. government agencies.Adopt standards for resolving jurisdictional disputes betweenthe Department of Commerce and the Departments of State andDefense over the control of "dual-use" goods andtechnology.  The lack of useful standards for determining theboundary between the scope of the Export Administration Act[EEA], administered by the Commerce Department, and the ArmsExport Control Act [AECA], administered by State and Defense,has created a situation in which non-weapons items withdefense applications are incorporated within the U.S.Munitions List and treated as weapons items.  The extensionof weapons export policies and procedures to non-weaponsexports in purely commercial transactions in the West resultsin unreasonable restrictions on U.S. exports and furtherencourages Western European companies to "de-Americanize"their products.Seek clarification from the EC regarding the conditions underwhich individual Member States will continue to exercise theright to restrict exports of Cocom-listed goods andtechnology to other Member States after 1992.  Whilealternative safeguards will probably be licensing may be keptfor munitions and nuclear technology items.  The U.S.,therefore, should seek understandings with Member States onhow such controls will be administered.Press the EC Commission to indicate how it will ensure acommon standard of enforcement.  Assurances are needed thatCocom controls on exports to non-Cocom countries will beeffectively enforced throughout the Community.Undertake a comprehensive review of U.S. foreign policycontrols to identify areas of unnecessary duplication andinconsistency that encourage foreign firms to design-out U.S.products and technologies.  Foreign policy controls arecurrently imposed under a broad range of laws andregulations, including the Foreign Assets Control Act, theTrading With The Enemy Act, the International EconomicEmergency Powers Act, and the Export Administration Act.Foreign firms attempting to comply with U.S. laws are facedwith an array of confusing and, at times, conflictingrequirements, most of which have some extraterritorial reach.The competitive disadvantage created for U.S. firms iscompounded by the fact that other countries are less prone touse export controls as an instrument of foreign policy and,when they do, they do not apply such controlsextraterritorally.U.S. companies interested in avoiding a post-1992 competitivedisadvantage in strategic technology trade need to monitorcarefully developments in the U.S. and the EC, and withinCocom, and seek to influence the redirection of policy.The ACTPN therefore recommends that U.S. industry:Participate in the streamlining of the Cocom control list.Industry participation in the statutorily-mandated technicaladvisory committees should be upgraded and more aggressive inpromoting control list rationalization.  In addition, theOmnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 permits thePresident to include representatives of industry as advisorsto the U.S. delegation at Cocom.  This increased role indeveloping U.S. technology transfer policy is in keeping withthe key role played by industry representatives of otherCocom countries in helping their countries prepare formultilateral control list negotiations.Support the initiation of a comprehensive study by theNational Academies of Sciences and engineering of currentU.S. export control policy. The study, which is required bythe 1988 Trade Act, is aimed at providing guidance forrenewal of the Export Administration Act, scheduled for 1990.Among the major goals established for the study is thedevelopment of dynamic and implementable principles fordetermining which technologies should be subject to controland at what point technological diffusion and/or obsolescencedictates that a particular technology should be decontrolled.The study will also develop proposals to harmonize U.S. andCocom procedures for dealing with cases of "foreignavailability," i.e., where identical functionally similartechnology exists beyond the reach of the Cocom countries.Monitor the implementation of the export decontrol measuresincluded in the 1988 Trade Act.  Particular attention shouldbe paid to the removal of unilateral export controls for theleast sensitive goods and technology, i.e., those whoseexport to controlled countries would require onlynotification to Cocom member countries.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990BackgroundThe convergence of economic and political change in Europe isplacing new strains on the ability of the U.S. tounilaterally control the flow of sensitive technologies thatcould enhance Soviet military capabilities.  First, Europeaneconomic integration is helping create strong competitorscapable of challenging U.S. dominance of high technologytrade for the first time in the post war era.  Economicintegration is leading to the creation of large companiescapable ot achieving greater economies of scale and ofinvesting heavily in R&D.  This development coincides withthe growing insistence by European countries on nurturing anindigenous high technology defense industrial base.Second, although European political integration is stilldistant, the EC has already taken its first, tentative stepstoward its goal of assuming a greater role in world affairs.One of the important changes made by the 1987 Single EuropeanAct was to incorporate the European Political Cooperationprocess in the Treaty of Rome, the EC's governing agreement.The Community has since begun to strengthen its politicalstructures, including those dealing with foreign policy.  Thekey challenge in this arena is the coordination of policytoward the Soviet Union and East Bloc countries.  Europeanattitudes on the issue of East-West relations have alreadystarted to diverge from American attitudes, which are onlyslowly emerging from the postwar consensus in which Europeanintegration was seen primarily as a bulwark against Sovietexpansionism.With the current Soviet and East Bloc leadership focused oninternal economic restructuring and pursuing trade anddefense initiatives with the West, most EC Member States areincreasingly persuaded that new realities have overtaken thepostwar consensus.  They argue that a new consensus amongalliance partners is needed, one that places greater emphasison multilateral coordination and is more open to East-Westtrade.  In this context, Europeans view the continuing U.S.preoccupation with restrictive East-West technology transferpolicies as misguided.  In particular, continued resistanceto reducing substantially the list of multilaterallycontrolled goods and technology serves to undermine adherenceto multilateral constraints as well as inhibit U.S.-basedexporters from establishing trading relationships in EasternEurope.The divergence between U.S. and EC approaches to technologytransfer may become more pronounced as European economicintegration proceeds and internal border controls areeliminated.  Debate over alternative safeguards forprotecting sensitive technologies is just beginning withinthe Community.  The debate is expected to center on thesetting of common minimum standards for licensing andenforcement, and on the role of the Commission in formulatingand enforcing a borderless control policy.  The UK andFrance, for example, have taken the position that they willnot relinquish to the Commission national controls onmunitions, nuclear and other sensitive military technologies;Germany, on the other hand, has historically expressed thedesire to turn over most controls to the EC.U.S. export control policies are currently conductedbilaterally and are based on the U.S. assessment of the riskof diversion of controlled goods and technology from thatcountry to the Soviet bloc and the People's Republic ofChina.  Other factors considered are possible nuclear weaponsproliferation and foreign policy restrictions aimed atspecific nations.  Countries that participate in multilateralcontrol agreements, such as the Coordinating Committee[Cocom], are given preferred treatment.  Cocom administersthree lists of controlled items: munitions, nuclear energyand "dual-use (i.e., items with both commercial and militaryapplication).  Cocom members include all the EC countries(except Ireland), the U.S. Canada, Norway, Japan, Turkey andAustralia.  Switzerland and Austria are accorded full Cocomprivileges although they are not voting members."Dual-use" technology is increasingly importamt to the SovietUnion which is intent on closing the existing gap with theWest through aggressive acquisition.  U.S. alliance partnersagree that the acquisition of leading Western "dual-use"technologies represents a serious military threat and havebeen supportive of U.S. attempts to strengthen Cocom.However, they resent the U.S. tendency to resort to foreignpolicy trade sanctions to penalize Soviet and other nations'political behavior and the application of extraterritorialcontrols that signal U.S. mistrust of its Cocom partners.These strains within the alliance are exacerbated by the morerestrictive U.S. control regime.  A National Academy ofSciences study in 1987 found that:"U.S. national security export controls encompass moreproducts and technologies, are generally more restrictive,and entail more administrative delays and shipperuncertainties than those of the other major Cocom countries.Only the United States requires foreign resellers, even incountries that are our closest allies, to obtain the priorapproval of-or to account periodically to-the U.S.government for reexports of U.S.-origin products, U.S.-originparts and components incorporated into foreign equipment, andforeign equipment, and foreign products manufactured withU.S.-origin technology.  These light of the fact that manycontrolled products are available from or through non-Cocomcountries with few or no restrictions."European countries, for example, have cited U.S.extraterritorial controls on reexports of U.S.-origin goodsand technology as the reason for denying U.S. participationin development of the European Fighter Aircraft [EFA} and foreliminating or designing out U.S. parts and components inprojects supported by Member States.The U.S. recently has acted to redress some of theseproblems.  The Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988contains reforms which, when implemented, will reduce thecost and competitive burdens of U.S. exports controls fornational security-controlled "dual-use" items, especiallywhere West-West trade is involved.  These reforms include:(1) decontrolling the exports of less sensitive U.S.-origingoods and technology to Cocom and other Free World countries;(2) decontrolling  the reexport of U.S. parts and componentscomprise less than 25% of the end-product.  In addition,unilateral national security controls are to expire unlessthe Department of Comerce determines that there is no othercomparable capability, or that negotiations for multilateralcontrol are underway.The U.S. has also taken the initiative within Cocom topropose upgrading the multilateral control system and tocreate greater harmonization of national policies.  The U.S.,as an incentive, has offered to go beyond the 1988 Trade Actand remove all requirements for validated licensing of "dual-use" exports and reexports to and among Cocom countries, andto reduce substantially the list of multilaterally-controlledgoods and technology.  Cocom Member States have respondedfavorably, indicating their willingness to upgrade theirenforcement control systems to an agreed-upon commonstandard.  It now remains for the U.S. to initiate arealistic reduction in the Cocom control list.An upgraded Cocom system based on common standards wouldsimultaneously allow removal of U.S. control over reexportsfrom Cocom and permit a license-free internal market for theEC.  These actions resolve much of the debate within theCommunity over alternative safeguards for protectingstrategic goods and technology once internal borders areeliminated.Summary of the IssueAs part of its 1992 program, the EC plans to eliminateinternal customs border controls, and is likely to exert moreauthority over the export control policies of Member States.These changes could increase tensions between the U.S. and ECover their differing approaches to technology transferfurther justifying European perceptions that U.S. policy isout of step with new political and economic realities.  Ifthe U.S. fails to reduce or remove its unilateral controlsover the reexport of U.S.-origin products to third countries,its company may find it more difficult to export to, andcooperate with, European firms and governments.  Europeansare increasingly unwilling to include U.S.-origin goods andtechnology in their end-products because of these reexportcontrols.  Increased rejection of U.S. goods and technologyby European customers could also discourage both U.S. and ECfirms from conducting research and development in the U.S.The U.S. should assign higher priority to substantiallyreducing the list of multilaterally controlled goods andtechnology.  This action would signal the U.S. commitment todeveloping and implementing common standards for nationalcontrols among the member countries of Cocom.  Such commonstandards must be sufficient to allow removal of U.S.extraterritorial control over reexports from Cocom countries,as well as permit a license-free internal market for theCommunity.The U.S. should also press the EC to indicate the extent towhich it will exert authority over the control policies ofMember States, and how it will ensure a common standard ofenforcement.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990National Institute of StandardsHearing Notice-Opportunity to CommentOn April 3, 1990, the National Institute of Standards andTechnology (NIST) will hold a public hearing to solicit viewsand recommendations  concerning the government's role incoordinating U.S. participation in international standardsactivities.  The hearing is expected to include expressionsof views on potential models for government-private sectorinteractions, such as the Standards Council of Canada or anyothers.The following representative subjects may be discussed byparticipants in the hearing.  They are offered as generalguidelines to stimulate contributions from interestedparties, but are not intended as limitations on subjectmatter or documented points of view.Standards ParticipationHow can we best ensure appropriate technical and financialsupport for international standardization activities?  Shouldthe Government help finance participation, especially bysmall and medium-sized companies?Standards UsageWhat is the relative utility of domestic and internationalstandards for your operations?  What standards do you use fortrading in foreign markets?  Describe any problems youencounter with language, units of measure, obsolescence, etc.Have you encountered any standards-related trade barriers?Document experiences.Testing and CertificationDescribe any problems associated with acceptance of yourproducts in foreign markets, including any burdensome testingor re-testing that you have experienced.  Do you rely on anyexisting agreements for acceptance of U.S. test data?  Do youuse the services of domestic testing and certificationbodies, and have you relied on self-certification for eitherdomestic or foreign sales?Describe any barriers to the acceptance of your product inforeign markets, including the role of testing.  What is theimpact of the cost of testing and/or certification on yourgaining produce acceptance?  What strategies do you recommendfor improving export potential?The information and comments obtained from the public hearingwill be used to make recommendations to the Secretary ofCommerce to improve the effectiveness of U.S. participationin international standards-related activities, coordinationwith the private sector, and delegation of any appropriateresponsibilities to achieve these objectives.The hearing will be held at 9:30 a.m. on April 3, 1990, inthe Auditorium at the U.S. Department of Commerce, 14thStreet and Constitution Avenue, N. W., Washington, DC 20230.Persons who wish to participate in the hearing must submit awritten request to Dr. Stanley I. Warshaw, Director, Officeof Standards Services, National Institute of Standards andTechnology, Administrative Building, Room A-603, GaithersburgMD. 20899.Requests should contain:  (1) The person's name, address,telephone and facsimile numbers, and affiliations; (2) thenumber of participants; (3) the reason for attending; and (4)a list of points to be discussed.  Oral presentations will belimited to topics specified in the written requests.Individuals who are unable to attend the hearing may submitwritten comments to Dr. Stanley Warshaw at the above address.both requests and comments must be received by March 22,1990.  Those persons wishing to appear at the hearing will benotified of the time allotted for their presentations.For more information, contact Stanley I. Warshaw, Director,Office of Standards Services, National Institute of Standardsand Technology, Administration Building, Room A-603,Gaithersburg, MD  20899; (301) 975-4000.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Antiboycott ProvisionAnnouncements of BXA FinesThe following notices have been released by the Department ofCommerce regarding the implementation of the anti-boycottprovisions of the Export Administration Act.Export Administration Regulations prohibit U.S. persons fromrefusing to do business with others because of foreignboycotts and from furnishing information about their businessrelations with boycotted countries and blacklisted persons.The Export Administration Act also requires individuals andcompanies to report promptly receipt of restrictive tradepractices or boycott requests.  The antiboycott regulationsapply to all foreign boycotts which are not supported by theUnited States and which are directed at countries friendly tothe United States.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Texas Exporter PenalizedThe Commerce Department has imposed a $2,500 civil penalty onMartin-Decker Company (MDC), a Cedar Park, Texas, exporter ofoil rig drilling monitoring equipment, for one allegedviolation of the antiboycott provisions of the ExportAdministration Act.During May 1989, MDC allegedly furnished to Saudi Arabiainformation about MDC's business relationships with a companyknown or believed to be blacklisted by some Arab countries.The act prohibits U.S. individuals and companies fromfurnishing information about their or other persons' businessrelationships with boycotted countries and blacklistedpersons.  Most members of the Arab League, including SaudiArabia, boycott goods and services from Israel.Martin-Decker voluntarily disclosed the alleged violation tothe department in a timely manner and cooperated fully withthe investigation.  While neither admitting nor denying thealleged violation, the company agreed to pay the civilpenalty. (BXA89-37).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Mitsubishi SubsidiaryThe Commerce Department has imposed a $52,000 civil penaltyon Mitsubishi International Corporation, the New York Citysubsidiary of Mitsubishi Corporation, a Japanesemanufacturer, for 26 alleged violations of the antiboycottprovisions of the Export Administration Act, Quincy M.Krosby, assistant secretary for export enforcement, announcedtoday (11/2/89).The department said that between April 1984 and December1985, Mitsubishi knowingly agreed, in one instance, to refuseto do business with boycotted countries and blacklistedpersons.  It also furnished 13 items of information about itsown and other persons' business relationships with boycottedcountries and blacklisted persons. the department said.  Thecompany also failed to report to the department requests itreceived from Arab League countries to engage in restrictivetrade practices or boycotts, the department said.  Mostmemebers of the Arab League boycott goods and services fromIsrael.Mitsubishi neither admitted nor denied the allegedviolations.  The company has agreed to pay the civil penaltyand take certain corrective measures to comply with the anti-boycott law.  The department noted that Mitsubishi cooperatedduring the investigation. (BXA89-40)Texas Construction Equipment ExporterThe Commerce Department has imposed a civil penalty of$18,000 upon Multi National Enterprises, Inc. (MNE), aPinehurst, Texas exporter of construction equipment, for 14alleged violations of the antiboycott provisions of theExport Administration Act, Quincy M. Krosby, assistantsecretary of export enforcement, announced today.(10/30/89)Between February 1985 and June 1987, MNE, in 11 instances,allegedly agreed to refuse to do business with Israel andblacklisted persons by agreeing to a contract condition whichrequired the company to comply with the boycott regulationsof Oman.  MNE also failed to report receiving three boycottrequests.While neither admitting nor denying the alleged violations,the company agreed to pay the civil penalty and takecorrective measures to avoid future violations.  Afterconsidering the financial situation of the firm, thedepartment suspended immediate payment of the penalty.Payment will be waived at the end of two years, provided MNEdoes not violate the law.(BXA89-42)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Massachusetts Interior Designer and PurchaserThe Commerce Department has imposed a $5,000 civil penalty onStaats International, Inc., a Cambridge, Mass., interiordesigner and purchaser of home and commercial furnishings,for one alleged violation of the antiboycott provisions ofthe Export Administration Act, Quincy M. Krosby, assistantsecretary for export enforcement, announced today.(10/31/89)In June 1984, Staats International allegedly furnished toSaudi Arabia information about another company's businessrelationship with a boycotted company.  The act prohibitsU.S. individuals and companies from furnishing informationabout their or other persons' business relationships withboycotted countries and blacklisted persons.  Most members ofthe Arab League, including Saudi Arabia, boycott goods andservices from Israel.  Although neither admitting nor denyingthe alleged violation, Staats International agreed to pay thecivil penalty.(BXA89-43)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990New Jersey Subsidiary of Korean FirmThe Commerce Department has imposed a $75,000 civil penaltyon Daewoo International (America) Corp., the Carlstadt, N.J.,subsidiary of Daewoo Corp., a South Korean constructioncompany, for 75 alleged violations of the antiboycottprovisions of the Export Administration Act, Quincy M. Krosbyassistant secretary for export enforcement, announced today.(11/1/89)Between March 1984 and May 1985, Daewoo allegedly furnished75 items of information to Libya about its businessrelationships with Israel, the department said.  The actprohibits U.S. individuals and companies from providinginformation about their business relationships with boycottedcountries and blacklisted persons.Although neither admitting nor denying the allegedviolations, the company agreed to pay the civil penalty andtake certain corrective measures to comply with theantiboycott law.(BXA89-44)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990California Manufacturer and Its Foreign Sales OfficeThe Commerce Department today announced that Rain BirdInternational, Inc., a California manufacturer of irrigationequipment and its foreign subisdiary, Rain Bird Middle EastLtd., each agreed to pay a civil penalty of $10,000 for fouralleged violations of the antiboycott provisions of theExport Administration Act.  Rain Bird Middle East Ltd. islocated in Sharjah, United Arab Emirates.In January 1987, Rain Bird International, Inc. and Rain BirdMiddle East Ltd. each allegedly furnished four items ofprohibited information to the United Arab Emirates concerningtheir, and other companies' business relationships withblacklisted persons, the department said.  The act prohibitsU.S. persons from furnishing information about businessrelationships with boycotted couantries and blacklistedpersons.  Most members of the Arab League boycott goods andservices from Israel.While neither admitting nor denying the alleged violations,the companies agreed to pay the civil penalty. The departmentnoted that both companies voluntarily disclosed the allegedviolations.(BXA89-46)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Virginia BankThe Commerce Department has imposed a $5,000 civil penalty onSovran Bank, N.A. ("Sovran"), a Norfolk, Va., bank, for onealleged violation of the antiboycott provisions of the ExportAdministration Act, Quincy M. Krosby, assistant secretary forexport enforcement, announced today.(11/8/89)In October 1985, Sovran allegedly negotiated and implementeda letter of credit requiring a certification that goods werenot of Israeli origin.  The act prohibits U.S. persons fromimplementing letters of credit containing such conditions orrequirements.  Although neither admitting nor denying thealleged violation, Sovran cooperated fully during theinvestigation and agreed to pay the civil penalty.(BXA89-47)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Illinois BankThe Commerce Department has imposed a $159,000 civil penaltyon Continental Bank, N.A., a Chicago national bank, foralleged violations of the antiboycott provisions of theExport Administration Act, Quincy M. Krosby, assistantsecretary for export enforcement, announced today.(11/27/89)On two occasions in 1988 and 1989, Continental allegedly paidletters of credit which contained requirements to certifythat the goods were not of Israeli origin, the departmentsaid.  The letters of credit involved the transfer of U.S.goods to Saudi Arabia.  The act prohibits paying letters ofcredit containing such conditions or requirements.Between February 1984 and November 1986, Continental alsoallegedly failed to report its receipts of 96 boycott-relatedrequests to engage in restrictive trade practices orboycotts.  The requests included prohibitions on the shipmentof goods of Israeli or South African origin, the departmentsaid.  U.S. persons are required to report promptly receiptof restrictive trade practice or boycott requests.In October 1982 and June 1983, two branches of Continental'ssubsidiary, Continental Bank International of Houston andContinental Bank International of Houston and ContinentalBank International of Los Angeles, agreed to pay civilpenalties of $13,000 respectively, for allegedly failing toreport promptly their receipts of restrictive trade practicepractice or boycott requests, the department said.Continental voluntarily disclosed the alleged violations tothe department.  Although neither admitting nor denying theallegations, Continental agreed to pay the civil penalty.(BXA89-48)For more information, contact John Thomas at the Bureau ofExport Administration, Department of Commerce (202) 377-2721.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990A Survey of Export Finance ServicesBanks in Export Finance - Part IServicing the EastBy Heather L. McCullochThe demand for export finance among American companies isgrowing as the ranks of new exporters expand, and experiencedplayers become more active in foreign markets.  While many ofthe larger banks are still reluctant to serve any but theirlargest customers, others have recognized the potentialbusiness of the expanding market of growing exporters.In the past, new or infrequent exporters have lost businessto foreign buyers which demanded credit terms.  Consideringthe small size of potential shipments and small companieslack of collateral to support working capital or accountsreceivable financing, many companies did not feel it wasworthwhile to seek credit from reluctant bankers.  Today,these companies see foreign markets as bearing the greatestgrowth potential, so their demand for export finance hasmushroomed.The following article is the first in a series on banks inexport finance.  The series, based on interviews with tradefinance specialists in banks across the country, will explorethe activities of those banks which are gaining a reputationfor servicing the needs of local exporters.  (The Exporterwelcomes your comments and suggestions as we progress fromthe East to West coast in the next issues.)While many of the larger money center banks have closed downor strictly limited their trade finance departments in recentyears, several regional and super-regional banks on theeastern seaboard have given trade finance top priority.This first article focuses on five east coast banks which arebecoming recognized for their expertise in the market.  Theyinclude the Bank of Boston and Bay Banks in Massachusetts,Philidelphia National Bank (PNB) in Pennsylvania, MarylandNational Bank (MNB) in Maryland, and Citizens and Southern inGeorgia.The trade services department of the Bank of Boston providesexporters with more than the traditional collections andletter of credit services.  While other banks have pulled outof the market, Bank of Boston has continued to provide adiversity of trade finance services for large corporateclients as well as small and medium-sized exporters.The majority of the bank's exporting clients havetraditionally been frequent exporters with established buyerrelationships; but the export finance group is beginning toaddress the growth potential in the companies which are newto exporting, or which are beginning to increase their exportsales.In order to provide such financing without increasing theirinternational exposure, the Bank of Boston's trade financespecialists have been trying to work more closely withgovernment programs to help companies which are small and/ornew to exporting.  In the past, the extensive paperworkinvolved discouraged many banks from participating in thegovernment programs.  The Bank of Boston is trying overcomethis hurdle by developing a reporting package that willexpedite administrative procedures to increase the cost-effectiveness of lending for smaller transactions.The bank is interested in doing more accounts receivablefinancing for sales covered by Eximbank or FCIA.  They havealso been active in providing buyer credits, a direct loan toa foreign client to support a customer's sale, again withExim or FCIA coverage.Bay Banks, of Boston, also sees potential in the expandingmiddle market.  The bank is trying to figure out ways to usegovernment working capital and accounts receivable financingguarantee programs more effectively, so they too can becomemore active in providing credit to smaller, or less frequent,exporters.One solution reducing the paperwork has been to try to workmore closely with MIFA-Massachusetts Industrial FinanceAgency-the state's export development agency.  MIFAfacilitates the processing of Exim and FCIA applications byscreening companies and providing administrative services inthe application procedure.  (For more information, seearticle on state agencies in this issue) Still, according tothe bank's trade finance specialists, the number of bankabletransactions under these programs is still disappointing.One problem with using government programs is the fact thatmany new exporters are start-up companies.  Exim requiresthat companies be in existence for three years before theyare eligible for their programs.  Trade finance specialistswithin the bank often find this requirement to be aconstraint on the bank's lending because they often see youngcompanies which would merit the bank's support if Exim weremore lenient.For medium term lending (mainly for larger transactions ofmore than 180 days), the bank is becoming more active inarranging "supplier credits"-a loan to the buyer, arranged bythe seller.  To minimize its own exposure, the bank worksclosely with Exim to arrange a guarantee of the loan, or withforfaiting houses, which will purchase or participate in thecredit obligation.  For short term financing, the bank mayuse the services of an international factoring house, whichwill purchase the exporter's foreign receivables at adiscount.Moving down the coast, Philidelphia National Bank(PNB) is agrowing 'super-regional' which sees trade finance as anintegral part of relationships with corporate clients.  Sincethe bank's trade finance unit is a "shadow unit", rather thana profit center, they are willing to work on all sizes oftransactions.  However, the focus of the bank is on servicingthe needs of its traditional corporate clients, rather thanseeking out new business amongst growing exporters.PNB bank is willing to provide buyer credits with FCIAinsurance or an Exim guarantee.  They are not involved ininternational factoring, but will participate in theforfait market, if needed to complete a transaction.  PNB hasalso been involved in the arrangement of countertradetransactions, though they will not take title to the goods.MNC International Bank is a wholly-owned subsidiary of theMaryland National Bank.  Focusing on merchant banking, MNC ismore deal-driven than commercial banks.  With a customer basewhich stretches across the United States,  this transaction-oriented, rather than relationship-oriented approach helpsthe bank to meet the needs of a diverse customer base.MNC is among the top ten users of Exim guarantee programs inthe area of post-export finance.  In structuring exportfinance, MNC's trade specialists try to respond as quickly aspossible to the customer's needs.  A large percentage areexporters of capital goods, so no transaction is "standard".In the area of pre-export finance, the bank is active in theprovision of working capital lending to small companies,again, it is one of the largest users of Eximbank's programs(this time for working capital guarantees).Non-traditional activities of the bank, include growingcooperation with Maryland National World Trade (formed in1983, the company was dormant for a period but is nowexperiencing a revival), and in a number of countertradetransactions.  MNC is seeking to expand its business with newexporters, on a deal-by-deal, or on-going basis.Citizens and Southern Bank in Atlanta, Georgia, has beenactively providing export finance services for the last 30years.  While the international departments of money-centerbanks were focusing on direct lending in the 1970's, Citizensand Southern continued to emphasize trade-related lending.The bank emerged largely unscathed from the third world debtcrises.  Consequently, they have been able to continue toaccept country risk from countries in which other banks havecompletely withdrawn.Citizens and Southern has one of the largest internationaldepartments in the southeast.  It is in the process ofmerging with Sovran Bank of Virginia, which is also known forits trade finance expertise.  On the domestic side, thebank's focus is on fulfilling the trade finance needs of itsestablished customers, but they will accomodate the needs ofsmaller, or less frequent, exporters if this service is partof a broader commercial relationship.The bank has followed the trade finance patterns of itscustomers, with a traditional focus on sales to LatinAmerica.  They are able to accept short term country risk incountries such as Chile, Brazil and Mexico which other bankshave been unable to do.To service the needs of its middle market clients, the bankhas developed strong expertise in factoring operations.Factoring is typically used in transactions of 120 days orless, and takes two forms, guaranteeing of the receivable ata nominal rate, and advancing against the guaranteedreceiveable. For the discounting of medium term notes, thebank is not, itself, an active player in the a-forfaitmarket.  However, they will consult customers on theavailability of forfaiting services, using access toforfaiting houses and other banks in the market.For more information, contact David Ames at Bank of Boston(617) 434-5178; Ben Schwartz at Bay Banks (617) 556-6262;Jerry Rama at PNB (215) 973-7336; Martin Brill at MNB (301)244-6076; or Ron Kissling at Citizens and Southern (404) 491-4840.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990The Roundtable On Credit ConditionsDevelopments in AfricaNamibiaNamibia, also known as South-West Africa, is moving towardsindependence.  At the moment, Namibia is still governed bythe Republic of South Africa.  Following recent elections,however, the former German and British colony will soon bepreparing the law of the newly independent nation.The UN General Assembly terminated South Africa's mandate forNamibia in 1966.  The Republic continued to occupy andadminister the territory in spite of a series of UNresolutions which sought to establish Namibian independence.Movement towards granting independence, as set out in the UNResolution 435 in 1978, was also stymied by armed conflict inneighboring Angola.On December 1988, a tripartite peace accord between SouthAfrica, Angola, and Cuba established a timetable for thephased withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola and called uponthe UN to effect movement towards Namibian independence.  Thepolling for the Constituent Assembly just took place.  Theseelections were a contest between the South West AfricaPeople's Organization (SWAPO) and the Democratic TurnhalleAlliance.  Real independence for Namibia is scheduled forApril of 1990.On the economic side, mining activity is the mainstay of theNamibian economy representing about one-quarter of GDP andproviding some three-quarters of the territory's foreignexchange earnings.  Of particular importance are the richdeposits of alluvial diamonds, of which Namibia producedapproximately one million carats in 1987 alone.The Rossing open-pit mine produces some 3,600 tons of uraniumannually.  This output is primarily used for generatingelectricity.  Other notable resources include copper, zinc,lead, tin, gold, silver, and semi-precious stones.Independence should result in the end of South Africansanctions, thereby opening up export markets and promotingthe development of the territory's resource potential.Some 70% of the population derive their livelihood from theagricultural sector, mostly employed in subsistence farming.Because of the arid climate and poor land quality, the sectoris dominated by extensive livestock husbandry, exporting meatand sheep pelts.  Wheat and maize are the principal arablecrops.Work is now underway to supply water from the Okavango Riverin the north to other parts of the country which should boostagricultural production.  Upon independence, Namibia hopes toimplement a 200-mile exclusive economic zone to conserve itsfishing resources, and it will develop fish processingfacilities.  With a small domestic market and close ties withthe South African economy, Namibia's manufacturing sectoraccounts for only 5% of the GDP.  It produces a limited rangeof consumer goods and is undertaking some export processing.Opportunities for growth are largely in import substitution,especially in foodstuffs, and in domestic processing ofprimary products.  In fiscal 1989-90 the budget deficit willmost likely increase to some 214 million South Africa Rand.This reduction can be largely attributed to substantial SouthAfrican aid reductions.The outlook for this sparsley populated, predominantly desertterritory is that the country will confront major challengesin its emergence as an independent nation.  Developedcountries, notably Great Britain and West Germany, haveplanned additional assistance, but despite Namibia'spolitical autonomy, it is likely to remain economicallydependent on South Africa for the foreseeable future.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Ivory CoastThe Ivory Coast was formerly a part of the French WestAfrica.  It became independent in 1960 under the leadershipof President Houphouet-Boigny.  Now over eighty years old, hewas confirmed in office for another 5 years in October 1985.The President heads the unity party, Parti Democratique de laCote d'Ivoire.  The constitution provides that, in the eventof the death or resignation of the Head of State, thePresident of the National Assembly will take power for aninterim period with an obligation to call new electionswithin 90 days.The Ivory Coast always had a free market economy, and between1973 and 1980 GDP increased on average by 6.8% per year.However, per capita income amounted to only US$ 864 in 1988,partly the result of austerity programs imposed by the IMFand the World Bank.  The good harvests of 1985 and 1986improved commodity prices, fuelling a short-lived recovery.However, the subsequent fall in both commodity prices and thedollar, together with a reduction in it cocoa crops in 1988,resulted in liquidity problems for the country.The banking system of the Ivory Coast came under pressure atthe end of 1988 when resources were required to finance cropsto the detriment of other sectors of the economy.  Exporterswere unable to repay crop credits while credit had to berestricted because of the increase in external debtrepayments.  As a result of the liquidity crunch, foreignbank subsidiaries obtained funds from head offices, whilelocal banks found it increasingly difficult to meet customerwithdrawals.  As some banks closed, others were reorganizedor merged.  (It should be noted, that the local currency, theCFA franc, is fully convertible with the Franch franc.)Agriculture in the Ivory Coast generates about 30% of the GDPand employs approximately 80% of the labor force of thecountry.  Agricultural products account for more than three-quarters of export earnings.  Since the end of the 1970s, theIvory Coast has been the world's biggest producer of cocoa.The country is also the third largest producer of robustacoffee.  These two crops together account for about one halfof export earnings.The coffee crop reportedly declined again in the 1988/89season, to 4.2 million sacks from 4.55 million in theprevious year.  This decline reflects the ageing of plantsand lower guaranteed prices than for cocoa.  TheInternational Coffee Organization export quota was reduced to3.6 million sacks in 1988/89, notably because of Westernconsumer preference for arabica.  A record cocoa crop of some750,000 tons was recorded in 1988/89 against 630,000 tons in1987/88, an increase of 20%.Cocoa and coffee are largely produced on small-scaleplantations which employ foreign labor and sell their cropsto Caisse de Stabilisation et de Soutien des Prix desProductions Agricoles (CSSPPA), the State marketing agency,at prices fixed by the government.  Since 1987, however, thelocal cost of cocoa, of about CFA francs 600 per kilo, hasexceeded the world price by about 50%.  With the governmentno longer able to make up the difference, planters have hadto sell crops at half the guaranteed price or to acceptpurchase vouchers in lieu of payment.In order to broaden the agricultural base, cotton is beingpromoted.  In 1986/87 the Ivory Coast became the third-largest cultivator among African cotton producers.  Exportsof tropical fruit and rubber have also increasedsignificantly.  Rubber production is expected to double by1990, making the Ivory Coast Africa's largest producer.  Riceoutput has also been increased considerably and self-sufficiency has been virtually achieved in pork and poultry.Wheat imports have been held down despite continuing highpopulation growth rate.  The production of yams and maniocfell, by 50% and 20% respectively in 1986/87.Fish production meets 60% of the domestic needs. Abidjan isAfrica's largest tuna fishing port, accounting for almost aquarter of the total Atlantic tuna catch.  The total area ofexploitable timber is estimated at only one million hectars,against 15.6 million at the start of the century, because ofthe excessive clearing of forest land.Industry, including mining and construction, accounts forabout 13% of the GDP, but employs only around 4% of the laborforce.  Agricultural and foodstuff processing account forabout 40% of output, with coffee and cocoa the major sectors.Some 40 firms produce textiles.  Wood is processed by about65 firms that depend on the level of activity in the localbuilding trade, which accounts for 3% of the GDP.  Over two-thirds of industry is lcoated in and around the commercialcapital of Abidjan.The Ivory Coast remains a net importer of energy.  Followingthe rapid introduction of thermal turbines after the droughtof 1983 to 1985, thermal power stations now account for 60%of total energy.  The possibility of exploiting rich naturalgas deposits in the coastal region has been considered, butrelatively lower oil prices have restrained the earlierenthusiasm for using gas instead of oil to fuel generators.On the financial side, total expenditures for 1989 have beenset at CFA francs 645 billion, an increase of 1.25 from theprevious year.  This amount includes an increase of 1.4% inoperating expenditure to CFA francs 500 billion.  The specialinvestment and equipment budget (BSIE), of CFA francs 145billion, has been increased by 1% and is being devoted mainlyto major agriculture programs (39% of the budget), housingand urban development (11%), and training (8%).Budget spending, particularly under the public sector'sconsolidated budget, could turn out to be substantiallyhigher than forecast.  The public sector's current revenueshould amount to CFA francs 880 billion, from which CSSPPA'sforecast deficit of CFA francs 180 billion must be deducted.Current expenditure is expected to total CFA francs 700billion.  Including the BSIE, which has local debt of CFAfrancs 50 billion and external debt of CFA francs 470billion, total expenditure will total around CFA francs 1,370billion.  With CSSPPA's cumulative arrrears and government-guaranteed loans of CFA francs 360 billion, the publicsector's financing requirement will increase to CFA francs850 billion (US$2.7 billion), or 28% of the GDP in 1989 andto fall to about CFA francs 500 in 1990.With approved or anticipated external funding of about CFAfrancs 475 billion, about CFA francs 140 billion for 1989will have to be generated through domestic measures such ashigher taxes, a reduction in "presidential levies", and a cutin guaranteed producer prices, none of which will be easy toachieve in the country.   As a result of this, adjustmentwill be spread over several years if the austerity policy ismaintained.With the Ivory Coast the world's largest cocoa producer, andbecause the quality of the bean is of the highest grade, thePresident adopted a policy in 1988 of holding back exports inan unsuccessful attempt to raise world prices significantly.Almost 90% of the crop has reportedly been sold but for onlya portion of the prices demanded.  An agreement reachedwith a commercial company in December 1988 provided for theremoval of 400,000 tons of cocoa in 1988/89.  Of this amount125,000 tons was applicable to 1988, half of which wasstocked in European ports for two years.  The selling pricewas reduced to the world price for the Ivory Coast cocoa (CFAfrancs 500 per kilo) by waiving a removal tax of CFA francs100 per kilo. In June of 1989, a contract for the removal of280,000 tons of cocoa, the balance of the 1987-89 crop years,was signed with another commercial concern.Despite the generally unfavorable trend in commodity pricesin 1989, with cocoa prices falling by 10% and cotton pricesby 7.5% (the exception was coffee with a 4.5% priceincrease), a rise in export volume should increase exportearnings by 12% to US$2.7 billion.  Imports are not expectedto increase because of the foreign exchange shortage and theimplementation of the IMF-agreed austerity program.  Oneaspect of this program is expected to be a fall in theguaranteed producer price for cocoa to CFA francs 250 perkilo from CFA francs 400.The rise in the trade surplus to US$1.1 billion, an increaseof 42%, should offset the adverse impact of higherinternational interest rates.  The current account deficit isexpected to fall to US$1 billion from US$1.3 billion in 1988but, at the equivalent of 10.5% of GDP, it will remain high.Principal and interest arrears are in the vicinity of CFAfrancs 470 billion, while payments to the IMF and the WorldBank remain behind schedule.  Debt is increasing rapidly.According to the World Bank, it amounted to US$13.5 billionat the end of 1987, a figure which includes guaranteed long-and medium-term public debt of US$8.4 billion.  According tosome estimates, total outstanding debt at end-1989 couldamount to US$15.5 billion if short-term debt is included.This implies a debt servicing of about US$2.9 billion, or 86%of foreign exchange revenues prior to rescheduling.France is the major trading partner of the Ivory Coast,accounting for 35% and 16% respectively of the country'simports and exports.  Nigeria, the Netherlands, and Japaneach provide about 6% to 7% of imports, while the majorexport markets, apart from France, are the United States(12%), West Germany(10%), and Italy(8%).Latest Information on the Ivory Coast: Responding to thedemands of creditors for deep cuts in the public-sectorspending, the country's President has radically streamlinedthe government.  Ten of the overall 39 ministeries wereabolished.  In general, credit terms extended to the countryshow all terms, from open account to strict letter of credittransactions.  The delay on lenient terms has been longer inrecent months, and some exporters have to wait several weeksfor payment.  Overall, payments are still being made.Exporters should definitely check the creditworthiness oftheir customers, both old and new, to avoid any surprises.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990State Export Development AgenciesStates Pick Up the Slack in Export FinanceBy Heather L. McCullochThe notion that small business in America is an untappedsource of exports which, once mobilized, will turn aroundAmerica's trade deficit is, today, a common perception.Though the theory has yet to be proven, state administratorsof newly established export finance agencies are trying theirbest to push local companies into international markets.The Reagan administration drastically reduced federal fundingfor Export-Import Bank (Eximbank) programs, recommending thatexporters turn to the private sector for export financing.Unfortunately, in the wake of the third world debt crisis andthe resulting increase in capital adequacy requirements;American commercial banks were simultaneously retreating fromtrade finance, particularly for their smaller customers.Small and medium-sized American companies are making progressin tackling foreign markets; but their lack of access toexport finance remains a major barrier to overseas sales.Small or infrequent exporters face many barriers to obtainingcredit from commercial banks.  It is harder for smallercompanies to obtain working capital financing for domesticinstances; but when it comes to cash flow being dependent onforeign receivables, the banks' concerns aboutcreditworthiness are multiplied.The majority of U.S. exports are sold on a cash or short termcredit basis (less than 90 days), but exporters areincreasingly demanded to extend credit terms in competitiveforeign markets.  In many cases where exporters can notextend credit, the sale is lost to competiters who can.In some states, few or no banks are willing to provide post-shipment export financing, even for their largest customers.Finally, smaller exporters have difficulties dealing withFCIA insurance programs because the administrative costs biteinto the profit margin of a small shipment, and privateinsurance for small transactions is typically hard to comeby.State governments have begun to respond to the gap infinancing between the private sector and the federalgovernment.  According to a recent survey by First WashingtonAssociates; as of June 1989, export-financing legislation hadbeen passed in 31 states and 24 states have operationalprograms.  Most state export development programs have thespecific goal of helping small and medium-sized non-exportersto enter foreign markets.  Unlike export credit agencies inother countries; they are designed and operated to meet localneeds, independent of federal management or financing.A diverse array of state programs has been developed, rangingfrom pre- and post-shipment lending to state guarantees,insurance and financial advice.  Some state agencies havelimited their involvement to counseling and documentaryassistance.  For example, the Massachusetts IndustrialFinance Agency (MIFA) provides export finance counseling andassistance in administrative aspects of Exim and FCIA loanapplications.Other programs, like Minnesota's Export Finance Authority(MEFA), play a larger role in the transaction.  MEFAencourages bank involvement by arranging export insurance andloan guarantees, as well as providing Eximbank packagingassistance and financial counseling.  MEFA supported $4.3million in export sales last year.The ultimate success of the state programs lies in theirability to bring the private sector back into export finance.Illinois was a pioneer in working with commercial banks toprovide direct loans to exporters.  In 1984, the state passedlegislation to create the Illinois Export DevelopmentAuthority (IEDA), a state export finance program.  Theprogram provides fixed-rate loans to local exporters, whoseexports have a minimum state content of 25%.  The loans willcover 90% of an export transaction, with a maximumtransaction size of $500,000.The California Export Finance Office (CEFO) is one of themost successful state export finance agencies.  The programhas supported over $160 million of export sales since itsinception.  The majority of the office's activities havesince been focused on providing pre-export guarantees forworking capital loans.  For a guarantee fee of 1%, the agencywill guarantee 85% of the export transaction, to a maximum of$350,000.  The program may soon be moving into post-shipmentfinance lending.  Administrators of the fund are currentlyexperimenting with the possibility of a foreign accountsreceivables lending program.Some state agencies have also been playing a more direct rolein providing direct working capital loans to support exports.The New Jersey Economic Development Authority recently beganto offer a one-year revolving line of credit of up to$100,000 for state exporters.  The line will cover theexporters costs of materials and production for foreignsales.  A confirmed letter of credit from the buyer orcoverage by the Foreign Credit Insurance Association is aprerequisite for state participation.State and local governments have also begun to work togetherwith the federal government to bring Eximbank programs downto the level of city government.  In 1987, experimentalEximbank City/State Agency Cooperation Programs were launchedin three states and three cities.  The programs, designed asdistribution vehicles for federal export finance programs,offer training for state and city personnel by Exim staffmembers.The City of Los Angeles has implemented the program in aparticularly innovative manner.  Loans to local exporters areapproved by the city; guaranteed by the state program orEximbank; and financed by a $15 million credit line providedby Imperial Bank, an L.A.-based regional bank.  Initiated in1987, the program is the largest municipal export financeprogram in the nation.Despite the demonstrated success of state programs inbringing new exporters into the market, critics of thelack of federal participation argue that the fragmentedapproach is not adequate to remedy America's trade imbalance.Howard Lewis, vice president of the National ManufacturersAssociation, is skeptical of the federal government'stendency to leave export finance problems to the states.  L.Fargo Wells, head of the California Export Finance Office,emphasizes the fact that state programs are meant tosupplement, not replace, Eximbank programs.  States arerestricted by size, budgetary restrictions as well aspolitical realities, so they can not be expected to solveAmerica's deficit woes single-handedly.With current budget considerations, however, it is unlikelythat the Bush administration will revitalize a currently'defunded' Eximbank.  By design or default, the stateagencies remain at the forefront of public sector exportfinance.For more information on the agency involved in exportdevelopment and export finance in your state, contact yourChamber of Commerce or First Washington Associates (703) 525-0966.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Export Development, Southern-StyleSouthern States Adopt Unified StrategyThe Southern Growth Policies Board held a key conference inNew Orleans on December 8-9, 1989 to set an internationalagenda for the southern states from 1990 to 1995.  Attendingwere over 70 high ranking representatives of twelve southernstate governments, legislators, regional organizations,universities, research organizations, the federal government,and others from the public and private sectors.  Uppermost onthe agenda was the subject of how the region could encouragethe growth of exports and international investment using avariety of new programs and policy approaches.Export finance and other trade promotion program were aspecial focus of attention.  The conference noted thelimitations of existing statistics on international trade,discussed the major issues affecting export success, andagreed on a variety of research projects which would helpsouthern legislatures and administrative agencies decidewhich policies and programs could be most helpful to theirstates.The Southern Growth Policies Board will play a catalytic andcoordinating role in seeking to implement the researchprojects endorsed by the conference and will share theresults between all members.  This is the first time that aregional grouping of states has gotten together for the jointplanning of comprehensive research and development effortsthat will lead to increased international trade andinvestment.  In the past this had always been done by theindividual states with consequent duplication of effort andsuboptimal utilization of the results.For more information, contact First Washington Associates,International Consultants (703) 525-0966.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990The Services Trade DeficitHouse Export Task ForceSubcommittee Hearing SummaryBy Craig Pena, staff member of the House Export Task Force.The House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on InternationalEconomic Policy and Trade recently conducted a hearing on theservices trade deficit.  The deficit was the first of itskind in thirty years.Chairman Sam Gejdenson, in his opening statement, explainedthat there are two components to the service trade balance,investment and sales.  Investment, the larger of the twocomponents, compares the earnings of foreigners' investmentsin the U.S. with the earnings of Americans' investmentsoverseas.  That portion of the service balance is currentlyin deficit.  The second factor of the services trade balanceis sales performance.  Here the U.S. ran a $5 billion surplusin the second quarter of 1989.The purpose of Friday's hearing was, according to theChairman "to find out the story behind America's newestdeficit." Comments from some of the witnesses are as follows:From C. Fred Bergsten. Director, Institute for InternationalEconomics:1.  Foreign investment in the U.S. has become greater thanU.S.  investment abroad.  However, on a per dollar basis,U.S. investments overseas still outperform foreigninvestments in the United States.  (Generally the foreignassets held by the U.S. are older investments which arereaching a maximum yield.  When the foreign held assetsmature, the services trade deficit can be expected toworsen.)2.  To alleviate the federal deficit, Bergsten argues that atax increase will have to exist and recommends a value addedtax (VAT) or an across the board consumption tax.From The Honorable Linda Powers.  Deputy Assistant Secretaryfor Services, United States Department of Commerce:1.  The services trade deficit of the past provided asubstantial "offset to the merchandise trade deficit."2.  "Lack of comprehensive trade data on services is indeedfrustrating to U.S. government efforts to formulate andexecute trade policy for the service sector".  Quite oftenmany "service trade and income flows do not pass (sic)generally pass through gateways where they can be easilycounted.  Accordingly, the system of collecting data onservices trade must be based largely on surveys of servicecompanies."3.  Powers states that "true traded services have not movedinto a deficit but show a growing surplus with exportsexceeding imports by approximately 6.8 billion dollars duringthe second quarter of 1989."  Of these "true services" it istravel and transportation that acquired the sizeabledeficits.  These deficits are offset by growing surplusesfrom technology licensing and other royalties and licensingfees which bring the entire "true services" balance tosurplus.4. "A recurring problem for exported-minded U.S.  serviceproviders is the persistence of a multitude of foreign tradebarriers to services.  One example is the EuropeanCommunity's television broadcast directive...  [However], thedevelopment of trade rules and procedures for the progressiveelimination of services barriers is a major component of theUruguay Round trade negotiations."From The Honorable Richard Self, Deputy Assistant U.S.  TradeRepresentative:1. Self agreed with Powers that there is no deficit in theU.S. services sector.2. "...the problem reflected by the data appears to stem fromincreased foreign investment in the U.S. rather than poorperformance of the service sector."3. "It is the role of the U.S. government to establish andmaintain a suitable international climate to enable U.S.service industries to gain access to markets and competefairly."From Gordon Cloney. President, International InsuranceCouncil:1. "International Trade Statistics for insurance arefragmentary because insurance transactions between countriesdo not pass through the equivalent of a customs house whererecording can take place."2. Cloney lists three types of trade discrimination practicesfaced by the insurance industry:a. The practice of simply closing a market to the U.S.insurer by nationalization or domestication of the market."b. "...making it impossible to set up, license and organizean effective establishment to operate in the market."c. Those [practices] which cripple the commercial operationsof the foreign insurer even when they are admitted andpermitted to organize.3. "The U.S. must be sure it provides its internationalinsurers with as good a commercial base for global operationsas possible.  Industry and government should cooperate toidentify and reduce or eliminate domestic disincentives todoing an international business from the U.S.  Our stateregulators are beginning to pursue this worthwhileobjective."All witnesses, while having varied points of view, agree thatas time progresses it will be the ever growing income fromU.S. assets held by foreigners that will lead to a furtherdeterioration of the services trade balance in the future.For more information, contact Craig Penia of the House ExportKO18 = National Governor'sAssociationBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Governors Create Export DatabaseThe NGA has created a database that will be useful fortracking the growth of exports state by state. While itdoes not answer the question of how many exporters there arein each state, the new database does allow states to trackthe growth of export industries in their state year by year.This database is necessary because the Census Bureau does nothave the funds to provide trade statistics below the nationallevel, in fact, the only detailed statistics are from the1987 trade year. In 1989, the Shipper's Export Declarationdatabase of transactions will be compared with the Census ofManufacturers' database of establishments to indentify thenumber and type of exporters in each state, at the four digitSIC level.  Even so, it will not be possible to update theCensus Bureau data.The new service being offered by the National GovernorsAssociation, in cooperation with DRI, will make it possibleto distribute national trade statistics to state activity atthe more detailed three digit level SIC classification,through the use of an input/output table. The service iscalled Expolink.Expolink contains the value of US exports to more than 141countries by state-by 3 digit SIC industry-for the fiftystates and the District of Columbia.  Estimated from severalsources, including the US Commerce Department's Origin ofMovement data series, Expolink contains the files of totalexports as well as a breakdown by mode of transportation (airand sea).For more information call Ron Cooper at the NGA (202-624-5370)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990New for ExportersPublicationsThe Art of ExportingThe Dartmouth Development Group of Vineland, New Jersey, hasrecently released The Art of Exporting, a hands-on guide tosetting up and maintaining export operations.  The manualcombines the latest information available from governmentsources with the experience of its authors, to provide apractical approach to exporting.  Topics covered includeoverseas licensing, export regulations, documentation, andexport finance.For more information, call Gaylord Evey at the DartmouthDevelopment Group, (609) 692-2610.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Country ForecastsCountry Forecasts is a semi-annual publication of PoliticalRisk Services, which offers an overview of major changes inthe international business climate, and an assessment oftheir implications for the future.  The report containsnearly 400 pages of facts, forecasts, and analyses, providingbriefings on 85 countries and regional comparisons on keysocial, economic and political variables.The December 1989 issue also contains a special section onthe consequences of the events in Eastern Europe forinternational business, based on a series of interviews bythe 250-member network of PRS country specialists.For more information or a copy of the report ($390) contactPeggy Murray (315) 472-1224.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990EDI Handbook - EuropeThe EDI Handbook is a 377-page handbook which provides acomprehensive overview of the latest developments inpaperless trading in Europe.  The book covers a wide range ofsubjects ranging from standards for EDI, value-added and dataservices and EDI, the legal context for EDI etc.Contact Blenheim Online, Tel: 44-868-4466, Fax: 44-868-9933(UK).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990International Credit ManagementBrian W. Clarke, international trade consultant and formerEuropean Director of the FCIB, is the editor of theHandbook of International Credit Management.  The book isdesigned to help both small exporters and multinationalcorporations in handling international risk exposure. Itincludes the work of eighteen experts in the field, coveringall aspects of recognizing, managing, and controlling countryrisk.Contact: Gower Publishing (802-276-3162).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Logistics SoftwareThe 1989 edition of Logistics Software has just beenpublished by the Council of Logistics Management, providingdetailed information on nearly 1,000 software packages ofinterest to logistics personnel. For the first time, thehandbook will be available in a 700-page soft cover bookand on an IBM/PC compatible disk.Contact the Council of Logistics Management (708) 574-0985($50.00 members/$75.00 non-members).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Marketing in SpainDun's Marketing Service has just released its newest editionof Spain's 15,000 Top Companies, a business directorycontaining basic information on Spanish companies with annualsales above $3 million.  This year's directory also includesa banking section, providing comprehensive data on thecountry's top banks.For more information, call Dun's Marketing Service at (201)605-6471.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990White Paper on Japanese TradeThe White Paper on International Trade Japan 1989, publishedby Japan External Trade Organization (JETRO), is nowavailable from International Publications Service (IPS).  Theenglish edition, published annually for the last 25 years,includes a breakdown of Japanese trade statistics as well assummary articles on Japan's role in the world economy.Contact Stacey Bujnowski, IPS Marketing Representative at(215) 785-5800 for a copy of the publication (Softcover:$85.00).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990SeminarsEurope 1992Frost & Sullivan will be sponsoring its second annualconference on Exploiting the Window of Oportunity and DoingBusiness in Europe, March 7-8, 1990, New York, New York.  Theconference will focus on bringing exporters up to date ondirectives, legal initiatives, and compromises with anemphasis on how these affect exporters' efforts to dobusiness in the European market.Contact Cheryl O'Sullivan, Frost & Sullivan, Inc.  (212) 233-1080.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Third Party LogisticsCompetitive pressures in global market demand that companiesmaintain sophisticated logistics operations whilesimultaneously cutting costs.  The Center for Logistics andTransportation at the City University of New York will beaddressing these sometimes contradictory goals in a seminartitled: Outsourcing Logistics Functions...Long Term Solutionor Fad?The seminar will address the issues involved in "outsourcing"management of logistics functions to optimize profits andservice objectives.  Speakers will debate the pros and consof third party management focusing on a realistic assessmentof the optimal structure for companies considering thisoption.  The seminar will be held on February 7, 1990 at TheGraduate School and University Center, The City University ofNew York.For registration or more information call (212) 642-2176.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Transportation MarketingThe Northwestern University Transportation Center will besponsoring a course on Transportation Marketing Strategy,January 22-26, in Evanston, Illinois.  The course is designedfor middle and upper level managers from both shipper andcarrier firms.  The curriculum offers an intensive overviewof analytical, planning, implementation, and controlstategies to assist participants in recognizing and meetingthe needs of their customers in increasingly sophisticatedglobal markets.The center will also be co-sponsoring an executive seminarwith the Council of Logistics Management, Logistics andDistribution Management, February 26-March 2.  The seminar isdesigned for executives involved in logistics,transportation, warehousing, third party logistics, andinventory control for both shippers and carriers.Call Barbara M. Duggan at (708) 491-3225 for more informationon either seminar.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990World Trade Institute: Upcoming EventsAside from those mentioned in last months issue, The WorldTrade Institute will be offering the following seminars inJanuary and February:  Introduction to InternationalTaxation, January 22-23, New York; Reducing European Tax,February 5-6, New York; Petroleum Tankship Operations, LosAngeles, February 12-15; Allocation and Apportionment ofDeductions under Section 864(e) & Treas. Reg. Sect. 1.861-8(re: foreign tax credit limitation and FSC income), February12-13, New York; Foreign Tax Credit Planning, February 15-16,New York.The Evening School of World Trade will begin spring sessionsat the World Trade Center beginning January 22; at the JohnF. Kennedy Intenational Airport beginning February 5; and atParsippany, New Jersey beginning January 29.  The program isa training course for shippers, carriers, banks, freightforwarders and others involved in foreign trade.For more information, call (212) 466-4044.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990ServicesExcess InventoriesAmerican-based importers and exporters can donate their slow-moving inventory to the National Association for theExchange of Industrial Resources (NAEIR), a non-profitorganization, and receive a tax deduction for the cost of theproduct and half of the difference between cost and fairmarket selling price.NAEIR in turn donates the goods to 7,500 schools andcharities throughout the U.S.  Donators are not charged forNAEIR's services, and tax documentation is providedimmediately.For more information, call NAEIR (309) 343-0704Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Online Trade InfoTrade Inflo has just announced Trade Information On-lineService (TIOS), an on-line trade fact database.  The serviceis available 24 hours a day, 365 days a year via a personalcomputer to provide up-to-date information on U.S.  importand export data.  The service can assist exporters,consultants, researchers, and international lawyers inmonitoring markets for products, exploring potentionalmarkets and analysing the competition in these markets.For more information, call Louis J. Greif, Director ofMarketing 1-800-527-6138.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Soviet Translation ServicesThe Corporate Word, a Pittsburgh-based translation company,just signed a letter of intent to establish a joint venturewith the USSR Chamber of Commerce.  The goal of the venturewill be to assist Western companies operating in the SovietUnion by providing Western technology and managementtechniques.The Corporate Word will set up subsidiary operations inMoscow.  With the assistance of its own advanced translationsoftware, the company will offer translation and marketingservices to all Western companies.For more information, contact Gregory Zaretsky at (412) 391-0378Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Trade ShowsAutomated International TradeThe NCITD-International Trade Facilitation Council will besponsoring a forum on Automating International TradeTransactions, to be held in Long Beach, California on January25, 1990.The forum will provide information on how EDI andcomputerization can improve international trade practicesfrom the perspective of the various parties involved in atrade transaction.For more information, call NCITD at (212) 941-0371Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Export '90, SeattleU.S. small business will be the focus of a trade fair andconference to be hosted by the Small Business Administrationand AT&T, in Seattle, Washington, March 27-30, 1990.  Thefair will be attended by foreign buyers from around theworld, including official delegations from Japan, SouthKorea, and Taiwan.Export 1990 will focus on three fast-growing industries:health care equipment; computers, software and peripherals;and process industries and pollution control equipment. Thefair will also feature an International Business Center tomatch small firms with interest foreign buyers.The Center will provide translators, meeting rooms, faxmachines and other business services to exhibitors.  Theconference is being actively promoted to buyers, agents, anddistributors in 26 nations by the U.S. Department ofCommerce.  Export 1990 will also provide workshops for smallbusiness on export policy to convey information gathered fromSBA regional and district-level meetings held across thecountry.For more information on exhibiting or registering call1(800)368-5855.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Expo Tech '90Expo Tech '90, an advanced technology trade fair for smallbusinesses, will be held in New York on March 23, 1990.  Thefair will be jointly sponsored by AT&T, the New York CityOffice of Business Development, the New York Chamber ofCommerce and Industry, and tyhe Manhattan Borough DevelopmentCorporation.  The purpose of the fair is to expose smallbusinesses to current advances in computing, printing, andcomputer-related technology.For more information, call the Manhattan Borough DevelopmentCorporation at (212) 791-3660.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Freight '90The 1990 Convention of the National Customs Brokers andForwarders Association of America (NCBFAA), February 25 -March 1, will focus on major transportation issues in the1990s.The convention will include an exhibit of industry supplies,products, and services, featuring the latest innovations toenable brokers/forwarders to improve operations and trimcosts.For more information, contact John R. McBride at (212) 432-0050.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990EDIA - 21st ConferenceNational EDI Systems Conference and ExhibitThe Maturation of EDIBy R.T.CrowleyOnce again, as they have for the last score of years, themembers of the EDI community made their annual pilgrimage toWashington, DC to participate in the TDCC: The ElectronicData Interchange Association's two-and-a-half day conference.Actually, as any regular attendee to this event knows all toowell, the conference itself may last only two-and-a-halfdays, but the other related meetings and happenings scheduledby other groups in conjunction with it stretch things out toa full week.  While many of the usual rites of this regularweek long "mating season" of EDI were observed, there were anumber of notable new twists and additions that point the wayto the future evolution of EDI as we now know it.I am fond of saying that to be involved in EDI is to bepassionately in love with change.  EDI represents amonumental change to the way that mankind will communicateand do business, but EDI itself is changing in many ways.The first TDCC conference, twenty-one years ago, consisted ofa little less than one-hundred fifty individuals who cametogether to discuss the, then "brand new", technology of EDI.Most attendees were either traffic managers from transportcompanies or production managers from manufacturing companieswith a small sprinkle of computer professionals from the samecompanies to advise them about the technical aspects of thediscussions.  Over the intervening years, the cast of at-tendees has undergone a subtle change which was quiteapparent in the over two thousand people who came toWashington, DC this year.Traditionally, in our society, the twenty-first yearrepresents the point of passage from adolescence toadulthood.  This twenty-first year saw the coming of age of anew type of individual that can now take their place as theEDI Professional.  These individuals are the consultants,neo-consultants, and semi-consultants who work for many typesof companies, and specialize in EDI as a profession.Conferences like this one are the places where these peoplecome together to learn their trade, sharpen their skills, andshare ideas.  This conference showed that EDI is no longer asideline, but a primary job skill that needs to be treated assuch by business and industry.This process of maturation is good for EDI as a whole.  Formost of its life, EDI has been something that has beenrelegated to the systems departments of many companies withthe advice of the commercial management to identify theneeds of the company.  EDI now has to be taken as a primarycorporate function with roots extending into both thecommercial and systems side of any enterprise.This change in the complexion of EDI was evident in the typesof sessions presented at the conference.  In the past, thesesessions were devoted to discussions of the specificapplication of EDI in specific industries.  This year thataccent changed to a more general view of the use of EDI inbusiness as a whole.  The subjects presented included suchtopics as "EDI Support Requirements for Smaller TradingPartners," "EDI: An Academic Perspective," and "LegalConsiderations in Planning, Establishing and Managing EDIPrograms."All of these topics address the real business needs andtheories that underlie the true purpose for the use of EDI.EDI is not simply a means of automating specific businesstasks, but a way of integrating the flow of information,material, and product through a chain that starts with rawmaterials, progresses through transport and manufacturing,and ends at the ultimate consumer of the product.  This truenature of EDI was well evident at this year's conference.The exhibition area also reflected the view of EDI as aprofession in itself.  More exhibits than ever before showedthe tools of the EDI trade, rather than the specificapplications of EDI that are available for doing businesswith specific companies.  A myriad of generalized softwarepackages, communications networks, and consulting servicescould be seen in the exhibition area, that allow any companyto become EDI-capable in short order.  It was obvious thatEDI is now available to all levels and sizes of business, andat a reasonable cost.The most significant event of the conference, however, was aluncheon address by The Honorable Esteban E. Torres, UnitedStates House of Rep-resentatives (D-California).  CongressmanTorres used this forum to announce the proposal of aCongressional initiative to encourage the use of EDI in smallbusiness.  In his position as Chair of the House SmallBusiness Subcommittee on Environment and Labor, he statedthat he would hold a series of field hearings during thesummer of 1990 on the impact and application of EDI in thesmall business community of the United States.The Congressman also stated that he would investigatelegislation that would provide a tax credit for the use ofEDI for both small business and big business in theirinteraction with small business.  These two initiatives willgo a long way to encouraging the use of EDI to an evengreater extent, and is supported by an EDIA Task Forcedirected toward the Small Business Community of the UnitedStates.  The EDI community should welcome this announcementwith open arms, and support it to the best of their ability.We have always spoken of EDI as a concept that will lead usall to a bright future.  I suggest that future has nowdawned, and we will move into it during the 1990's.  Many arefond of talking of how different this world will be at theimpending change of millennium in the year 2000.  Theshifting of the world political climate, the 1992 accords inEurope, and the proliferation of EDI both nationally andinternationally will all contribute to this.  We, in EDI, canlook with pride to the significance of our own contributionto this change.For more information, contact Robert T. Crowley at Tel: (201-785-9560)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990EDI and Third Party ManagersMiddlemen on the Fast TrackBy Donald R. GreenwoodThe historical role of the freight forwarder and broker mustbe singled out if one is to understand the dynamics ofinternational trade.  This market segment has traditionallybeen comprised of numerous small and medium sized companies,the majority of which employs less than five people.Until quite recently, most of these forwarders and brokersused little automation in their day-to-day activities.  Theirprimary means of communication consisted of the telephone,facsimile, telex, couriers, and mail.  With the introductionof the mini- and micro- computers, many of these companiesbegan to automate their back office functions (i.e.,accounting and financial functions).  However, due to a lackof off-the-shelf software and the high cost of people todevelop new software applications, these computer systemswere rarely used in the day-to-day operation of managing thein and outbound international shipments.The emergence of Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) and itsassociated value-added computer applications, has sparked ademand for more accurate shipment information and processing.As a result, a new player-called the logistics managementcompany-is emerging.  These new full-service logisticscompanies manage the physical and information flow ofshipments-from the purchase order all the way through tofinal delivery.Logistics management companies are making investments incomputer hardware, application software, and communicationsto support their primary business.  This investment, in turn,is forcing changes on the forwarders and brokers to automatetheir own operations.  The need for expensive technology ismaking survival difficult for small and medium-sizedforwarders and brokers not servicing a niche market.The emergence of sophisticated third party managers hasled to several acquisitions and mergers within the industry.The resulting influx of investment capital is allowing thesecompanies to expand both vertically and horizontally, withthe resulting larger companies increasing their services andlocations worldwide.  If the current trend continues, itappears that fewer and larger forwarders, or "mega-forwarders", will be managing the movement of internationalshipments.  This trend is occurring within Europe, as well asin North America.If one were to forecast what changes are likely to occur inthe industry in the future, I would venture to say thatthe Electronic Forwarder will emerge in the mid-1990's.  TheElectronic Forwarder will be a fully automatedforwarder/broker who has access to a worldwide communicationsnetwork for the electronic exchange of documents andshipment-related information.It will be possible to exchange information instantaneouslybetween clients, carriers (both domestic and international),ports, government agencies, off-shore forwarders and brokers,as well as ultimate consignees.  This information will beavailable totally electronically and will provide immediateaccessibility from mainframe, mini-, and micro- computerslocated around the world.New products will include applications that address both theoperational and customer support needs of the industry.  Theywill meet the needs of both back-office support systems aswell as the primary activities of the companies in theinternational trade industry by integrating software with aworldwide communications network that provides:-shipment tracking and tracing (international and domestic)-transportation scheduling-electronic booking-equipment tracking and management-export/import documentation generation and exchangebroadcast messaging EDI with full standards support.-electronic payments-manifesting systems-bay plan managementAlthough initially these applications wil be developed foraccess via micro, mini, and mainframe computers, addressingvoice response systems via a handheld telephone handset willbe addressed.  These are just a few of the applications theGE Information Services are developing to address the needsof the industry.Mr. Greenwood is a senior consultant on trade andtransportation services at GE Information Services.  For moreinformation, Mr. Greenwood can be reached at (214) 788-8200.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990EDI StandardsEdifact and CEN Join Forces(Reprinted from EDIFACTS, the bulletin of the WesternEuropean EDIFACT Board.)In Helsinki, at a meeting held on the 27-28 September 1989,the WE/EB arrived at an agreement with the European standardsbody, CEN, which will give it associated body status.Cen, the European Committee for Standardization, is made upof the national standards bodies of the 18 EC and EFTA MemberStates.  It works to implement harmonized standards inEurope.Once standards have been issued by CEN, they must be adoptedby the CEN members as national standards.  CEN has alreadyadopted some of the components of UN/EDIFACT, issuing thedata element directory as EN27 372 and the syntax rules asEN29 735.  In the future, it will issue relevant UN messagesas European standards.The signing of this new agreement will strengthen thestandards - making the role of the WE/EB, putting Europeancompanies one step ahead in their preparations for theintegrated market place of 1992.For more information, contact the EDIFACT Awareness Group c/oSITPRO; (London) tel:  44-1-287-3525.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Technical Help To ExportersEuropean Certification UpdateA look at what has happened to approval marks over the lastseventeen years.In June 1972, Technical Help to Exporters' Quarterly Bulletinfeatured an article on approval marks.  It looked at a rangeof European marks then in existence, and the extensive usewhich many European manufacturers made of them to sell intodifferent countries. Seventeen years on, an understanding ofthe need for approval marks in the markets of differentcountries remains just as important, despite moves towardsEuropean harmonization.  All the marks shown in the 1972article are still in existence; in fact, a few have beenadded-particularly in Germany where the need for some thirdparty indication that a product is safe is most widespread.It must be admitted that most serious exporters are much moreaware of the need for some sort of an approval mark than theywere seventeen years ago.  But many still think that the'Common Market' and the approach of '1992' will obviate theneed for them to do much about it.Directives from the European Commission on subjects such asconstruction products, toys, personal protective equipment,and electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) are now illustratinga European CE mark which is intended to indicate compliancewith the directives.  In some cases a manufacturer can putthis mark on his product and thus make his own claim ofcompliance.  In other cases some test results from a'recognized' laboratory must be available to support theclaim.  This raises many questions:-Will the need fornational marks go away?  Will national marks be obsoleteafter 1992? Will national marks still be applied in additionto the CE mark, or will national marks come to mean more thanthey mean today, having 'quality', 'performance', or 'fitnessfor purpose' connotations?  The German government's GS markwhich means 'tested for safety' is in fact used together withthe mark of the organization which did the testing, such asVDE, TUV, BG, RAL, etc.In the UK the British Standars Institute (BSI) Kitemark whichhas existed since 1902 and the Safety Mark which wasdeveloped in 1973 both mean something to purchasers inBritain.  Both require a product not just to be safe but alsoto be backed up, by BSI, as an indication of establishedquality control.  The license has to satisfy BSI that hismanufacturing process is capable of consistently producing aproduct made under quality controlled conditions.  Othercountries' marks indicate a similar process and arerecognized as such by purchasers in these countries.  Theyare not, therefore, going to disappear overnight in 1992 justbecause the Commission publishes a directive whichpromulgates a CE mark.Maybe one day we shall see fewer certification marks thanthere are today but, as in the USA, it will be the marketplace that will determine which, or even if, a certain markis needed.  Exporters can not ignore the need forcertification now and in the future.Reprinted from Technical Export News, December 1989.  Formore information, contact Technical Help for Exporters, Tel:0908 220022 (UK)Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Standards EuropeReport of US - EC Standards DiscussionsReport provided by the Department of CommerceOn October 4 and 5, 1989, the U.S. Department of Commerce andU.S. private sector experts met with experts on standards-related matters from the European Community Commission andthe Committee for European Standardization (CEN) and theCommittee for European Electrotechnical Standardization(CENELEC) to discuss U.S. concerns arising from the EC's 1992initiatives to harmonize European standards, testing, andcertification.Mandate and ObjectiveThis was the first meeting between the United States and theEuropean Community that brought government and private sectorexperts together for a detailed review of standards-relatedmatters.  In recent months, representatives of U.S. andEuropean private sector standards interests met on theseissues.  However, there was a growing and an overwhelmingexpectation from the users of standards that governmentsneeded to formally engage on this matter to develop a broadand balanced review.It was expected that this meeting would clear up confusionand misunderstanding and relieve concern stemming from theEC's EC 1992 initiatives in standards, testing andcertification.  It was further expected that, where problemswere identified, the governments and their private sectorswould determine the appropriate next steps.The meetings resulted from a May 31 agreement between U.S.Secretary of Commerce Robert Mosbacher and the EC CommissionVice President Martin Bangemann.  At that time the U.S. andthe EC governments agreed that they:-share the goal that the EC's single market should contributeto sustaining an effective liberalization of trade andinvestment.-commit to the work of international standardization bodiesand the principle of transparency in standardization, testingand certification.-afford imports equal access to testing and certificationprocedures as enjoyed by domestic products.-encourage the recently-initiated exchanges between Europeanand United States standards bodies that advance these goals.-meet and formally discuss any issues of mutual concernregarding regulations, private sector standards activity, oraccess to testing and certification for products.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Standards Development In The European CommunityThe European Community has devised a series of sectoralstrategies to terminate trade barriers within the EC marketdue to standards-related practices.  These strategies followtwo general frameworks-one for regulated products and one fornon-regulated products.The European Community intends to regulate food, drugs,autos, and tractors by issuing mandatory harmonized Europeantechnical specifications legislated entirely by the ECCommission.  Any product meeting these legislated standardsis guaranteed the free circulation of the entire EC market.The European Commmunity also intends to legislate harmonizedessential requirements covering safety, consumer protection,and the environment for a wide range of products listed inthe Annex.  Products able to meet these essentialrequirements are guaranteed free circulation throughout theEuropean Community.The essential requirements and the criteria to meet theseessential requirements differ widely from product to productdepending on the level of risk and commercial factors.  EachEC product directive specifies these differences.  Directivesare published in the EC Official Journal.These product specific directives mandate the criteria to beapplied for declaring conformity to the mandatoryrequirements, types of testing, and the nature of thecertification required in order to market the product in theEuropean Community.The EC Commission has asked the European standards entities,CEN and CENELEC to develop voluntary product standards thatin general are presumed to meet the mandatory requirements inthe EC directives.  In the case of construction products, theEC Commission is developing "interpretative documents" andcode-type standards that concern the general safetyrequirements of the building and engineering works themselveswhich will ultimately be regulations.  At the same time,CEN/CENELEC is developing voluntary standards for theproducts that fall under this sector.For telecommunications equipment and software, the EuropeanTelecommunications Standards Institute is developingharmonized standards for terminal equipment and software.These standards must be adopted by telecommunicationsadministrations in Europe.  Any product meeting thesestandards is free to circulate in the European Community.All other products not covered by directives are unregulated.Technical specifications associated with the sale of theseproducts are those specified between a willing buyer and awilling seller.  Such unregulated products are guaranteedfree circulation throughout the community.Freedom of circulation in the EC Community for regulated andunregulated products is supported by the legal principle ofmutual recognition.  That is, any product that is able to besold in one EC member state market is guaranteed access toall other EC markets.For the regulated products listed in the annex, theCEN/CENELEC needs to develop 900 product standards byJanuary 1, 1993.  In the event that harmonized CEN/CENELECstandards are not completed by that date, the EuropeanCommunity will adopt an interim standard until theCEN/CENELEC work can be completed.  This interim standardwill probably be selected from the existing Europeanstandards which most closely approximates the requirements inthe EC legislation.  The EC could select a non-EC standard.The EC probably will not allow the mutual recognition ofexisting national standards as the transition.Although the EC Commission has no intention of changingproduct standards legislation already adopted, in certaininstances current legislation will be amended to simplifyrequirements within product groups and improve consistency ofapproach for companies.  For example, the machinery directivewill be amended to include small forklift trucks and liftingand loading equipment which were covered by previouslegislation.  In like manner, the EC is reevaluating theconsistency of approach for electrical products which couldresult in amendments to recent directives and the terminationof older directives.Because the EC product directives were developed over aperiod of 5 years or more, there are a variety ofinconsistent requirements for products regarding testing,certification and marking.  The EC Commission can be expectedto develop various amendments as the system evolves.For telecommunications equipment and software, the EuropeanTelecommunications Standards Institute is developingharmonized standards for terminal equipment and software.These standards must be adopted by telecommunicationsadministrations in Europe.  Any product meeting thesestandards is free to circulate in the European Community.All other products not covered by directives are unregulated.Technical specifications associated with the sale of theseproducts are those specified between a willing buyer and awilling seller.  Such unregulated products are guaranteedfree circulation throughout the community.Freedom of circulation in the EC Community for regulated andunregulated products is supported by the legal principle ofmutual recognition.  That is, any product that is able to besold in one EC member state market is guaranteed access toall other EC markets.For the regulated products listed in the annex, theCEN/CENELEC needs to develop 900 product standards byJanuary 1, 1993.In the event that harmonized CEN/CENELEC standards are notcompleted by that date, the European Community will adopt aninterim standard until the CEN/CENELEC work can be completed.This interim standard will probably be selected from theexisting European standards which most closely approximatesthe requirements in the EC legislation.  The EC could selecta non-EC standard.  The EC probably will not allow the mutualrecognition of existing national standards as thetransition.Although the EC Commission has no intention of changingproduct standards legislation already adopted, in certaininstances current legislation will be amended to simplifyrequirements within product groups and improve consistency ofapproach for companies.  For example, the machinery directivewill be amended to include small forklift trucks and liftingand loading equipment which were covered by previouslegislation.  In like manner, the EC is reevaluating theconsistency of approach for electrical products which couldresult in amendments to recent directives and the terminationof older directives.Because the EC product directives were developed over aperiod of 5 years or more, there are a variety ofinconsistent requirements for products regarding testing,certification and marking.  The EC Commission can be expectedto develop various amendments as the system evolves.The European Community requires all member states to regulatefurther national standards development so that new standardsactivity does not interfere in the EC internal market.Generally, member states must notify the EC of new nationalstandards development proposals and the EC Commission mustdecide if it wants to intercede with a proposal for thedevelopment of an EC-wide standard.  Also, under the SingleEuropean Act, EC member states may keep a previously existingessential requirement more stringent than the EC proposal ifthe EC Commission agrees.  These are the only exceptions tothe harmonization process.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990International Standardization and EC 1992In order to complete its work by January 1, 1993, CEN/CENELEChas stated that it wants to use international standards (ISOand IEC standards) where these standards are appropriate tomeet the EC's essential requirements and the standards can bedeveloped in a timely manner.The United States stated that sole reliance on ISO/IECrequires effort to make the ISO/IEC activities and proceduresrelevant to manufacturers and professionals in the respectivemarkets.The United States stated that it was interested in using theISO/IEC forum as one of the ways to participate in the ECstandards development. In some products, the EC had adoptedIEC and ISO standards.  However, in many product areas therewas no international work, international work had beenblocked, or international work was not being used.The United States government and the EC Commission agreed toreview the ability of their respective private standardsbodies to live up to their commitment to use internationalstandards.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Transparency of EC Commission and CEN/CENELECThe EC Commission will not share early drafts of ECdirectives.  The only official access to information onessential requirements is in the EC Official Journal.The EC Commission is willing to consult with U.S. interestsat any point over its regulations.  CEN/CENELEC stated thatit has recently instituted several changes to make itsprocess more transparent to non-members. CEN/CENELECpublishes draft standards and monthly activity reports thatsummarize working group activities.  These publications areavailable through ANSI New York City.CEN/CENELEC has agreed to accept comments from U.S. intereststhrough ANSI in New York City.  Comments may be made at anystage of standardization.ANSI intends to submit all U.S. comments on CEN/CENELECstandards activities to review by the Technical AdvisoryGroups (TAGs) before being submitted to CEN/CENELEC.  Inthe absence of TAGs, ANSI intends to submit comments directlyto CEN/CENELEC.CEN/CENELEC have encouraged their working groups to acceptoral presentations from non-EC interests.ANSI reported that its proposal to ISO to have members of theISO technical committees participate in the standardsdevelopment work of the CEN/CENELEC had been refused. ANSIreported that CEN agreed to joint review of work plans.The US government and the EC Commission agreed to review theeffectiveness of these methods of transparency worked outbetween CEN/CENELEC and ANSI.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Testing and CertificationFor regulated products, on the date of implementation of ECproduct directives, the European Community intends to allowonly the sale of such products that bear a CE mark ofconformity to EC essential requirements.  Regulated productswithout this mark cannot be sold in the EC.The ECE mark will signify that the regulated products havecomplied with the EC essential requirements and will beallowed free circulation in the EC.The CE mark signifies that the product conforms with theessential requirements in the EC directives in a mannerspecified in the applicable EC product directive.While many of these product directives rely on CEN/CENELECproduct standards, other standards may be recognized and insome product directives adherence to standards are notexpected.No mark is required for non-regulated products except thoseagreed by a willing buyer and seller.Additional marks will continue to be affixed to products as"quality" marks signifying performance or safety levels morestringent than that specified by the CE mark.  Absence ofthose national "quality" marks does not affect the legalright to market a product.For the most part, the date of implementation of these ECproduct directives is in 1992 but no later than January 1,1993.  (Toys, pressure vessels and electromagneticcompatibility are implemented in 1990 and 1991).EC product directives covering products listed in the annexspecify the means of proving conformance.  These mandatoryprocedures offer some flexibility to manufacturers to chooseamong options to show compliance but the specific directivedictates the type of conformance procedure and theserequirements must be met.Proof of conformance requires that the CE mark be affixed tothe product.  Depending on the EC product directive, the CEmark can be affixed by the manufacturer or an approved body.Interpretation of essential requirements related to ECproduct directives summarized on the previous pages and theinterpretation of compliance with European Norms or standardsgenerated by CEN/CENELEC rely upon approved bodies to performtests, certify compliance, audit quality control systems andso on.At this time, member state governments are the only entitiesthat can approve these testing and certifying bodies toperform the services required in the EC directives.The EC Commission states that approved bodies in the EC mustcarry out the third party intervention in a non-discriminatory manner.At this time, member states will only approve entities toperform services required by the EC directives that arelocated within their national boundaries.  Member states alsoare required to accept the approvals of all other memberstates in the products covered by the directives.Selected EC product directives rely on accreditation ofquality assurance techniques in manufacturing plants as themeans to show compliance with an essential requirement.CEN/CENELEC has adopted EN29000 series standards on qualityassurance to advance harmonization.  EN29000 is the Europeanversion of ISO 9000.In like manner, EC testing labs, inspection and certifyingbodies follow EN45000 standards on establishing competence ofbodies.  CEN/CENELEC is developing sectoral elaborations forthese rules as well as EN29000.It is EC Commission's recommendation that in the futureforeign bodies be approved to perform regulated activitiescalled for in the EC product directives outside the EC.  Inorder to have any force in the marketplace, the EC Councilmust adopt the EC Commission recommendation.  Counciladoption may come as soon as January 1990.The EC Commission has recommended that foreign testing andcertifying bodies be required to satisfy the same criteriafor becoming an EC approving authority as is inherentlyapplied to the EC testing and certifying authorities.Therefore, foreigners must be prepared to:-guarantee adherence to the EC essential requirements-adopt EN29000 and EN45000 series of standards as the basictechnical instruments for performing regulated activities.(Any sectoral adaptations to these basic series developed bythe EC must also be complied with.)-competence must be maintained on a continuous basis.-guarantees must be developed for equivalent and equal accessto the market provide for mutual benefits under the systems.In the case of foreign approvals the EC will look for anational system that can guarantee that approval bodies meetEC requirements.  This does not have to be the U.S.government nor does it have to be a single system for allproducts or approvals.The EC Commission expects that the approved bodies notifiedunder the directives will carry out the negotiations withthird country entities to establish mutual recognitionagreements.  EC Council will approve these agreements beforethey can be implemented to assure that the objectives of theEC have been met.All existing bilateral agreements between EC member statetesting and certifying bodies and third country bodies willhave to be transposed (renegotiated) as EC-wide bilateralagreements when the EC product directives are implementedunder the conditions stated above including "mutualbenefits."In addition to the CE mark, many EC directives requireadditional product labels that give an EC contact point forthe manufacturer.  In virtually all directives, the Europeanstandard developed by CEN/CENELEC carries additional weightthat aids the manufacturer to establish conformity to theessential requirements in the EC product directive.For more information, contact Charles Ludolph, Director,Office of European Community Affairs, International TradeAdministration, Washington D.C. 20230.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 19901992 Center in the U.S.George Mason University CenterFocus on 1992George Mason University's Center for European Community (EC)Studies, which opened last month in Norfolk, Virginia, is noivory tower enterprise.  The Center was established with theexplicit purpose of providing the business community withinformation and assistance in understanding developments inEuropean efforts to establish a single market by 1992.GMU's designation as a European Documentation Center, by theEuropean Commission in Brussels, will help it to accomplishthis goal.  The Center will receive all EC officialpublications and will have unlimited access to EC databasesin Brussels and Luxembourg.  With these resources, it will bea unique information base for Northern Virginia and thegreater Washington area; both of which generate a strongdemand for international economic information.The colleges of George Mason University will also benefitfrom the center's resources, as well as its promotion ofresearch, conferences, and seminars on EC issues.  Theundertaking of collaberative research projects betweenEuropean and American academics will also benefit the rest ofthe University.Another GMU program of particular interest to exporters isthe Entrepreneurship Institute.  Established in 1986, theinstitute has focused its efforts on encouragingentrepreneurial approaches to business.  On the internationallevel, the institute aims to promote export expansion,particularly amongst small, high-technology companies.  TheEuropean center will give impetus to their efforts byproviding access to information about the latest developmentsin the European market.The EC Center will also house the headquarters of theEuropean Community Studies Association (ECSA), an associationof European scholars and researchers in the United States.The organization held its first conference in May 1989 withits second planned for May 1991.For more information, write to Dr. Desmond Dinan, Center forEuropean Community Studies, George Mason University, Suite450, Quincy Street Station, 4001 North Fairfax Drive.Arlington, VA  22203Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Predex ForecastUpdate of a Ten-Year ForecastProvided by Predex Corp.The RandTen years ago a client asked us to forecast the rand tenyears out.  Last March the Financial Mail reported theresults (see below), and wondered how the model, updated withdata of the past decade, would forecast the next ten years.Under the conditions described below, this simple model seesthe rand recovering in 1990-91.How bad can a worst-case scenario be?  Worse even than aforecaster's wildest expectations.  A 10-year projection onthe rand, made in 1980 by U.S. currency analyst CharlesRamond, plotted a series of alternative outcomes based on 12different scenarios-and failed to come up with any estimateas bad as reality.Though Ramond, president of Predex Corporation, "oldestindependent forecaster of currencies," correctly interpretedthe trend, he failed to foresee the strength of the forcesworking against the rand.  His worst-case prediction waspitched at a rand of around US75 cents in 1988 - instead ofthe 43 cents it actually averaged last year.Why was reality so much worse than expected?Within the confines of the model, two assumptions turned outto be grossly understated.  The predictions thrown out bywhat Ramond describes as a naive model were based on twofactors: the real price of gold (the price adjusted for USinflation), and US inflation in relation to the SA inflationrate.When the forecast was written in 1980, says Ramond, the randhad been worth between $1,15-$1,40 for most of 14 years."Inflation was raging worldwide, US long rates were nearing20% and a Federal Reserve (Fed) chairman named Volcker wasabout to throttle that inflation with the deepest USrecession since World War 2."As a result of Volcker's success, Ramond was wrong in two ofthree assumptions. Though he correctly predicted SA'sinflation rate was likely to be higher than that of the US ifit was not the same, he did not foresee:-The real gold price falling, as it has uninterruptedly upuntil the present; or-The wide divergence between inflation rates in the US andSA.Ramond estimated the lowest year-on-year change in US CPIwould be 5%. "It actually reached 2% before rising again.Similarly for SA, the highest CPI we assumed in any year was14%-which it has exceeded for the past four years."Factors not taken into account by the model, which exerted apowerful influence on the rand in recent years, were capitalflight and credit sanctions.  The effect of these isillustrated in the graph which carries a forecast based onactual gold prices and relative inflation rates of the US andSA, contrasted with what happened in the years to 1988. Thediscrepancy is due to factors outside the model.Crucial to the future course of the rand is the continuingsuccess of US monetary policy.On this score Ramond has some reservations.  He says, ina recent presentation on the US economy, present Fed chairmanAlan Greenspan referred to an (unidentified) economicindicator which has been flashing warnings of inflation forseveral years.  And, as a result, he has been attempting tochoke back growth in M2 since last March.Ramond believes Greenspan's attempts to hold downinflationary forces may be undermined by monetisation ofdebts of the devasted savings and loan industry.What is bad news for the US may then bring a measure of goodto SA.For more information, contact Predex Corp. (212) 319-6400.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Political Risk LetterCountry UpdatesPolitical and Economic Forecasts from PRS, a division of IBCUSA.Changes in Eastern EuropeThis article is a summary of a special report in theDecember 1989 issue of Country Forecasts, which containsdetailed analysis and comparative rankings of the countriesof Eastern Europe.Irreversible Momentum for Economic Liberalization:The introduction of market mechanism in the Soviet Union andmost of the other Eastern European states is irreversible.At the same time, the movement toward open economies will beslow and tortuous.  Many pockets of political andbureaucratic opposition remain to disrupt reform, so that therules of the game will be altered frequently.  The keyelements will be ability of Gorbachev to remain in power inthe Soviet Union and the progress made in East Germany towardeconomic coordination with West Germany.Political reform, on the other hand, will proceed at a muchslower pace, with movement toward liberalization intermixedwith repression.  Political liberalization may even bestymied, particularly if nationality conflict increasessubstantially in the Soviet Union.  However, even a return towidespread political repression, would only slow, notreverse, economic liberalization.Business Prospects Are Improved, But Limited:Within the next 3 to 5 years the risks of unexpected andunusual costs outweigh the potential for profits except forthe sale of products and services that improve the base forlong-range economic development.Key Risk Factors:-A chronic shortage of foreign currency.-Poor training, experience, and attitude among both labor andmanagement.-An entrenched bureaucracy resistant to change.These problems are similar to those that plague most ThirdWorld countries.  The difference with Eastern Europe is thatits economies, while under-developed, contain much morepotential than those of Africa and Latin America.  Theworkforce is relatively educated and the underclass isrelatively small.  In addition, the economic development ofEastern Europe is a much higher priority to the countries ofWestern Europe than economic development in Latin America orsub-Sahara Africa is to the industrialized countries.Better business prospects are by no means certain.  In anycase, the opportunities will not be uniform throughoutEastern Europe. Continued improvement depends on severaleconomic and political conditions, including avoidance ofnationallity conflicts and territorial disputes; continuedcooperation between the United States and the USSR; thecoming to power of competent leadership in Eastern Europe;and adequate aid and investment from OECD countries.If these conditions were to develop, the economies of mostEastern European countries could be equal in strength andbusiness potential to some of the newly industrializedcountries by the year 2000.Pre-1945 Economic Performance Will Be A Guide To TheFuture:In estimating the varying strengths and weaknesses of theeconomies of Eastern Europe, the health of the economiesprior to World War II is a better guideline than the currentpolitical attitudes toward reform.  It is easier to changepolitical leaders, official government policies, and evenideology than the attitudes of potential business managers,the discipline and skill of the labor force, and economicinfrastructure.  In addition to these crucial long-termeconomic factors, it is also necessary to look at eachcountry's debt, hard currency positions, and experience withprivate market mechanism during the last forty years.  Basedon these political, economic, and financial considerationsEastern European countries are ranked below-from the best toworst-with respect to climate for international business overthe next ten years:(1) East Germany(2) Czechoslovakia(3) Hungary(4) Poland(5) Romania(6) USSR(7) Bulgaria(8) YugoslaviaThe events in Eastern Europe will have a variety of effectson other parts of the world.  Most important is in WesternEurope, especially West Germany. German firms already have ahead start on trade and investment in Eastern Europe, andwill be able to move quickly to take advantage of the newopportunities in the region.  The movement toward EC 1992will not be significantly slowed by recent events, as long asthe question of German reunification does not become astumbling block.  Firms from North America and Japan willfind it much more difficult than European firms to capitalizeon developments on the continent.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Bulgaria-Slow Economic ReformAfter resisting pressure for reform from both the SovietUnion and within the country, Bulgaria's long-term leader,Tidor Zhivkov, stepped down in November.  The government hadpermitted more dissent in recent months despite occasionalcrackdowns, and had allowed some private activity in theservice sector at the urging of the Soviet Union.  However,events in East Germany in November appear to have convincedthe leadership that Zhivkov had to go and that economicreform had to be pursued more vigorously.Poor economic conditions and resistance from within thebureaucracy and party will limit the speed of economicreform.  The new leadership itself is drawn from those whowere influential in the Zhivkov regime.  The new Communistparty leader is Petar Mladenov who was the Foreign Ministerudner the previous regime for 18 years.  The most crucialfactor, however, will be the degree of economic progress inthe more reformist Eastern Europe.  Bulgaria will continue tofollow rather than lead in dismantling the state control ofits economy.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Brazil-Collor Slight FavoriteThe first state of the voting has left a clear choice for theBrazilian electorate which votes on December 17th.  Thefront-runner in the first round was the forty year old formerstate governor, Fernando Collor de Mello, who will face thelabor leader Luis Inacio da Silva, popularly referred to asLula. Collor is advocating privatization and austerity andopenness to international business while Lula is calling forstrong central government control, land reform, and lessopenness to international business.With a television debate and stronger party base for Lula,Collor will have a tough time winning the election despitehis strong showing in the first election.  However, supportfrom the center and right along with his youth should enablehim to win a close race. Because the two houses of Congressare likely to be hopelessly divided among several parties,whoever wins the presidency is likely to pursue policies lessextreme than the positions they currently advocate.Nevertheless, a victory by Collor is much preferred by thedomestic and international business community.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990China-Business Conditions DeclineDespite an attempt to attract new foreign investment withpromises of more open-door policies, the government will beunable to reverse declines touched off by the studentuprising in June 1989.  Foreign exchange reserves aredrastically down, from $19 billion in April to $14 billion inJune.  Foreign debt service payments to reach peak in the1990-1992 period, although the debt service ratio is stilllow compared with other Third World countries.  China will bepaying higher interest rates because of a reduced creditrating by international financial institutions.Japanese businesses have maintained their investments inChina, but Japanese banks are not likely to put in moremoney.  Several joint-venture automobile factories have beenforced to close because of reduced domestic demand andbureaucratic inaction.  More restrictions on imports can beexpected to protect foreign reserves.Tough austerity measures have slowed growth and halted whatwas becoming a runaway inflation.  However, populardissatisfaction with the measures will require tightpolitical control, which will further reduce worker morale.The replacement of troops with police at key points inBeijing will likely be followed by other symbolic acts on thepolitical front, such as the removal of martial law, in orderto reduce human rights pressure.  Business interests havelost influence among the leadership, and the ascendance ofthe hardliners is likely to last for some time.For more information, contact Political Risk Services (315)472-1224.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Shipping RegulationsReport on the 1984 Shipping ActThe following has been abstracted from an executive summaryof the Section 18 Report on The Shipping Act of 1984,published by the Federal Maritime Commission, September 1989.OverviewUnder the 1984 Act's new agreement review process andstandard, the Commission experienced (a) an increase in theaverage number of agreements and modifications filed eachyear; (b) a reduction in average processing time peragreement; and (c) a decline in the cost of proceedingsbefore the Commission.  These changes freed more Commissionresources for expanded enforcement actions which broughtabout significant increases in penalty collections.These procedural improvements also enabled the Commission todevote more time to address foreign government restraints onshipping.  The Commission instituted more proceedings undersection 19 of the Merchant Marine Act, 1920, since enactmentof the 1984 Act than at any other comparable period of time.These Commission actions have had a positive influence ontrading conditions in the US foreign commerce.The 1984 Act's reforms did not bring about the negativeconsequences that some observers predicted.  The creation of"superconferences" and the increase in rationalizationagreements did not result in sharp rate increases,curtailment of shipping services, or loss of independentcarrier competition.  The 1984 Act did not have a significantimpact on rate levels, service frequency, and the strength ofindependent competition.  The US trades remained open andcompetitive.The popularity of the IA and the service contract provisionsof the 1984 Act led to a disagreement about whether commoncarriage obligations should be relaxed.  In particular, majorshippers have called for a greater role for contractcarriage.  These shippers would like Congress to establish aclear distinction between common carriage under tariff ratesand carriage under service contracts.  They would (a) requirethat the terms of service contracts be kept confidential; and(b) prohibit conferences from restricting the right to theirmembers to enter into service contracts.Carriers, on the other hand, assert that these steps wouldultimately undermine the tariff system, the conferencesystem, and the principle of common carriage in oceanshipping.  Instead, they advocate continued filing andpublication of the "essential terms" of service contracts andthe availability of those terms to similarly situatedshippers.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990The Impact of the 1984 Act on the International ShippingIndustryAs required by the 1984 Act, the Commission collected andanalyzed information on the Act's impact on rates, service,independent carriers, and regulatory proceedings.  Inaddition, the Commission conducted a series of annual surveysto solicit the views of the maritime industry on theconsequences of the 1984 Act.  These survey results weresupplemented by policy papers presented by industryrepresentatives serving on the Section 18 Study AdvisoryCommittee.The major conclusions to be drawn from this information areas follows.Data and Analysis on the Impact of the 1984 Act(1) The Commission experienced an increase in the averagenumber of carrier agreements and modifications filed eachyear, and a reduction in the average processing time peragreement.(2) Changes in the agreement review process and standard ofreview made easier the creation of superconferences and theuse of conference intermodal authority.(3) The 45-day agreement effectiveness provision in the 1984Act decreased the average processing time for agreements tobecome effective to less than one-third of that required forapproval prior to the 1984 Act.  The total cost of majorproceedings declined as well.(4) Following implementation of the 1984 Act, there was adecline in the number of major proceedings before theCommission coupled with a modest increase in the averagelength of those proceedings.  The Commission was able,therefore, to concentrate its resources on more complexproceedings and other issues, including enforcement cases andstrategies.(5) Independent action rates and service contracts expandedthe commercial options available to the shipping public.  Insome trades, port-to-port tariff rates became the exceptionrather than the rule.(6) The main factors that explain freight rate structures(value, tonnage, distance, direction, stowage, refrigeration)did not change appreciably as a result of the 1984 Act.Where change was noted - in the significance of the directionvariable (i.e., outbound US versus inbound US)- the mostlikely cause appeared to be trade flow imbalances, ratherthan provisions of the 1984 Act.(7) Quarterly rate data on the major moving commodities in 18US trades between 1976 and 1988 indicate that fluctuations inthe supply of and demand for liner shipping services - not IAand service contract provisions -were the basic cause of therate changes that occurred after implementation of the 1984Act.(8) A comparative study of rate stability in 18 US tradesbefore and after implementation of the 1984 Act indicatesthat only six US/Pacific trades experienced a decrease inrate stability.  However, that decrease began in 1982,suggesting that changes in the international economy were theprimary cause.(9) A comparison of shipping capacity growth rates before andafter implementation of the 1984 Act showed that, of the sixUS trades studied (North Europe, the North Pacific, the SouthPacific, Italy, Australia and Brazil), three trades exhibitedno dramatic changes in growth; two trades showed significantincreases in capacity growth; and one trade, the Australiatrade, showed a decrease in capacity growth.  These resultssuggest that the prevailing economic conditions in specifictrades, rather than particular provisions of the 1984 Act,were the important influences on the level of capacityprovided to shippers.(10) A comparison of the largest US trade, the Pacific trade,with the largest non-US trade, North Europe/Far East,involving nine basic service parameters, revealed broadlysimilar patterns of change during 1984 to 1988 period.  Theseresults further support the view that factors other than the1984 Act were mainly responsible for changes in servicelevels.(11) Data from the six trades studied indicate that nocontraction in the average number of direct ship callsoccurred between 1984-1988.  In fact, the average number ofcalls made annually in the US port regions studied increasedslightly.(12) As inland transport costs declined relative to all-watertransport costs, service concentration at the US rangeclosest to the foreign destination increased.(13) The relative strength of independent carriers, asreflected in the proportion of total shipping capacityprovided, has changed little since the implementation of the1984 Act.  In some individual trades, such as the NorthEurope trade, independents made significant market shareinroads.(14) Independent carriers made significant gains in terms oftonnage carried in the largest US trade, i.e., the Pacifictrade.(15) Comparisons of value-to-tonnage ratios betweenconference and independent carriers show that in most UStrades, conference cargo mixes yield a higher ratio.  Butfigures also show that independent carriers reduced thedifference between their ratio and those of the conferencesin most US trades.  Independents appear to be increasing theproportion of high-valued cargo in their cargo mix.(16) The Brazil trade, with its bilateral maritime agreement,revenue pooling agreements, and cargo reservation laws, ischaracterized by high conference market share with noindependent action on rates.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Industry Views on the 1984 Shipping ActThe views offered by various industry segments affected bythe 1984 Act varied widely.  They varied both acrossindustries and within each industry.  A presentation of eachindustry group's views is contained in Chapter 7.  To theextent that consensus exists on some key points, thefollowing broad conclusions can be drawn:(1) There is industry support for retaining an "open"conference system in the US trades.  Alternative approaches,such as prohibiting conferences or allowing "closed"conferences, had little support.(2) A majority of the international ocean shipping industrysupported the proposition that tariffs continue to be filedwith, and enforced by, the FMC.(3) The revised agreement review process in the 1984 Act hasproven beneficial.(4) The more controversial 1984 Act provisions are (a) themandatory independent action provision, and (b) the provisionpermitting service contracts.  Generally, shippers tended toendorse shorter notice periods for IA and the extension of IAto service contracts, while carriers tended to prefer theopposite.Volume and Mass Tariff System(1) In response to Commission surveys, neither users norproviders of tariffs favored a system of tariffs based solelyon volume and mass (i.e., weight or measure) or afreight-all-kinds system.(2) An analysis of the economic implications of adopting asystem of tariffs based on volume and mass suggests that sucha system could cause distortions in the existingtransportation system.(3) Volume and mass tariffs might lead to a simpler system,and therefore require less regulatory oversight.  Such asystem could also:(a) reduce the movement of low-valued cargo in the US trades;(b) increase the impact of IA on conferences;(c) create distortions in the choice of ports if Canada, forexample, does not impose a similar system; and(d) complicate intermodal ratemaking.(4) Based on both data and theory, it is difficult to make acase for adopting a system of tariffs based on volume andmass of shipment.(5) There was some support, especially among shippers, for alump-sum per container system.  This suggests support a moresimplified tariff structure.(6) There is little data to support the contention that thecurrent rate structure results from conferences' exercise ofmonopoly power.Antitrust Immunity for Ports and Marine Terminal Operators(1) The regulation of marine terminals was a reaction to thepricing policies of railroad-owned marine terminals and theireffects on competition among shippers lines.  The currentsystem of terminal control and coordination by state-sponsored public port authorities does not present similarthreats to competition.(2) The need for antitrust immunity to lessen excessivecompetition depends on one's theoretical point of view.  Theneoclassical economic interpretation concludes that there isno strong case for antitrust immunity.  On the other hand,the Austrian economic view states that a case can be made forgranting antitrust immunity.(3) Public or quasi-public agencies are not motivated solelyby economic considerations, and antitrust principles based onthe traditional ideas of competition may not be fullyapplicable.  Interport conferences that include members fromtwo or more states generally are not successful in reducinginterport competition.(4) There is no clear public benefit in allowing privatemarine terminal operators to collectively fix rates andcharges within a port.  Granting antitrust protection forsuch purposes may not be necessary or economicallyjustifiable.(5) The need to provide antitrust immunity for portauthorities and private terminal operators to allow "parity"with carrier conferences is questionable.  Carriers'bargaining strength over terminal leases or services isgenerally due to port-related geographical and logisticalfactors and the availability of alternative ports-of-call,not to the carriers' 1984 Act antitrust immunity.(6) Public port authorities may enjoy protection from USantitrust laws even without 1984 Act antitrust immunity.However, not all ports may enjoy the same level of immunity.This could result in a nonuniform application of antitrustimmunity.(7) Whether to retain the current 1984 Act antitrust immunityprovisions dealing with marine terminals, or to limit themonly to public port authorities, or to remove themaltogether, requires a value judgment that balances allregulatory concerns.  These include economic analysis,antitrust policy, state and federal regulatoryresponsibilities, and established industry practices.FMC Tariff Filing and Enforcement(1) The historical record reflects a continuing reliance ontariff filing and enforcement.(2) Based on annual survey responses, a majority of theshipping industry favor the continuation of the existingtariff filing and enforcement system.(3) Surveys indicate that carriers believe they shouldcontinue to have the right to file excepted commodity rates,but oppose IA on these rates.  Shippers are divided on thefiling issue but favor mandatory IA on excepted commodityrates.(4) Surveys of the tariff filing and enforcement practices offoreign governments reveal a trend towards increased tariffregulation.(5) The commission would find it difficult to meet itslegislatively mandated responsibilities in the absence oftariff requirements.(6) Of the policy options considered, only the existingsystem ensures a nondiscriminatory ocean transportationsystem.(7) The existing tariff filing and enforcement mechanism, inan open conference environment, can promote marketefficiency, ensure fair treatment of shippers by carriers,and preserve just competition between carriers.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990Summaries of Supplementary ReportsService Contracts(1) Service contracts have had a significant impact upon themaritime community.  During the period of study, carriers andconferences filed 17,103 service contracts and substantialamounts of cargo moved under those contracts.(2) Sixty-nine percent of service contract filings were byindependents (or individual conference carriers), and 31percent were by conferences.(3) Evergreen Line filed more service contracts (2,333) thanany other carrier or conference.  The Asia North AmericaEastbound Rate Agreement ("ANERA") had the second highesttotal (1,317), and the North Europe-U.S. Atlantic Conferencewas third (1,253).(4) There was a wide variation in rates between servicecontracts and tariffs for similar commodities carried byconferences.(5) Industry opinions are mixed on both effects of servicecontracts and the extent to which the service contractprovisions of the 1984 Act should be amended.(a) Since 1986, carriers have increasingly indicated thatservice contracts have had a positive impact on their firms.(b) Shippers, especially those who have successfullynegotiated them, view service contracts favorably.(c) Majority support existed in the maritime community forcontinuing to require that the essential terms of servicecontracts be made publicly available.However, a significant number of shippers prefer confidentialcontracts.(d) Carriers oppose, while shippers support requiringindependent action on service contracts.Independent Action(1) IA allows conference members to offer lower rates andmore responsive service to shippers.  IA enhances thecompetitiveness and flexibility of conferences because themembers are able to compete both among themselves and withindependents.  If intraconference competition becomes toointense, the ability of the conference to stabilize rates canbe threatened.  Although mandatory independent action mayhave expedited changes in tariff rates, market conditionsdetermined their ultimate levels.(2) The large number of IAs taken by two conferences in thePacific trades, the Transpacific Westbound Rate Agreement("TWRA") AND ANERA, may reflect the level of competition fromindependents in those trades.  The recent decrease in the useof IAs by TWRA carriers may be explained by growing USexports that have served to reduce excess shipping capacity.Slowing imports may be the reason for the growing use of IAby ANERA carriers.(3) Mandatory independent action in conference agreements wasnot subject to as much debate as was the length of themaximum IA notice period.  The current ten-day maximum periodwas opposed by carriers and supported by shippers.  While theten-day notice period may have facilitated carrier ratereductions, it did not cause them.  The cause was more likelyovertonnaging.(4) Service contract rates were affected by IA on tariffrates because tariff rates were often the basis fornegotiating service contract rates.(5) It is difficult to formulate specific conclusionsconcerning IA on service contracts (i.e., a member's right toenter into individual service contracts), because of theminimal amount of such activity under the 1984 Act.  Theimpact of service contract IA on the conference's ability toestablish uniform rates in an overtonnaged market could lastlonger than for IA on tariffs, because a service contracteffectively diverts at least a portion of a shipper's cargofrom other carriers for the duration of the contract (ratherthan for a single voyage).Technical Adjustments, Clarifications, and AnomaliesThe Commission has identified certain provisions of the 1984Act which are unclear or might create unintended effects.these provisions are discussed in the Section 18 Report'sfinal chapter.Copies of the full "Section 18 Report on the Shipping Act of1984" are available from the Superintendant of Documents,Stock No.  014-000-000-80-1Back to Headline List WT03-B05-2IA087-000634-B038-25http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it114.html 205.156.212.5 19970122024629 text/html 73252HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:43:56 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:46 GMTContent-length: 73065Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it114.html Sample Issue Copyright THE EXPORT PRACTITIONER via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FEATURES KENNEDY, D'AMATO ADD LIBYA TO IRAN OIL SANCTIONS BILL Bill lacks the real teeth that proponents claim (642 words) CWC-FREE AT LAST! Senate expected to ratify by late spring '96 (733 words) ENCRYPTION AT A CROSSROADS-THE FIRST OF MANY Industry calling for more liberal export criteria (903 words) WASSENAAR ARRANGEMENT (A.K.A. "NEW FORUM") TO TAKE PLACE OF COCOM The United States and its allies commence post cold war export control regime (838 words) ANTICIPATING THE FINAL FORMAT OF NEW BXA REGULATIONS (759 words) OPINION PARIAH RESTRAINT Sanctions and Sanctimony on the Banking Committee by E.J. Prior and Michael Schaffer (841 words) VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE Third in a four-part series (2111 words) MONTHLY FEATURES FOCUS ON ENFORCEMENT (1112 words) LOGISTICS LOG (703 words) INSIDE BXA (1793 words) REGULATIONS BRIEFS (98 words) TABLE OF DENIAL ORDERS (109 words) UPCOMING TAC MEETINGS (81 words) CopyrightTHE EXPORT PRACTITIONER via NewsNetJanuary 1996KENNEDY, D'AMATO ADD LIBYA TO IRAN OILSANCTIONS BILLBill lacks the real teeth that proponents claimThe Senate on December 20 passed the Iran Oil Sanctions Act of 1995(S. 1228), a bill sponsored by Senator Alfonse D'Amato (R-NY) toimpose discretionary sanctions on  foreign companies that invest over$40 million in the Iranian oil industry in any year.  The bill is awatered-down incarnation of other foreign sanctions bills advanced byD'Amato earlier in the year, and is unlikely to be enforced frequentlyenough to ignite disputes with U.S. trading partners.  In a last-minutemaneuver, Senator Edward Kennedy (D-MA) made Libya an additionaltarget of the sanctions bill.The Senate passed the bill with the blessing of the Clinton administration,which had opposed previous D'Amato proposals to cut off all U.S. tradewith foreign companies that pursue trade with Iran. The purpose of theseproposals was to bring bout an international embargo against Iran byforcing foreign companies to choose between trading with the U.S. andtrading with Iran.The new bill is much narrower-both in terms of the activities that triggerthe sanctions and the sanctions themselves. The administration would beobliged to impose at least one of the following sanctions against foreigncompanies that invest over $40 million in the Iranian oil industry in oneyear:*  Denial of U.S. Export-Import Bank assistance;* Denial of export licenses for products to be shipped to sanctionedpersons;* Prohibition on loan assistance from U.S. financial institutionsexceeding $10 million in any 12 month period; and* Ban on the operation of financial institutions that contribute to Iran's oildevelopmentAccording to Senator D'Amato, several major European corporations willbe affected by the measure.  These companies include but are not limitedto Repsol-Spain, Agip-Italy, Total-France, Petrofina-Belgium,OMV-Austria, and Veba-Germany.According to Washington, D.C. attorney Eric Hirschhorn, a partner atWinston and Strawn, the bill represents a victory for the Clintonadministration, which can now avoid the political heat of vetoing a billthat purports to punish terrorist states. "They were going to go off a cliffon this one," said Hirschhorn, "this is a short drop compared from thelegislation that started.  Do I like it?  No.  It is a pointless exercise andmay cause retaliation from overseas, but it could have been a lot worse."Here's what the bill does not do and where it has been narrowed:* It only applies to "investments" (not just trade) of over $40 million in a12 month period;* It no longer denies entry into the United States of executives who workfor companies subject to the bill's sanctions; and* It no longer prohibits the importation into the United States of itemsfrom companies subject to sanctionsThe amended version of the bill was fittingly passed on the eve of theseventh anniversary of the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 overLockerbie, Scotland.  "Despite U.N. economic sanctions which have beenin force since 1992, the Government of Libya has refused to turn oversuspects, and the two suspects remain in Libya under the protection ofColonel Qadhafi," said Kennedy on the Senate floor when introducing hisamendment.  As with Iran, the sanctions will not prohibit foreigncompanies from doing business in Libya.Hill sources claim that the House will consider similar legislation butmay attempt to make it stricter, most likely by lowering $40 milliontrigger and by including import sanctions against any foreign companythat trades with, not just makes investments in, Iran.But any attempts to beef up the bill may be more trouble than they areworth. Administration sources say that though the administration wasoriginally not very excited about the bill, the final product is about thetype of bill they expected, and is one they will support.  Further, theadministration expects that the House version will closely resemble theSenate bill.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORT PRACTITIONER via NewsNetJanuary 1996CWC-FREE AT LAST!Senate expected to ratify by late spring '96Responding to pressure from exporters, the  Clinton administration andthe press, Senator Jesse Helms (R-NC) has agreed to consider allowingSenate ratification of the Chemical Weapons Convention treaty, aground-breaking arms control agreement that Helms has kept bottled upfor months in the Senate Foreign Relations committee, which he heads.Helms was keeping the CWC, along with other critical foreign policyitems-like ambassadorial nominations and the START II treaty-hostage tohis plans to downsize the State Department and its affiliated agencies, theAgency for International Development and the Arms Control andDisarmament Agency.  It was unclear whether Helms had securedconcessions from the Clinton administration in return for his about face.In a brief statement, Helms asked that the treaty be placed on the Senatecalendar by May 1 unless his committee reports it out before then.Furthermore, he pledged to begin committee hearings on the treaty inFebruary.  Although Helms in the past has pilloried the treaty for weakenforcement provisions and the possibility of non-compliance by Russia,his committee will almost certainly deliver the treaty to the Senate floorwith a recommendation for ratification.Republican presidential front-runner Bob Dole, eager to show deftforeign affairs leadership, promised speedy Senate action on the treaty.Ratification, which requires approval by two-thirds of the Senate, shouldbe a mere formality.Reaction from industry was swift.  "We finally got a date certain," saidMike Walls of the Chemical Manufacturers Association (CMA).  FredWebber, CMA president, applauded the move: "[t]he Senate has cleared amajor hurdle and opened the way for the United States to join 44 othernations in ratifying the Chemical Weapons Convention early next year,"he said in a press release.  "We are, today, one step closer to realizing thetreaty's goal for a future free of chemical weapons."BXA gearing up for implementing regulationsImminent ratification set off sirens at the Commerce Department'sBureau of Export Administration (BXA), which must coordinate treatycompliance with U.S. chemical companies.  Larry Christensen, BXA'sregulatory guru, said that his reg-drafting team will step up its CWC workin January and February. Christensen's office must churn out a set ofregulations that mirror the CWC's host record keeping and reportingrequirements.  Christensen said his goal is to finish the regulationsquickly to allow industry to gear up for compliance.  The samplecompliance forms that BXA has already circulated have drawn afavorable response from chemical companies.Had Helms not relinquished his control over CWC, U.S. producers wouldbe burdened with controls parallel to those that will be put on pariahnations such as Iran, Iraq, Syria, Libya, and North Korea.  Of equalimportance, the United States will now be a participant, rather than anobserver, on inspection teams.  United States officials will also be eligibleto hold positions on the CWC's Secretariat when it is established.The treaty is widely recognized as one of most comprehensive armscontrol agreements ever negotiated. It not only bans chemical weapons,but also asserts strict control over the production and trade of chemicalwarfare precursors, which include commonly traded commercialchemicals used to make consumer goods such as clothing and paint. Thejurisdiction of the treaty is so broad, in fact, that its compliancerequirements bind companies that do not produce chemicals but merelyuse them as inputs in manufacturing.Politically, the newly pronounced action on CWC will save the UnitedStates from international embarrassment-it was the United States thatinitially led the charge for the treaty.  Once the Senate gives itsratification, other countries will be sure to follow, pushing to ratificationtotal safely above the 65 countries needed for the treaty to enter intoforce.  Currently, 43 countries have ratified the treaty.But the challenge of ratification is trifling compared to the treaty'scalling: Stemming the spread of chemical weapons.  As calamities in theMiddle East and Japan over the past decade have shown, chemicalweapons are the equal opportunity equalizer of poor, technologicallybackward terrorists and two-bit dictators the world over.  The CWC,despite its lofty aims and well-conceived provisions, can no more hope tostop rogues from acquiring chemical weapons precursors than to preventthem from acquiring the rudimentary scientific expertise to convert theminto chemical weapons.  The hope, however, is that the treaty will act adeterrent by strengthening the chorus of international condemnation ofchemical weapons.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORT PRACTITIONER via NewsNetJanuary 1996ENCRYPTION AT A CROSSROADS-THE FIRST OF MANYIndustry calling for more liberal export criteriaIndustry and government officials went at it again over encryption exportcriteria this month at a December 5 meeting at the National Institute ofStandards and Technology (NIST).  After the government bureaucratsand industry techies had said their piece, and the banter was finished, itwas not difficult to tell exactly what came out of the meeting. Thoughthere was an admirable exchange of thoughts and comments betweengovernment and industry, one left the NIST center feeling that the wholeday there was a fruitless exercise with little impact on how thegovernment will control the export of sensitive encryption software.According to one industry source who requested anonymity, despite thechange in the proposal's language (see last month's Practitioner for themost recent draft), the government is basically sticking with its August 17proposal as the answer to the matter and will not accept anything else."Basically, that is the deal" said the source.  The two sides will certainlyclash again before any final resolution is reached.64 Bits Just Won't Do ItThe most critical issue remains the number of key length bits that thegovernment will allow producers to export.  The debate centers aroundrequirement number seven of the government's latest draft for keyescrow encryption export criteria.  Requirement number seven reads asfollows:  "7.  The product's key escrow cryptographic functions shall usean unclassified encryption algorithm with a key length not to exceedsixty-four (64) bits."Industry is becoming increasingly more insistent that the governmentincrease the permissible export level to at least 80 bits, if not more.  Toput all this in context, it is important to understand the industry standardfor judging encryption.  Industry generally considers 40 bit lengthencryption as "weak" encryption; 64 bit encryption is "good" encryption;and "strong" encryption is considered to be encryption key lengths of 80bits or more.  This includes Skipjack, 80 bits, and triple DES, withapproximately 112 bits depending on which operational mode you use.Note that since the French broke the Netscape Navigator's 40 bitencryption system in November, 40 bit encryption has not even beenconsidered "weak" encryption by many.This all brings us back to industry's request to increase the level ofencryption key length bits that can be exported.  Banks, for instance, needto protect millions of dollars in overseas financial transactions. Thechemical and petroleum industry have similar interests.  Though the twosides can discuss the exact procedures regarding how a key escrow agentwill interface with government law enforcement agents, and otherlogistical issues, the government, the National Security Agency inparticular, will not show any public willingness to go above  64 bits.Other problems with the 64 bit level involve issues concerningcompetitiveness rather than security.  For instance, under the latest draft'srequirements, U.S. industry will be at a great competitive disadvantagewhen facing competition from unescrowed systems with over 64 bitsmanufactured overseas.  Moreover, there has been a greater demand fortriple DES, a feature that is prohibited under requirement number eight inthe latest draft.At least one industry source in the know, however, indicated thatgovernment officials have privately expressed a willingness to considerlarger symmetric encryption key lengths.  This is conditioned, of course,that the encryption system and the accompanying escrow arrangementsare hardware-based products that are designed to make themtamper-proof.  Trusted Information Systems (TIS), of Glenwood, MD hasrequested that the government consider for export a hardware-basedsystem with key lengths up to 128 bits when it is accompanied with sucha tamper-proof system.  TIS claims that the government has expressed awillingness to discuss the request, but has not gone much further thanthat.As the debate over key length intensifies, it is becoming more apparentthat 64 bits will not satisfy industry's concerns.  In any event, encryptionsoftware producers may be well advised to take the best arrangement theycan get from the government and start marketing their products to see ifthey will actually be able to sell them.European Officials Meet to Discuss Encryption IssueIn a related development, European industry representatives andEuropean government officials met at a two day conference inmid-December to devise a global encryption policy.  It was the first timeleading European business associations and government officialsdiscussed the growing number of encrypted electronic messages sentinternationally.  At the conference, officials analyzed the use andsafekeeping of keys to encrypted messages, and the conditions underwhich governments will be allowed to access the messages.The two sides also attempted to assign the liability in the case of misuseor material loss  under any encryption methods.  OECD governmentofficials participated in the conference along with representatives of theInternational Chamber of Commerce, the Business and Industry AdvisoryCommittee of the OECD, and information technology associationscovering Europe, Canada, Japan, and the United States.Both U.S. government and industry officials would be well advised tokeep abreast of their European counterparts' activities.  Once all sideshave finished their bantering, any rules adopted in the United States willneed to be consistent with procedures overseas.  If U.S. criteria end upbeing more liberal than other country's criteria, it will be of little usebecause U.S. producers will have nowhere to sell their product.  If U.S.criteria is too stringent, then U.S. producers will not be able to compete.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORT PRACTITIONER via NewsNetJanuary 1996WASSENAAR ARRANGEMENT (A.K.A. "NEW FORUM") TO TAKEPLACE OF COCOMThe United States and its allies commence post cold war export controlregimeThe United States and 27 other nations, on December 19 reached finalagreement on a new trade control agreement to restrict the transfer ofweapons to rogue states.  The  group includes Russia and nations of theformer Soviet Union.  The arrangement was first called the "New Forum"when its countries announced in September that they had agreed inprinciple on a regime.  But naming an international regime "New Forum"begged the question: What do you call the treaty ten years from now?The Old Forum, The Aging Forum, The Adolescent Forum?This must have been on the top of the drafters' minds as they crossed thet's and dotted the i's on the new export control regime's final declaration.Now given the lengthy title of The Wassenaar Arrangement on ExportControls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies,the agreement will replace the now-defunct Coordinating Committee onMultilateral Export Controls (COCOM).  The agreement is known simplyas The Wassenaar Arrangement: a ten word title does not easily lenditself to an acronym.The length of the treaty's title was almost as long as the text of its finaldeclaration.  It is obvious from the declaration's few sentences that thereis more work to be done, said one administration source.  The declarationonly named the member countries and announced that each of thecountries would submit initial elements of the new arrangement to theirrespective governments for approval.  The declaration also established apreparatory committee that will begin work in January 1996.  TheSecretariat will be located in Vienna, Austria, and the first plenarymeeting will be in Vienna on April 2 and 3, 1996.Impact for shippersThough the administration can declare victory for the agreement, there islittle practical impact for exporters.  The agreement does not provide aspecific list of countries to whom members cannot ship goods.  Rather,the agreement prohibits the shipment of arms and dual-use items to thefour generally recognized pariah states: Iran, Iraq, North Korea, andLibya.  But even these seemingly politically uncontroversial parties arenot named in writing.  It is difficult to fathom member countries agreeing,much less committing, to prohibit exports to other countries.No list of controlled goods, well there is a list, it just is not public.Enforcement mechanism: The Wassenaar Arrangement (one Freudianslip and it's the Weimar Arrangement) lacks the type of system underCOCOM where member countries reviewed sensitive exports to pariahcountries.   Though this might change, there is no strong enforcementmechanism as of yet.State Department officials hail the agreement as a long overduereplacement of COCOM, and as an agreement more suitable andresponsive to the post-cold war world.  The arrangement will aim torespond to new security threats posed by rogue countries.  Indeed, acentral part of the regime is its members' commitment to stop theacquisition of armaments and sensitive dual-use items by such countries.Building on the lessons of the Iraq war, the Wassenaar Arrangementseeks to prevent the accumulations of conventional arms around theworld.  "The Iraq war taught us that indiscriminate exports ofconventional weapons and sensitive dual-use technologies can poseserious threats to our interests, foreign policy goals, and to internationalsecurity," said a State Department fact sheet.Little burden on exportersThe Wassenaar Arrangement will require exporters to furnish little, ifany, additional information, said a State Department official.  Thoughthere may be some items that will require reporting in the future, for thetime being most of the information will be captured throughcongressional reporting requirements, the licensing process, andShipper's Export Declarations.  There may be a very small set of generallicense items that will have to be reported in the future. Highperformance computers, for example, are one likely target of the regime'sreporting requirements.Any new reporting requirements will be published in the Federal Registerby the Bureau of Export Administration.  These new regulations willmost likely require shippers to send in a summary of the designated itemson a periodic basis (e.g. quarterly). The Wassenaar Arrangement'sdual-use and munitions list essentially parallel U.S. law, so there is reallyno need for exporters to be aware of additional lists.The central goal of these new reporting requirements is for each membernation to have information at its disposal to share with other membercountries.  The regime provides  a context where countries will be privyto information to which they previously did not have access.Administration cautiously optimistic on regimeThe regime meets the Clinton administration's goals of moving forwardand beginning cooperative efforts with other countries.  Administrationofficials are generally pleased with the results, though they candidlyacknowledge that they would have preferred a setup that featuredstronger restraint provisions and more mechanisms for openness andtransparency.  In any event, sources say, the Wassenaar Arrangement willprovide a context and mechanism where such matters can be debated atgreater length.  And debated they will surely be.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORT PRACTITIONER via NewsNetJanuary 1996ANTICIPATING THE FINAL FORMAT OF NEW BXAREGULATIONSWhile it may cripple national parks and museums and delay issuance ofgovernment paychecks and entitlements, the federal shutdown has notblanketed the dank halls of the Bureau of Export Administration (BXA)in a black haze of dormancy.  Nope, as this Practitioner goes to press,BXA's regulations policy group is working away, churning throughinteragency comments, to bring you the revised version of the ExportAdministration Regulations (EAR) by January 1996, as well as trying tohammer out the much-anticipated computer decontrol that PresidentClinton announced on October 7, 1995.  Because the government isclosed and official meetings between important inter-agency players arehamstrung, these regulatory changes are not expected in the FederalRegister before the end of the year, and may even not be out until muchlater.A sign of recent progress, however, did appear in the mailboxes of theever-shrinking ranks of Distribution Holders in the form of a December15, 1995 letter from Acting Office of Export Licensing (OEL) DirectorEileen M. Albanese.  The letter authorized DL holders to adopt the majorreforms in computer export controls and raise the level of computereligibility on their special licenses.Using the grouping of countries that President Clinton gave, thefollowing is a breakdown of how the countries will be grouped:* Country Group A-no CTP restrictions:  Japan, U.S., Australia, Austria,Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, TheHoly See, Iceland, Italy, Ireland, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco,Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, San Marino,Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the U.K.;* Group B-CTP up to 10,000 Mtops:  Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei,Chile, Colombia, The Czech Republic, Ecuador, Hong Kong, Hungary,Indonesia, Jamaica, Kenya, Malaysia, Nigeria, Poland, Peru, Philippines,Singapore, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South Africa, South Korea,Taiwan, Tanzania, Thailand, Uruguay, Venezuela; and* Group C-up to 2,000 Mtops, and for civil end-users only, up to 7,000Mtops are permitted under the Distribution License, as long as shippersmeet certain conditions and the procedures are updated appropriately inthe Internal Control Program:  Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, India, Israel, Kuwait, Morocco,Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates,Vanuatu and Yemen.These conditions are similar to the supercomputer safeguards plan fromthe current regulations and are as follows:For all three groups-(1) No physical or computational access may begranted to nationals of Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea, Syria,Sudan, and Somalia.  (2) Appropriate measures and checks must beestablished to ensure that physical and computational access to thecomputer and computer using facility will be limited to authorizedpersons.  (3) The computer may not be used for military (Weapons ofMass Destruction), cryptography, or clandestine activities.  (4)Appropriate monitoring of the use of the computer (any indications ofimproper or unauthorized use or requests for runs will be promptlyreported to the government of the importing country).* For Group A-No reexport outside Group A.* For Group B and C-No reexport or intra-country transfer without priorwritten authorization from the Bureau of Export Administration.* For Group C-Security measures will be established to protect thecomputer against theft or unauthorized use at all times.The current regulations, which prevent delivery of higher level computersfor destinations not eligible in this listing for these higher level computerswithout an approved individual validated license or "other appropriateexport authority," remain in effect.This notice should provide a good hint of what the final computerdecontrol will look like.In another harbinger of how upcoming regulations may affect exporters,BXA on December 7 notified DL holders that the regulatory reformeffort would include the new Special Comprehensive License, which willexpand the slate products and countries eligible for special licenseexports.Deborah Kappler, head of special licensing and compliance at BXA,noted that when the new EAR is adopted, there will no longer be severaldistinct special licenses, such as the DL, the service supply license, theproject license, and so on. Instead, these licenses will be consolidated intoone Special Comprehensive License (SCL).  DL  holders should refer topart 752 of the EAR draft, which will be effective upon publication in theFederal Register.  No changes in action or use of current special licensesis required for 12 months.  But after that time, holders who wish tocontinue will be switched to the SCL and will have to go for a newpre-license consultation, reapply on new forms, and submit a copy oftheir Internal Control Programs.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORT PRACTITIONER via NewsNetJanuary 1996PARIAH RESTRAINTSanctions and Sanctimony on the Banking Committeeby E.J. Prior and Michael SchafferScore one for democracy.  With a vote balance resembling the majoritiescommanded by Brezhnev in the Supreme Soviet, and a public hearingwhich made the politburo look like a rancorous debating society, SenatorAlfonse D'Amato's Senate Banking Committee this month took acourageous stand, they say, against dictatorship.  Making up inself-congratulation and blatant bandwagon opportunism for what the newbill, sponsored by D'Amato (R-NY) and ranking committee DemocratPaul Sarbanes (D-MD), lacks in political daring, the Banking Committee,with the passage of the Iran Foreign Oil Sanctions Act of 1995 (S. 1228),has further tightened the thumbscrews on a reliably crowd-pleasing foe:Iran.The committee's December 12 hearing was not burdened with intricatelegislative maneuvering or political nuances.  Foregoing thenumber-crunching details of a traditional public mark-up, D'Amato,Sarbanes, and the paltry two other committee members who bothered toattend instead rushed through fifteen minutes of pro forma gushingbefore adjourning in time for the Senators to listen to Israeli PrimeMinister Peres' address to Congress.  The hearing proceeded as follows:Committee chair D'Amato inveighed against Iranian terrorism andpraised Sarbanes' assistance in crafting and pushing this crucial piece oflegislation.  Sarbanes inveighed against Iranian terrorism and praisedD'Amato's leadership on the committee.  D'Amato, digressing briefly toinveigh against Iranian terrorism, then praised Senator Barbara Boxer(D-CA) for her crucial assistance with the bill.  Boxer, for her part,inveighed against Iranian terrorism before launching into an adulatoryspeech about D'Amato that may even have outdone her Democraticcolleague.This celebration of committee backslapping and groupthink was a fittingharbinger of the uncontested December 18 Senate vote that passed theIran Oil Sanctions Act. Still, Senator Edward Kennedy (D-MA) added adose of drama the next day when he sponsored an amendment pullingLibya, another oil-rich pariah, into the sanctions party.All of this was timed perfectly to coincide with the seventh anniversaryof the terrorist bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland,and the same-day announcement that a Scottish businessman had beenindicted in Boston for selling over $250,000 worth of U.S. computerequipment to Libya.  Rhetorical politics at its best: two terrorist birdswith one legislative stone.  Clearly, this is one bill whose targetconstituency is unconcerned with the details, just so long as the bad guysare getting it.But what does all this mean for industry?  Lost in the posturing andhoopla were the details of the bill, and what it suggests about futuregovernment involvement in trade with politically profitable yeteconomically marginal foreign targets. (Tremendously profitable China,like Iran a dictatorship and an irresponsible world citizen, would never besingled out for such treatment.)  Fortunately for exporters, the bill willnot require the imposition of U.S. trade sanctions against foreigncompanies that do any trade-even in sweaters and garden hoses-withIran, as was previously contemplated. Removed from the bill were banson imports from any country that dealt in oil equipment with Iran, and aban on travel to the United States by executives of companies engaging insuch activity, two measures that would have signaled a drastic change inAmerican policy.  Also, the bill only penalizes those who invest morethan $40 million supporting oil refining procedures in either country overany 12 month period.So much for the good news.  The bill still requires the President toimpose one of four types of sanctions: Deny assistance from the U.S.Export-Import Bank; Withhold export licenses of the foreign corporationsU.S. subsidiaries; prohibit commercial bank loans above $10 million;and/or ban the operation of financial institutions that support oildevelopment projects in Iran or Libya.The Iran Foreign Oil Sanctions Act of 1995 should alert industry thatthey need to keep a watchful eye on Congress.  Though the stigma ofarguing against punishing pariah nations such as Iran and Libya could bedamaging from a public relations standpoint, industry should havelobbied much harder against the measure, lest next time they are not solucky.Senator D'Amato's stated goal-a laudable one-is to stop Iranianterrorism. The problem is that this bill bears no relation to its fulfillment.Instead, it will be greeted with rolled eyes by a domestic and foreignpublic already cynical about U.S. policy's being subject to unpredictablelurches to and fro at the whim of publicity-minded legislators, makingpeople still more unsure of what American policies really are, and lesslikely to take us seriously when we do something we mean.  Usually ThePractitioner would skewer such a measure as an unreasonableextraterritorial assertion of U.S. law that will end up hurting U.S.industry.  But we won't waste our time on this one. That's because thebill will be passed, signed by President Clinton and then tucked away inthe drawer of some mid-level NSC bureaucrat and forgotten for good.The only folks that will hear about it again are the voters of New YorkState, who will hear that their senator's impossible-to-implementsanctions bill underscores his nails-man approach to Middle Eastterrorism.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORT PRACTITIONER via NewsNetJanuary 1996VOLUNTARY DISCLOSUREThird in a four-part seriesThe Export Practitioner has asked three leading practitioners to providetheir thoughts on four hypotheticals involving voluntary disclosure ofexport violations.  Each of these individuals has asked to remainanonymous so as not to affect cases they are handling for their respectiveclients.  Their advice contains general legal guidance and should not beconstrued as specific legal advice.Subscribers are welcome to contact The Practitioner directly if they haveany specific questions regarding these essays.  The Practitioner againthanks each of the three authors for the time and thought they have takenin preparing these essays.For eight years, Knowledge, Inc. a Huntsville, AL.-based computer firmhas been supplying general purpose computers to Enhanced ProductionConcepts Inc. (EPCI), an Indian research firm.  When Knowledge filledits first order to EPCI, it completed a comprehensive customer profile andlearned that EPCI was a reputable firm that assisted Indian companieswith enhancing their manufacturing operations.Accordingly, Knowledge has made over 40 computer shipments to EPCIsince 1988 and has enjoyed a warm relationship with EPCI's principals.Staff at the two companies routinely trade E-mail messages on topicsranging from curry chicken and seafood gumbo to Himalayan treks andhow to buy gifts for people who have everything.  The E-mail trafficomitted mention of export controls, for Knowledge's computer shipmentsalways fell under the Commerce Department's export licensingthresholds.However, a recent E-mail from EPCI set off the export compliance sirensat Knowledge:  An EPCI engineer revealed that for the past three yearsthe company had been working on a project with the Indian governmentto enhance the production of its line of Prithyi ballistic missiles.Knowledge's export compliance officer, John Noblinders, plungedimmediately into a tizzy of panic.  He recalled the time at a 1992 BXAseminar when Bill Clements scared him and his peers with his discussionof Commerce's "know" controls, which require licenses for any shipmentthat the exporter "knows" is destined for illicit weapons activities.Noblinders comforted himself with the notion that he did not know aboutthe EPCI contract.  Then he E-mailed the entire sales staff and told themto put on hold any new contracts with EPCI.  He got a response from theSouth Asian sales manager saying that EPCI had briefed him on theirmissile contract two years ago.  The manager added that some of therecently shipped computers may have assisted with this project.Is there a violation that merits voluntary disclosure by Knowledge, Inc.?Essay number oneKnowledge, Inc. definitely has a problem that demands self-disclosure,but the situation may not be as bad as its export compliance manager,John Noblinders, believes. Clearly, Knowledge, Inc. has been violatingthe Export Control Regulations by doing business with the Indiancompany, Enhanced Production Concepts, Inc. (EPCI) for the past twoyears, ever since Knowledge's South Asian sales manager was briefed onthe nature of EPCI's business.  Obviously, the incriminating informationpassed on to the sales manager, who was an officer of Knowledge, Inc. atthe time, is the equivalent of "knowing" that EPCI was a company towhich any computers shipped would require a license, since anyknowledge gained by any officer can be imputed to the corporate entity.Nonetheless, while low performance computers may have helped EPCI inits design work on Prithyi ballistic missiles, it can be argued that theywere not at all integral to that work, and they did not advance the designor production of such missiles in any unique way.  Therefore, theself-disclosure-which should be made promptly and in full detail-couldargue that while there was a technical violation of the ExportAdministration Regulations (EAR), the violation was incidental andinconsequential.Recent changes in the EAR/EPCI regulations recognize that not allshipments to prohibited sites and prohibited activities are equal, that theshipment has to in some way advance the design or production of theproliferation-related product.  Particularly, in today's world, wherecomputers have been all but decontrolled (with only very highperformance supercomputers having any restrictions at all), it couldeasily be argued that the computers that were shipped to EPCI over thepast two years were no more significant to the production of ballisticmissiles than other word processing and calculating devices, such aspencils and slide rules.  While that argument may seem bizarre to those ofus who practiced export controls during the Cold War, it would bedifficult for a Government that has just decontrolled almost all computersto almost all destinations around the world to argue that somehow theseparticular low performance computers shipped by Knowledge, Inc. pose adanger of undermining the antiproliferation objectives of the UnitedStates Government.  This is not to claim that Knowledge, Inc. did notviolate the EAR, only that the penalty should fit the crime (which intoday's world is insignificant).Essay number twoKnowledge, Inc. may have violated the EAR and, if so, is required todisclose such violations to the Bureau of Export Administration (BXA)and the Census Bureau.  Under the Enhanced Proliferation ControlInitiative, an exporter must obtain a validated license for productsotherwise eligible for general license treatment only if BXA informs theexporter that a validated license is required because there is anunacceptable risk of use or diversion to missile projects (15 C.F.R. sec.778.7(C)(2)); or if the exporter "knows" that the products are destined fora missile project listed in Supplement 6 to Part 778 (15 C.F.R. sec.778.7(C)(1)(i)); or if the exporter "knows" that the products will be"directly employed" in the design, development, production, stockpiling,or use of missiles (15 C.F.R. sec. 778.7(C)91)(ii); 58 Fed. Reg. 68029,68030 (1993)).BXA never informed Knowledge that a validated license was required forexports to EPCI.  The Prithyi project is listed in Supplement 6 to Part 778but, assuming that EPCI employed the computers at EPCI's facility andnot at the Prithyi facility, the products were not "destined for" a listedproject.  Nevertheless, Knowledge may be deemed to have had therequisite "knowledge" that EPCI's computers would be directlyemployed in missile design, development, or production.  The theory ofsuch violation would be that Knowledge's failure to inquire after seeing a"red flag" constituted impermissible self-blinding.  If the goods in factwere to be directly employed in missile design, development, orproduction, Knowledge would be deemed to have had knowledge andhence to have violated the EAR by exporting the products to EPCI undera general license.For the past two years, Knowledge's South Asian sales manager hasknown that EPCI was assisting the Prithyi missile project.  Evenassuming that the sales manager did not have actual knowledge that EPCIwas "directly employing" Knowledge's products in the project, he hadsufficient information to raise a "red flag" concerning EPCI's activities.Because the sales manager's knowledge almost certainly would beimputed to Knowledge, this gave rise to a duty on the part of Knowledgeto inquire further.  If EPCI in fact was using the products to enhance theproduction of missiles, a violation of the EAR occurred when Knowledgeshipped computers to EPCI after the sales manager learned about EPCI'sactivity on the missile project.Knowledge has stopped exports to EPCI and hence has no prospectiveduty to inquire under the "know" provision of the nonproliferationregulations.  But Knowledge probably has a duty to inquire under anotherprovision of the EAR.  Section 778.5(a)(3) requires exporters to notifyBXA and other cognizant agencies upon receipt of "information whichwould lead a reasonable prudent person to believe that a change ofmaterial fact or intention [previously represented to a federal agency] hasoccurred."  This requirement is separate from and additional to thenonproliferation validated license requirements of Parts 771 and 778.When Knowledge exported its products to EPCI, Knowledge presumablysubmitted Shipper's Export Declarations (SED) to the Census Bureau(through the Customs Service) stating that the products were eligible forexport under general license.  Although Section 787.5(a)(3), like thenonproliferation rules, is triggered by knowledge (i.e. "has occurred")rather than such lesser thresholds as reason to know or reason to believe,the presence of the "red flag" could constitute "knowledge" for purposesof this provision in the same manner as for the nonproliferationprovisions.  That is, the "red flag" information gained by the salesmanager would mean that Knowledge must inquire whether the goodsrequired a validated license (and thus made "general license"representation on the SEDs inaccurate).If the inquiry yields positive information about such use, there is achange in previously represented material fact or intention and Section787.5(a)(3) requires Knowledge to file an amended SED with the CensusBureau and to also advise BXA as well.Essay number threeThe EPCI "catch-all rules" present perhaps the stickiest of all voluntarydisclosure questions.  At this point, it is not yet clear whether Knowledge,Inc. has committed a violation, but the facts indicate a strong possibility.The question is whether the provisions of EAR 778.7(c) (1) wereviolated; did someone in Knowledge, Inc. know that they were exportingproducts that would be used in a listed missile project in India or thatwould be used in design, development, production, or use of missiles inor by India.  BXA published very helpful guidance on the catch-all ruleon December 23, 1993, clarifying that one must "know" that suchactivities are transpiring for such a violation to occur.  (58 Fed. Reg.64550; knew about EPCI's missile contract, and said that some of therecently shipped computers "may" have assisted with the project.  Amore thorough investigation is required to determine whether they weredirectly employed in such missile activities and whether anyone fromKnowledge knew this.  Careful interpretation of this murky law appliedto the facts learned is in order.Knowledge, Inc. needs to take the following basic steps:*  place further shipments to EPCI on hold pending results of theinvestigation*  alert the general counsel, CFO, or other appropriate person pursuant tothe company's compliance program so that a decision can be made atappropriate levels of "shared responsibility" on this delicate matter;*conduct a more thorough investigation (under the auspices of counsel toretain the privilege) to determine whether there have in fact been anyviolations;* set up some type of screening program so these questions can beferreted out in advance, not two years after they should have arisen;* train sales and other appropriate personnel on the EPCI catch-all rules,instructing them to refer any questions to Noblinders, as exportcompliance administrators are otherwise unlikely to know about suchinformation to supply their screening checklists effectively.Whether or not there was a clear violation, Knowledge, Inc., shouldseriously consider whether making some sort of voluntary disclosure isnevertheless in its best interests.  The adverse publicity from dealing witha missile manufacture can cause much worse collateral damage to acompany's reputation and thereby its sales and even its stockperformance than the potential export control law penalties.  If theinvestigation shows clearly that employed in applicable missile activities,so there was no violation of law, a report to BXA can help demonstratethis fact and also show concern of the "good citizen" corporation inbringing the matter to the attention of appropriate government officialsbecome a cause celeb, such a disclosure and consultation could provideuseful cover for the company and put it in a better posture than having noaction.Unfortunately, a disclosure of no violation can also have the practicaleffect of putting all future sales to EPCI on hold until BXA responds withthe requested advice, which could take a very long time (years in a fewcases).  The various agencies addressing EPCI problems have notdeveloped a sound process for answering these hard questions in the fourand a half years that the catch-all rule has been in place if there is aproblem, but the application is unclear, or they do not want to disclosesources and methods of intelligence gathering.  Thus, if one wants to dobusiness with entities like EPCI, it is often better to make your owndecisions and thoroughly document your files than to file an end-usercheck with BXA and see whether they are allowed by other agencies toprovide a meaningful response.Clearly, this is a sticky wicket.  All advice in prior hypotheticals applies.Further advice should await discovery of all the facts, and application ofthe judgments of experienced counsel based on the benefits anddetriments of disclosure versus nondisclosure as applied to that company.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORT PRACTITIONER via NewsNetJanuary 1996FOCUS ON ENFORCEMENTBXA Enforcement Heads Declare Victory on Efforts in 1995In 1995, the Bureau of Export Administration (BXA) set a new highwater mark for enforcement of export control regulations, according toJohn Despres, BXA's chief enforcement official. Despres commendedenforcement field agents and his higher-ups in the Clinton administrationfor a record year both in terms of fine totals and related convictions forexport control violations.But what does a successful 1995 mean for '96?  For starters, BXA plansto hire new investigators in its various field offices.  Also, enforcementofficials plan to target foreign representatives of U.S. companies with ahard-hitting message: Just as in 1995, export control violations in 1996will bring dire consequences for their perpetrators.Computers and Software Remain Targets for '96Continuing a sift begun immediately after the conclusion of the ColdWar, BXA's enforcement efforts in 1996 will focus on nonproliferationcontrols.  Despite the administration's imminent liberalization of controlson computer hardware and technology, the Office of Export Enforcement(OEE) will ply the country's ports for diversion of computer technologyto pariah nations such as Iran, Iraq, North Korea, and Libya, all of whichremain subject to U.S. embargoes.  This claim has credibility in light ofthe recent arrest and indictment of a Scottish businessman for attemptingto send computers to Libya (See related story below).So how can enforcement agents tell the difference between a 486computer and one that operates in thousands or tens of thousands ofMTOPS?  Simple: They compare information from computermanufacturers with information from shippers and other sources.Of course, no way is as good as two of the most historically tried and truemethods:  Following the money, and the anonymous tip. The first of thesehas been particularly helpful, says Despres, in cases involving high-gradeencryption software.  Any party interested in purchasing such softwaregenerally seeks a continuing relationship with its supplier. The mere factthat encryption software may be available on the Internet as freeware isalmost meaningless.  If a company wants reliable encryption software itwill buy it from a company, not download it off CompuServe.Voluntary Disclosure a Mitigating CircumstanceThough it may never appear in writing, OEE wants exporters to knowthat it welcomes voluntary disclosures and will consider them amitigating factor in enforcement cases.  "There is a strong and recurrentinterest on the part of exporters to know what the advantages are fordisclosing infractions," says John Despres. "We encourage this."  Inrecent years, exporters have pressed OEE for written guidance on howvoluntary disclosures will be considered. Barring a reversal of existingpolicy, OEE will not issue such guidance, but Despres said that theawards of voluntary disclosure "will be very substantial."Frustrated by industry pleas for concrete data on mitigation levels, FrankDeliberti, BXA's deputy assistant secretary for enforcement, pointed tothe commendable record of voluntary disclosure mitigation. "There is areal piece of information that could put this to bed," said Deliberti. "Over99.8% of the cases end up in a warning letter, an information letter, or ado-nothing letter."AES Predeparture Certification Requirement Key to Enforcement EffortsThe big hang-up for Customs' Automated Export System (AES) is thedebate over its predeparture approval procedure.  Exporters areconvinced it will hang up their shipments.  Customs, for its part, saysthey have nothing to worry about.  For BXA's enforcement folks,moreover, AES-and especially predeparture certification-is a valuableenforcement tool.  And Deliberti notes that the threat of having shipmentsheld up "is nothing new, and it could still be held up based on currentregulations."In whatever way AES is implemented, it will provide critical information,potential leads, and answer questions for investigations in a more timelymanner.  As opposed to the current system, under which agents siftthrough piles of paper SEDs, they will now have at their disposal a muchmore comprehensive and timely set of information to be used ininvestigations and enforcement actions.  Industry doesn't want to hearthis, and will let the government hear it vociferously once the firstshipment is unnecessarily delayed and an exporter loses business as aresult.Scottish Businessman Stung Trying to Ship Computer to LibyaDavid McKeeve had no idea what he was in for when he traveled fromScotland to Boston to clear up some paperwork problems with the Bostonseaport supervisor. McKeeve explained to the official that an October1995 shipment of computers were destined for Cyprus or Ethiopia. AfterMcKeeve signed documents swearing to this, the seaport supervisorrevealed his true identity-a Customs enforcement official-and arrestedMcKeeve for conspiring to export computers to Libya in contravention ofthe U.S. embargo.The indictment, unsealed on December 19, charges that McKeeve, alongwith associates of his company, McNeil International, attempted to export$335,000 worth of computers from Boston to Libya in October byfalsifying the ultimate destination of the shipments.U.S. Attorney Donald K. Stern, who is prosecuting McKeeve, praised theCustoms Service for its action: "The Customs Service did an excellentjob in getting him back into this country, so that he cold be arrested andface an American court." If convicted, McKeeve faces a maximumpenalty of 20 years in prison and a fine of $550,000.  The computerequipment is also subject to forfeiture.Filtration and Pumping Equipment Manufacturer Hit with AntiboycottViolation PenaltiesAn administrative law judge this month affirmed Commerce Departmentcharges against Illinois-based Serflico, Ltd., a commercial filtration andpumping equipment manufacturer and its President, Jack H. Berg, for 25violations of the antiboycott provisions of the Export AdministrationRegulations.  Serflico was penalized $118,000, while Berg was set back$90,000 in civil penalties.  The judge also barred Serflico for one yearfrom exporting to Bahrain, Iraq, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Oman, Qatar,Saudi Arabia, Syria, the United Arab Emirates, and the Republic ofYemen.  Mr. Berg could not be reached for comment.The judge found that between January and July of 1989, Serflico andBerg had violated the antiboycott prohibition by furnishing businessrelationship information in responding to a boycott questionnaire from adistributor in Iraq.  Serflico also failed to report to Commerce its receipt,on seven different occasions, of boycott-related requests.  The antiboycottregulations require companies to report all such requests to theDepartment of Commerce or be subject to civil penalties and denial ofexport privileges.  The antiboycott provisions also prohibit providinginformation on a company's business relationship with a boycottedcompany, or with any person known or believed to be restricted formconducting business with a country that participates in the Arab boycottof Israel.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORT PRACTITIONER via NewsNetJanuary 1996LOGISTICS LOGHarbor Maintenance Fee Collection Prohibited-But Court Stays itsDecisionThe New York-based Court of International Trade will allow the Clintonadministration to continue collecting the Harbor Maintenance Fee(HMF), a levy that it struck down in October as an unconstitutional taxon exports, until the administration's appeal is heard.The appeal may take years, and in the meantime exporters should followone of two courses to have their HMF payments refunded. First, continueto file quarterly HMF statements and pay the appropriate fees.  Then filefor a refund in accordance with Customs' refund filing procedures.When Customs denies this request, file a formal protest with Customs.Once the formal request is denied, file directly with the Court ofInternational Trade.  Under the alternative approach, file directly with theCourt of International Trade.In addition, the judge handling the case will entertain briefs on whetherinterest should be refundable along with the fees, and, if so, when theinterest should begin accruing.  According to Munford Page Hall II, apartner at Dorsey and Whitney in Washington, D.C., who represents aninterested party in the case, the judge will have to decide whether interestwill start accruing for the prejudgement period, the postjudgement period,both, or neither.AES Team Remains Unfazed by the Court's DecisionFor Customs' Automated Export System (AES) Team, it is business asusual.  Though HMF collection was once trumpeted as one of AES'greatest benefits, Customs is moving ahead regardless of the court'sdecision.  This decision is as much budgetary realpolitik as a defense ofthe HMF.  AES officials are convinced that even if the court's decision isupheld on appeal, Congress, obsessed more than ever with tax revenue,will not tolerate the loss of HMF revenue.To make up the difference, AES officials think that lawmakers will draftan HMF that will withstand constitutional scrutiny.  The long-term viewis to build a system to collect fees because Customs is sure that there willeventually be a "legislative fix," says Peter Baish, Customs' OutboundProcess Director.Editor's Note:  Almost immediately upon announcement of the tradecourt's decision, opponents of HMF universally changed its language andbegan calling it HMT.  The "T" standing for tax rather than "F" for fee.In accordance with the industry standard, and to emphasize thePractitioner's support of the court's ruling, the Practitioner will from thispoint forward use the convention HMT when discussing the issue.AES Hints at Plan for Early '96Customs will be conducting random checks on business travelers toverify compliance with export controls on hand-carried items such aslaptop computers and cellular phones. The compliance checks will focuson flights to countries where demand for high-tech products is great andthat are subject to tight U.S. export restrictions.  Customs will beexamining whether such checks are worth the effort-a determinationthat will take one year to make.Through AES, Customs will also reportedly attempt to "help" smaller anduninformed companies prevent unintentional violations.  It remains to beseen whether this is a public relations effort or whether Customs is beinga truly charitable government agency.  In another effort, Customs hopesto use AES to identify odd transactions.  One place that AES will help,explains Baish, is when there is a suspect export of, for example, farmequipment from the Bronx to Columbia.  Having such informationavailable electronically rather than on a paper SED will enhanceenforcement efforts.Discussing another long-range '96 plan, Dorleen Pilachowski of the AESTeam confirmed that Customs will attempt to include all export formsinto the AES system, such as export licenses.   The idea is to present "onegovernment face" to the export community, says Pilachowski.  They willreportedly do this, however, only after a lot of inter-agency consultation.Customs had better start consulting soon: Bill Reinsch, The Bureau ofExport Administration's chief export official, is already on record in lastmonth's Practitioner as saying that even though he supports the generalnotion of AES, he would be against it if Customs attempts to includelicense applications in the system.  "We think that a system to file exportlicenses would be a bad idea," said Reinsch.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORT PRACTITIONER via NewsNetJanuary 1996INSIDE BXAWhat Shutdown?Yes, the government is shut down and its employees furloughed untilfurther notice.  But as the public goes without its national parks and theVermeer exhibit, BXA, like the pink Energizer Bunny, just keeps goingand going and going with what is little more than a skeleton crew.  Creditfor BXA's continued operation lies squarely with its Under Secretary,William Reinsch, who has been charged with the multiple-hat duties ofemergency export license administrator, enforcement agent, publicrelations officer, etc.  If you place a call to BXA while the shutdown isstill in effect, don't be surprised if the BXA chief answers the phone too.Nevertheless, according to Reinsch, the shutdown has had a severeimpact on export licensing.  BXA typically approves an average of 35licenses a day at a value of  $32.5 million.  Each day they also receiveover 400 calls for information.  During the shutdown, none of that ishappening.  Additionally, 1,027 pending license applications worth $2.3billion are in administrative limbo because they are not being acted on."I object in principle to holding hostages," said Reinsch in an interview,"The President is prepared to negotiate to achieve the result everybodywants.  [Congress'] actions are incomprehensible."Other than licensing issues, BXA has held onto its computer personnel,two assistant secretaries, and its enforcement agents.  BXA's enforcementagents are deemed essential, just as any other federal law enforcementpersonnel.  So your chances of sneaking unlicensed goods out of thecountry are the same as they are in normal times.The biggest change in BXA's game plan for the shutdown this month-ascompared to handling last month's shutdown-was its retention of the11-member export regulation rewrite squad.  As the deadline for the newExport Administration Regulations (EAR) neared, BXA went to itsofficial-in-the-clutch to get the job done in time for January's bigevent-the exporter's Super Bowl-Update West.  With the clock runningout, BXA sent EAR veteran Larry Christensen, sidelined during lastmonth's shutdown, dashing onto the regulatory playing field to lead therewrite team to San Jose with something to show: a new EAR.Christensen was not quite able to get the new regulations out by BXA'sinitial goal of January 1, and had to bring the agency's efforts intoovertime so that participants at Update West would have a new EAR totake home with them.  The unofficial revised goal of getting the new regsto the Federal Register is now set for January 12.  It is not yet knownwhether the EAR will be in hard copy format or on diskette.In addition to its presentation at Update West, BXA is preparing outreachpresentations around the country to explain the new regs to exporters(See schedule at bottom of this column).  The presentations will includewritten training materials, charts, visual materials and the like.  It is yet to be determined if these materials will be mailed out to interested personsor whether the parties will have to attend the presentationsIn any event, the rewrite has undergone no further adjustments of greatmagnitude since the  November draft version.  "There are no deal killers.Nothing will torpedo it," said one BXA source.  According to EricHirschhorn, a partner at Winston and Strawn law firm in Washington,D.C., the new regulations will make life easier for the first-time exporter,but they will disorient veteran exporters steeped in the arcane ways of thelong-standing regulations. Further, foreign reexporters face an even moredifficult task with the new regulations, which will not even include achapter to reexports, as the current regulations do.Control List Makes Switch to EU Numbering SystemThe Euro trend has reached the untrendy world of export controls. Aspart of an interim rule to overhaul dual-use export control regulations, theBureau of  Export Administration (BXA) will convert all Export ControlCommodity Numbers (ECCN) in the Commerce Control List (CCL) tothe format used by the twelve countries of the European Union.To assist exporters in bridging the transition between the two formats,BXA will place a "slashed-out" version of the current ECCN entriesalongside the new Euro versions. The most obvious difference betweenthe two versions is plain to see: The European ECCNs are one characterlonger than the long-standing CCL versions. Still, the new ECCNs shouldscarcely pose an intellectual challenge even for the most blockheadedexporter. For example, the current ECCN 3A01A under the new formatwill be 3A001.In other changes to the CCL, BXA is adding entries to CCL category 10(Miscellaneous) covering items on the International Atomic Energy List(a.k.a. the "Trigger List"). Also, the "related controls" and "relateddefinitions" sections have been added to every entry. If neither applies toa particular entry, the term "N/A" is used.Executive Order ExpeditesLicensing   Sort ofOn December 5, President Clinton dusted off and then signed ExecutiveOrder 12981, a year-old initiative that purports to streamline theinteragency processing of export license applications. "Early on, thisAdministration committed itself to a broad interagency review process,but one which provided accountability," said Bill Reinsch.  "ThisExecutive Order accomplishes both of those goals.  It is good for U.S.business and the American people."For exporters, the order promises a more responsive export controlregime, as it reduces to 90 days from 120 days the government's deadlinefor reaching decisions on export license applications. If a decision is notpassed down within the deadline, the case is automatically referred to thepresident for final resolution. The order's effective date is February 6,1996.The order allows all federal agencies access to export license applicationssubmitted to BXA on the condition that the agencies deliver theirrecommendations within 30 days of receipt. Should they fail to issue arecommendation, BXA may assume that they support the application.BXA officials argue that the inclusion of all agencies in the licensingprocess will protect national security, foreign policy and nonproliferationinterests.In the event that an agency recommends denying  a license application, itmust clearly state the recommendation's statutory or regulatory basis.The order also requires agencies to adhere to strict review deadlines.Here's a quick look at the time frame under which agencies will have tooperate:Within nine days of registration:* additional information must be requested if needed* the license must be referred interagency* it must be Returned Without Action (RWA) in the event a license is notneeded* an intent to deny must be issued* classification of an item must be verified and the license must begranted if there is no referralOther agencies that request referrals will have only 10 days to requestadditional information and 30 days to recommend approval or denial.  Aninteragency review board will resolve disputes among the relevantagencies. Under the order, a subcommittee of  the Advisory Committeeon Export Policy (ACEP), which consists of representatives of thedepartments of State, Defense, Energy, and the Arms Control andDisarmament Agency, must resolve disputes over applications within 14days. The subcommittee's decisions may be appealed to the ACEP chair,the Under-Secretary of Export Administration, who must make a finaldecision within 5 days of the decision.If an agency fails to give its recommendation in the allotted time frame,the agency will be considered to have no objection to the issuance ordenial of a license.  In other words, acquiescence is acceptance.The interagency review process will need some fine tuning, however.According to Eric Hirschhorn, former head of what is now BXA, theorder still does not apply to the Central Intelligence Agency, which is thebiggest dilatory culprit when it comes to license applications. In addition,licenses that under the old system would be reviewed in less than 10 daysmay now take longer, as various agencies get in on the act of reviewingthe dwindling number of applications submitted to BXA.New Computer Regulations Near CompletionThe computer export decontrol announced by President Clinton inOctober will appear as a final rule in the Federal Register by earlyFebruary, according to BXA officials (see related article page 8).Implementation of the decontrol has reportedly been hung up over adispute with Japan over whether the decontrol violates the 1991U.S-Japan agreement to jointly regulate exports of supercomputers.President Clinton introduced the initiative as a unilateral measure afterTokyo balked at approving the radical level of decontrol that it set forth.According to administration sources, however, recent negotiations withTokyo have patched up the differences.BXA to Play Role in CWC ImplementationWith the Chemical Weapons Convention now moving through SenatorHelms' Foreign Relations Committee (see related article page 5), BXAwill now be responsible for developing and maintaining a database ofdomestic chemical production, says Bill Reinsch.  In addition, BXA willbe preparing the treaty's regulations so that exporters will be able toprepare for the treaty's requirements.  BXA will also be responsible fororganizing the logistics for approximately 15 to 20 regular inspections(inspections with advance notice) per year.  They expect two or threechallenge inspections (inspections without notice) per year.  TheBureau's officials will accompany inspectors and will organize outreachefforts.Commerce Includes Software and Semiconductors Under GeneralLicense GLXThe Commerce Department announced on December 13 that it hasexpanded eligibility for General License GLX to include commoditiessuch as virus protection software and semiconductor items.  Theexpansion also includes mobile telephones that contain encryptiontechnology, a change that eliminates cumbersome validated licensingrequirements for U.S. exporters. GLX authorizes license-free exports of awide range of dual-use commodities for civil end-users in China, theformer republics of the former Soviet Union, and Eastern Europe.Industry applauded Commerce's announcement.  "This modernization ofexport controls on semiconductors will greatly reduce needless and costlylicensing delays and burdensome paperwork," said Thomas W.Armstrong, president of the Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA).Producers had long claimed that such items were widely available in theinternational marketplace and that U.S. restrictions hampered their effortsto compete globally.  Statistics show that less than one-third of some 139billion semiconductors and 33 billion integrated circuits were made in theUnited States.  Mobile telephone producers-such as Motorola andNokia-will benefit from the change."This expansion of the GLX category is a prime example of our efforts toeliminate controls that are no longer necessary and to help U.S. businesscompete globally," said BXA chief Bill Reinsch.  "This expansion willlead to new export opportunities for U.S. businesses, and increasedopportunities for U.S. businesses and increased exports mean a strongerU.S. economy and jobs for our citizens."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORT PRACTITIONER via NewsNetJanuary 1996REGULATIONS BRIEFSExpansion of General License GLX and GTDROn December 20, 1995 the Bureau of Export Administration issued afinal rule revising the Export Administration Regulations (EAR) byexpanding General License GLX eligibility, and eligibility for GeneralLicense GTDR.FR 65526, December 20, 1995Policy on Munitions Export Licenses to NigeriaOn November 10, 1995, the Department of State issued a public noticeadvising that all licenses and other approvals to export commercialdefense articles or services to Nigeria are suspended until further notice,pursuant to sections 38 and 42 of the Arms Export Control Act.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORT PRACTITIONER via NewsNetJanuary 1996TABLE OF DENIAL ORDERSSheryl Pinsonnault, U.S.Effective Date: November 27, 1995Charge:  Violation of the Export Administration Act, sec. 787.2Action:  Fined total amount of $10,000; Denial of export privileges for 3yearsJames L. Stephens, U.S.Effective Date:  November 27, 1995Charge: Violation of Export Administration Act, sec. 787.3, 787.4, 787.5& 787.6Action:  Fined total amount of $60,000; Denial of export privileges for 15yearsAnatoliy Kuntsevich, RussiaEffective Date:  November 27, 1995Charge:  Violation of the Export Administration act and the Arms ExportControl Act as amended by the Chemical and Biological WeaponsControl Act of 1991Action:  Loss of government contract privileges; Denial of importprivilegesBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE EXPORT PRACTITIONER via NewsNetJanuary 1996UPCOMING TAC MEETINGSAll Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) meetings are held at the U.S.Department of Commerce, 14th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.,Washington, D.C., at 9:00 AM in room 1617-M2, unless otherwiseindicated.Jan. 12: PECSEA (2:00 to 5:00 PM, Room 1430)Feb. 1: Regulations and Procedures (Room 3884)Feb. 20:  Trans TACEditors Note:  In the event that TAC meetings are canceled as a result ofthe government shutdown, please call the Bureau of ExportAdministration directly 202-482-2583.Back to Headline List WT03-B05-3IA087-000634-B038-57http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it133.html 205.156.212.5 19970122024707 text/html 58197HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:44:57 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:24 GMTContent-length: 58010Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it133.html Sample Issue Copyright FREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNet October 18, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Hong Kong bank granted branch status (441 words) Taiwan outward investment ranks as 2nd highest in Asia (367 words) High-speed railway bidding to open (394 words) Visa's card for stored value introduces electronic cash (422 words) A booster shot for democracy (444 words) Religious group scandal leads to cult crackdown (820 words) Open telecom door prompts a surge (773 words) Production drain to mainland (272 words) UPS opens regional center (260 words) WTO talks end with Australia (763 words) Trade group arrives from mainland (656 words) Opposition bars premier from power plant report (822 words) Justices open dual-status hearing (702 words) A Lafayette-class missile frigate, the Hsi Ning,... (142 words) Examination Yuan President Hsu Shui-teh, acting as... (88 words) The Russian Foreign Ministry has notified the ROC... (101 words) All-party meeting sets up national conference plan (654 words) CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996Hong Kong bank granted branch status from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p8by Deborah Shen     The Ministry of Finance on Oct. 15 approved a proposal by theBank of East Asia, Hong Kong's largest bank, to upgrade itsrepresentative office in Taiwan to branch status.     The BEA is the first bank with mainland Chinese investment to bepermitted into the Taiwan market. Also, it is only the second HongKong-based bank allowed to set up a branch on the island. The firstsuch branch was opened in 1984 by the Hongkong Bank, also known asthe Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corp. Ltd.     But as the Hongkong Bank relocated its headquarters to Londonseveral years ago, the BEA can be seen as the only bank trulyheadquartered in Hong Kong to operate a branch here on the island,the ministry noted.     The ministry expects that approval of the BEA's upgrade proposalwill encourage the Hong Kong government to gradually give the greenlight to each of the seven similar proposals made by Taiwan-basedbanks. The Taiwan banks have applied to either set up representativeoffices in the British colony or upgrade their existing offices thereto branch status.     The BEA had applied to the ministry more than a year ago toupgrade its representative office, which was set up in Taiwan inApril 1993. But as the bank failed to meet the ministry's request forconcrete data on its mainland Chinese ties, the ministry postponedapproval of the application.     The move in turn caused the Hong Kong government to also delayapproval of the applications by the seven Taiwan-based banks,according to the ministry.     The situation improved a few months ago when the BEA presented alist of its shareholders to the ministry. After reviewing theinformation, the ministry decided to approve the upgrade proposal, asit was determined that the mainland Chinese stake accounts for only11.77 percent of the bank's total capital. The figure is well belowthe 20 percent ceiling imposed by the ROC government.     However, because the BEA is a listed company, it is possiblethat the percentage of mainland Chinese-owned shares could increaseover time. Thus, if the 20 percent ceiling should ever be exceeded,the ministry said it will have to consult with the Mainland AffairsCouncil at that time on how to handle the case.     As of the end of 1995, the BEA had capital assets totalingUS$1.1 billion, ranking the bank as Hong Kong's largest. The bank has74 branches in Hong Kong, in addition to six more branches and fiverepresentative offices in mainland China.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996Taiwan outward investment ranks as 2nd highest in Asia from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p8by Kelly Her     Taiwan's outbound investment last year ranked as the secondhighest in Asia, according to a United Nations report cited locallyby the Council for Economic Planning and Development.     Outward investment by Asian countries and territories in 1995amounted to US$43 billion, representing 90 percent of such investmentby developing countries worldwide, the CEPD said, referring to thereport.     Hong Kong was Asia's top supplier of foreign capital last year,investing US$25 billion abroad, mainly in mainland China.     Taiwan placed second with outbound investment totaling US$3.8billion. Mainland China ranked third with US$3.5 billion, South Koreafourth with US$3 billion and Malaysia fifth with US$2.6 billion.     The same report noted that the mainland not only was the thirdlargest foreign investor in Asia, but was also the region's topforeign investment site.     But the pace of foreign capital coming into the mainland isexpected to slow after hitting a peak this year due to the mainland'simplementation of credit-tightening measures and gradual phasing outof preferential treatments for foreign investors. Foreign investmentin the mainland is projected to fall below US$30 billion in 1997.     However, the report said the mainland investment by Japan, SouthKorea and the European Union will likely increase despite the generalslowdown.     The report noted that as long as the mainland enjoys rapideconomic growth and opens new investment fields, it will remain amajor foreign investment site.     According to the report, worldwide investment in developingcountries last year accumulated to US$99.7 billion on impressive 15percent annual growth. Two-thirds of this investment capital headedto Asia, with the mainland absorbing the most, or 38 percent.     Investment capital injected into Asian countries from throughoutthe world reached US$65 billion in 1995, representing an increase of21 percent from a year before. Ninety percent of the investment fundswere destined for Southeast Asia and East Asia.     Foreign investment during the year in the mainland, Malaysia andSingapore reached US$37.5 billion, US$5.8 billion and US$5.3 billion,respectively. Projects in Indonesia, Thailand and Hong Kong totaledUS$4.5 billion, US$2.3 billion and US$2.1 billion, respectively.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996High-speed railway bidding to open from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p8by Kelly Her     The Ministry of Transportation and Communications is scheduledto make a public announcement at the end of October inviting privatefirms to participate in Taiwan's high-speed railway project.     Different from in the past, the ministry will divide the biddinginto two phases by first selecting qualified applicants and thenconducting thorough evaluations of their detailed investment plans.     Qualified applicants must possess considerable financial assetsand technological capabilities. On the financial side, a bidder needsto have either a minimum paid-in capital of US$363 million or annualrevenues of more than US$1.09 billion. Sound financial performanceover the past three years is also required of an applicant.     The ministry's guidelines permit several companies to pool theirefforts and bid collectively in the form of an alliance. An alliancebid must have a combined paid-in capital of at least US$363 million.Each investor in the partnership is required to have paid-in capitaltotaling US$72 million or more.     The 330-kilometer rail will provide an express link betweenTaipei, the northern business center of the island, and Kaohsiung, amajor port city in the south. The high-speed transportation system isslated to become operational by the year 2003.     As designed, the large-scale railway project will cost aroundUS$16 billion. Also, it has been decided that private capital mustaccount for more than 40 percent, or US$6.42 billion, of theproject's total investment.     Participation is open to private firms on abuild-operate-transfer basis. The categories available for privateinvestment include rail installation, station construction,electrical engineering and maintenance operations.     As such, the project is expected to add vigor to Taiwan'sconstruction, electrical engineering and financial service sectors bybringing ample business opportunities to them.     But opportunities exist in more than only the constructionphase. Private firms will also have the opportunity to take charge ofthe management, operation and maintenance of the transportationsystem after its completion, according to the ministry's ProvisionalEngineering Office of the High-Speed Rail.     This aspect explains why such strict financial conditions havebeen imposed on bidders, the office noted.     In the days ahead, the office plans to organize severalinvestment seminars targeting leading domestic and foreignconglomerates in an effort to spur their eagerness to participate inthe high-speed railway project.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996Visa's card for stored value introduces electronic cash from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p8by Deborah Shen     Visa International Service Association will cooperate with eightbanks in Taiwan to issue "Visa Cash" cards on the island at thebeginning of next year.     The move will mark the first entry of an international-standard,microchip-based, stored-value purchasing card into the Taiwan market.In addition, it also ushers in a new era of purchasing withelectronic cash in Taiwan, according to Visa, which already issuesthe No. 1 credit card on the island.     The U.S.-based company and the eight local banks held a jointnews conference in Taipei on Oct. 15 to announce the launching inTaiwan of a Visa Cash pilot program. The partnership expects that200,000 disposable Visa Cash cards will be available on the market inearly 1997.     So-called Visa Cash is an alternative purchasing medium foreveryday low-value products and services like newspapers, bus faresand cups of coffee. The microchip embedded in the stored-value cardautomatically deducts the amount of each purchase to keep track ofthe card's remaining value.     "Visa Cash will revolutionize the way Taiwan people pay forsmall-value purchases," according to Raymond Chan, executive vicepresident and general manager of Visa's North Asia, Asia-Pacificregion.     As cardholders do not need to authorize transactions by usingpersonal identification numbers or signing their signatures, VisaCash is nearly as convenient to use as regular currency, Chan noted.     Since Visa launched a pilot program in Hong Kong in August ofthis year, more than 100,000 Visa Cash cards have been issued in theBritish colony, according to the company executive.     Chan said Taiwan is an ideal market for the service, as theaverage local consumer spends about US$7,275 annually on dailynecessities.     The eight local banks participating in the program includeCitibank, Chinatrust Commercial Bank, Standard Chartered Bank,International Commercial Bank of China, Chung Shing Bank, Far EasternInternational Bank, Grand Commercial Bank and Taishin InternationalBank.     In the first phase of the Taiwan pilot, the eight banks willissue 200,000 disposable Visa Cash cards in denominations of NT$1,000(about US$36) and NT$500, according to Albert Shiung, vice presidentof Visa International Asia-Pacific and the company's country managerin Taiwan.     Shiung further explained that the success of the initial phasewill lead to the issuance of value-reloadable purchasing cards.     The firm said 5,000 Visa Cash purchase-processing devices willbe installed at convenience stores, food courts in department stores,fast-food restaurants and supermarkets across Taiwan.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996A booster shot for democracy from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p6by FCJ Editors     The National Development Conference scheduled for December holdsout promise for the continued advance of democracy in the Republic ofChina on Taiwan. But much work must be done beforehand to ensure thatthe forum concentrates on the promotion of genuine politicalcommunication. Five days, while a fair amount of time forbrainstorming ideas, can rush by in a blur when it comes to searchingfor agreement on bedrock issues.     Fortunately, work began weeks ago. A Presidential Office taskforce established a broad-based preparatory committee to organize theconference, and seminars throughout the Taiwan area have been plannedto sound out grassroots opinion before the forum actually convenesDec. 23 in Taipei. The preparatory committee's initial work has beenhopeful. On Oct. 11, committee members from all three major partiesagreed on an ambitious aim for the conference: to build a consensuson the major topics of future national development in order toformulate policies and put them into practice.     The three main topics--constitutional reform and party politics,economic development, and relations between Taiwan and mainlandChina--have fundamental importance. ROC parliamentary bodies, thoughcrucibles of democratic debate, sometimes cannot escape gridlock. Theeconomy has been sluggish. And intermediary agency talks betweenTaiwan and mainland China have been on hold for 16 months. Sharplycontested political issues cluster in thickets around all of thesetopics. The 150 conference delegates, meeting outside establishedgovernment structures, will attempt to break pathways into the clear.     President Lee Teng-hui introduced the idea of the NationalDevelopment Conference in his inaugural address May 20, and themeeting of course has a historic precedent. In the summer of 1990,after his first-term inauguration, Lee convoked the similarly namedNational Affairs Conference. It gave birth to several agreements thatbuilt the framework for Taiwan's democratization, such as the directelection of the provincial governor and Taipei and Kaohsiung mayors.     In addressing the preparatory committee last week, Lee set thetone for the forthcoming conference. He pointed out that nationaldevelopment reached a new stage with the direct presidential electionthis year and asserted that "how to concentrate the experience andwisdom of our people" is the key to the future.     The ROC's political landscape has indeed changed in six years.New democratic institutions are in place. The rule of law has beenstrengthened. The government is more representative and moreresponsive. Yet progress, while it leaves old roads behind, alsopresents new and uncharted regions ahead. The National DevelopmentConference can at the very least help light the way.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996Religious group scandal leads to cult crackdown from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p4by Christie Su     ROC law enforcement agencies have launched an island-widecrackdown on religious cults whose illegal activities threaten socialstability and undermine public morality in Taiwan.     The operation targets religious cults and temples across Taiwanwhich are not registered with the government, swindle money out offollowers through fraudulent means, or have ties to gangsterorganizations.     Moreover, the Interior Ministry has announced its intention toestablish an interministerial task force that will focus onstrengthening the management of affairs related to civilian groups onthe island.     The various measures are part of the government's wide-rangingwar on crime. The cleanup campaign comes in the wake of a majorreligious scandal involving "supernatural" shenanigans, politicalfigures, gangsters, enormous sums of money, and thousands of dupedpeople in Taiwan and in mainland China.     The scandal surfaced last week when Taipei City Councilor ChuMei-feng accused a Taipei-based cult, the Sung Chi-li MiracleAssociation, of swindling money from people.     Chu, a member of the New Party, announced in an Oct. 9 pressconference that she had received complaints from around 40 people whoclaimed cult leader Sung Chi-li had cheated money from them throughfraudulent acts.     Meanwhile, several association members went to the police withsimilar charges against Sung.     Councilwoman Chu also named Frank Hsieh, the DemocraticProgressive Party's vice presidential candidate in the elections thispast March, as being associated with the cult. Moreover, Hsieh, aformer legislator, was accused of having received about US$580,000 incampaign donations from cult leader Sung.     Hsieh, however, denied receiving any such donations andclarified that his only tie to the association is that he has servedas its legal consultant.     It was also reported that some government officials in Taiwan,including the deputy director-general of the National PoliceAdministration, Yu Yu-tang, might be associated with the mystic cult.     On Oct. 10, the Miracle Association issued a statement refutingall charges against it. The statement emphasized that the associationwas a registered private organization devoted to helping people byteaching them how to discover their real selves through philosophicallearning. The group further stressed that it had no links to illegalbusinesses.     But an extensive police investigation and an explosion of mediacoverage on the case suggested otherwise, resulting in the arrest ofSung and several core members of the association on fraud charges.     The police investigation revealed that the cult leader, whosereal name is Sung Chien-lin, had a string of previous convictions onfraud and violations of the so-called negotiable instruments law.     Using trick photography, Sung had convinced his associationmembers that he possessed the ability to separate his body and souland miraculously manifest himself at different points on the globesimultaneously. This purported supernatural power of his can be usedto help his followers ascend to paradise after death, he had claimed.     But during police interrogations a few days after the scandalbroke, Sung finally admitted that the manifestation photos were fakesand he did not possess any supernatural powers.     Police reports said Sung had bilked association members out ofabout US$7 million. The illegal fortune was amassed through severalsources: the sale of books, video tapes and photographs about Sung'sso-called miraculous manifestations, donations from the cult leader'sfollowers, and fees Sung charged to people who wanted to meet him inperson to learn how to develop supernatural powers for themselves.     Reportedly, one photograph showing a haloed image of Sungfloating in the sky above a range of mountains was purchased by acult follower for US$3,000. Personal meetings with Sung, however,came with a price tag of US$363,000 each, according to media reports.     The ill-gotten gains afforded Sung a luxurious lifestyle. Hereportedly had vast real estate holdings, including the elaboratelydecorated association temple. The gaudy-looking temple has since beenrazed by the Taipei City Government for building code violations.     Taipei police authorities also have alleged that Sung and hisassociation maintained links to underworld organizations.     Police reports said Sung's group set up money-solicitingbranches in mainland China as well as Taiwan. Members of the mainlandbranches included college professors and ranking Chinese Communistofficials.     The Taipei District Prosecutor's Office said it has frozen theassets of the association pending completion of the investigation.     Hsieh, the former lawmaker accused of receiving politicaldonations from the association, on Oct. 14 filed slander chargesagainst Councilwoman Chu.     News analysts suggested that the allegations of Hsieh's closerelations with the cult will probably become a hindrance in hispolitical future. Hsieh had recently announced that he wanted to runfor the mayor's office in Kaohsiung in two years.     The campaign to ensure propriety in religious activities alsoincludes inviting religious leaders in Taiwan to discuss how to breakdown potentially harmful superstitions in society, said Chao Shou-po,secretary-general of the Executive Yuan.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996Open telecom door prompts a surge from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p3by Kelly Her     The opening of Taiwan's telecommunications market has encouragedleading foreign investors to launch new projects on the island,resulting in a dramatic rise in the overall inward investment duringSeptember.     Approved investments in Taiwan by foreign nationals and overseasChinese in September totaled US$345 million, a sharp rise of 78percent over the previous month.     In its report, the Investment Commission of the Ministry ofEconomic Affairs attributed the surge in inward investment to theliberalization of Taiwan's telecommunications market.     Representing the biggest of September's foreign-fundedtelecommunications projects, the Taiwan affiliate of U.S.-basedSouthwest Bell Corp. funneled US$123 million into a joint venture onthe island.     As for in the first nine months of the year, the InvestmentCommission approved 344 foreign investment projects on the island, up15 percent from the same period of the previous year. These projectswere valued at US$1.64 billion, down 5 percent from the year-earlierlevel.     Despite a downturn in sales in the semiconductor sector, theelectronics and electrical products industry still attracted the mostforeign investment of all industries in Taiwan in theJanuary-September period. Even so, the industry's investment totalwas a substantial 50 percent lower than the year-earlier total, thecommission reported.     The period's other leading investment areas included theisland's banking and insurance, wholesale and retail, food andbeverage, and service industries. Together with the electronics andelectrical products industry, these industries accounted for 55percent of the total inward investment between January and September.     The commission said the government's campaign to build Taiwaninto an Asian Pacific operations hub is helping to attract foreigninvestment into the five industries.     Looking at September's outbound investment in areas besidesmainland China, the commission's report said Taiwan enterprisespoured US$156 million into 32 projects overseas. The value figurerepresented a hefty 62 percent increase over the non-mainlandoutbound investment of the same month a year ago.     In the first nine months of the year, non-mainland outwardinvestment by Taiwan firms climbed to US$1.49 billion, up animpressive 49 percent from the year-earlier period.     The most popular investment areas of the Taiwan firms were thebanking and insurance, electronics and electrical products, andservice industries. Projects in the three industries made up 62percent of the island's total outbound investment between January andSeptember.     A particularly strong increase was noted in Taiwan firms'establishment of investment holding companies overseas in the period.The commission said this was a reflection of the trend by theisland's investors to update their information and technologies as ameans of accelerating their internationalization and bolstering theircompetitiveness.     The report also evaluated investment targeted at the other sideof the Taiwan Straits. In September, the commission gave the greenlight to only 16 mainland investment proposals filed by local firms,a decrease of 48 percent from the number of proposals in August and arecord single-month low.     The aggregate value of September's mainland projects was US$46.4million, down 62 percent from August and the lowest value in 20months.     The slowdown indicates that the mainland investment fever ofTaiwan enterprises has subsided significantly in response toPresident Lee Teng-hui's call for the government to review its policyon cross-Straits business exchanges, according to the commission.     In the first nine months of the year, the number of approvedmainland proposals decreased 24 percent from the year-earlier period.However, the value figure increased 15 percent. The commissionattributed this phenomenon to the fact that the average size   ofTaiwan companies' mainland projects is getting bigger, even thoughthe number of projects is dwindling.     In an attempt to lure more foreign capital to the island, theEconomics Ministry has targeted 10 newly developing industries inTaiwan for active investment promotion. The 10 include the consumerelectronics, communications, precision machinery, semiconductors,aerospace, pharmaceuticals, high-end materials, health careequipment, pollution prevention equipment, and bio-technologyindustries.     Chou Yen, director-general of the ministry's IndustrialDevelopment and Investment Center, said the IDIC will encourageforeign firms to inject capital into these industries.     To help formulate measures for promoting such investment, thecenter will survey foreign firms already operating on the island tosee whether they plan to launch new or expansion projects, he added.     Also, the center already has sent out correspondences to leadingfirms around the world, introducing Taiwan's investment environmentto them and inviting them to gear up local projects, Chou said.     Ministry statistics show that since 1952 a total of 7,705foreign-invested projects, worth around US$36 billion, have beenapproved by the government.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996Production drain to mainland from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p3by FCJ Editors     Thirty percent of the Taiwan investors with projects in mainlandChina have completely ceased production here on the island, accordingto a survey report released Oct. 14 by the ROC Mainland AffairsCouncil.     The council commissioned the Chinese Professional ManagementAssociation of Taipei to conduct the survey on some 300 Taiwaninvestors on the mainland.     According to the survey, many of the investors who no longermanufacture their products in Taiwan continue to receive exportorders and conduct research and development work here on the island.     However, about 10 percent of Taiwan's mainland investors havewithdrawn their operations from the island entirely. Of thesecompanies, 40 percent are now engaged in agriculture, fishery ormining on the mainland. Many others operate service businesses there.     More than 60 percent of the investors surveyed are focusing onthe mainland's domestic market.     Some 89 percent of those surveyed said they continue to purchasethe materials they need for mainland production from plants inTaiwan. However, a declining trend is foreseen, as half of theinvestors said they plan to reduce their Taiwan materials purchasesin the days ahead. Explaining the reason for the expected change,they noted that more upstream and midstream Taiwan factories aredeciding to relocate to the mainland.     About 30 percent of those surveyed said they think the productsthey produce in Taiwan and on the mainland are of the same level ofquality. This is seen as a sign that the production technology on themainland has improved.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996UPS opens regional center from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p3by FCJ Editors     The U.S.-based courier United Parcel Service opened itsAsia-Pacific regional center at the Chiang Kai-shek InternationalAirport on Oct. 10.     UPS said the northern Taiwan center will bolster its serviceto regional customers and eventually hook up with the company'sEuropean base to form a worldwide delivery network. More than that,the opening of the first phase of the UPS center is seen as a steptoward Taiwan becoming a regional air shipping hub.     The inauguration of the US$400 million center, however, wasmarred by a demonstration by 100 members of the Taipei Air Cargo andWarehousing Industrial Union, who said the inroad gained by UPS willenable the U.S. firm to seriously undermine their businesses.     The union companies said the privileges granted to UPS willenable the major international courier to elbow many of them out ofthe market. This, in turn, will result in closures and the loss oflocal jobs, they warned.     UPS is the first foreign express courier that the government haspermitted to establish an Asia-Pacific freight center on the island.The company also has been given special treatment, including 24-hourcustoms clearance and quarantine and certification services.     In December, UPS filed an application to set up themultimillion-dollar center at the CKS airport. The government gavethe green light earlier this year despite protests from localcouriers which feared they would not be able to compete with the U.S.delivery giant.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996WTO talks end with Australia from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p3by Deborah Shen     Following 14 rounds of bilateral negotiations, the ROC hasfinally reached a consensus with Australia on the terms applicable tothe ROC's bid to enter the World Trade Organization.     Australia now becomes the 11th WTO member country to havecompleted bilateral talks with the ROC on membership terms, LinYi-fu, director-general of the Board of Foreign Trade, said.     The two sides are expected to sign an accord on the agreed-uponpackage of entry terms in the next few weeks. The finalized accordwill help speed up the ROC's admission into the trade body, Lin said.     Lin was the chief ROC negotiator in what now appears to havebeen the final round of WTO talks with Australia. During the Oct. 7-8negotiations in Taipei, the two sides failed to resolve a majorsticking point which had lingered since the bilateral talks beganseveral years ago. That would be the ROC's tariff rate on imports ofAustralian beef.     At the conclusion of the Taipei negotiations, the Australiandelegation, headed by Graeme Thomason, said it would need to consultwith its government on proposals made by the ROC in the meetings. Theproposals included reductions on the tariffs which the ROC applies toimports of Australian beef.     Australia is the largest source of imported beef in Taiwan.According to the Council of Agriculture, the island imported morethan 57,000 metric tons of beef and beef products last year, of whichabout 30,000 metric tons came from Australia.     Even so, Australian negotiators have long complained in thebilateral WTO meetings that the ROC applies discriminatory treatmentto imports of Australian beef. In that the ROC classifies importedbeef from the United States as "special grade" and beef fromAustralia as "ordinary grade," the Australian product falls into acategory with a higher tariff. This makes Australian beef lesscompetitive in the Taiwan market, they noted.     Currently, the ROC government taxes special-grade imported beefat a rate of NT$22.1 (US$0.80) per kilogram. Ordinary-grade importedbeef faces a duty of NT$30 (US$1.09) per kilogram.     The ROC's initial stance was that it would not cut tariffs onimported agricultural products until after gaining membership in theWTO. The nation's negotiators decided to yield ground, however,following President Lee Teng-hui's call for WTO talks with relatedcountries to be completed by next March so that the ROC can enter thetrade body before Hong Kong goes over to mainland China rule in July1997.     The nation's negotiators drew up a package of WTO entry terms,adding in a key element--the beef tariff reductions long sought byAustralia. The proposal was presented to the Australian delegationduring the Taipei meetings in an effort to secure Australia's fullsupport of the membership bid.     On Oct. 11, Australia notified the ROC that it had decided toaccept the beef tariff reductions as well as the rest of the entryterms. The package of proposals is expected to boost the value ofAustralia's overall exports to Taiwan by US$23.7 million annually.     Under the accepted terms, the ROC will cut its tariffs onAustralian beef by 10 percent, lowering the duty from the currentNT$30 (US$1.09) per kilogram to NT$27 (US$0.98) per kilogram beforebeing admitted into the WTO. After membership is gained, the ROC willfurther cut the beef tariffs over a period of six years to NT$15(US$0.55) per kilogram.     In other areas besides beef imports, ROC negotiators also agreedto open the Taiwan market to 2,000 Australian-made compact cars forthe first time ever, beginning in 1997. After membership in the WTOis granted, the quota will be gradually increased to 6,000 cars.     The ROC also promised to double the annual import quota of 1,200metric tons of Australian apples and allow Australian peaches, plumsand oranges to enter the Taiwan market for the first time ever, atannual quotas ranging from 600 to 1,000 metric tons.     The package of membership terms also includes measures to openup Taiwan's financial and legal services and other service markets.     The ROC applied to join the WTO's predecessor, the GeneralAgreement on Tariffs and Trade, in 1990 under the name "CustomsTerritory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu." Currently, the ROCmaintains observer status in the trade body.     The 11 countries with which the ROC has completed talks underthe WTO framework include South Africa, Turkey, Malaysia, the CzechRepublic, Slovakia, Hungary, the Philippines, El Salvador, Colombiaand Uruguay as well as Australia.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996Trade group arrives from mainland from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p2by Weiling Liu     A high-profile mainland Chinese trade delegation arrived inTaiwan this week to meet with business leaders, tour industrial sitesand promote investment in the mainland.     The 14-member delegation led by Guo Dongpo, chairman of theChina Council for the Promotion of International Trade, was invitedfor a weeklong visit by the China External Trade Development Council,or CETRA, Taiwan's top trade promotion organization.     Guo's position is equivalent to the rank of vice minister in themainland government, and the make-up of his delegation made it themost influential to visit Taiwan since both sides began exchanges oftrade professionals last year.     Other delegation members include Wang Wende, director of theOffice of Taiwan, Hong Kong and Macau Affairs under the Ministry ofForeign Trade and Economic Cooperation; Zhang Yuqing, director of thesame ministry's Treaty and Law Department; and Xu Mang, director ofeconomic affairs of the State Council's Taiwan Affairs Office.     Guo said upon arrival that he hoped the trip would help to easetensions between Taiwan and mainland. "The main purpose of myweeklong visit here is to call on my old friends as well as to makenew friends," he said. "I hope to meet with as many Taiwan businessand industry executives as possible to facilitate future developmentof cross-Straits trade ties."     Asked to comment on President Lee Teng-hui's recent warningsabout the risks of overreliance on trade and investments in themainland, Guo smiled but said nothing.     During an Oct. 14 dinner hosted by CETRA Chairman WangChang-ching, Guo said he wanted to understand Taiwan better andintensify industrial and commercial exchanges. He said he had nospecial intention to meet any high-ranking officials in the MainlandAffairs Council, the ROC government's top agency for mainland policy.     MAC Vice Chairman Kao Koong-lian had said three days earlierthat MAC officials would not hesitate to meet with the mainlanddelegation. But Kao did not attend the Oct. 14 dinner even though hehad been invited. The MAC said that pressing matters had detained Kaoand that he would attend a party for Guo toward the end of the visit.     MAC officials also did not attend CETRA's Oct. 15 welcomingreception for Guo's delegation. Asked at the reception whether hewould like to meet with Kao, Guo replied: "I will follow the schedulearranged by my host." Asked whether Guo's trade promotion councilplans to set up a liaison office in Taiwan, Guo said the council hasalready built up regular dialogue channels with CETRA.     Taiwan's intermediary agency for cross-Straits talks, theStraits Exchange Foundation, which is affiliated with the MAC, alsoappeared to keep its distance from the mainland delegation. AlthoughChiao Jen-ho, SEF vice chairman and secretary-general, attended theOct. 15 reception, he stayed only briefly.     Analysts suggested the response by the MAC and SEF reflected theROC government's decision to cool down trade and investment exchangeswith the mainland. In response to such suggestions, the mainland'sWang said that massive amounts of capital from all over the worldhave been funneled into the mainland's infrastructure market and thatTaiwan risks missing out on a golden opportunity.     The delegation on Oct. 15 toured the Taipei InternationalElectronics Show at the Taipei World Trade Center and the next dayvisited the Hsinchu Science-based Industrial Park, the heart ofTaiwan's computer chip industry. On Oct. 17 the delegation planned totour the Kaohsiung-based China Steel Corp. and call on Kao Chin-yen,chairman of the Chinese National Federation of Industries.     The schedule for Oct. 18 included a seminar with Taiwan businessleaders and a meeting with SEF Chairman Koo Chen-fu. A meeting withJeffrey Koo, chairman of the Chinese National Association of Industryand Commerce, was planned for the following day. The delegation wasscheduled to depart Taiwan on Oct. 20.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996Opposition bars premier from power plant report from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p2by Virginia Sheng     A test of wills between the ruling and opposition partiesunfolded this week as Premier Lien Chan was blocked from entering theLegislature to explain why the country needs a fourth new powerplant.     On Oct. 15, Lien made several attempts to enter the Legislature,where he planned to appeal to restore funding for the power plantproject. But on each attempt he was blocked by a human wall ofDemocratic Progressive Party lawmakers.     "It does not make any sense," Lien said in reaction. "TheCabinet should be respected." He also made a thumbs-down gesture toexpress his disappointment.     Government Information Office Director-General Su Chi laterquoted Lien as saying that the incident was "a dark day fordemocracy" in Taiwan. "They should try to convince people withreason, but not through force," Lien said.     Su added that the government welcomes any reasonable discussionof policy but not irrational behavior. He said the denial of Lien'sentry has deprived the public of its right to learn about thecontroversial project.     At the core of the conflict is the project proposed by thestate-run Taiwan Power Co., the sole power supplier on the island, tobuild a new nuclear power plant in the coastal township of Kungliaoin Taipei County.     The project was first proposed in 1980 but was shelved in 1981because the 1979 Three-Mile Island accident in the United Statesfocused public attention on safety.     Safety concerns grew in the mid-1980s, prompted in part by fearsgenerated by the 1986 accident at the Chernobyl plant in formerSoviet Union and in part by operational flaws at Taipower's threeexisting nuclear power plants.     The proposal for the fourth plant won a legislative nod in 1992.Two years later lawmakers approved a budget to cover the project forthe next seven fiscal years. Each year since then oppositionlawmakers have tried to block the funding.     In a surprise move this year, the DPP and New Party lawmakersteamed up on May 24 to pass a resolution that scrapped the budget.Undaunted by the setback, the Cabinet on Oct. 8 sent the power plantproject back to the Legislature for reconsideration.     The ruling Kuomintang is expected to override the opposition'sresolution on Oct. 18, as it needs the support of only one-third ofthe lawmakers present to do so. The KMT controls 83 seats in the164-seat Legislature.     Furthermore, Lien said, the Legislature's original approvalshould stand lest the nation's major policies be subject to constantchange by the lawmaking body at the expense of responsible politics.     Suspension of the power plant project would mean a heavyfinancial loss, would inevitably hurt the ROC's credit rating andwould erect an unnecessary barrier to Taiwan's bid to join the WorldTrade Organization, Lien said.     The Legislature was originally slated to hear Lien explain whythe plant was necessary on Oct. 15, discuss the issue on Oct. 17, andthen vote on the reconsideration proposal on Oct. 18. But the rowoutside the Legislature disrupted this schedule.     The row also had political implications beyond the power plantitself, as it reflected a looming constitutional showdown between theexecutive and legislative branches over Lien's serving simultaneouslyas vice president and premier.     But the opposition tactic itself came under heavy criticism, assome said it used the letter of the law to violate its spirit. Theblocking tactic was carried out by through provisions in the law thatpermit street demonstrations.     Some feared that the Oct. 15 confrontation would build tensionsand close off room for discussion and peaceful settlement of domesticpolitical differences in Taiwan.     While the power plant issue has been debated for more than 10years without reaching a consensus, they said, the greater damage maybe to the island's democratic spirit.     After Lien returned to his office, the Legislature approved amotion raised by opposition lawmakers to adjourn the session. Amongthe 145 legislators present, 75 supported the motion, 68 opposed andtwo abstained.     But before opposition deputies claimed victory, LegislativeSpeaker Liu Sung-pan announced that the lawmaking body would vote onthe project on Oct. 18 without further debate.     The announcement by Liu shocked the opposition lawmakers, whoaccused the speaker of repeatedly violating the neutrality of hisposition.     The opposition also pointed to legislative rules. If the Cabinetwants to reverse a legislative decision, they said, the premier mustfirst report to the lawmakers on why he wants the change before avote is taken.     KMT legislators countered that Lien had intended to do so butwas barred by the opposition.     "You opposition deputies have chosen to skip the review sessionby dismissing the meeting," one KMT lawmaker said. "Although thepremier could not come into the Legislature to deliver his report, hedid send in a written report."-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996Justices open dual-status hearing from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p2by Virginia Sheng     The Council of Grand Justices on Oct. 16 heard arguments onwhether it is constitutional for the vice president to serveconcurrently as premier.     The hearing, presided over by all 16 grand justices, wasprompted by a petition from the opposition parties claiming the dualstatus violates the ROC Constitution.     President Lee Teng-hui announced in June that he had retainedLien Chan as premier after Lee and Lien were sworn in as presidentand vice president in May. Lien had submitted his resignation aspremier to Lee, not the Legislature, and in retaining Lien as premierthe president did not seek legislative approval.     The opposition lawmakers objected and petitioned the grandjustices to rule on the issue. In the meantime, opposition lawmakerslast month prevented Lien from making his administrative report tothe Legislature. This week they barred him from explaining theCabinet's energy policy.     Before the Oct. 16 hearing began, the opposition insisted thatPresident Lee participate. The justices decided it would besufficient to send Lee a letter asking his opinions on the issue.     Because the petition concerns the Presidential Office ratherthan the Cabinet, the opposition also questioned whether it wasproper for Justice Minister Liao Cheng-hao to defend for thepresident since he is a Cabinet official.     Liao, for his part, asserted that the grand justices should notbe ruling on the question in the first place because the dispute ispurely political and not constitutional.     Citing former Vice Presidents Cheng Chen and Yen Chia-kan asprecedents, Liao said that serving in two posts at the same timecauses no difficulties in practice. Chen served as premier from 1958to 1963 and Yen from 1966 to 1972. Liao also pointed out that theConstitution does not state an objection to a dual status such asLien's.     The opposition said the two precedents took place during themartial law period, when some provisions of the Constitution werefrozen. They said the government is responsible to establishconstitutional precedents in the time since martial law was lifted in1987.     The opposition also urged the grand justices to rule not on thebasis of whether the dual status is practical, but whether it isjust. It is not a matter concerning Lien's ability to serve in twopositions at the same time, they said, but whether Lee has the rightto retain Lien.     Justice Minister Liao emphasized that the ROC government isneither a full parliamentary system nor a full presidential system.Thus, he said, the grand justices must take political realities intoaccount. He said that the duties of both positions are clearlydefined in the Constitution and that there is no problem concerningthe compatibility of Lien's dual roles.     Hu Fo, an academic and constitutional expert representing theopposition parties, argued that the precedents do not make a validcase. According to the Constitution, Hu said, the vice president is abackup for the president while the premier should be held responsibleto the Legislature.     What matters is that in retaining Lien without legislativeapproval, the president acted without any check and balance, theopposition argued. The opposition added that, should a president beunable to finish his term, the vice president would succeed him andin such a case confusion would arise if the vice president and thepremier were the same person.     Lien resigned as premier in January, as required by theConstitution, before the newly elected Legislature convened Feb. 1.Lee then renominated him as premier and the nomination wonlegislative approval.     Lien resigned again before he was sworn in as the vicepresident. In June, Lee announced that he had retained Lien aspremier. The opposition complained loudly because Lee's choice forpremier was not submitted to the Legislature for approval.     The nine-hour hearing before the grand justices Oct. 16 endedwithout any conclusion and was scheduled to resume Nov. 1, witharguments centered on the relationship between the president and vicepresident, the president and the premier, and the original design ofthe Constitution. A ruling is expected in two months.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996A Lafayette-class missile frigate, the Hsi Ning,... from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p1by FCJ Editors     A Lafayette-class missile frigate, the Hsi Ning, wascommissioned Oct. 12 at the Tsoying naval base near Kaohsiung insouthern Taiwan. The 3,600-ton frigate, the second of six orderedfrom France, is armed with torpedoes, U.S.-built surface-to-airmissiles, ROC-developed Hsiungfeng II anti-ship missiles, the Phalanxrapid-fire gun system and advanced reconnaissance equipment. Thewarship's surfaces are clad in high-tech composite materials thatmake it far less detectable by radar, earning it the nickname"stealth frigate." The ROC Navy ordered the six frigates from Francein 1991 as part of a 10-year plan to modernize the fleet. The Navyhas also leased Knox-class frigates from the United States andordered locally built Cheng Kung-class frigates patterned afterU.S.-made Perry-class frigates.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996Examination Yuan President Hsu Shui-teh, acting as... from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p1by FCJ Editors     Examination Yuan President Hsu Shui-teh, acting as President LeeTeng-hui's special envoy, led an eight-member delegation to Gambia toattend the West African country's presidential inauguration on Oct.18. President Yahya A. J. Jammeh obtained power after a coup in 1994and was elected Gambian head of state on Sept. 26 this year. The ROCresumed official diplomatic relations with Gambia on July 13, 1995.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996The Russian Foreign Ministry has notified the ROC... from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p1by FCJ Editors     The Russian Foreign Ministry has notified the ROC ForeignMinistry that it will open a liaison office in Taipei in lateNovember. The Moscow-Taipei Cultural and Economic CoordinationCommission will be authorized to issue entry visas to ROC citizenswho want to visit Russia. Russia will thus become the 45th countrywithout formal diplomatic ties with the ROC to open a representativeoffice in Taiwan. Victor Trifonov is expected to be named the firstrepresentative in the ROC.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List CopyrightFREE CHINA JOURNAL via NewsNetOctober 18, 1996All-party meeting sets up national conference plan from FREE CHINA JOURNAL, Oct 18, 1996, v13; n40; p1by Virginia Sheng     The consensus-building conference proposed by President LeeTeng-hui in his inaugural address this spring has been scheduled forfive days in late December, a top presidential aide said.     Huang Kun-huei, secretary-general to the president, said theNational Development Conference will be held Dec. 23-28 at the TaipeiInternational Convention Center with the aim of building a consensuson key concerns in order to formulate and implement policies.     These and other details were agreed on during an Oct. 11 meetingof the conference preparatory committee. Huang is executive directorof the 29-member committee, which was established on Oct. 5 by aPresidential Office working group.     Lien Chan, ROC vice president and premier, is the preparatorycommittee convener. Deputy conveners represent each of the threemajor political parties in Taiwan.     The deputy conveners--the Kuomintang's Vincent Siew, theDemocratic Progressive Party's Chang Chun-hung, and the New Party'sLee Ching-hua, said the first preparatory meeting was conducted withmutual respect and a comprehensive exchange of opinions. Huang calledthe meeting "harmonious" and the discussion "heated."     President Lee told the committee that the conference willfulfill the pledge in his May 20 inaugural address to invite opinionleaders and representatives from all quarters to exchange views onmatters of far-reaching importance to the Republic of China.     "After we accomplished the direct presidential and vicepresidential election on March 23 ... national development has strodeonto a new stage," Lee told the committee. "In the new system, how toconcentrate the experience and wisdom of our people to seek long-termprosperity for the nation is the key to whether we can launch awide-ranging development program and enter the next century."     The conference agenda will fall under three major topics:constitutional reform and party politics, economic development, andrelations between Taiwan and mainland China.     Possible subtopics include the governmental structure, electoralsystem, taxation, financial liberalization, public facilityimprovement, social security programs, balancing economic developmentand environmental protection, cross-Straits relations and nationalsecurity, and the parallel policies of developing Taipei-Peking tiesand carrying out pragmatic diplomacy.     About 150 delegates, including political figures, scholars andother opinion leaders, will be invited to the conference. Vigorousdebates are expected on such issues as the relationship between thepresident, the premier and the Legislature, the abolishment of theprovincial government and the policy toward the mainland.     The committee also decided to hold 15 forums throughout Taiwanto gather suggestions from the general public. Forums among overseasChinese were rejected owing to disapproval by opposition committeemembers.     In general comments, Chang of the DPP argued that the governmentshould consider the conference a forum to establish national policy.If the conference is not empowered to lead to changes, he added, thenthe DPP will withdraw from it.     The New Party's Lee characterized the conference as a forum fornegotiation or coordination between political parties. He said themeeting in effect will serve as another advisory board to PresidentLee rather than as an extraconstitutional mechanism affectinggovernment operations.     While the DPP favorably recalled the National Affairs Conferencein 1990 for laying down a good foundation for subsequentconstitutional amendments, the New Party disagreed. The New Partyalso insisted that four subtopics be included on December's agenda:administrative neutrality, judicial independence, militarydepoliticization and media fairness.     Such particulars and other matters--such as whether to frame theconference around panel discussions and whether to prepare studypapers in advance--will be taken up in future preparatory meetings.The next is set for Oct. 22. Committee members agreed that subsequentmeetings should be attended both by party-recommended representativesand nonpartisan experts.     As preparatory committee convener, Lien was praised for givingall members plenty of time to express themselves, though some saidthis led to inefficiency. The meeting exceeded its original two-hourtime frame by 90 minutes.-ENDCopyright 1996 Free China JournalBack to Headline List WT03-B05-4IA087-000634-B038-121http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it134.html 205.156.212.5 19970122024812 text/html 232810HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:45:26 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:38 GMTContent-length: 232622Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it134.html Sample Issue Copyright THE HINDU via NewsNet September 27, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES India: Solanki offers to resign AICC post (250 words) Sri Lanka: 100 LTTE cadres killed in fighting (385 words) India: Strategy for last phase of Jammu & Kashmir polls (211 words) The Hindu-Editorial: Towards justice in Bosnia: "It is in the interest of the former belligerents (in the Bosnian war) to have those guilty (of war crimes) convicted" and to get rid of "these embarrassing figures" (1551 words) The Hindu-Editorial: A challenging Task (666 words) The Hindu-Editorial: Arbitrary exercise of power (668 words) Heritage Day observed sans rancour in South Africa (612 words) India: Pak. trained ultra held (459 words) India: Malabar varsity to be called Kannur University (397 words) The Hindu-Editorial: Central Asia eyes Afghan corridor (925 words) India: Andhra Pradesh releases water into Poondi canal (584 words) India: How much water for Madras? (252 words) India: Shifting of refugees begins (182 words) India: Effluents treatment: High Court direction to SIV (629 words) India: Annamalai Chettiar award for Subbulakshmi (183 words) India: Parties flouting poll code (362 words) China may back India for U.N. Council seat (264 words) Delhi to host NAM meet (413 words) India: High Court rejects Rao"s plea for anticipatory bail (512 words) India: CBI chargesheet Rao in St. Kitts case (1259 words) India: Villagers flee as Pak. firing intensifies (86 words) Indian fiscal deficit is unsustainable: Camdessus (361 words) India: PM takes oath as RS member (277 words) India: BJP to move High Court on irregular land deals (860 words) The Hindu-Editorial: Hares, hounds and lawyers: Lawyers must consciously project the counter image that they are mediators of accountability and not for political, financial or any other kind of hire in public interest litigation (1641 words) Attitude of our athletes has to change: Amritraj (413 words) Film Review: "Subhash" (1010 words) India-Film: Humane, down to earth: Vijayalakshmi (297 words) India-Music: A mesmeric touch: Sanjay Subramaniam (887 words) India-Music: Marked by refinement: Neyveli R. Santhanagopalan (570 words) India-Art: Based on Nature: T. C. A. Gopalakrishnan (256 words) Book Review: Desika sthotras (306 words) Dance: Confident display (273 words) Neat job by veteran director: "Nerukku Ner" (686 words) World record break by Russell: Causier pips Gilchrist at the post (1075 words) Sleek and modern (654 words) Lanka scores a convincing win (658 words) Unusual combinations (645 words) Specialist openers, need of the hour (1010 words) Mrunalini earns IWM norm (213 words) India: Madras Stock Exchange online trading inaugurated (448 words) India: 65,000 bookings for Ford Escort (151 words) India-Corporate Results: MAC Industries (380 words) India-Corporate Results: Shalimar Paints (187 words) India-Corporate Results: BPL Refrigeration (372 words) India-Corporate Results: Alpic Finance (224 words) India: Procedures for NRI investments simplified (279 words) Microbe capable of degrading oil isolated (374 words) India: Adult TV channel jinxed? (692 words) India: Brahmothsavam fetches TTD Rs. 3.3 cr (125 words) India-TV: Renuke Shahane: Choosy about her roles (1235 words) India: Situation will be clear in 20 days: Waghela (434 words) India: 14 airports to be developed for global operations (283 words) Dustin Hoffman: Cinema"s diminutive dynamo (1382 words) A zest for life (1111 words) India: SPG cover: V.P. Singh reiterates demand (243 words) India: End of the road for Narasimha Rao? (619 words) India: Urea scam: CBI may send team to Geneva (278 words) Asian tariffs impede growth: World Bank (1476 words) India: Cauvery: Karnataka denies understanding (525 words) India: Bhatnagar prizes announced (253 words) India: EC looking into BJP complaints against PM (302 words) CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Solanki offers to resign AICC postfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 13, Col. dFrom Our Special CorrespondentNEW DELHI, Sept. 26.The  AICC general secretary, Mr. Madhavsinh Solanki,  today  tookthe lead among the AICC office-bearers by offering to resign fromhis post to enable the new party president, Mr. Sitaram Kesri, toreconstitute  the AICC. According to sources, in a  brief  letteraddressed to the newly-appointed Congress president, Mr.  Solankihas offered to demit office to enable Mr. Kesri to choose his ownteam of office-bearers.Mr.  Solanki's  offer  is bound to put  pressure  on  other  AICCoffice-bearers to follow suit though all indications are that Mr.Kesri has no intention at this juncture to reshuffle the AICC.Another  general  secretary, Mr. Devendra Dwivedi,  had  gone  onrecord  that the new president should have a free hand to  choosehis  own  secretariat. The observation of Mr.  Dwivedi  triggeredspeculations that the AICC general secretaries may resign.But the issue did not figure at the first formal meeting  betweenthe general secretaries and Mr. Kesri earlier in the day. Neitherany  of the general secretaries nor Mr. Kesri made any  referenceto the subject.In  the course of the meeting the general  secretaries  discussedthe  issue  of  rescheduling  of  the  organisational  elections.Immediately  after  the  appointment  of Mr.  Kesri  as  the  newpresident,  the Congress represented to the  Election  Commissionseeking  extension  of  time till February end  to  complete  theorganisational elections.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Sri Lanka: 100 LTTE cadres killed in fightingfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 13, Col. dFrom Amit BaruahCOLOMBO, Sept. 26.At  least  100 LTTE cadres were killed and scores of  Sri  Lankansoldiers feared dead or wounded as the Tigers and the Army foughttheir most fierce battles in the Vanni mainland during the  five-day-old Operation Sath Jaya-III (True Victory-III) today.A  military source said that the security forces, who claimed  tohave repulsed a massive LTTE counter-attack this morning west  ofParanthan, had the bodies of some 100 Tigers in their possession.Apparently, the security forces have also taken heavy casualties.No details were, however, available of military dead or  wounded.The Defence Ministry here maintained total silence on the  courseof fighting this morning.An  official release merely said this morning:  "Latest  reportsindicate  that  the terrorists had launched  a  massive  counter-attack during the very early hours of September 26 on the  troopsadvancing  along the western flank. This counter-attack has  beenrepulsed very effectively causing very heavy casualties among theterrorists."Earlier,  the military claimed that it continued to advance  botheast  and west of Paranthan in the Vanni mainland  amidst  fierceresistance  from  LTTE cadres as 13 soldiers and 30  Tigers  werekilled in the last 24 hours."On  the  western  flank,  troops  captured  an  important  roadjunction  by  the afternoon of September 26.  Terrorists  offeredheavy  resistance during this confrontation prior to the  captureof the road junction," the Defence Ministry said in a statement.According  to  the  release,  Sri  Lankan  troops,  after  havingcaptured  the Murasumoddai area east of Paranthan,  had  advancedone more kilometre.Meanwhile, the LTTE denied Government statements regarding  Tigercasualties.  "There is no truth to the Sri  Lankan  Government'sclaim  that  its troops have either killed or  wounded  100  LTTEfighters on Tuesday..." the Tigers said.According  to a Tiger release from London, the "actual  number"of LTTE fighters killed in battle between Sunday and Tuesday  was26.  Fourteen cadres were killed on Sunday, three on Tuesday  andnine on Wednesday.The  Tigers  also alleged that five persons were  killed  and  15wounded  when  Sri Lanka Air Force (SLAF) aircraft  "attacked  alarge  crowd  of fleeing civilians"  moving  from  Puthumurippu,Kilinochchi, yesterday.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Strategy for last phase of Jammu & Kashmir pollsfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 13, Col. cFrom Our Special CorrespondentDODA, Sept. 26.A  strategy has been worked out to ensure orderly,  peaceful  andfree  and  fair  elections  for the rest of the  six  out  of  87Assembly  constituencies of Jammu and Kashmir in the  fourth  andfinal phase of elections.This is keeping in view the increasing number of bomb explosions,attacks on the lives of candidates of pro-India political partiesand  their activists currently engaged in electioneering in  Dodadistrict to disrupt the conduct of elections on September 30. Thedistrict is most prone to militant violence.According  to  official sources, Army jawans  and  officers  willcommand  and direct anti-militant operations in  the  mountainousdistrict  of  Doda spread over 11,600 sq. km. The  BSF  has  beenasked to continue anti-militant operations in close  coordinationwith  the Army. But the maintenance of law and order will be  thesole  responsibility of the State law and order  authorities  whohave  already  got deployed more than 500 companies of  the  BSF,CRPF,  ITBP  and the Jammu and Kashmir Armed  Police.  They  willprovide  security cover to candidates and their  activists,  pollconducting officers and all polling booths.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996The Hindu-Editorial: Towards justice in Bosnia: "It is in the interest ofthe former belligerents (in the Bosnian war) to have those guilty (of warcrimes) convicted" and to get rid of "these embarrassing figures"from THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 12, Col. cBy Vaiju NaravaneTHE  war  in  the  former  Yugoslavia,  a  particularly  barbaricconflict,  lasted  from  1991 to 1995 and  claimed  an  estimated100,000  lives. Thousands of people both Serbs and  Muslims  weretortured  or  detained in concentration camps,  women  were  massraped  and an estimated half a million people were driven out  oftheir  homes.  In  1993  the  United  Nations  Security   Councilestablished  the International Criminal Tribunal for  the  formerYugoslavia in an attempt to punish the Serbs, Muslims and  Croatsguilty of the worst atrocities. So far the Tribunal has  indicted75 persons of war crimes and crimes against humanity. Of these 51are  Bosnian  Serbs. These include the Bosnian Serb  leader,  Mr.Radovan  Karazdic  and General Ratko Mladic who  are  accused  ofhaving  ordered, the massacres in Srebrenica where  an  estimated5000  Muslims  were  killed. In addition Mr.  Karazdic  and  Gen.Mladic  are  charged with genocide and  crimes  against  humanityarising   from  atrocities  perpetrated  against   the   civilianpopulation  in  Bosnia-Herzegovina,  for  the  sniping   campaignagainst  civilians  in  Sarajevo  and  for  the  taking  of  U.N.peacekeepers as hostages and their use as human shields.The President of the International Criminal Tribunal, Dr. AntonioCassese, an eminent Italian jurist, spoke to The Hindu on how thetribunal has gone about its tasks and the problems it has  faced.Excerpts from the interview:The  Hindu:  This is the second time since World War II  that  aninternational court has been set up to try war criminals. What isthe difference between this tribunal and that of Nuremberg?Mr. Antonio Cassese: There are several differences. At  Nurembergyou  had what has been called Victors' Justice. We  are  carryingout  Victims' Justice. We can do this because this Court  is  notthe  projection of the four great powers which won the war as  inthe  case  of  Nuremberg,  but  the  expression  of  the   entireinternational community. Of the 11 judges, only two are European.The  others come from countries as far flung as Australia,  CostaRica,  China or Canada. The Nuremberg judges were  nominated.  Wewere elected by the international community.Secondly,  the  Nuremberg  court was set up at a  time  when  thevictors  had  total power and control over defeated  Germany  andjudges only had to demand documents or summon witnesses for it tobe done. This court was set up by the U.N. Security Council  whenthe war was still going on. Since we don't have a judicial policewe  have to rely on the justice ministries and police  forces  ofthe nations concerned to obtain evidence.The  final difference with Nuremberg is that those  sentenced  bythis  court can appeal. For us a fair trial has become  somethingof  an  obsession.  I always say that it is in  the  interest  ofRadovan  Karazdic  and Ratko Mladic to stand trial  because  theywill  be  assured of a fair trial and if they are  innocent  theywill be acquitted.What are the instruments at your disposal?We  don't have the kind of marvellous documentary evidence  whichwas available to the Nuremberg prosecutors where every order  wassent  in  quintuplicate. For certain crimes  committed  in  1990,1991,  1992,  for  instance  in the case  of  mass  rape,  it  isdifficult  to gather direct medical evidence. Our  investigationsare therefore conditioned by the type of evidence we are seeking.With little documentary evidence available we rely, above all, oneyewitness  accounts. But often people who have witnessed  crimesare  afraid  to testify because of possible  repercussions.  Fearprevents  many  from coming forward. We do not have the  kind  ofeyewitness  protection programmes which exist in the U.S. We  canprotect  our  witnesses  only when they are here  in  Holland  bydisguising their voices or keeping their identities secret. I  amnow trying to set up a network of Non-Governmental  Organisationswhich can help eyewitnesses before and after they testify. So  itis very difficult to gather proof.Of  the  75 persons accused of war crimes and/or  crimes  againsthumanity only eight have been brought before the Court. How  doesthe Court intend to see that justice is done?Not  all  those  who  have been  arrested  are  minor  criminals.Blaskic,  for  instance, is a general in the Croatian  army.  Theprosecutor  is  going  ahead with investigations and  no  one  isexcluded even at the highest levels. Secondly, we have invented aspecial  procedure called Article 61, by which there will  be  notrial  or  sentencing in absentia. Under this  procedure,  if  anaccused  fails  to  appear before the court,  we  call  upon  theprosecutor  to  make  not  just the  charges,  but  the  evidencegathered  against them public. Against Karazdic, for instance  wehave  the testimony of a Muslim who remained buried under a  heapof bodies at Srebrenica. And we can make this evidence public. Ifa  three-judge bench decides that the proof  presented  indicatesthat the accused may have committed the crimes, an  internationalwarrant  is  issued via Interpol for the person's  capture  whichgoes out to 200 countries around the world. And then we address aletter  to  the head of the U.N. Security  Council  naming  thoseStates which have offered them protection or shelter. Last week Isent  a  letter  to the U.N. Security Council  stating  that  theRepublic  of Croatia and the Bosnian Croat Federation had  failedto arrest Ivica Rajic, a Bosnian Croat military leader. The  sameis true in the case of Karazdic and Mladic. The Security  Counciltook  note of my letter and condemned the Governments  concerned.Over a period of time such initiatives have a cumulative effect.Who can arrest these criminals?The  Dayton  accords have strengthened the Court.  They  make  itbinding   upon  the  Republika  Srpska  and   the   Bosnian-CroatFederation  to cooperate with us and to give free access  to  ourinvestigators. This obligation has only been partly observed.  Inaddition,  Article  9 of the accords forbids  anyone  accused  orindicted by the Court to hold appointed or elected public office.This  is  the  case of Karazdic. Croatia has now  adopted  a  lawcalling  for cooperation with the Court and convinced Blaskic  toappear  before the court. Drazen Erdemovic (charged with  killinghundreds   of  unarmed  Bosnian  Muslims,  after  the   fall   ofSrebrenica)  was handed over by Belgrade. So something has  movedsince Dayton. The States concerned tend to look upon the  handingover  of  their  citizens  as  extradition.  We  say  it  is  notextradition, it is surrender. Last May we signed a memorandum  ofunderstanding  with NATO under which NATO forces have the  right,not  the  duty,  but  the right,  to  arrest  these  alleged  warcriminals.  But NATO forces cannot easily arrest  these  accused,who  always go about heavily armed or protected, without  riskinginnocent human lives. And this I understand.Prosecutor  Richard  Goldstone  (South  Africa)  left  the  Courtaccusing  NATO  of "pusillanimity" for not  having  helped  youcomplete your work. Do you share this view?IFOR  or the U.N. implementation force has been in existence  forthe  past  nine months. And their mandate, which depends  on  thepoliticians,  has  not  been revised or updated.  However,  I  amconfident  and  optimistic that the next few months  will  see  achange.  This  view is based on several factors  including  talkswith relevant people. But I cannot tell you more.I  would  want to see the arrest of all the big fish -  not  justKarazdic  and Mladic. And I say that the arrest of  these  peoplewill have a salutory effect even on the peace process.Will it be difficult to prove their responsibility?Many  of these leaders never gave written orders. So  documentaryevidence,  unlike in the Nazi trials, is hard to find. But  thereis the concept of command responsibility or the responsibility ofthe commanders, that is to say, besides the military  commanders,the  heads of state or government who could be held  responsible.They  could  be  accused  of crimes  of  commission  or  even  ofomission,  of  having failed to punish those  who  committed  thecrimes.  And it is here that the evidence produced at the  trialsof the small fry becomes important. This is how we can  constructthe  pyramid which leads to the very top. It will take us a  longtime, at least five to seven years to complete our work.How do you respond to affirmations that the arrest of Karazdic orMladic will get the war going again?This was true before the elections. I believe that the  electionswill  bring about a stabilisation of the political situation  andperhaps  even  an  attempt at integration. I feel it  is  in  theinterest  of the various former belligerents to have  the  guiltyconvicted by our Tribunal, to apportion blame, to rid  themselvesof  these  embarrassing  figures. It will be  in  their  economicinterest to do so because donor States could make development aidconditional  to  the  resolution of this question.  Even  if  thearrest of these figures leads to minor tension or friction in theshort run, it is better this way than to have war later on, sincemost   of  the  persons  indicted  for  war  crimes   are   ultranationalists.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996The Hindu-Editorial: A challenging Taskfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 12, Col. bDESPITE  THE  SHORTFALL it experienced in  raising  the  targetedinternal  and  extra budgetary resources (IEBR) in  1995-96,  theKarnataka  Government  has opted for a 40 per cent  rise  in  itsAnnual  Plan outlay for 1996-97 at Rs. 4,360 crores.  Apparently,the overall performance of the State's economy has encouraged theGovernment to take an optimistic view on the prospect of  raisingIEBR  to the tune of Rs. 1,000 crores. The growth rate  in  Statedomestic  product (SDP) is expected to go up to 5.3 per  cent  in1995-96  from 4.8 per cent in 1994-95. Although its  debt  burdenstood at a staggering Rs. 8,704 crores at the end of 1994-95, theState's  record in debt servicing has been fairly impressive.  Asthe  ratio of interest payments to the State's  revenue  receiptswas about 10 per cent, the Government appears to be confident  ofits ability to raise both internal and extra budgetary resources.The  step up in the Plan outlay calls for a budgetary support  ofRs.   3,359.45  crores,  a  daunting  task  indeed.  As   Centralassistance and market borrowings have more or less been pegged bythe  Planning  Commission, the Government has to strive  hard  tomake  good  the shortfall by tapping its  internal  and  externalbudgetary resources.The  State Plan for 1995-96 was set at Rs. 3,575 crores, but  theGovernment  stepped  up the outlay to Rs.  3,758.28  crores.  Therevised  Plan  called  for a budgetary support  of  Rs.  2,903.29crores and mobilising IEBR of Rs. 854.99 crores. Following a hugeshortfall in the IEBR, the Government had to cut the Plan size toRs.  3,100  crores. The budgetary support also had to  be  scaleddown to Rs. 2,675.78 crores. Although some buoyancy was marked inthe tax and non-tax revenue receipts, the actual mobilisation  ofresources  fell far short of the targets. Failure of  monsoon  inthe  catchment  area hit the hydel power  generation  stations  -Karnataka relies largely on hydel power - obliging the Governmentto  raise  its  budgetary support to the power  sector  from  Rs.220.84   crores  to  Rs.  344.51  crores.  The  resource   crunchinevitably  led to scaling down the outlay on the  energy  sectorfrom  Rs.  689.06  crores  to  Rs.  515.98  crores.  The   actualmobilisation of IEBR at Rs. 424.22 crores was barely half of  thebudgeted  estimate. Even as Karnataka claims to have the  highestper  capita  Plan  expenditure, the shortfall  in  the  budgetarysupport   in  funding  last  year's  Plan  had  undoubtedly   hitdevelopmental projects in the priority sectors.As  the infrastructure projects claim a lion's share of the  Planoutlays,  the Government has taken initiative to tap the IEBR  toimplement  them.  The  recent revision of  the  power  tariff  isexpected  to yield about Rs. 400 crores to the State  electricityboard.  The Krishna Bhagya Jala Nigam has yielded Rs. 300  croresand the Government appears to be confident of raising another Rs.200  crores for the Upper Krishna Project (UKP) for  which  WorldBank assistance was expected earlier. With the Central assistancepegged  around Rs. 378 crores, the State Government hopes  to  beable to raise about Rs. 59 crores under different programmes. Butit is the irrigation sector that claims a major share of the Planoutlay.  As the State is under considerable pressure with  regardto  the  deadline to utilise the Krishna waters,  the  irrigationsector  has  been  allocated  Rs.  1,168  crores.  The   proposedexpenditure of Rs. 1,000 crores on the UKP and Rs. 300 crores  onthe Cauvery basin project has far reaching political implicationsfor  the State. The increase in the size of the  district  sectorplan  to Rs. 732 crores from Rs. 620 crores  envisages  increasedresponsibilities  for the Taluk panchayats in  rural  developmentprojects. Given its acute infrastructural problems, it remains tobe  seen whether Karnataka has learnt its lessons  in  mobilisingresources  and implementing its ambitious Plan without  cost  andtime over-runs.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996The Hindu-Editorial: Arbitrary exercise of powerfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 12, Col. aTHE  SUPREME  COURT'S  strictures  on  the  former  Minister   ofPetroleum and Natural Gas, Mr. Satish Sharma, on his  "arbitraryand  mala fide" orders of allotment of 15 petrol pumps not  onlyreveal a shocking state of affairs governing the conduct of  somepublic  functionaries in the discharge of their duties  but  alsoexpose the role played by them in distributing favours to all andsundry  including friends, thereby violating all norms of  decentpublic behaviour. Mr. Satish Sharma was one of those high profileMinisters  who was considered a blue-eyed boy of the  late  PrimeMinister,  Rajiv  Gandhi, and was therefore in a position  to  dowhatever  he liked without being questioned. The allotment of  15petrol pumps on the face of it is but a very small affair and yetit  would  only show to what depths a Minister could  descend  inusing  his powers. Mr. Sharma could not have made any profit  outof  these  transactions considering the fact that they  were  allgiven  to  the relatives of Ministers and officials. And  it  wasprecisely  keeping  this  fact  in mind  the  Supreme  Court  hadobserved  that  no public servant could arrogate to  himself  thepower to act in a manner which was arbitrary.There  was no doubt that the allocation was absolutely  arbitraryin  nature  because no attempt was made to fix any  criteria  norwere  particular rules and regulations governing such  allocationobserved  at all. Which in effect meant that the former  Ministerwent about this business as if he was dealing with a matter whichhad  no public ramifications and that the departments  under  himwere  treated  as his private domain where his will was  law.  Itgoes  to  the credit of the Supreme Court that it had  come  downheavily on the misuse of his powers in the field of  distributionof  Government  wealth in various forms. The problem  of  ethicalconduct  for public functionaries, in fact, arises by  virtue  ofthe power and influence they command and the commitment they haveto undertake of loyal and disinterested service to the public. Ifon the other hand every public functionary at all levels begin tofeel that they have a right to use their powers either to  enrichthemselves  or  their close associates, the  administration  willcrumble.The  Ministers  do have certain discretionary  powers  which  aregiven  to them on practical considerations, to  avoid  proceduraldelays and to achieve quick action by cutting red tape. These arelaudable objectives but it also means that such powers should  beused  in  a  manner  totally consistent  with  the  values  of  ademocratic regime. It is often said that ethics in Government canbe no better than they are in society, that it is a reflection ofthe values set within the community. This is taking an  extremelycynical  view  of the real issue involved.  Public  functionarieslike  Ministers who claim to represent the people at large  couldwell set the tone for the rest of the society. Lack of  integrityand  probity  in  the discharge of public duties  and  the  utterdisregard  for  social  responsibility by  persons  in  authorityshould  be effectively dealt with in the interests of creating  ajust  society in which every person enjoys the right to  equalityof  opportunity.  Mr. Satish Sharma must pay the  price  for  hisindiscretion.  The Supreme Court has pronounced its  verdict  andthe  question is whether Mr. Sharma has any chance of  explaininghis  conduct  in defence of his actions which have been  held  as"utter  violation  of the law laid down by this Court  and  havealso  infracted  Article 14 of the  Constitution."  This  aspectdeserves  a deeper consideration especially when  the  allotmentsare  stated to be within the category of "discretionary  quota"given to the Minister as distinct from discretionary powers whichin  any case would have to be exercised in a  strictly  judiciousmanner.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Heritage Day observed sans rancour in South Africafrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 11, Col. bFrom M. S. PrabhakaraCAPE TOWN, Sept. 26.The observance of Heritage Day (also known as Shaka Day,  markingthe anniversary of the assassination of King Shaka), which is oneof the 12 national holidays in the new South Africa, on  Tuesday,was  notable  for the absence of rancour and  controversies  thatmarked its observance in 1994 and 1995.In  1994, the controversies arising out of the decision  of  KingGoodwill Zwelithini to invite the President, Mr. Mandela, for theevent  without routing that invitation through  his  `traditionalPrime  Minister' Dr Mangosuthu Buthelezi, marked the  open  splitbetween  the King and his kinsman, introduced a new element  intothe  fractured  and  tension-ridden  politics  of  KwaZulu-Natal,further  embittering  relations all around. Following  this  openconfrontation  and  some ugly incidents, Mr. Mandela  decided  tostay away from the ceremonies.Last  year,  the King, now more alienated from his  kinsman  thanever,  decided  not  to  take part  in  the  public  observances.Addressing  a rally at Stanger in KwaZulu-Natal on that  day,  DrButhelezi  said that the day would be remembered in  history  `asthe  day of the Zulu covenant'. "We are now moving  towards  ourliberation as one nation with one kingdom and one purpose.  Todayis  the  day of unity and the beginning of our  liberation,"  hesaid.On Tuesday, however, the King shared the stage at the King's parkstadium  in  Durban with the Premier of the  province,  Dr  FrankMdalsose  (who is also the National Chairman of the IFP) and  Mr.Jacob  Zuma of the ANC. Observers believe that this marks  a  newand more positive stage in the relations between the King and theIFP. In the province itself, the relations between the leadershipof the IFP (which leads the coalition government) and the ANC  (ajunior partner) have been more visibly amiable for some time.The highlight of the Heritage Day celebrations was the  unveilingof  a memorial to Enoch Mankayi Sontonga, the composer  of  NkosiSikelel  Africa  (God  Bless Africa), the moving  anthem  of  theliberation movement, at the Bramfontein cemetery in  Johannesburgby  Mr.  Mandela.  Mr.  Mandela  also  conferred  the  Order  forMeritorious Service, Gold Class on the composer and presented theaward to Santonga's granddaughter; and named a park and street inthe vicinity of the cemetery after Enoch Santonga.Little  is  known  about  Enoch  Santonga  though  his  song   isuniversally  recongised by the African people on  the  continent,and not merely in South Africa. Indeed, the anthem invokes divineblessing on the continent and its people, and transcends nationalidenties; and is acknowledged and sung in many African  countriesas an anthem of struggle.Sontonga  who was a priest and teacher died unhonoured  nearly  acentury  ago and buried in an unmarked grave.  Burial  registers,where  he is identified only by his first name with  the  furtherinformation that he was a `kaffir' (the pejorative term by  whichboth the segregationist British colonial rulers and the apartheidregime  which  further  refined on  its  predecessors'  crueltiesreferred to the black people), record that he was buried on April19  1905;  and  that he was 32 years of age at the  time  of  hisdeath.  Extensive  research undertaken after the  country  becamefree  succeeded in locating the unmarked grave in the  segregatedsection  of the cemetery. Indeed, this feature of  spatially  andracially segregated burial sites is likely to continue in the newSouth  Africa  far into the foreseeable future  even  though  theSeparate  Amenities Act and all other apartheid legislation  havebeen scrapped.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Pak. trained ultra heldfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 9, Col. bFrom Our Staff ReporterNEW DELHI, Sept. 26.The  Special  Cell of the Delhi police claimed to  have  arrestedKuldeep  Singh  alias Bitta alias Chaudhary,  a  Pakistan-trainedmilitant  belonging  to  the Khalistan  Commando  Force  (Panjwargroup) from a hotel in Paharganj. Kuldeep had come to the Capitalto  strike  here and eliminate important people. Nearly 3  kg  ofRDX, two timers and two detonators were recovered from him,  saidthe police.Addressing a press conference here today, the Deputy Commissionerof  Police (Special Cell), Mr. B. S. Bhola, the suspect had  beenassigned  the task of killing moderate Akali leaders,  especiallyMr.  Prakash Singh Badal and those involved in the November  1984riots.  Acting  on  this  information,  the  police  stepped   upvigilance  and  started  checking hotels  and  guest  houses  andmanaged to arrest Kuldeep.During  interrogation Kuldeep told the police that  the  militantleaders  like  Paramjeet Singh Panjwar, Lakhbir  Singh  Rode  andWadhwa  Singh  were  under tremendous  pressure  from  the  InterSevices Intelligence of Pakistan to indulge in a major strike  inIndia.  To  step up action, various Sikh  militant  organisationshave  come together and working under close cooperation with  theKashmiri militants including Lashkar-e-Toiba of Pakistan.Mr.  Bhola said Kuldeep had entered India through  Chammb-Jhorianborder  in  Jammu  region in August 1996 with 10 kg  of  RDX,  10timers and 10 detonators. The material was buried under sand nearAkhnorr  border  on the Indian side and he was asked  to  get  intouch with other activists and establish hideouts for himself  inPunjab  and Delhi. He was directed by Paramjeet to check in  somehotel in Delhi and inform him about his location so that he coulddirect other militants.Kuldeep  had  been asked by Paramjeet to conduct a recce  of  thevital installations, residences of the VIPs and those involved inNovember 1984 riots. Mr. Bhola said Kuldeep had gone to Sofia  inBulgaria in 1990 on a genuine passport. From Sofia he shifted  toGermany  and  subsequently to Belgium in search of job.  Here  hecame  in  contact with Prasan Singh, president  of  InternationalSikh Youth Forum who motivated him to join the movement.Mr.  Bhola  said he was sent to Pakistan in June 1992 on  a  fakepassport along with Sukhvinder Singh and Surjeet Singh Bhalla. AtLahore  they were received by the Pak ISI agents and Bhai  NishanSingh  of KCF (Panjwar). Kuldeep Singh was imparted three  monthstraining  from June 10 1993 to August 30, 1993 in "Ilaka  Gair"along  with 25 other activists. They were trained in handling  ofassault  rifles, pistols, LMG niper rifle, rocket  launchers  andother explosives.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Malabar varsity to be called Kannur Universityfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 6, Col. dFrom Our Special CorrespondentTHIRUVANANTHAPURAM, Sept. 26.The Malabar University's name was changed to Kannur University bythe Assembly this evening.An official amendment moved by the Education Minister, Mr. P.  J.Joseph,  for the purpose at the fag end of the discussion on  theBill  lead  to  noisy scene in the  House,  with  the  Oppositionregistering its strong protest.The  UDF members alleged that the change was being made  with  aneye  on  the impending Thalassery byelection in which  the  ChiefMinister,  Mr.  E. K. Nayanar, is a contestant and  that  it  wasagainst the guidelines of the Election Commission. They said thatthe  Education  Minister's  failure to disclose  at  the  SubjectCommittee meeting that there was such a move was an insult to itsmembers and the House at large.They alleged that it was also part of a move by the Government toappropriate the parentage of the law. They asserted that whateverthe  Gvoernment  did,  the Bill would remain a  creation  of  theprevious  UDF  Government and its Education Minister, Mr.  E.  T.Mohammed Basheer.The ruling LDF, however, strongly defended the change saying  thename  Malabar University was inappropriate for a university  withjurisdiction  over only two districts and a taluk of the  Malabararea.They  also said that the Government did not need such as  gimmickto ensure Mr. Nayanar's victory from Thalassery and that he wouldwin by a handsome margin anyway.The  Education Minister too stoutly defended the name change.  Hesaid the name Malabar University was inappropriate as only two ofthe  nine  taluks  of  the  old  Malabar  area  came  under   theUniversity.  Besides,  the old Kannur district consisted  of  thearea now brought under the University.Mr.  Joseph also claimed to have held informal discussions  aboutthe  name  change at the Subject Committee meeting and  with  theleaders of the Opposition parties. He added that the present Billwas  more  democratic than the one drafted by  the  previous  UDFGovernment.  The present law provided for election of members  tothe  various  University  bodies unlike the  earlier  Bill  whichenvisaged nomination.The Opposition, however, insisted on division and the name changewas accepted by the House by 63 votes to 34.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996The Hindu-Editorial: Central Asia eyes Afghan corridorfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 13, Col. eFrom C. Raja MohanTASHKENT (Uzbekistan), Sept. 26.Five  years after emerging as an independent nation,  Uzbekistan,the  largest of the Central Asian republics, is striving hard  atgaining  access to the sea. The quest for a reliable corridor  tothe  outside  world  has begun to influence  the  foreign  policythrust of the Uzbek Government here, most notably in Afghanistan.Uzbekistan hopes that peace in Afghanistan will open a gateway tothe Indian Ocean through Pakistan.As the land-locked Central Asian Republics struggle to  integratethemselves into the world economy, the search for access roads tothe  sea has become one of the most important preoccupations  forthe  newly-independent  nations. Whether it is to  transport  theabundant  oil  and natural gas riches of the region or  to  buildstrong trade links with the rest of the world, securing  reliableaccess lines to the sea has become vital for Central Asia.The  problem  is  most  acute for  Uzbekistan  that  is  "doublelandlolcked." It has to go through at least two countries beforetouching  any  sea  port. On the  northern  side,  Uzbekistan  isbounded by Kazhakstan and Russia. To the West, Uzbekistan has  topass  through Turkmenistan, the Caspian Sea - which is  itself  alandlocked water body - and the Caucasus before it can reach  theBlack  Sea.  To  the East it has to  go  through  Tajikistan  andtraverse the entire territory of China to touch the Paciffic.  Tothe South it has two options for getting to the Indian Ocean:  gothrough  Turkmenistan  and Iran or go down  via  Afghanistan  andPakistan.Centuries  ago, the fabled "Silk Road" of Central Asia was  theartery  of trade between Europe and China as well as  the  Indiansub-continent.  But once the sea routes between Europe  and  Asiaopened  up, and the Central Asian Khanates were  integrated  intoCzarist Russia and later the Soviet Union, the Silk Road lost itsglory. With Central Asian republics re-emerging after the fall ofthe Soviet Union five years ago, rebuilding transportation  linksto the outside world is at the top of the agenda here.While the travellers on the Silk Road had to face the unforgivingelements  and  punishing bandits, trading along these  parts  nowfaces  equally  daunting  obstacles:  many  national  boundaries,transport tariffs and conflicts over agreements on anything  fromfreight  forwarding paperwork to visa applications  for  drivers.The  Central  Asian  governments as  well  as  international  aidagencies  are helping develop new transportation projects in  theregion.  The focus is on creating multiple routes out of  CentralAsia  in order to limit the vulnerabilities of relying on  anyoneparticular outlet.As  part of its strategy of defining a new political  profile  inthe  regional and the international arena, Uzbekistan is keen  todiminish  its  current dependence on the  Russian  transportationnetworks  to the north. And Tashkent is looking at access to  allthe three seas - to the Black Sea in the west, to the Pacific  inthe  east  and the Indian Ocean to the south. The  Europeans  aresaid  to  be enthusiastic about the routes between West  and  theEast  through Caucasus and Central Asia that will develop a  landaccess  to  the Chinese market. The proposed network  could  alsoinclude  spurs  to  the  South  through  Iran,  Afghanistan   andPakistan.The  indications here are that the Uzbek Government has  set  itssights on realising the Afghan-Pak. corridor to the Indian Ocean.Officials and academic analysts here believe that the Afghan-Pak.corridor  is the simplest and most attractive - economically  andpolitically  -  to hook up with the rest of the world.  It  wouldhelp  the  Central Asians with an important  alternative  to  thecurrent  dependence  on the Russians. Transportation  links  fromUzbekistan  and Turkmenistan into Afghanistan and  Pakistan  willalso  help the Central Asians avoid a total reliance on Iran  foraccess to the south.The  dream of reaching the warm water ports of the  Indian  Oceanfaces  just  one obstacle: the instability  in  Afghanistan.  Norsurprisingly,  Tashkent  has  stepped  up  its  efforts  to  drawinternational  attention to the Afghan crisis. It has  taken  theinitiative  to call for an arms embargo against Afghanistan as  afirst  step  towards peace. Rapid developments on the  ground  inAfghanistan  in the form of the recent military advances  by  thePakistan-sponsored Taliban against the Kabul Government, however,may  have complicated the prospects for the Uzbek  proposal.  Butcorridor is likely to be enduring.International oil companies are also interested in developing theAfghan-Pak.  corridor to transport the huge oil and  natural  gasreserves in Central Asia. A western oil executive told The  Hinduhere  that  building  an oil  pipeline  through  Afghanistan  andPakistan could be "the catalyst for the economic  transformationof  the  region." Road and rail infrastructure  could  be  builtalong  the  pipeline  routes linking  Central  Asia  to  Pakistanthrough  Afghanistan. An American oil company, Unocal,  has  beenpushing  the  proposal in Washington as well as  in  the  region.Unocal  appears  bullish on the project, despite  the  widespreadscepticism about the prospects for peace in Afghanistan.India will have to carefully consider the efforts to link CentralAsia  with Pakistan through Afghanistan and the  consequences  ofsuch   a   fundamental   geopolitical   restructuring   in    ourneighbourhood.  The first thing New Delhi needs to do is  to  payimmediate   diplomatic   attention   to   the   developments   inAfghanistan, that could emerge as the hinge between Central  Asiaand the subcontinent.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Andhra Pradesh releases water into Poondi canalfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 6, Col. dFrom Our Staff ReporterHYDERABAD, Sept. 26.The  Andhra Pradesh Government has formalised the  dedication  ofthe Telugu Ganga Project, a canal dug up to convey Krishna watersto  Madras  for drinking purpose.  It released  Srisailam  watersinto  the Poondi canal, the last segment. The waters, drawn  fromSomasila  project but stored in Kandaleru, a balancing  reservoirmidway,  were released into the Poondi canal.The release was made on Wednesday as announced earlier. The waterso  released  will reach Uthukottai, near  Poondi  reservoir,  onSeptember  29  and  the  Chief Minister of  Tamil  Nadu,  Mr.  M.Karunanidhi,  will  receive the delivery of water at  the  bordervillage and, in turn, formally release into the Poondi  reservoirat  a function to be attended by Mr. Manohar Joshi and Mr. J.  H.Patel, Chief Ministers of Maharashtra and Karnataka respectively.Later  in  the  day, at another function  at  Madras  the  AndhraPradesh  Chief  Minister,  Mr.  N.  Chandrababu  Naidu,  will  befelicitated  as  a  token  of gratitude  to  Andhra  Pradesh  forimplementation of the project against heavy odds.  The Tamil NaduMinister  for  Public  Works, Mr. Dorai  Murugan,  came  here  onThursday,  to  invite the Chief Minister,  the  Major  IrrigationMinister, Dr. K. Sivaprasada Rao, and others.Dr. Sivaprasada Rao questioned the propriety of some  Rayalaseemapoliticians  belonging to the Congress(I) raising a bogey of  theGovernment giving waters to Madras city without meeting the needsof  their region. He blamed them for "the strange  inconsistencyin their stand" because the successive Congress Governments  didnot  oppose  the proposal and,  instead,   accepted  the  amountsgiven by Tamil Nadu Government for implementation of the project."Had  they  been  sincere in their stand, they  would  not  haveaccepted the money from Tamil Nadu in the first place," he said.Dr.  Sivaprasada  Rao also said the agreement providing  for  theTelugu  Ganga  Project was achieved between  the  three  riparianStates  of  Andhra  Pradesh, Karnataka  and  Maharashtra  at  theinstance  of Indira Gandhi and in the original project which  wasenvisaged as a tunnel, there was no irrigation component at  all,much less to benefit Rayalaseema. If the Congress leaders at thattime  had  been sincere enough about  serving  Rayalaseema,  theywould  have  prevailed upon Indira Gandhi for  inclusion  of  theirrigation  component.  "But  they are raising  the  issue  now,having kept silent then," he said.Referring  to  the farmers of the region who were  agitated  overconveying water to Madras, Dr. Sivaprasada Rao made it clear thatwhat   was  being  sent  for  the  present  was  3   tmcft,   thecontributions made by Karnataka and Maharashtra. Making reductionin their original share by 5 tmcft each, these two upper riparianStates  had  already released that much quantum  into  Srisailam.Andhra Pradesh would add its share only towards the fag end.The  Minister  said it was not true that water was not  given  toRayalaseema  altogether  because an extent of  47,000  acres  wasalready served with the Telugu Ganga in the region - 37,000 acresin Kurnool district and 10,000 acres in Cuddapah. The  Governmentwould  need  at  least Rs. 1,000 crores to  complete  the  entireproject in its present form and it would fully spend the Rs.  100crores allocated under the present budget.Asked about the contributions made by the Tamil Nadu  Government,the Minister said that what it owed towards the project was  lessthan Rs. 10 crores.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: How much water for Madras?from THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 4, Col. eFrom Our Staff ReporterMADRAS, Sept. 26.With  the  arrival  of  Krishna water  almost  a  certainty,  thequestion  uppermost in the minds of people in Madras is how  muchextra water they will get.At  present, 260 million litres of water is supplied to the  cityresidents  daily. If three tmc ft comes, it means an addition  of240 million litres daily (mld).In  fact,  when Krishna water was scheduled to come to  the  citylast December, Metrowater had planned to increase the quantum  to380-400 mld.It is not known whether the authorities will now be able to stickto  the  earlier plan as many aspects on water  availability  arestill not sorted out.For  instance, officials are not clear on how much Krishna  waterwill  be actually available for the distribution network and  howlong  the water will continue to flow as there are only a  coupleof  weeks left for the onset of northeast monsoon.  Moreover,  asthe  Kandaleru-Poondi  canal is a newly  constructed  one,  theremight be some teething problems and this could affect the patternof inflows.In  view of these and other factors, any decision on increase  ofdaily  supply will be dependent on the pattern of inflows. It  islikely  that  the  officials will raise the supply  in  a  phasedmanner.  Apart  from  the  quantum,  hours  of  supply  will   beincreased.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Shifting of refugees beginsfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 4, Col. cRAMANATHAPURAM, Sept. 26.The shifting of refugees from the Mandapam camp, which is gettingfilled  up due to the recent influx, began on Thursday  with  thetransportation  of  421  Sri Lankan Tamils to  various  camps  inTiruchi and Pudukkottai districts. The refugees, belonging to 100families, were transported with armed escorts in seven buses.The  Special Deputy Collector (Rehabilitation), Mr.  V.  Subbiah,told  The  Hindu  at the Mandapam camp that  the  Government  hadplanned  to accommodate the refugees at the camps  in  Kamarajar,Pasumpon Muthuramalinga Thevar, South Arcot-Vallalar, Dharmapuri,Tiruchi,  Pudukkottai,  Tiruvannamalai-Sambuvarayar,  Coimbatore,Vellore-Ambedkar,  Salem,  Thiruvalluvar,  Periar  and   Dindiguldistricts.  The  refugees  would  be shifted  in  batches  of  50families to each district. Fifty per cent of Thursday's  despatchincluded  those who had already been living in the Mandapam  campfor  the past few years. Mr. Subbiah said about 300 families  hadexpressed their willingness to go to the camp at Kottapattu  nearTiruchi as most of their relatives were living in that area.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Effluents treatment: High Court direction to SIVfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 4, Col. aFrom Our Staff ReporterMADRAS, Sept. 26.The  Madras  High Court has granted time till October 16  to  theSouth  India  Viscose industries, Coimbatore, to  show  that  theLindox  Reactor  plant  installed by it  for  treating  effluentsreached  its optimum operation level and BOD would be reduced  tothe maximum extent.A  Division Bench comprising the Chief Justice, Mr. K. A.  Swami,and Mr. Justice A. R. Lakshmanan, passed this interim order on  awrit appeal seeking immediate closure of the pulp unit of the SIVat  Singanallur on the ground that the industrial effluents  werepolluting the waters of the Bhavani.The  Bench said on October 17, a qualified engineer of the  TamilNadu Pollution Control Board (TNPCB) and also an engineer of  theKing  Institute,  Madras, should inspect the  industry  and  takesamples of water from the discharge point and also at each  pointof  100 metres upto 1,000 metres. They should test the  same  andsubmit  a report with regard to the contents showing whether  theBOD, COD and colour had been reduced and if so to what extent andwhether they were within tolerable limits.Both the Board and the King Institute should submit the report tothe  court  in five sets on October 28. It was also open  to  theindustry  to  collect  the samples of water  and  have  the  testconducted and submit its report also in five sets.Referring  to the Board's plea for immediate closure of the  pulpunit,  the Bench said in these cases, it was always the  questionof balancing public interest and the interest of the industry andits  workmen.  The  Judges  pointed out  that  the  industry  hademployed over 3,000 workers and was in existence for a long time.Moreover, 300 similar industries were functioning throughout  thecountry. As the time sought for by the industry was not long, theBench  accepted  the request of the company to  grant  time  tillOctober 16, when the reactor would reach its optimum level.Initially  the  SIV filed a writ petition  challenging  the  showcause  notice issued by the Board on February 15, 1995 as to  whythe pulp unit should not be closed. Disposing of the petition,  asingle  Judge  directed the Board to give an opportunity  to  thepetitioner  to put forth its proposal for effluent treatment  andto comply with the conditions imposed by the Board.The  Bhavani  River Protection Joint Council,  which  got  itselfimpleaded in the writ petition, preferred an appeal and submittedthat  it was high time the pulp plant was directed to  be  closeddown immediately to prevent pollution of the Bhavani river water.It  said it was necessary to stop further discharge of  effluentsinto the river to prevent injury to public health.On  behalf of the SIV it was submitted that steps had been  takenfor effluent treatment by installing the Lindox Reactor Plant  ata cost of Rs. 50 crores. It was making further efforts to  ensurethat  the  effluent was treated to the required  extent.  If  thefactory  was  ordered to be closed about 3,000 workers  would  berendered  idle. An opportunity might be given till October 16  sothat  the plant after reaching its maximum operation  bring  downthe BOD content to the tolerance limit which would in turn reducethe COD and consequently the colour of water.The  Board submitted that even if the strategy suggested  by  theindustry  was fully implemented, the COD would not be  completelyreduced  and  further  efforts  had to  be  made.  There  was  nojustification to permit the pulp plant to continue to operate anymore.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Annamalai Chettiar award for Subbulakshmifrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 3, Col. dFrom Our Staff ReporterMADRAS, Sept. 26.The  veteran carnatic musician, Mrs. M. S. Subbulakshmi, will  beconferred this year's "Raja Sir Annamalai Chettiar CommemorationAward', at his 116th birth anniversary celebrations to be held onSeptember 30.The  award  instituted  by  Annamalai  Chettiar  Memorial   Trustconsists of Rs. 50,000, a citation and a shawl.The  secretary of the Trust, Mr. A. R. Ramaswamy, said  this  wasthe first time an award was being given to a person who had  doneyeoman service to "Tamil Isai."A  three-member  committee comprising Mr. P.  R.  Gokulakrishnan,president, Tamil Isai Sangam, Mr. V. Thiruvengadam, Director, AIRand  Mr. Shanmugasundaram, Principal, Music College proposed  thenominee for the honour.Mr. Ramaswamy said the trust had given Rs. 50,000 on September 11to the physically handicapped. Another Rs. 50,000 would be  givenas  award  to a woman or institution working for  the  uplift  ofwomen  on  October  11, marking the  birth  anniversary  of  RaniMeyammai.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Parties flouting poll codefrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 3, Col. bFrom Our Staff ReporterMADRAS, Sept. 26.That  the civic polls are round the corner has been evident  overthe  past  couple  of  days  with  political  parties  and  theircandidates  putting  up flags, festoons and  even  an  occasional`arch' in various parts of the city.Flags  are  tied  to  ropes  and  hung  across  many  roads.  TheCorporation  lamp posts have come in handy for the  purpose.  Theparties do not seem to have taken the model code of conduct  laiddawn  by the State Election Commission, for the elections to  theurban local bodies, seriously.Section  11  (General)  in  Booklet 3  says  that  'no  party  orcandidate  shall permit its/his followers to use any  private  orpublic  property  for erecting flag staffs or  cut-outs,  pastingnotices, posters or writing slogans or suspending banners withoutthe written permission from the owner of the property  concerned;and  where such permission is obtained, a copy of the same  shallforthwith be sent to the District Election Officer and in case ofCorporation to the Returning Officer.'But  Corporation  sources  said permission is  not  accorded  forerection  of  structures  across roads,  putting  up  banners  orfestoons.A  trip  round the city reveals that parties have not  taken  therules seriously. Flags tied to ropes have been hung between  lampposts across the road Dr. Radhakrishnan Salai, Gopalapuram,  AnnaNagar 2nd avenue, Nelson Manickam Road, Sterling Road, MuttukkaduRoad,  L.  B. Road, Greenways Road, V. K. Iyer  Road,  RoyapettahHigh  Road  and Srinivasa Avenue (RA Puram).  The  barricades  onmedians have also come in handy to install the flagstaff.The ruling party flags and festoons are the most `visible' of thelot; followed by the TMC, the odd Rajni Rasigar Mandram flag and,at a couple of places, AIADMK.Loudspeakers,  especially  the cone type, too have  been  workingovertime  - either blaring music or the voices  of  propagandistscanvassing votes for a particular candidate. The code of  conduct(Section 13, General) says that "loudspeakers shall not be  usedto  transmit  music or songs".Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996China may back India for U.N. Council seatfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 1, Col. fFrom R. ChakrapaniUNITED NATIONS, Sept. 26.In  the forthcoming elections for the non-permanent seats in  theSecurity Council, the United States is known to be backing  Japanbut  India is not altogether without support from  the  Council'spermanent members.Russia  is  believed to have indicated to  the  External  AffairsMinister, Mr. Inder K. Gujral, that it will vote for India.Another  surprise  development  is said to  be  that  China  willsupport India. There are signs that relations between Beijing andNew  Delhi are warming up with a projected visit to India by  theChinese  President, Mr. Jiang Zamin. The Chinese  relations  withJapan  are not at its best currently. A Chinese statement in  theGeneral  Assembly  also showed that Beijing is concerned  at  thedangers  inherent  in  a unipolar world if it  was  going  to  bedominated  by a single super power - the United States. The  samestatement,  delivered by the Chinese Foreign Minister,  Mr.  QianQuichen also gave his support to the Non-Aligned Movement voicingthe concerns of developing countries.Mr. Gujral was asked about the chances of India succeeding in itsefforts  to get elected to non-permanent seat falling  vacant  tothe Security Council from the start of the new year. "We have  afighting  chance  to win" replied Mr. Gujral. "If  we  did  notwin,"  he  said,  there  was no reason  why  India  should  feeldisappointed. "But I do think our chances of getting elected arereasonably good."Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Delhi to host NAM meetfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 1, Col. eFrom R. ChakrapaniUNITED NATIONS, Sept. 26.The  next  meeting  of the Inter-Ministerial group  of  the  Non-aligned  countries will be held in New Delhi, it was  unanimouslydecided at a meeting of the group here on Wednesday. The meeting,which  could be held in April or later, will be  of  significancebecause  it  will  define  issues to be  brought  up  before  theNationalised Summit meeting, probably to be held in South Africa.At  a  meeting  of  the  ministerial  group  held  at  the   U.N.headquarters,  and  attended  by a  large  number  of  NonalignedForeign  Ministers,  the  External Affairs Minister,  Mr.  I.  K.Gujral,  offered  to host the Inter-Ministerial  meeting  in  NewDelhi  and this was readily endorsed by Egypt and  several  othercountries.About  40  Ministers participating in the  discussions  made  thepoint  that  the  Nonaligned  movement  had  not  only  lost  itsrelevance in the post-Cold-War era.Earlier,  Mr. Gujral spoke of the "new challenges"  that  wouldconfront the Nonaligned movement in the post-Cold-War period  andit would be necessary for these countries to face them  unitedly."These   challenges,"  he  said,  "are  posed  by  forces   ofextremism,  ethnic  discord, terrorism  and  growing  disparitiesacross  the  globe.  To these challenges, we must  add  those  ofnuclear disarmament, and economic and social development."He recalled the struggle of the nonaligned countries in the  areaof  nuclear  disarmament,  and explained why  India  opposed  theComprehensive  Test  Ban  Treaty. It would  be  apparent  to  anyimpartial  observer  that  the  CTBT text  did  not  reflect  anymeaningful  commitment  to the cause of global peace  or  nucleardisarmament.  The  treaty,  in  its  essential  form,  sought  toperpetuate the discriminatory and highly unequal status quo "forall times".It was necessary for the Nonaligned movement, Mr. Gujral said  towork for a world free of nuclear weapons and the Nonaligned forumwas   the  most  appropriate  platform  to  achieve  the   commonobjectives and shared visions.Mr.  Gujral also referred to India's bid to seek a  non-permanentseat in the U.N. Security Council in the vacancy to be caused  byIndonesia's exit. He sought the support of Nonaligned  countries,pointing  out  that  if India lost the fight,  it  would  depriverepresentation for the movement.Mr.  Gujral exchanged views on bilateral and multilateral  issueswith  more  visiting  Foreign Minister,  including  Russia's  Mr.Primakov and Ministers from the European Union.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: High Court rejects Rao"s plea for anticipatory bailfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 1, Col. dFrom Our Staff ReporterNEW DELHI, Sept. 26.The  Delhi High Court today dismissed the former Prime  Minister,Mr.  P. V. Narasimha Rao's petition for anticipatory bail in  the$100,000  Lakhubhai  Pathak cheating case, in which he  has  beensummoned  by a trial court here to appear before it on  September30.Mr. Justice S. K. Mahajan dismissed Mr. Rao's petition  observingthat it was not maintainable. "It should be left to the  regularcourt  to  deal with the matter on the accused  appearing  beforethat court," he observed."As  only  summons  have  been issued by  the  trial  court  forappearance  of  the petitioner (Mr. Rao) on September  30,  therecannot be any apprehension of his arrest before he appears in thecourt," Mr. Justice Mahajan noted in a four-page order.The  Judge passed the order after hearing arguments by Mr.  Rao'scounsel,  Mr. Kapil Sibal, and counsel for the CBI, Mr.  S.  Lal.The  court  was packed to capacity during the  proceedings  whichlasted for 25 minutes.The Special Judge, Mr. Ajit Bharihoke, on September 21  dismissedan application by Mr. Rao seeking recall of the summons issued tohim earlier by the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Mr. Prem Kumar,and issued new summons to him to appear in his court on September30.Arguing on the application today, Mr. Sibal submitted that  sincethe offence was non-bailable, the former Prime Minister would  bearrested immediately on his appearance in the trial court and  hewould  have to make an application for bail. Mr. Sibal  expressedfear that the trial court might not grant bail to Mr. Rao when heappeared before it on September 30.In  this regard, Mr. Justice Mahajan observed in his  order  that"the  contention of Mr. Sibal that even in a case where  summonshave  been  issued  by  the  trial  court  for  appearance,   thepetitioner  is entitled to move this court for anticipatory  bailis not correct"."It  is  only in the case of non-bailable warrants  having  beenissued  and  in  the case of apprehension by the  accused  to  bearrested  before  he appears in the court, which had  issued  thenon-bailable warrants, that there is an apprehension of arrest bythe  accused.  In the present case, in my opinion,  there  is  noapprehension of arrest of the petitioner till the time he appearsin the trial court."Opposing  Mr. Rao's petition, Mr. Lal contended that there  couldbe  no  apprehension on the part of Mr. Rao as it was  a  summonscase.  The petition of Mr. Rao seeking anticipatory bail was  notmaintainable, he submitted.About Mr. Sibal's submission that Mr. Rao be granted anticipatorybail  by the High Court as was granted to the BJP leader, Mr.  L.K. Advani, in the multicrore Jain hawala case, Mr. Lal  contendedthat  the  case  of  Mr. Advani  was  different  as  non-bailablewarrants had been issued against him by the court.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: CBI chargesheet Rao in St. Kitts casefrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 1, Col. aFrom Our Special CorrespondentNEW DELHI, Sept. 26.The  former  Prime Minister, Mr. P. V. Narasimha Rao,  and  threeothers, including the self-styled godman Chandraswami, were todaychargesheeted by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in theSt. Kitts Forgery case.The  CBI  also named the former Minister of  State  for  ExternalAffairs,  Mr.  K. K. Tewary and Mr. Kailash Nath  Aggarwal  alias"Mamaji,"  close  associate  of  Chandraswami  in  the  15-pagechargesheet  filed in the court of Mr. Prem Kumar, Delhi's  ChiefMetropolitan Magistrate.A. P. Nanday, former Deputy Director, Enforcement Directorate andGeorge D. McLean, Chairman of the First Trust Corporation Bank inSt. Kitts, also figure in the chargesheet. However, the two  havesince died and the proceedings against them have terminated.Mr.  K. L. Verma, former Director in the Enforcement  Directorateand  Mr. Larry J. Kolb, a relative of the arms dealer  Mr.  AdnanKhashoggi, were named as accused in the chargesheet but there wasno  sufficient evidence against them. The CBI has  requested  theCourt  that the two may be discharged. The chargesheet will  comeup  for further consideration before the Court on October 1.  Thejudge   directed  the  CBI  to  file  supporting  documents   andstatements before the next date of hearing. Both Chandraswami andMr.  Aggarwal  are now lodged in the Central Tihar Jail  here  inconnection with the Lakhubhai Pathak cheating case.The  chargesheet came a day before the scheduled hearing  of  theSt.  Kitts  case tomorrow in the Supreme Court. The  CBI  had  onSeptember 9 told the apex court that it would be in a position toapprise   the   court  of  "definite   actions"   relating   toinvestigations in the case.According to the chargesheet, the CBI investigation revealed thatthe  persons accused, in conspiracy with each  other,  fabricatedevidence with the intent and knowledge to cause the former  PrimeMinister, Mr. V. P. Singh and his son, Mr. Ajeya Singh, convictedof  the offence under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act  (FERA)and  the  Prevention of Corruption Act (PCA) and  to  harm  theirreputation in the eyes of the public.The  chargesheet  refers to the report of the  auditors  who  hadscrutinised  the accounts of the First Trust Corporation Bank  inthe  Carribean island of St. Kitts. It says that the account  wasopened  on  September 16, 1988 and closed on February  13,  1989.Incidentally, both the days were public holidays in St. Kitts.  Atotal amount of $21 millions was deposited and withdrawn from theaccount.The four accused, including Mr. Narasimha Rao, have been  chargedunder  Section 120-B read with Sections 195, 469 and 471  of  theIndian   Penal  Code.  The  provisions  relate   to   conspiracy,fabrication  of false evidence with intent to procure  convictionof  offence punishable with imprisonment of seven years or  more,forgery and using forged documents.The  chargesheet said that as the Minister of State for  ExternalAffairs,  Mr.  Tewary  had called for  the  file  containing  theapplication  for  passport  of  Mr.  Ajeya  Singh  to  trace  hissignatures  which  were  allegedly  forged  later.  This  showed,according  to  the chargesheet, that Mr. Tewary  knew  about  theconspiracy right from the initial stage.The chargesheet was filed six years after the CBI registered  theFIR in the case on May 25, 1990. The Supreme Court had pulled  upthe  CBI in April last for dragging the investigations.  It  saidthat if the situation had reached a stage where no candid  resultcould be achieved, the Court might be forced to record a  findingthat the investigating machinery had come to a grinding halt.The case had been gathering dust until the end of last year  whenthe Supreme Court had brought it back to life following a  publicinterest petition moved by Mr. Anukul Chandra Pradhan,  advocate,seeking  the Court's directions to the CBI and other  authoritiesto conduct an expeditious probe.The  FIR had referred to the alleged role of Mr.  Narasimha  Rao,then  External Affairs Minister in the Cabinet of Prime  MinisterRajiv Gandhi, as well as of Capt. Satish Sharma and others in theforgery conspiracy but none of them was mentioned as "accused."The  St. Kitts case relates to the opening of a bogus account  byalleged  forgery of bank documents to show that Mr.  Ajeya  Singhhad  stashed  away  a large amount of forex in  the  secret  bankaccount.  The documents pertained to the bank account alleged  tohave  been  in  the name of Mr. Ajeya Singh,  maintained  in  St.Kitts.  The  whole exercise, according to the CBI, was  aimed  atdefaming Mr. V. P. Singh, potential rival of Rajiv Gandhi.On  the role of Mr. Narasimha Rao, the FIR said that  during  hisstay  in  New  York between September 25 to October  5,  1989  inconnection  with  the  U.N.  General  Assembly  session,  he  hadinstructed  Mr.  R. K. Rai, then India's  consul-general  in  NewYork,  to  authenticate  certain  documents.  Telephonic  contactbetween Mr. Rao and Mr. Khashoggi reportedly took place at  23-06hours on October 3 and at 09-42 hours, the Counsellor had met Mr.Rao in his hotel suite.The  entire  exercise  was  allegedly done  at  the  instance  ofChandraswami  alias Nemi Chand Jain who had urged the  Governmentto  send a team of officials to probe the alleged account of  Mr.Ajeya  Singh in St. Kitts. A team, comprising the then  Chief  ofthe  Enforcement  Directorate,  Mr. K. L. Verma  and  the  DeputyDirector,  A. P. Nanday, had visited the island and  returned  toNew  York with photocopies of some documents which were  attestedby George McLean.Nanday  was deputed by the Rajiv Gandhi government in  September-October 1989 to inquire into "reports" that Mr. Ajeya Singh hada foreign bank account. He conducted investigation in the  "fullknowledge"  of  Chandraswami, Mr. Aggarwal,  George  McLean  andLarry  Colb.  Nanday had also avoided  Indian  Embassy  officialsthroughout  his  stay abroad and was  Chandraswami's  guest.  Thegodman  was  staying in Mr. Adnan Khashoggi's  apartment  in  theOlympic Towers.While  in  New  York, the officials sought  directions  from  theGovernment and were told that the documents should be attested toby some officials of the Indian Embassy in the U.S.  Accordingly,the help of Mr. Narasimha Rao was sought as he happened to be  inNew York as part of his scheduled visit. He then asked Mr. Rai toattest  the documents which would be brought by the officials  ofthe  Enforcement  Directorate.  The  allegation  was  that  whileChandraswami's  secretary was the "master forger," Mr. Rao  hadordered Mr. Rai to authenticate the documents.According to the chargesheet, Mr. Rao who was staying at the U.N.Plaza hotel was contacted on telephone by Chandraswami on October3,  1989. A day later, Mr. Rao contacted Mr. Prakash  Shah,  thenAdditional Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs, in connectionwith the authentication of the documents.The  chargesheet  said that on October 6, 1989 Mr.  Aggarwal  hadcalled Mr. Shiv Kumar, Indian High Commissioner in Port of Spain,and  introduced him as a family friend of Mr. Narasimha  Rao.  Heasked the official to go to St. Kitts and meet the Prime Ministerthere and inquire about the affair. He had also made a  telephonecall to Mr. S. C. Gupta, then Second Secretary in the Indian HighCommission  in Port of Spain, and virtually dictated a letter  tohim to be sent to St. Kitts.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Villagers flee as Pak. firing intensifiesfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 1, Col. aFrom Our CorrespondentSRINAGAR, Sept. 26.The hostilities on the India-Pakistan border in northern  Kashmirhas  intensified  in  the last three days,  leaving  hundreds  ofpeople homeless.Most  of  the projectiles fired from across the  border  hit  thecivilian  targets,  creating  panic among the  masses.  When  thefiring  did not stop on Tuesday, the people had no option but  toflee. Large-scale migration started on Wednesday.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Indian fiscal deficit is unsustainable: Camdessusfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 1, Col. bFrom Sridhar KrishnaswamiWASHINGTON, Sept. 26.The  Managing  Director of the International Monetary  Fund,  Mr.Michel   Camdessus,   has  termed  the  Indian   fiscal   deficit`unsustainable' and has called upon New Delhi to cut this in halfover the next five years.Answering  a  question  at a press conference  this  morning  theManaging  Director of the IMF made the point that while India  inthe  last  few years had solved a few problems such  as  externalfinancial  vulnerability  and  reducing inflation,  the  pace  offiscal  consolidation  seemed  to be  concentrated  only  on  theCentral  Government side. The overall public sector deficit  thatwould  have to include the Centre and State governments  and  thepublic sector enterprises came to over nine per cent of the GrossDomestic  Product  and this was not  sustainable,  Mr.  Camdessusremarked.The  issue  of fiscal deficit is expected to figure high  on  theagenda  in  the  meeting between Mr.  Camdessus  and  the  IndianFinance Minister Mr. P. Chidambaram during this year's meeting ofthe World Bank and the IMF.The argument of Mr. Camdessus has been that if the problem of thefiscal  deficit  was  not addressed  this  would  jeopardise  theinvestment  needed for sustained high growth, and if  allowed  tocontinue  there  was  the  potential  of  the  risk  of  externalvulnerability re-emerging.The  IMF Managing Director said that while there was no  dramaticsolution to the problem, the fiscal deficit could be halved  overthe  next five years. Last week a senior official of the IMF  hadsuggested that the programme of halving the fiscal deficit over afive  year  period could be done at the rate  of  one  percentagepoint a year. Today Mr. Camdessus argued that while taking  stepsto  come  to  grips with the fiscal  deficit  India  should  alsosimultaneously develop efforts on the structural side that  wouldhelp  do  away  with the quantitative  restrictions  in  imports,continuing  the  financial reforms and the reform of  the  publicenterprises, besides opening much more broadly the big domain  ofpublic infrastructure to private investment.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: PM takes oath as RS memberfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 1, Col. dFrom Our Special CorrespondentNEW DELHI, Sept. 26.The Prime Minister, Mr. H. D. Deve Gowda was today sworn in as  amember  of  the Rajya Sabha. He had been elected  unopposed  fromKarnataka.  The Prime Minister was administered the oath  by  theSecretary General of the Rajya Sabha, Mrs. V. S. Rama Devi in thechamber of the Rajya Sabha Chairman, Mr. K. R. Narayanan.Besides the Vice-President, Mr. Narayanan, the Railway  Minister,Mr. Ram Vilas Paswan, the Information and Broadcasting  Minister,Mr.  C.  M. Ibrahim, the former Finance  Minister,  Dr.  ManmohanSingh, Mrs. Margaret Alva and Mr. S. S. Ahluwalia (all  Congress)Mr.  Satish Aggarwal and Mr. T. N. Chaturvedi  (Bharatiya  JanataParty) attended the oath-taking.Mr.  Gowda,  thus  became  the  first  Prime  Minister  to  enterParliament  through the Rajya Sabha. In 1966, when Indira  Gandhiwas  elected leader of the Congress Parliamentary Party, she  wasalready a member of the Rajya Sabha. In 1991, Mr. P. V. NarasimhaRao  chose to enter the Lok Sabha by contesting from the  Nandyalconstituency.`No threat to Govt.'The Prime Minister was reported to have said that there could  beno threat to his Government owing to the change of leadership  inthe  Congress. According to Mr. Gowda the decision to  support  anon-BJP  formation was taken by the Congress  Working  Committee.The  implication  was  that it was not  a  private  understandingbetween  Mr.  P.  V.  Narasimha Rao and  him;  rather  it  was  apolitical  commitment  made  in a particular  context  which  hadremained unchanged.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: BJP to move High Court on irregular land dealsfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 6, Col. dFrom Our Special CorrespondentBANGALORE, Sept. 26.The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has decided to approach the HighCourt through public interest petitions challenging the irregularland and other deals which had resulted in huge loss to the Stateexchequer   as   the   Government  seemed  to   be   unmoved   byrepresentations and agitations.This  was stated here today by Mr. B. S. Yediyurappa,  Leader  ofthe Opposition in the Assembly.The  party would come out with a "public  chargesheet"  againstthe   Government  about  the  several  irregular  deals   to   bedistributed  among the public as it had done successfully  duringthe Chief Ministership of Mr. S. Bangarappa.Mr.  Yediyurappa mentioned of a transaction involving  about  300acres  of  Government  land estimated to cost  around  Rs.  1,000crores near Bidadi coming under Ramanagaram Assembly constituencyrepresented  by  the Prime Minister, Mr. H. D.  Deve  Gowda,  and"misuse of funds" in road laying in new Bagalkot town.Participating in a meet-the-press programme, Mr. Yediyurappa saidonly  two years ago the authorities had spent Rs. 4.5 crores  forlaying a 7.5 k.m. stretch of metal roads in the new Bagalkot townwhich  worked out to Rs. 63 lakhs per k.m. This was  the  highestrate ever paid. The authorites had invited tenders for a  similarroad for which the cost specified was Rs. 23 lakhs, which clearlyindicated misuse of at least Rs. 3 crores earlier.Mr.  Yediyurappa said several such cases had been highlighted  byhim  during  the discussion on the no-confidence  motion  in  theAssembly  recently,  but  the House  had  been  adjourned  amidstconfusion without a reply.Describing  the 118-day-old Government headed by Mr. J. H.  Patelas  one  that lacked political stability and direction,  the  BJPleader  said it was "an orphan" supported neither by the  PrimeMinister  nor the Ministers and legislators of the ruling  party.The  hope  that  with  Mr. Patel  becoming  Chief  Minister,  theCongress  culture would go had been belied as he was  looking  toDelhi  for  everything  and was in the clutches  of  the  excise,granite and land grabbers, he added.Mr. Yediyurappa said the only strength of the Janata Dal, both atthe  State  and in the Centre, appeared to be  the  weakness  andfactional   fight  in  the  Congress.  The  Prime  Minister   wasblackmailing  the  Congress leadership and even hijacking  it.  Abeginning had been made with the weaning away of Mr. Ajit Singh.He  said  the  State Government was  not  taking  the  Oppositionparties into confidence while dealing with important issues  suchas  river water. Even an attempt was made to mislead them on  thenature of talks and the understanding arrived at with Tamil  Naduduring  the  Cauvery water talks recently. The  talks  themselveswere  stage-managed to save the chair of the Prime  Minister  andthe  State Chief Minister. Similarly, the Alamatti Dam issue  wasbeing treated as if it was a party affair, he said.Mr.  Yediyurappa  said he recently visited the  Tungabhadra  leftbank  area where an aqueduct had collapsed. The canal itself  hadbeen  repaired 176 times in the last 45 years. One  estimate  putthe current crop loss at Rs. 500 crores.Mr. Yediyurappa, who has just returned from a tour of the  State,said  he was confident his party would win at least four  of  thesix  Assembly seats it was contesting. The party  was  supportingindependents in two constituencies as its aim was to see that theJanata Dal was defeated.Mr.  Ramachandra Gowda, MLC and vice-president of the State  unitof the party, said that completion of 118 days in office was  theonly  achievement  of  Mr.  Patel.  The  ruling  party  was   notconcentrating  on  administration  as it was not  sure  when  theGovernment would come down because of instability.Replying  to  a  question, Mr. Yediyurappa  said  the  party  haddecided to support any candidate to be fielded by the Congress orthe  Rashtreeya Nava Nirmana Vedike in the election to the  RajyaSabha.  But  because  of  the decision of  the  Congress  at  thenational level not to field a candidate and the difficulty of thelatter  in fielding a candidate without involving an  element  ofrisk  to  the ruling party legislators  supporting  the  nominee,there was no choice except to keep out of contest.Mr.  Yediyurappa denied there was any understanding  between  thePrime  Minister and the BJP president, Mr. L. K. Advani,  not  tofield  a  BJP  candidate against Mr. H. D. Deve  Gowda.  He  alsodenied  there was any alignment with the Vedike. It was  only  anunderstanding  to  defeat the Congress and the Janata  Dal  whichwere two sides of the same coin, he added.To  another question, Mr. Yediyurappa said Mr. Hegde had his  owncontribution  to the Janata Dal coming to power in the State  andMr.  Gowda  becoming the Prime Minister. In the  State  politicalinterest,  the BJP had to support his stand.  The  meet-the-pressprogramme  was organised jointly by the Press Club  of  Bangaloreand Bangalore Reporters' Guild.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996The Hindu-Editorial: Hares, hounds and lawyers: Lawyers must consciouslyproject the counter image that they are mediators of accountability andnot for political, financial or any other kind of hire in public interestlitigationfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 12, Col. cBy Rajeev DhavanJOKES about lawyers are increasing. If earlier 'legal` joke bookscarried  innocuous  titles like 'Laughter and the  Law`,  today`santhologies  are  more direct and vicious, sporting  titles  like"Lawyers as reptiles." Jokes tell us a lot about how a  societythinks.  But, not all jokes reflect public opinion. Jokes  are  apowerful  weapon to embarrass, oppress and type-cast  people  andcommunities. If they occasion humour, they also defame; and,  maydamage  the  psyche of those at the receiving  end.  Jokes  aboutlawyers  are  typically about their ruthlessness, their  lack  ofscruples in inventing arguments for whoever is willing to  rewardlawyers, their money mindedness. Lawyers are supposed to have  noqualms  about running with the hares and hunting with the  houndswith equal aplomb. And, the jokes tell it all.Despite this reputation, people resort to lawyers. Perhaps,  theyhave  no  other  choice but to turn to the  most  'artful`  in  asociety  in  which disputes abound and the rule  of  law  suffersinjury  from constant attack. Some interesting questions come  tothe fore in the recent exchange between Mr. Anil Diwan who is theSupreme Court`s amicus in the Hawala case and Mr. Ram  Jethmalaniwho  was  involved in the public interest case which led  to  theSupreme Court`s investigation and subsequent orders; but who  nowappears  for  one  of  the accused, Mr.  L.  K.  Advani,  who  isallegedly  a friend and political ally. Since  both  involvementswere  pro bono (without any payment), the issues are not  cloudedwith  any accusation that any appearance was for  personal  gain.The  argument is over the application of professional  norms  (ifany) to public interest law (PIL) counsel. The narrower issue  asto  whether  it is proper for Mr. Jethmalani to  appear  for  Mr.Advani  leads to questions about wider issues  concerning  publicinterest  lawyers, PIL and the judicial activism that  has  grownout  of it. Is PIL a public trust or a matter for the  individualperception of the PIL lawyers involved?PIL is a powerful instrument of accountability but it must not beabused  as  it  has  been  in  many  cases.  Mr.  Jethmalani   isresponsible  for assisting the courts on many  crucial  questionsabout who may represent the public interest. Any doubt about  thelegitimate  use of PIL can only give the enterprise a  bad  name.Controversy  abounds.  One strand of the controversy  is  whether'libertarian`  lawyers  can  ever  appear  for  those  who   haveallegedly abused human rights. Several lawyers (including myself)have  been criticised for doing so even where it has been  arguedthat  there  were public interest reasons for appearance  on  theother  side.  This new controversy goes further, it  involves  anallegation  of  'floor  crossing` in the same  batch  of  relatedissues. It is particularly important because of the status of thecounsel and because it is not muddied by financial considerationsbut  it is about the scope of the public interest insofar  as  itconcerns PIL lawyers.The  exchange  between Mr. Anil Diwan and Mr.  Jethmalani  is  asembarrassing  as it is troubling. Why should two  senior  counselquarrel  in  public  over  this  issue?  Discounting  personalityclashes  and differences, the issue needs examination. The  factsseem  to  be  documented in an exchange of  letters  between  theprotagonists  which  have been made public. In  response  to  Mr.Jethmalani  having declared that he will appear for  Mr.  Advani,Mr. Diwan issued a press statement on September 22, 1996 (the daythe proceedings were to start) with "extreme reluctance and onlyfrom a sense of public duty," expressing his discomfiture  whichrelates back to March 26, 1996 when he had earlier written to Mr.Jethmalani  expressing  'alarm` and 'distress` about  the  latterappearing  for  Mr.  Advani.  It  transpires  that  it  was   Mr.Jethmalani  who had involved Mr. Diwan in this case. There is  nodispute about Mr. Jethmalani`s involvement with the PIL case thatled to the Hawala proceedings. In fact, in his letter of April 3,1996,  Mr. Jethmalani forthrightly states: "I am quite clear  inmy mind that I am the architect of the petition, the moving forcebehind  it  and  a  constant  participant  and  advisor  in   thedeliberations." So the issue was not whether he was involved  inthe  PIL  case but whether having been involved he  was  free  toappear  for one of the accused. After explaining why  the  chargeagainst  Mr. Advani is totally untenable, in the same letter  Mr.Jethmalani makes it clear that he has "no intention of appearingfor accused other than Mr. Advani."Mr.   Jethmalani  justified  his  stance  by  referring  to   theAdvocates` Conduct Rules (which he claims to have drafted)  whichmake  a  lawyer bound to accept any brief (except  under  specialcircumstances, see R. 11) and to argue fearlessly by all fair andhonourable  means  (R.  15) as long as he  does  not  breach  theconfidence  of the client (R. 17 and 24). But, who is the  clientin the PIL case? Are PIL lawyers their own clients even when theyappear  for others? Mr. Jethmalani`s April 3, 1996 letter  becameredundant  because his junior wrote to Mr. Diwan on April 9  thatMr. Jethmalani would not appear for Mr. Advani. Mr. Diwan repliedby drawing attention to another rule (R. 33) that anyone who  hasadvised  or drawn pleadings for one side shall not plead for  theopposite  party, pointing out that Mr. Advani`s name  appears  inthe PIL petitioners` pleadings. Equally, having used the  diariesas a leverage, could any PIL lawyer cross over to the other  sideand  question any part of the case on which the PIL  petition  isfounded?  The  fact  that PIL cases  are  non-adversarial  cannotforeclose  the  issue. Those affected by the PIL  and  are  beingbrought  to book are on the other side. Anyhow, the death of  thecontroversy  in April did not prevent a September  revival,  withMr.  Jethmalani  informing Mr. Diwan by letter on  September  17,1996  that he was appearing for Mr. Advani and Mr.  Diwan  makinghis press release. Mr. Jethmalani had fairly told Mr. Diwan  thathe  hoped  that Mr. Diwan would not create  controversy  but  Mr.Jethmalani would understand if he did.This  controversy is important because the distinguished  counseldid  what  they did for clear reasons which  are  documented.  Itaffects  cause  lawyering in India and may set patterns  for  thefuture.  Mr. Jethmalani`s stance appears to be that  the  purposebehind  the Hawala PIL case was to expose corruption and nab  theguilty  and  not  oppress  the  innocent;  and  that  it  is  notinconsistent with the public interest but fulfils its purposes todefend Mr. Advani against whom there is no case in law. But, if apersonally judgmental stance of this nature were to be  accepted,every PIL lawyer would be free to make exceptions, jump the fenceand  defend  whom  they like. This is not  to  suggest  that  PILlawyers  should not be discerning about whom they  are  attackingand exposing. Indeed, it is their public duty to ensure that  thePIL case does not result in a miscarriage of justice. But, once aPIL case starts, it is for the Court to determine who is innocentand who is guilty.However  great  a criminal lawyer a person may be,  a  prosecutorcannot cross over and be defence counsel even though it is alwaysopen to the prosecution to submit that there is no case against aparticular  accused. Such withdrawal can only take  place  withinthe discipline of the law. PIL lawyers are no differently  placedthan prosecution counsel. In environment cases, PIL lawyers oftendistinguish between real and wrongly accused defaulters. As  longas  this  is  honestly  done to  the  Court  concerned,  this  isunexceptional.  But, these are the farthest limits to which  theycan go. But, just because they feel that one of the persons  theyare  proceeding against is innocent, they cannot appear in  mind,spirit or fact for the allegedly innocent either in that case  orany  other  related  proceeding. If this rule  of  thumb  is  notrespected,  lesser  professionals would, even with  the  best  ofintents, run with the hares and hunt with the hounds.What  complicates  the  present  imbroglio  is  Mr.  Jethmalani`scloseness  with the BJP, his appointment as Law Minister  in  theill-fated  BJP  Ministry, his ire  against  particular  politicalparties  and  persons and his frankly declared  political  views.This  must,  perforce, leave behind the impression  that  a  veryimportant  PIL case was not without political undertones even  ifit  was conceived in the public interest. This would  affect  theenterprise of PIL as a whole. Properly interpreted the rules  arereasonably  clear  cut. Involvement in a case (albeit  by  givingadvice or settling legal documents) is enough to prevent  lawyersfrom  appearing for anyone in that or in any related  case  wherethere may be a potential conflict of interest. This rule must  beapplied  in  an all or nothing fashion; and,  with  even  greaterrigour in PIL cases where the public is the client.Jokes  about lawyers underline public suspicion about how  artfullawyers  can be. But, before the jokes take their  toll,  lawyersmust  consciously  project  the  counter  image  that  they   aremediators  of accountability and not for political, financial  orany other kind of hire in PIL cases. Even the best of  intentionsmay produce the worst of results. Nothing should be permitted  toundermine  faith in the law at a time of moral cholera.  If  thismeans clearer rules about cause lawyering, so be it. All the moreso,  because two senior counsel and 'eminent jurists` seem to  beunsure about the rules and the right course of action.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Attitude of our athletes has to change: Amritrajfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 22, Col. aMADRAS, Sept. 27.Vijay Amritraj sees India's poor record in the world of sport  asa puzzle. And he quietly sets about putting the pieces together."All  the  pieces are there," he says, with a  smile  quite  asradiant  as a child would flash after putting together its  firstplastic alphabet puzzle."It's  the attitude," says Vijay, raising his voice  just  thatbit  for theatrical effect as he picks up the last piece  of  thepuzzle.  "The attitude of our athletes has to change. They  seemto  settle  for less, they seem to be contented with  less,"  hesays.It  is  another  one  of  the  globe-trotting  former  Davis  Cupcaptain's    meet-the-media    mornings   and    the    celebrityplayer-turned-commentator is talking about why India should be sobackward in the world of sport."If  you look at the kind of money that has gone into  the  game(tennis) in the last five years and then look at the results,  itdoesn't  match  up.  We  really have  to  demand  more  from  ourathletes," says Vijay.He  is  tremendously impressed by Leander  Paes's  bronze-winningeffort  at Atlanta but feels that it is not enough in the  largercontext of Indian sport."Why settle for one bronze. I think if we make a serious effort,if  we  shortlist 10 or 15 sports where we are fairly  good,  andthen  bring in sponsorship and scientific training, there  is  noreason  why  we should not win at least five golds  in  the  2004Olympics," he says."From  a  very  young age you have to aim for  the  sky,"  saysVijay,  who was recently elected to the Board of the Tennis  Hallof Fame at Newport, Rhode Island.Quickly  the  conversation  veers towards his  pet  project,  theBritannia  Amritraj  Trust programme. And Vijay says  that  "BATcannot always be the answer. It is only an example, a  yardstick.Others have to follow."He  is happy that BAT has moved to its own facility at  Mogappiaron the outskirts of the city. "We'll continue to put in our  bitbut  you can never teach anyone to win. If you ask what  does  ittake to win, the answer is, there is no answer. Some do it betterthan the others," he says.In his time, he did it better than any other Indian of his era.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Film Review: "Subhash"from THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 26, Col. eIt  has now become a standard theme for the heroine to  wish  thehero  to  be a national personality to ask for her hand  and  thelatter  doing  so  in a trice on  the  screen.  Sivasri  Pictures"Subhash"  is no exception and with that format is included  aninteresting  twist  in  the form of the brother of  the  hero,  aminister,  being hand in glove with anti-national elements  whichputs the hero in a dilemma to arrive at a decision.Director  R.  V. Udayakumar, who has displayed  his  flourish  indealing with love themes set in rural areas, ventures into  areasof  action.  His handling suffers to some extent in  the  openingportion  the  Indian  army  men  are  at  the  receiving  end  incontaining  the infiltrators on the border, only  Col.  Subhash'sline  of  communication being `active'. The viewer is  given  theimpression  that  the  other two wings of the  Indian  team  havefailed  to  stop the aliens. But actually one sees  some  half-a-dozen  automatic  weapons  carrying  thug  like  persons  runninghelter-skelter  in the forest; the hero, with a pistol  on  hand,goes  bang bang. Then a commander at the  headquarters  announces`Thank  God, the country has been saved (by Subhash), the  entiresegment  of the dialogue here being mostly in English.  What  hadhappened  to  the  other two wings of the Indian  forces  is  notknown.  This  sloppy work of the director is compensated  by  thegood  camera  work of Shiva and the director comes into  his  ownwhen he moves into the drama of hearts.As usual it is the timid Shastri girl Savithri (Revathi) for whomthe  hero  Subhash (Arjun) falls in love though he has  a  svelteshapely  lass Anitha (Monica Bedi) almost begging for  his  love.Subhash's father (Jai Shankar) is a rich influential lawyer whilehis  first  son Rajasekhar (Siddique) is  a  respected  minister.Rajasekhar  and  his wife (Sudha) treat the hero like  their  ownson. The wooing of Savithri by Subhash gives rise to some  tendermoments  nicely  handled  by  the  director,  particularly   whenSavithri  says she does not love him and asking him to stay  awayfrom  her,  all told in gentle manner. The timid  nature  of  thecharacter  is  adequately brought out by Revathi with  her  voicemodulation. She further catches the attention in the scene  whereshe  firmly  states that she wants a life partner  who  had  donesomething  for the country, making the hero join the  army.  ThenRevathi  is sidelined till the end when the minister's  moves  tosafeguard  his position occupy the frames. Manivannan, the  partyworker with ulterior motives and with a cheeky tongue, cashes  inon  the  opportunities  in  the  toppling  game  played   betweenRajasekhar  and  his  arch  rival in  politics  but  best  friendArumugamy  (Prakashraj). Siddique and Prakashraj are made  up  onthe  same lines and one has to make sure who is going to die  andwho  isn't. Siddique plays the cool customer villain  with  quietefficiency.Arjun shows remarkable agility in the action segments,  indulgingin  clashes  atop  a moving goods train in a  ghat  section,  thecamera  of Shiva again doing the trick and the stunt men  of  theSubbarayan team essaying the action with vigour. In the  face-to-face  meeting with his brother on the train Arjun is quite up  tothe task. Monica Bedi is at ease in the romance areas  performingthe dances with elan. (Arjun has rendered a song with Sujatha  in"Chutti  Ponnu" and all the lyrics for the six songs have  beenwritten by the director). The other two reasonably good tunes  ofVidyasagar  are  "Thendral vanthu" (SPB  and  Chitra),  "Mugamenna" (SPB and Swarnalatha).The Vadivelu-Vivek comedy is nothing much to enthuse about  whileadequate support is extended by Jai Shankar, Y. Vijaya, Sudha, K.R.  Vatchala,  Prakashraj,  Hemanth  (the  bogus  swamiyar)   andPrasanna.`Mission: Impossible'Watching  director  Brian de Palma's creations  is  like  piecingtogether  a giant jig-jaw puzzle. The way he unfolds  the  drama,the  close-up, tight editing and the depiction of  incidents  allmake  the  viewer's grey matter work overtime. And if  the  themehappens to be connected with undercover agents as in  Paramount's"Mission: Impossible" then the intrigue and suspense will  gripthe viewer till the last.The  theme  about  double agents is not new  but  the  director'sinimitable  style  of  narration  makes  every  twist  and   turnengrossing.  Ethan  Hunt's  (Tom Cruise) entire  team  headed  byveteran  Jim Phelps (Jon Voight) is killed while on a top  secretmission  to retrieves a list of CIA agents stolen by the bad  manGolitsyn.  Now Golitsyn wants to steal another list of  the  realnames  of  the agents. The top brass suspects Etham, who  is  thesole  survivor and he is suspended. The escape of Ethan from  theposh  aquarium-cum-restaurant  where  he  meets  the  CIA  chief,Kittridge  (Henry Czerny) is an interesting scene. Ethan goes  toJim's  place  to learn the identity of the culprit  and  that  iswhere he gets the first clue - "Job: 14," a code connected withthe  Bible - and learns about the dealer Max (Venessa  Redgrave),an old woman with deadly connections. He makes a deal with her toget  the identity of the seller of the first list by offering  toget the second list.For  this piece of operation, he gets the help of  Krieger  (JeanReno)  and Luther (Ving Rhames) and breaks into a  high  securitychamber  of  the  headquarters.  The  trio  escape  the  securitymeasures  by  entering the chamber  through  the  air-conditionedduct.With  the  information  in hand, Ethan  prepares  for  the  finalmeeting with Max when a "dead" Phelps makes his appearance. Theunbelievable  happenings atop the fast moving train offer  a  newexperience to the viewers.Top  Cruise is a co-partner of the movie shot by Stephen H.  Brumwith the special visual effects provided by Industrial Light  andMusic.D.S.R.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India-Film: Humane, down to earth: Vijayalakshmifrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 26, Col. dRight  from her childhood, she had the burning desire to  act  infilms.  Born into an indigent agriculturist's family of Eluru  inAndhra  Pradesh  Vijayalakshmi knocked at the  doors  of  severalproducers  before she bagged a couple of roles in Malayalam.  Herpersistence  paid  off  when  she  was  cast  in  a  Tamil  film,"Vandichakram" directed by K. Vijayan. Overnight  Vijayalakshmibecame a star with a new name `Silk' Smitha.There  was no looking back for Smitha after  "Vandichakram".  Adance number by her became mandatory in almost all Tamil films. Asong  with Kamal Hassan in AVM's "Sagalakalavalavan"  became  abig  hit and boosted her popularity immensely. She acted  as  theheroine in four films - "Silk Silk Silk" and "Police  Police"in Tamil and "Veeravikram" and "Premachesudu" in Telugu. Whenshe was riding the crest of a success wave, two films produced byher bombed at the box office.A  frustrated Smitha quit acting in films for two years. She  re-entered the film industry through Maniratnam's "Geetanjali".Smitha   was  a  humane  person.  Every  year,  on  Pongal,   shedistributed free clothes to the poor. Her views on marriage  werefirm.  She once said that no one would be interested in  marryingher. "He may ask me why I wear this dress and that. As far as  Iam  concerned, marriage is not for me. So I am not interested  init."  Her biggest regret in life was the film she produced.  "Idid  the biggest blunder in my life by producing films. I do  notknow  anything about production. But I produced three  films  andlost what I had earned through acting."S. R. ASHOK KUMMARCopyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India-Music: A mesmeric touch: Sanjay Subramaniamfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 27, Col. aSVK  on  a  concert where there was enough  musical  material  totickle the admiration of listeners.In  the  concert  by Sanjay  Subramaniam  for  the  MaharajapuramViswanatha Iyer Trust, the joy he created in the alapana and songwas  a palpable entity. His imagination was not vitiated  by  theusual intellectual mechanism. Massive in manodharma, energetic inexposition, sumptuous in sensitivity and replete with  refinementhis  Bhairavi raga alapana brimmed with  fascinating  sentiments.The  values  he  cherished  in  elaborating  the  raga  made  hispresentation  first class. He gave primacy to raga swaroopa  evenwhile  sticking to present day cutcheri formulations.  There  wasenough  musical  material  in  it to  tickle  the  admiration  oflisteners.  The  characteristic feature of his technique  is  hislesser  desire  to please the rasikas by the voice  than  by  thegrandeur of the raga structure.Sanjay  Subramaniam believes in an assertive salesmanship of  hismusical  wares.  In the very first song `Vallabha  Nayakasya'  inBegada, the pace and punch were overpowering. He gave a  mesmerictouch  to  this  song  and the  others  `Kartigeya'  (Thodi)  Oh!Rajeevaksha  (Aarabhi) and "Upacharamulanu"  (Bhairavi).  Therewas ostentation and pomp in the way he rendered the kirtanas, butrefinement in approach made for their instant appeal. The Aarabhiraga  alapana glistened with elegant sancharas. While  diligentlyeschewing  obesity in vinyasa, the delineation looked  aggressivewith  the janta sancharas, a distinguishing label, gaining  greatprominence  at  his hands. The Bhairavi  coming  immediately  wascouched  in  salubrious  tenderness. Perhaps  the  very  mood  ofBhairavi  induced  him to soften his voice  particularly  in  thesthayi  range  when he emphasised the beauteous light  and  shademanoeuvres. Sriram Kumar on the violin had not much difficulty inframing the alapana lines of Aarabhi and Bhairavi because  Sanjayearlier had laid the highway well and truly. The movement of  thesancharas  was smooth and the low modulation made  his  renderingsoft  and  flexible. Arun Prakash as  the  mridangam  accompanistcontributed to firmness of percussive support without sacrificingthe gentleness of laya's place in a concert.In the 5 O'Clock session Sasikaran presented his musical trainingthrough  emphasis  on  songs. If Sanjay sought  to  win  audienceappreciation  through Begada, Aarabhi and Bhairavi (all  familiarragas)  Sasikaran  somehow seemed to place his  faith  on  Chaya,Tarangini,   Kannadagowla,  Bhoopalam  and   Chandrajyoti   oftenprovoking  some members of the audience to ask the vocalist  whatraga  it was. A cutcheri built on such a selection  could  hardlyenthuse the rasikas. Towards the end came Madhyamavati (`PalinchuKamakshi')  while  his  presentation of the raga  picture  was  ascale-model.  B. Gayatri, violinist, played with such  depth  anddelicacy that one could easily differentiate the approach of  thevocalist  and  the  appeal of the violinist. It  was  a  luminousMadhyamavati   that  Gayatri  presented,  luxurious   in   lovingsancharas. There was enough expressional maturity in her handlingof  the  raga. Sasikaran sang "Sri Maha Ganapathe"  (Abhogi,  acomposition  of N. S. Ramachandran) "Kripa joo chutaku"  (ChayaTarangini)   `Orajoopuchu'  (Kannada  Gowla)   `Sadaachaleswaram'(Bhoopalam)  and "Bhagyanayya" (Chandrajyoti).  Familiar  ragasand songs are the surest and easiest way to woo rasika attention.J.  Balaji  was  the mridangam accompanist who  nursed  his  rolecompetently.Being brought up in an atmosphere of excellent musical  traditiongives a head start to a young aspirant like Master Ramprasad, thegrandson of Palghat Mani Iyer. Striving to live up to the demandsof  such a tradition requires not merely well-learnt songs,  ragaalapana techniques and swaraprasthara methods. These are  aspectsof  music  that  many youngsters in the  field  today  are  quiteconversant with and climb the dais with confidence. But only whenthe  most  elusive  feature of refinement  in  interpretation  isachieved,  the advantages of an ennobling traditional  atmospherecan  be  said  to have conferred noteworthy  excellence.  In  theabsence of such refinement, music becomes formula-ridden.Singing  for  Raga  Tarangini  the  performing  style  of  MasterRamprasad gave rise to these thoughts. He has memorised the songswell  and presenting them to the audience with competence he  puthis claim to due recognition on that score. He seems to feel thata  stepped-up  kalapramana  to  songs  contributes  to   cutcheriliveliness.  In  that attempt, in singing fast  sangatis  or  thesecond kala swaras he bit more than he could chew. Each  avartanaof  the  second  kala swara to the  songs  "Chani  Todi  Theve"(Harikambhoji)  "Tulasidala" (Mayamalavagowla)  and  "EnnaganuRama  Bhajana" (Pantuvarali) was a race to the  starting  point.The  same  haste  was  to be noticed  in  the  mel  kala  neravalpassages.  Nowadays  cutcheries  centre mainly  round  these  twosegments  of swara and raga speeds. Ramprasad too seems  to  havefallen  into  this trap. With many years before him he  would  dowell  to gradually understand that visranti is the atman of  goodmusic. Pantuvarali raga lines were okay, but the Mukhari  alapanaattempt  was not so satisfying. Mukhari and Begada are two  ragaswhose  scales  alone do not bring out their beauty.  One  has  tosense  a  feel  of the ragas. "Emani Ne"  was  the  kirtana  inMukhari.  T.  R. Rajamani kept his role of a  violin  accompanistwell  both  in raga alapanas, neraval and swaras.  Ganapathi  Ramplaying  on  the mridangam gave lustrous  support  through  well-nourished korvais and cross-beats to embellish the songs.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India-Music: Marked by refinement: Neyveli R. Santhanagopalanfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 27, Col. aWith  his  artistic  talents  directed  strenuously  towards   anintuitive  search for and interpretation of the features  of  theclassical  music of the South in a state of old time  excellence,Neyveli  R. Santhanagopalan succeeded in sustaining the  interestof  an appreciative audience. Featured by Tambaram Music Club  atSita Devi Garodia Hindu Vidyalaya Higher Secondary School in EastTambaram,  his vocal recital gave much satisfaction to lovers  ofserious music.The  vocalist's  involvement  in conveying the  contents  of  hisrecital  in a reasonably refined style was discernible  right  inhis  faithful  execution  of  the  opening  piece,  the   varnam,`Viriboni'  in Bhairavi set to ata tala. His exposition  of  thismonumental  varnam  with concentration on the projection  of  itsclassical  strength  evoked keen listening. Though  he  chose  torender  the first line of his extempore swaras for this piece  inthe  slow  tempo with an earnestness to extend  the  raga's  moodrefreshingly  and forcefully, the instinct to engage  himself  inexciting progression of swaras in the accelerated middle pace hada sway and made him spurn the slow pace instantly.Santhanagopalan's  rendition  of the piece,  "Girirajasuta"  ofTyagaraja  in  Bangala was adequately reflective  of  the  song'sscintillating  musical  setting in a happy mood.  The  piece  wassuffixed  interestingly with a set of colourful swara texts.  Thevocalist's  outline of Panthuvarali had a smart course  with  itsfamiliar phrases touched upon with a commendable insight into itsswarupa.  The  piece that succeeded it  was  `Aparamabhakthi'  ofTyagaraja  extended elegantly to an engaging session  of  neravaland swaras for `Lakshmidevi' etc.Following  an attractive representation of Marukela of  Tyagarajain  Jayanthasri,  Santhanagopalan  presented  a  fairly  detaileddescription  of Bilahari with a clear perception of its  Carnaticidentity. The piece, `Sri Chamundeswari' in it came in a pleasingdiction.Tiruparkadal  S. Veeraraghavan's accompaniment on the violin  wascomfortable. His profile of Bilahari had an enjoyable traditionalflavour.T.  K.  Murthy offered lively rhythmic support on  the  mridangamwith  powerful  percussion  patterns.  Srirangam  Kannan   playedgleefully on the morsing.The  veena  recital of Prabhavathi Ganesan featured  by  TirumalaTirupati Devasthanams Information Centre at its auditorium in  T.Nagar on the day of the birth star of Lord Venkateswara formed  adelightful  display  on  her  accomplishment  as  a  sufficientlysensitive artiste.Opening  her  recital with a  tasteful execution of  the  varnam,`Vanajakshi' (Kalyani, adi tala), she played `Vallabha Nayakasya'of  Muthuswamy  Dikshitar  in Begada with a zest  to  expose  itsmoving  musical  contents through hearty gamakas.  The  artiste'srecital of the piece, `Orajupu' (Kannadagowlai) of Tyagaraja camein a mellow style of veena artistry.Her sketch of Panthuvarali was tentative and it was followed by aconvincing  diction of `Aparamabhakthi.' The piece was  completedwith a tidy session of neraval and swaras.Following an enjoyable exposition of `Kshirasagara' of  Tyagarajain  Devagandhari,  the artiste rendered `Manavyala' of  the  samecomposer in Nalinakanthi in an agile instrumental version. It wasin  her  detailed delineation of Karaharapriya  that  PrabhavathiGanesan revealed the strong foundation laid for her artistry in arigorous  school.  The  essential  features  of  this  raga  werecommunicated by her in an immensely satisfying emotive mode.  Herdiction of the piece, `Pakkala' (Tyagaraja) in it was neat.Nanganallur  Sriram  (mridangam)  and  Rajesh  (ghatam)  providedaffable percussion support.- R.V.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India-Art: Based on Nature: T. C. A. Gopalakrishnanfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 27, Col. cT.  C. A. Gopalakrishnan was a member of the Madras Art Club  andlearnt painting from artists who were also in the faculty of  theCollege  of Arts and Crafts, Madras.Even  though the Club is no longer functioning he continues  withhis  hobby  in a very keen manner.All his themes are based on nature and the paintings such as  the"Serene forest" and "The glowing forest" evoked cool and calmfeelings in the viewer.Even   when  expressing  abstract  emotions  like   "Suspicion"Gopalakrishnan   uses  birds  and  animals  to  illustrate   suchfeelings.In all the water colour paintings exhibited recently at the LalitKala  Akademi,  he uses the same style of filling the  area  withthin  lines of colour using 0 or 00 brushes instead of  giving  awash;  of course in the pen and ink drawings - some of  his  werealso  shown  -  this  is a  practice  adopted  by  many  artists.Gopalakrishnan admitted to using the same technique in oils  too.His works are pleasing and decorative:He  has participated in many National exhibitions, and the  showsof Academy of Fine Arts, Calcutta, Hyderabad Art Society,  BharatKala  Parishad, Hyderabad in which he was  "Highly  commended,"All India Prints Exhibition, etc.He  also participated in a camp organised by the Tamil Nadu  OviaNunkalai Kuzhu and his work can be found in the Madras Museum andprivate collections.LAKSHMI VENKATRAMANCopyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Book Review: Desika sthotrasfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 28, Col. dDesika  sthotras  - Chakkrika Audios, 25, Peyalwar  Koil  Street,Triplicane, Madras-5. 2 vols. of one hour each. Rs. 32 each.A boon for the lovers of the many of Sri Vedanta Desika's  slokasin  a  cassette.  The first volume contains,  among  others,  thefamous  Raghuveeragadyam,  Gopalavimsathi,  Dasavathara  sthotra,Sudarsana  Ashtakam and four more while the second  one  containsHayagreeva sthotra, Abeethi sthavam, Vairagya Panchakam and threemore   -   all  fluently  and  slowly  rendered  by   Nagai   SriVeeraraghavan to be easily followed by those who hear it.It has been rendered in such a way that those who want to get theslokas by heart can do so.Kalakshepams  -  Chakkrika  Audios,  25,  Peyalwar  Koil  Street,Triplicane. Rs. 32 each.Two  studio recorded kalakshepams of one hour duration each  havebeen  released.  Fluently rendered in  Tamil  Velukkudi  Krishnanexpounds  the greatness of Srirangam and that  of  Thiruppanalwarand  the  greatness  of  the beautiful  benevolent  eyes  of  SriRanganatha  in  his cassette "Aranganai Kanda Kangal".In  the  second  cassette  entitled  "Acchuvaiyum  icchuvaiyum"Velukkudi  Krishnan deals with the ways and means by which  thosewho  want  to attain salvation can get it in an easy  manner.  Heexpounds  in detail how to achieve this by dealing with the  lifeof Sri Thondaradippodi Alwar's Thirumalai.Nithyanusandanam  -  Chakkrika  Audios, 25, T.  P.  Koil  Street,Triplicane, one hour duration. Rs. 32.This  cassette,  the  first  of the series, is  a  must  for  anyVaishnavite  either to recite Nithyanusandam, as the name  itselfreveals  or  hear it. This cassette gives in  a  beautifully  andslowly  rendered  version  Thiruppallandu,  Thiruppalli  Ezhuchi,Thiruppavai,  Neerattam,  Poochoodal, Kappidal,  Chenriyongu  andAmalanadhipiran.   These  have  been  rendered  by  Dr.   M.   A.Venkatakrishnan and his party.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Dance: Confident displayfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 28, Col. dSri   Parthasarathy  Swami  Sabha,  the  96  year  old   culturalinstitution conducted a dance series recently, featuring artistesfrom different schools.S.  Meera, disciple of S. K. Kameswaran and Saroja, performed  onone of the evenings, marking her out as a sincere follower of theVazhuvoor  tradition. Guru S. K. Kameswaran, gave  vocal  supportfor  the  recital  which was conducted by  Mahalakshmi  who  ablyhandled the nattuvangam.Meera  has  a  charming personality  and  very  expressive  eyes.Technically she scored fairly in the Jatiswaram (Kalyani) and  inthe    following   varnam,   "Naadanai   Azhaithu    Vaa"    ofTiruveezhimizhalai  Sri  Nataraja Sundaram  Pillai.  The  typicaltheermanams  of Vazhuvoor school were fulfilled skilfully by  thedancer.  But her abhinaya one hopes, will improve with  time  andexperience.Also  there  seemed  a wrong notion  in  her  presentation  that,throughout  the recital a dancer should keep a pleasant face  andthat  too  with  a full smile always  flashing  the  teeth.  Thisappeared  totally  unrelishable, especially when the  dancer  wasemoting  for the lines - "Vedanai Tuyarile" -  meaning  "whileexperiencing  the pangs of agony".A calm face would bring the necessary dignity. The ideas of Bhavaabhinaya,  without  dramatisation or overdramatisation,  and  thefeeling  of sensitive element of divine approach to this  sectionof  Bharatanatyam  seem  to  have lost  their  values  when  suchpresentations are witnessed.Earlier  in  "Brochevarevarura"  (Khamas)  scenes  of  GajendraMoksha  was  overdramatised. Subtlety is the keynote  to  achieveskill in abhinaya.Meera,  on the whole, appeared composed and confident  throughoutthe performance.NANDINI RAMANICopyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Neat job by veteran director: "Nerukku Ner"from THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 29, Col. aSeething  with the memories of humiliations and grievances,  theyshun each other, one man's name spelling anathema to the other.In  `Nerukku Ner', the ultimate confrontation is not between  theusual duo - friends whose goodwill has soured or brothers who aredeadly enemies. The clash is between an elderly father-in-law andhis  only middle-aged son-in-law. Nursing a deeply felt sense  ofwrong  done, and allowing emotional wounds to fester, they  avoideach other's company. Until compelled by circumstances and  theirown impulses to forget and forgive, to bridge the gulf.One  of the few quality plays to be witnessed recently  "NerukkuNer"s strength was the completely natural way in which the storyand  theme was dealt with. Writer K. S. N. Sundar showed  a  goodgrasp of human psychology and built up the drama in neat, logicalsteps.  Veteran  director K. S. Nagarajan had done  a  fine  job,handling  the  story  in a crisp, capable  fashion  not  allowinghimself  to  be sidetracked into irksome comedy or  padding.  Theresult was wholesome fare that captured the essence of the milieuit was set in - the Brahmin middle-class - without distortion  orcaricature.Even  after a quarter century has passed, Raghavachary (K. S.  N.Sundar)  rages  at the insults heaped on him  by  his  son-in-lawVaradarajan  (V.  Chandru)  years  ago. When  his  only  son  anddaughter-in-law perished in an accident, Raghavachary had  soughtrefuge for his year old orphaned grandson, in Varadarajan's home.The   son-in-law  ordered  him  out  as  he   held   Raghavacharyresponsible  for his mother's heartbreak and  death.  Varadarajanalso forbids his wife Vaidehi from having anything to do with herfather.Determined  to cope on his own, Raghavachary, a widower,  managesto bring up his grandson. At 25, Madhavan (Akshay Kumar) is now asmart  executive  and the apple of his  grandfather's  eye.  WhenVaidehi  (S. P. Srimathi) seeks to get her daughter  Mala  (Indu)married  to  Madhavan  using her son Mukundan (G.  Arun)  as  go-between,  Raghavachary opposes the match tooth and nail. So  doesVaradarajan.After  attempts to fix up matches elsewhere for the girl  by  herfather fizzle out, the two antagonists finally meet. And sunderedties are mended and harmony is restored in the family.The  play owed its vitality to the excellent acting by  the  leadartistes.  Sundar was matched in word and gesture by Chandru  andtogether they kept the two decade enmity at full steam.  Srimathias  the  one who feels unhappy and frustrated  by  the  obstinateattitude of husband and father, put in a convincing  performance,her  face  reflecting  her anxiety well.  Her  nine-yard  costumewrapped around her Egyptian mummy-like struck the only artificialnote  in the drama. Indu, the obedient daughter and Arun  as  herrational  elder brother filled the bill. Akshay Kumar,  the  dutyconscious, affectionate grandson is the same in every play -  notfor  him  the  nuances of a character  or  slight  variations  inportrayal.  Ramji who played the portly officer who does his  bitin aiding the reconciliation, was adequate.A  delightful portrayal was put in by V. Ramani as  Rangudu,  thelittle-educated next door youth who makes it big in the politicalscene.  His astute questions (on economic liberalisation,  hawaladeals  and benami) and answers were pertinent statements  on  thecontemporary  scene,  and  also  lightened  the  atmosphere.  Thesuccess of the characterisation was largely due to the casual andnatural delivery of the lines by Ramani who made the absurd soundplausible.The  play  sagged in the middle with the `I hate him'  and  `Malamust marry Madhu' incantation becoming tiresome; a little editingwould help.The  manner in which the foes make up in the end, each  eager  toapologise to the other and take on the blame was true to life.Sadly,  for  a  good effort there were hardly 25  people  in  theMylapore  Fine Arts Club auditorium where Kala Nilayam  presentedthe drama under the auspices of Sri Parthasarathy Swami Sabha.KAUSALYA SANTHANAMCopyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996World record break by Russell: Causier pips Gilchrist at the postfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 22, Col. aBy G. ViswanathMUMBAI, Sept. 26.Fifty-eight seconds ...59... seconds and bang. The finishing  andtriumphant  stroke  was rammed in by David Causier  in  the  lastsecond. It was sudden death for 1994 World professional champion,England's Peter Gilchrist. It was akin to a last ball finish in acricket match.The  cue  ball  (white) was close at hand  and  the  object  ball(yellow) perched at the mouth of the top right hand pocket beggedto be sunk in. But the clock could have beaten the young Causier.The  18-year-old literally counted the closing seconds  with  hiseyes  on the neon clock lights ticking away as fast as his  heartbeat."The white (Causier's cue ball) stopped at 1 hr 58 seconds and Ihit  it," said Causier who, after playing the finishing  stroke,marched towards Gilchrist in a jiffy with an extended right hand.Gilchrist  could not believe he had lost the  quarterfinals,  butthe  cruel reality was that he was beaten by a quirk of  fate  inthe Gold Flake World professional billiards championship here  onThursday.Sethi to meet ShandilyaTop-notcher Mike Russell embellished his comfortable 2391-821 winover  Devendra  Joshi with a world record break of  753  compiledunder  the  baulkline rule. Russell will take on Causier  in  thesemifinal on Friday. Three-time champion Geet Sethi shrugged  offhis first session diffidence to get past Chris Shutt in the  lastof  the  quarterfinals.  Sethi  plays  Shandilya  in  the  secondsemifinal.The man to mark is Russell who was the first cueist to break  the500-barrier in the championship. He smashed a 676 against  MukeshRehani  in  the first round. Russell's skill was evident  in  thefirst  session  when he carved out three century  breaks  in  thefirst  session, including the 291 on his 27th visit.  He  startedthe second with a 148 and then firmly placed himself on top tableto amass 753 in less than three quarters of an hour. The previousbest was his 713 against Sethi in the British Open. It was a one-sided affair all the way with Joshi making two century breaks  of133 and 120.Sethi,  playing on the disputed table with a coarse  cloth,  cameinto  his  own in the second session. Down by 39  points  at  theinterval,  Sethi carved out two big breaks of 183 and 190 to  ekeout a win by 331 points.Last  year in the qualifier at Leeds, Causier was beaten  by  theclock and Gilchrist scraped through by four points. A year  laterthe story was reversed in a classic quarterfinal match watched bya capacity crowd.In  another quarterfinal, Ashok Shandilya, trailing  behind  AlokKumar by 251 points after the first two-hour session, turned  theheat on his opponent in the second session to win 1402-1178.The  match between Causier and Gilchrist on Thursday never  threwthe  prospect of a humdinger. Causier, playing with a  free  mindand  with  a  fixity of purpose, began with  a  197.  Three  morecentury  breaks of 115, 164 and 109 put him ahead at 766-369  andit  seemed Causier was determined to deal the knock-out punch  toGilchrist. But the 1995 world champion showed splendid resiliencewith a masterly 244.Gilchrist  was far from his best in the first 30 minutes  of  thesecond  session,  but moved into top gear from  his  10th  visit.Causier slammed a 193 and collected two more breaks of 86 and  92to  lead by 269 points. Gilchrist hit back with a 210 to  whittledown  the  lead and the match was really opening up.  There  wereexactly 6 minutes and 40 seconds left when Gilchrist came for hislast  visit and all he needed was 104 points. While Causier  keptchewing away at his fingernails, Gilchrist moved on to top table.Gilchrist  was focussed and he measured every shot. Referee  AjayRastogi's baulkline warning at 80 reminded Gilchrist that he  hadafter  all an encumbrance to meet before playing a shot  at  100.His  hand ball crossed the baulkline on effecting a red  pot  andthe  immediate target was 104 which he met in seconds. The  crowdapplauded and Gilchrist thought he had already gone past 104.  Helooked  at the clock and wasted a few seconds. At exactly 1  hour55  seconds he bent low to play a thin in-off on the object  ball(white) with the red on spot. He missed contact.Three  seconds left and Causier got the godsend  opportunity  forsurvival in the championship. He rammed his cue in a split secondto sink the yellow. He got the crucial two points which made  allthe  difference  and helped him progress to the  semifinals.  Theverdict  was clear. "The beep went off after Causier struck  theball.  We saw it on the replay on the television monitor,"  saidan official. "I don't want to play another match like this...  Ifeel  sorry for Peter, " trailed off Causier making the sign  ofthe cross.Alok  Kumar,  the  surprise packet of the  championship,  was  incontrol in the first two-hour session. "I was hitting the  wrongsides - the in-offs and canons - in the first session. I did  notget  my rhythm. But in the second everything went right, "  saidShandilya after his win. Shandilya recovered with breaks of  169,76,  54, 96 and 85. But it was a 198 on his 12th visit which  puthim ahead of Alok Kumar for the first time in the match. And a 94proved  to be the clincher. Alok Kumar made a 127 in  the  secondsession, but nerves played on him in the last 30 minutes.The  results: David Causier (Eng) 1432 (197, 115, 164, 109,  193)bt  Peter  Gilchrist  (Eng)  1430 (110,  244,  210,  104);  AshokShandilya  (Ind)  1402 (120, 169, 198) bt Alok Kumar  (Ind)  1178(104, 102, 127); Geet Sethi (Ind) 1496 (126, 111, 183, 125,  190)bt  Chris  Shutt 1165 (102, 204); Mike Russell (Eng)  2391  (117,182, 291, 148, 753, 132) bt Devendra Joshi (Ind) 821 (133, 120).Final to be telecast liveDoordarshan will telecast live the final slated for Saturday  at.The telecast begins at 2-20 p.m. on the National network (DD  1),according to a Doordarshan press release on Thursday.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Sleek and modernfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 29, Col. dYou may be a writer, a designer, an architect or an engineer. Youmay  also  have a table to work on. But the moment  you  want  towork,  you conveniently shift all your accessories to the  diningtable  where  spreading  everything  from  paper  and  pencil  toreference items is easy. Lack of space prevents you from buying atable as big as a dining table for your study. So the only optionavailable  is  a change in the work area,  and  unfortunately  ithappens quite too often.It  is  for  such professionals that Nirja  Lath  of  Jaipur  hasdesigned  a special kind of utilitarian and space saving  writingtable. The table has all the small utility spaces and drawers  tokeep books, writing things, pins, papers, etc. The long table topfixed  temporarily  to  the tall structure  can  be  pulled  downwhenever one needs large work area, and once the table comes downone has plenty of space to spread sheets of paper, draw, write ordo whatever one wants to.Many  in  Madras might have seen the space  saving  furniture  ofNirja Lath at the Central Cottage Industries Emporium in  Madras.Her  designs  are unconventional and very modern.  Naturally  hertarget  customers are the modern day urban Indians whose life  isextremely  fast  paced, who live in small houses but  would  likekeep  them  elegant,  neat and orderly.  None  of  the  furnituredesigned  by her has any frills, ornamentation or  grandeur,  butlook dignified, in harmony with the present day world. There is aquiet  smoothness in their lines, a rhythmic and fluent  flow  intheir curves and a clarity in their finish.You might be involved in your work when your baby is crawling allover the room and trying to overturn whatever she can cling onto.At  least for a while, you can keep her amused with some toys  inthe chair designed by Nirja. There is a box like structure  whichcan accommodate the chair inside in case of such emergencies. Andas  the child grows up, this structure can be turned sideways  sothat  it  becomes  the little one's eating  table,  or  even  herdrawing  and  studying  table. Of course  the  chair  which  oncetrapped her can be hers to sit in front of the table. This is oneof the most innovative and attractive designs in the show.A stylisitically created cot which is just a few inches high fromthe  floor  looked  extremely restrained in its  lines,  and  canprovide  grace  to  a child's room. The  child  can  roll  aroundwithout  the fear of getting hurt on falling down from  the  cot.The back rest of the cot has adequate space where the mother  canstore  bed  sheets,  pillow covers,  etc.,  without  wasting  theprecious space inside an almirah.The piece-de-resistance was the dressing table cum clothes  standcum  cupboard.  It  is said to be fastest moving  item  on  show.Another  item which looks very simple and plain is a divan  whosehead  rest can be raised when you want to rest and enjoy a  movieon the television, and later on it can be lowered to function  asa cot also. A useful item for avid television watchers who preferthe lying down position to the sitting position!"We  haven't provided any fine work which can attract  dust,  socleaning  or dusting the furniture is not a big problem  for  theurban  working  woman. Even though there is a  great  demand  forornamental  furniture these days, we saw a lot of interest  amongpeople  in  the  kind  of space  saving  furniture  that  we  areoffering," one of the organisers said.An  exhibition of these stylish designer furniture  organised  byAkar Prakar of Jaipur was on show at the Vimonisha Art gallery.SHOBHA WARRIERCopyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Lanka scores a convincing winfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 22, Col. eBy S. R. SuryanarayanDOHA, Sept. 26.Sri  Lanka ended its campaign with a 3-0 win over Philippines  inthe  FIFA World Cup Asian Zone group 10 qualifying tournament  atthe Khalifa Stadium here tonight.Roshan  Perera (two) and Chaminda Steinwell were the scorers  forthe Lankans who led 1-0 at the half-way stage.The  Filipinos  also finished their engagement with  their  thirddefeat.  The  new  comers  to the  World  Cup  qualifying  phase,Filipinos had a nightmarish experience, conceding as many as  tengoals in their three matches and not having scored any.Tonight  the  team  had a chance or two  to  score,  but  clearlyfinesse was missing when most needed.Sri  Lanka now awaits India's match tomorrow to know  whether  itwill be placed second or third finally in the league table.  Witha win and a draw to its credit, the team has four points.This  has  been  a tournament devoid  of  public  interest.  Evenmatches involving Qatar did not attract fans. So today it was nota surprise to see a near empty stadium for what essentially was amatch  of only academic interest.  Both the teams are out of  therace.The  interest if anything was only is seeing whether  Philippineswould be able to gain its first point or whether Sri Lanka  wouldbe  able  to pump in many goals, something that could  stand  theisland  nation in good stead in case there is a tie for a  secondplace with India.Expectedly,  the  Sri  Lankan attack looked  lot  more  incisive,something  that was to energise the handful of Lankan  supporterswho were quick to begin their cheering efforts.Roshan  Perera and Antony  Silva had Chaminda Stenwell  today  toadd  sharpness  to the Lankan offensive. The  Filipinos  held  onprecariously  with  goalkeeper  Edmundo looking  totally  out  ofsorts. He nearly messed up a straight forward collection of a tryby  Silva and conceded a flag kick. Silva took the kick from  farside and Chaminda rifled his header perfectly to beat the crowdeddefence for the Lankan breakthrough.It  must be said that the Filipinos were not mere  spectators  inthis match. There were attempts to make combined moves,  inspiredby  Eduardo  from the middle. As usual Viliran and  Lobaton  shotahead showing good speed to cause concern in the Lankan  defence.Viliran  once did essay a crisp waist-high shot, but straight  togoalkeeper Lalith Weerasinghe.But  what  almost undid the Lankan joy was the run by  the  rivalcaptain  Vincente in a flash counter attack. The  Lankan  defencehad  advanced  too far to check him. Seeing  the  danger,  Lalithrushed out of the box to challenge Vincente. He succeeded even ifin  the process he conceded a free kick and also earned a  yellowcard for touching the ball outside the penalty area.It was a lucky escape for Sri Lanka, nonetheless.Play  became lot more pedestrian after the change of ends.  This,despite the Filipinos success now in working a few positive movesengineered by Vincente and Edurardo.This  was  the  first occasion when the Filipinos  were  able  toexhibit  a  bit  of their ball skills. But  the  enthusiasm  thusworked  up  finally gave way to trouble at its own  end.  A  longclearance  from  Dudley Steinwall saw Roshin rushing  ahead  withnone  really to challege him. A quick trapping and placement  sawRoshan getting the second goal.Another  phase of dullness followed before Sri Lanka  earned  thegift of a spot kick when Talavera used his hands to stop a  Silvatry.  Roshan converted to help Sri Lanka record its best  win  inthis tournament.It  was  yet  another day of  poor  refereeing.  The  Kazhakistanofficial, Ordabaev, allowed several fouls to go unnoticed.Friday's match: Quatar v IndiaCopyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Unusual combinationsfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 30, Col. dMarien Mathew visits a restaurant where one can enjoy the food ofhis choice  watching his favourite star in action.Visualise  this.  It  is  the year  2000.  After  long  extensiveresearch,  scientists  have made a pathbreaking  discovery.  Theyhave  identified the genes that make Tamilians so susceptible  tofilms.  Yes,  it  has  to be in the  genes.  There  is  no  otherexplanation  for the incomparable effect the celluloid magic  hason us.Elsewhere  in  the  world  when  media  experts  talk  about  thepotential  of the visual medium we already have a list  of  ChiefMinisters to prove the point. Here in Tamil Nadu the stars,  oneson the silver screen not the astral variety, have more  influenceon ordinary, mortal beings.So how about celebrating it? Let us succumb to the spell of thoselavishly  mounted  glittering sets, where the  hero  and  heroineprance  about  singing  songs,  a  practice  continued  from  thepioneering days of S. S. Vassan and A. V. Meyyappa Chettiar.  TheTaramani  Talkies  is  all  about this.  The  restaurant  in  thepremises  of MGR film City takes care of your  entertainment  andfood.The  ambience is unmistakable. You have to walk past  the  ticketcounter  or  reception to the multi-cuisine restaurant.  The  bigscreen  showing  the  hero and the heroine  gyrating  to  a  songdominated  the  room. Isn't this bliss, watching  your  favouriteactor/actress and enjoying the food of your choice. The  TaramaniTalkies  offers Indian and Chinese food, while the Baalcony,  therooftop section has Chettinad cuisine alone.The  Baalcony,  opened a few months ago, doesn't have  any  filmifrills.  The  only  embellishment is the sky, the  moon  and  thestars,  that  is  if  it is a clear night.  The  brief  menu  waspredominantly non-vegetarian.Though  two  soups  are  mentioned in the  menu,  both  were  notavailable. For the maincourse, there were Kallu Dosa, Idli, Appamand  Idiyappam,  very much the homefare. The  Idiyappams  (stringhoppers)  were  as soft too as the homemade ones. One  is  a  bitapprehensive  about  ordering idiyappams at restaurants  as  moreoften than not, they come dry. Then no amount of soaking in gravymake their journey down the throat easy.What  makes Chettinad cuisine so interesting is its not so  usualcombinations.  Idli and dosa, which make the very  foundation  ofSouth Indian vegetarian food, acquire non-vegetarian flavour alsohere. So besides Sambar and Chutney, we have Mutton Kola  UrundaiKozhambu  or Chettinad Kozhi or Meen Varuval as side dishes.  Theresult  is,  if the crisp, thin light brown dosa,  hot  from  thetava,  is  irresistible with sambar, it becomes a  knockout  whentouched  up  with  meaty/fish flavour. The  Baalcony  has  MuttonKheema Dosa and Prawn Dosa to substantiate the point.Chettinad  Cuisine  comes  from the royal  kitchens  of  merchantprinces,  the  Chettiars.  The key word here  is  royal,  for  itexplains the characteristic richness of this culinary style.  Thewedding feasts of the Nagarathar Community are almost  legendary.On  these occasions which run into days, the guests are feted  byexemplary food and excellent music and dance.Aattukal Paya, a rather mild mutton curry with coconut milk, wentwell  with  the  idiyappams. Varutha Kozhi also  was  nice.  Whatstruck one most was the meagre inclusions of vegetarian dishes onthe  menu. There was only one semi-fried mixed  vegetables  dish,vegetable  Chettinad  which  had  at  least  something   remotelyChettinad about it. The other vegetarian items listed on the menuwere  Mulagutawny  Soup,  which  is of  British  Raj  origin  andvegetable Kuruma.But  at  the end of the meal, when you get a bill  of  less  thanthree   hundred  bucks  for  a  couple  who  is  bothered   aboutauthenticity and lack of choice? And the food is quite nice too!Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Specialist openers, need of the hourfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 22, Col. dBy R. MohanTORONTO, Sept. 26.Life's  journey from celebrated years as the well feted whiz  kidto  middle  age can be very long. It is, perhaps,  the  curse  ofSachin  Tendulkar  that  the experience of life,  like  his  lostchildhood, should be so compressed.In  terms  of  cricket, he has already attained  middle  age.  Ifanyone wishes to pick an argument about that, it is quite  likelyhe  may not have seen the stony expression on the skipper's  facewhen  he  went up to receive the loser's cheque in  the  decidinggame of the Sahara Cup on Monday."It was disappointing," he said in a kind of under statement atthe press conference. "We were very confident about chasing  214but   we  could  not,"  he  said.  A  dead  giveaway  that   thevicissitudes  of the captaincy are catching up with him  even  asexpectations turn into disappointments so quickly.The captaincy, much like the rose, comes with the thorns. But  hehardly  needs to blame himself so much because had the toss  gonethe  other way it was likely that the match and the Cup may  havegone the other way, too.The toss matters a lot on wearing pitches because chasing on themis never going to be fun. His predecessor learnt a bitter  lessonat  the Eden Gardens and Sachin accepted that the most  importantthing  he  learnt from the Sahara Cup is chasing is  never  easy.Leaving  aside  for the moment the matter of chasing  or  settingtargets, let us examine where India really went wrong.Notwithstanding the desire to be tactically flexible, the team iserring  in  believing  the batting order  is  everything.  Sachinhimself  may  have brought about a seminal event in  opening  theinnings at the Eden Park in Auckland two years ago. But he shouldknow by now that changes in the batting order form only a part oftactical innovativeness.Results should be more even irrespective of the batting order  orthe availability or absence of leading batsmen through injury  ordisciplinary action as in the famous case of Navjot Sidhu.A  32-16-2 (win-loss-no result) head-to-head record in favour  ofPakistan  in  one-day  Internationals  exists  despite  all   thetinkering  with the batting order that captains and their  think-tanks have done over the years.The  problem  right  now for India is the absence  of  a  regularopening  partner for Sachin Tendulkar. It is another matter  thatit should not be assumed that Sachin should always be the  openerin  the  limited-overs game. Such a  supposition  also  militatesagainst tactical flexibility.This may be solved when Sidhu can return to the side in time  forthe  triangular  series  in the middle of  next  month.  But  theselectors,  the  captain and whoever constitutes  his  think-tankthen should decide straightaway that the need for a specialist todo this job is very urgent.It is possible to compromise on the opening slot in home  cricketwhere the fastest bowlers, be they white, black or brown, are  sodefeated by the conditions that they can be rendered patheticallyineffectual.  But  the moment the Indian team  steps  abroad  andcomes across unfamiliar pitches, any tactical change of the ordercan get horribly undone.For  instance, Mongia is never likely to succeed  against  cleverfast bowlers like Wasim Akram. And Jadeja is unlikely to ever fitthe  role  of an opener again even if he succeeds at the  job  onflat pitches as he has in Asia.There  is one simple rule when it comes to opening batsmen.  `Andthat  is - `Find specialists'. Don't ever compromise  unless  theopener is a quality player of the calibre of Sachin Tendulkar whocan cope with the technical demands of playing the new ball  evenwhen  it comes to adapting oneself to the aggressive way  of  theone-day game.What is the point in carrying a Vikram Rathore in the squad if heis  not  to  be used even in the one-day game.  Whatever  be  histechnical weaknesses, he can still cope with the requirements  ofthe  one-day  game. Use him or Sidhu, not Jadeja, or  Mongia,  oreven Saurav Ganguly even if he is good enough a player of the newball to be considered for the job.The  easy solution to team balance that Manoj Prabhakar  used  tooffer  as opener spoiled the Indian team thoroughly. The  era  ofthe  all  rounders  is  well  behind us  now.  There  is  no  usepretending that every Tom, Dick and Harry is an all rounder untilthe  era of the true all-rounder comes again. The solution  wouldthen lie in giving a run to the specialists like Sidhu and  leaveit  to  them to work out how active they should be in  the  earlyovers.Krish  Srikkanth was a natural at the job of striker. The  nationis  not going to find too many like him. Pinch hitters at one  ortwo drop may fare well enough. But not too many converted openerscan  shine all the time as the specialists like Gordon  Greenidgeand Desmond Haynes did. We do not have to seek far to see why theWest Indians were so great as a one-day team in the days of theirabsolute dominance. They always used specialist openers. They didnot believe in sending some hit-and-giggle batsmen in first.Bring on Sidhu or give Rathore a fair run. But do not  compromiseon  the  opening  slot even in home  cricket  merely  because  itbecomes  convenient  to do so. The number of  times  Kapil  Dev'spromotion in the order failed is reason enough to suggest not allare equipped to come out and bat first.It  would  even  make sense to send in  a  quality  batsman  likeAzharuddin  to  open  the innings. But it  would  be  foolish  topersist with the likes of Jadeja and Mongia.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Mrunalini earns IWM normfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 22, Col. cBy Arvind AaronYEREVAN, Sept. 26.India's  Mrunalini  Kunte  made her  maiden  International  WomanMaster norm with a quick draw against WGM E. Zayac of Belarus  inthe tenth round of the 32nd Chess Olympiad here at the Sports andConcert  Complex here today. The Indian women drew  1.5-1.5  withBelarus.Mrunalini Kunte, born on December 23, 1973 near Bombay, is a postgraduate  in  Commerce from Pune. She is  the  reigning  nationalwomen's  champion  and should be able to get her other  norms  insuch strong opposition. Mrunalini's real strength in chess is herability to draw games against tougher opponents.Mrunalini  said, "I am happy," as she was filling the form  fornorm  application  this  evening. She spent  the  last  48  hourscalculating  rather  than preparing for the match.  The  off  daytomorrow would be the time to celebrate.For  the Indian women IWM Saritha Reddy did the scoring,  beatingA.  Sorokina  in  43 moves with  the  white  pieces.  BhagyashreeThipsay  was beaten by untitled T.Zagorskaya in a  Dutch  defencegame.  Bhagyashree lost a pawn with the black pieces and  lost  acouple more to resign in 44 moves.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Madras Stock Exchange online trading inauguratedfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 19, Col. aMADRAS, Sept. 26.The  screen-based  trading  on  the  Madras  Stock  Exchange  wasformally inaugurated by Mr. Suresh Krishna, Chairman and ManagingDirector, Sundram Fasteners.Speaking  on the occasion Mr. Suresh Krishna said this  marked  anew  chapter  for  MSE which had a good carrier in  the  last  60years.  He wanted the MSE to enter into new areas  of  operationssuch as derivative trading.The  first deal on online trading was put through by selling  100shares of Sundram Fasteners by Mr. Suresh Krishna at Rs. 700  andMr. Prem Sundara Iyengar, President of the MSE was the buyer.Mr.  Suresh Krishna left a word of caution that only quality  andprompt delivery schedule would pave the way to success. He  citedthe  examples of multinationals like General Motors and  Ford  inmaintaining quality.He  said  the  same  accepted business  norms  applied  to  stockexchanges  and brokers also. He said "we cannot be operating  onthe  same  way  that  we  were  doing  and  have  to  adopt   newtechnologies.  It  is  very important  to  build  confidence  andquality  and without quality and trust stock exchanges  will  notsurvive."  He  hoped  the MSE would live up to  its  ability  tosatisfy  the  most discerning customers and Mantrra  would  offerefficient service to the investors.Mr. S. Sadagopan, Chief General Manager, Madras Telephones,  saidthat  they would be able to complete the job of  providing  leaselines  in a short time and said the  international  communicationtraffic  to  Madras was growing at a fast pace. He was  happy  tonote  that the trading system through leased lines network  wouldbe  one  of  the largest of such networks  for  mission  criticalapplications in the Asia Pacific region.Earlier, Mr. Prem Sundara Iyengar, President of the MSE said  thescreen-based  trading would be fully operational from  October  7and appreciated the efforts taken by the members of the  Exchangeand  the  software  professionals involved in the  work  and  theMadras Telephones in providing the lease lines.Mr.  Chandra Balaraman, Chairman and Managing Director of  IndigoTechnologies,  which executed the project for  Tandem  Computers,said  the  system  was very  reliable  with  parallel  processingfacilities.   He   said  TESA   (Tandem   Electronic   SecuritiesArchitecture),  the software, being in use in  several  countrieshad been customised by Indigo Technologies for MSE. He added  thesystem  based on wide area network using leased lines  was  user-friendly and cost effective.Mr. Frank Dorrian, Regional Director of Tandem Computers for Asiasaid it was a major step forward in automation of equity  marketsin India.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: 65,000 bookings for Ford Escortfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 19, Col. dOur Staff CorrespondentMUMBAI, Sept.26.Mahindra Ford has received over 65,000 bookings for Ford  Escort.The bookings were open in eight cities and the highest number  ofbookings was received in New Delhi.According to a press release issued by Mahindra Ford, Ford Escortproduced  in  India  is the latest European model  and  has  beenspecially engineered to suit Indian conditions.Apart  from seven dealer cities - New Delhi,  Mumbai,  Bangalore,Madras, Chandigarh, Hyderabad and Ahmedabad - booking  facilitiesfor  Ford Escort were also available in Calcutta.  Bookings  wereclosed  on September 23 after remaining open for a period of  twoweeks.Deliveries  of Ford Escort will start from October  21.  MahindraFord  India  Ltd (MFIL) is a joint venture company  between  FordMotor Company and Mahindra & Mahindra.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India-Corporate Results: MAC Industriesfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 18, Col. eMAC  Industries  has  successfully  implemented  the  scheme  forabsorbing MAC Property Development and MAC Civil Engineers  aftergetting  the  approval  of the shareholders and  the  High  Courteffective  from April 1, 1995. The working results  for  1995-96,even  though they include the turnover of the merging  companies,were  not  satisfactory because of the poor contribution  by  theaquaculture  division.  The impact of virus disease in  both  thefarm  areas  in Tamil Nadu was so severe that  the  turnover  hasdeclined  to Rs. 127.41 crores from Rs. 158.11 crores  even  withthe contribution of Rs. 29.78 crores by the two merged  companiesreferred to above.The  gross profit before depreciation and interest  charges  alsodropped  abruptly  to  Rs. 930.96 lakhs from  Rs.  17.61  crores.Interest  charges  were  lower at Rs. 554.22  lakhs  (Rs.  614.79lakhs). The sum set aside for depreciation has been raised to Rs.175.23  lakhs (Rs. 133.34 lakhs). The liability for  taxation  islower at Rs. 30 lakhs (Rs. 56 lakhs). The distributable profit isonly Rs. 171.51 lakhs against Rs. 956.27 lakhs.The directors however have decided to maintain the dividend at 25per cent, taxable. The prospects for the current year are  viewedwith  optimism. It was possible to maintain the dividend  becauseof a larger amount brought in from the previous year. The  amountrequired  is  Rs. 370.69 lakhs (Rs. 283.84 lakhs) as  the  equityshares  issued in 1994-95 are eligible for a  full  distribution.The  transfer  to  general reserve is Rs.  1  crores  (same)  anddebenture redemption reserve Rs. 165.67 lakhs (Rs. 53 lakhs). Thesurplus  carried forward is Rs. 437.73 lakhs against  Rs.  969.73lakhs brought in which includes Rs. 32.19 lakhs being net surplusof amalgamated companies.The paid up equity capital has increased to Rs. 14.82 crores fromRs.  14.44 crores as a result of the merger while  reserves  werelower  at Rs. 45.89 crores against Rs. 47.95 crores as the  outgoin respect of dividend is more than available profits.The  palm  plantation in Andhra Pradesh  is  making  satisfactoryprogress  and an area of 1,025 hectares has been cultivated.  Thepalm oil crushing mill has also commenced trial production.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India-Corporate Results: Shalimar Paintsfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 18, Col. eShalimar Paints has registered a net profit of Rs. 2.09 crores ona  turnover of Rs. 120.02 crores in the 12 months ended June  30,1996  against Rs. 1.03 crores and Rs. 107.79 crores  respectivelyin 1994-95.The  gross profit, before depreciation and interest charges,  hasrisen to Rs. 11.43 crores from Rs. 10.89 crores. Interest chargesclaimed  Rs. 7.35 crores (Rs. 7.29 crores). The amount set  asidefor  depreciation is Rs. 1.99 crores (Rs. 1.09 crores). In  1994-95, an amount of Rs. 1.48 crores has been provided as bad debts.The company has projected a net profit of Rs. 5.29 crores in  theletter of offer when it issued partly convertible debentures on aright basis. As the powder coating project has been deferred  andthere  was  also an increase in input costs, it could  achieve  alower  net  profit  of Rs. 2.09 crores. It  is  stated  that  thecompany  has not availed itself of the term loan intended  to  beraised for the powder coating plant.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India-Corporate Results: BPL Refrigerationfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 18, Col. eBPL  Refrigeration has been increasing its market share with  theintroduction  of  new  types  of  frost-free  refrigerators   andincreasing production. But for the fire accident in the  existingfactory at Bangalore the working results for the year ended March31, 1996 would have made even better showing. As there is a  lossof output for one week due to the accident and also a  slackeningin  growth  momentum  subsequently, it is  anticipated  that  theprogress in 1996-97 will be more impressive. New models also willbe  marketed  and  arrangements  are  being  made  for   completedesigning with engineers getting the requisite training from  theJapanese collaborators, Sanyo.Sales  have risen by 63.1 per cent to Rs. 215.96 crores from  Rs.132.37  crores  and  the gross  profit  before  depreciation  andinterest  charges by 59.2 per cent to Rs. 28.68 crores  from  Rs.18.02  crores  in 1994-95. Interest charges have spurted  to  Rs.14.07   crores  (Rs.  6.80  crores).  The  sum  set   aside   fordepreciation  is  Rs. 450.69 lakhs (Rs. 314.89 lakhs).  There  isagain no liability for taxation. The residual profit has risen ina less pronounced manner (25.1 per cent) to Rs. 10.11 crores fromRs. 8.08 crores mainly due to heavier burden of interest charges.The  dividend  has  been  maintained at  20  per  cent,  taxable,absorbing Rs. 544.44 lakhs (Rs. 468.74 lakhs). The larger  amountis  due  to  the equity shares allotted to  the  promoters  at  apremium of Rs. 38.44 per share being eligible for a proportionatedistribution.  The  transfer to general reserve is  Rs.  1  crore(same)  and debenture redemption reserve Rs. 2.25 crores  (same).The  surplus  carried  forward is Rs. 378.16  lakhs  against  Rs.236.38 lakhs brought in.The  paid up capital has increased to Rs. 29.64 crores  from  Rs.24.94  crores  as  a result of the allotment of  94  lakh  equityshares  of Rs. 10 each at the above mentioned premium. These  arepaid  up  to the extent of 75 per cent. Reserves  amount  to  Rs.87.52  crores after giving effect to the latest  allocations  andtaking  credit  also for the premium on  the  preferential  issueagainst Rs. 64.78 crores.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India-Corporate Results: Alpic Financefrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 18, Col. eAlpic  Finance is maintaining the equity divided at 35  per  centfor the 12 months ended June 30, 1996. The company could  achievea  larger turnover and net profit despite uncertain and  volatilemoney market and tight liquidity situation. The company's focuseson  consumer  finance  through  its  niche  product  Medipic  andmarketing  of Carpic has paid rich dividends and  this  accountedfor  nearly  70  per cent of its  current  year's  disbursements,according to a company release.During the period under reference, the company reported an incomeof  Rs.  133.63 crores against Rs. 98.90 crores.  Other  receiptswere  lower  at Rs. 60 lakhs against Rs. 114.60  lakhs.  The  netprofit,  before  depreciation and taxation, has improved  to  Rs.67.31 crores from Rs. 54.94 crores.After providing a sum of Rs. 26.14 crores (Rs. 20.46 crores)  fordepreciation  and  Rs. 1 crore (Rs. 72 lakhs) for  taxation,  theresidual  profit is higher at Rs. 40.17 crores against Rs.  33.77crores.The transfer to general reserve is Rs. 15 crores (same),  generalreserve  No.  1  Rs. 10 crores  (nil)  and  debenture  redemptionreserve  Rs. 5 crores (nil). Reserves stood at Rs. 188.91  croreson  June  30, 1996 against the unchanged paid up capital  of  Rs.11.84 crores.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Procedures for NRI investments simplifiedfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 18, Col. dFrom Our Staff CorrespondentMUMBAI, Sept. 26.The Reserve Bank of India has further simplified the policies andprocedures  for NRI investments. The present scheme for  100  percent   investment  by  NRIs  in  sick  units  will   be   furtherliberalised.The  RBI  will  give general permission for  interest  free  non-repatriable  loans from NRI relatives for personal  purposes  andfor business activities. Interest free repatriable loans up to  $2.5  lakhs with a maturity of seven years will be cleared by  theRBI  automatically. Other cases will continue to be cleared on  acase to case basis by the RBI.NRIs/OCBs will be permitted to establish schools and colleges  onthe  same  terms  and  conditions as  a  resident  individual  orcorporate body.The  existing  40  per cent scheme will  be  abolished.  In  non-Annexure-III  industries, investments by NRIs/OCBs up to  51  percent in companies other than listed companies will be allowed  ona repatriation basis.The  condition  regarding  60 per  cent  turnover  from  eligibleactivities  for  investment to be eligible under the old  40  percent and the proposed 51 per cent scheme will be waived.NRI  participation in venture capital activity will be  permittedon  the same terms and conditions as foreign investment  in  thisarea.Housing Development Finance Corporation (HDFC) and other  housingfinance institutions will be permitted to grant loans to NRIs foracquisition  or improvement to the existing houses on  terms  andconditions  as applicable to residents. All information  relatingto NRI or foreign investment will be put on the Internet.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Microbe capable of degrading oil isolatedfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 17, Col. aFrom Our Special CorrespondentTIRUCHI, Sept. 26.A  microbe  existing in nature named pseudomonas which  has  beenfound to be capable of degrading oil, has been isolated by Mr. P.Raghavan a research scholar, working under Prof. M. Vivekanandan,Head  of  Department  of  Bio-technology,  of  the  BharathidasanUniversity, after studies for the past 30 months.Oil  spilling both on land and sea in recent years, has  been  onthe increase, and is posing challenges to the  environmentalists.Bioremediation  is  considered  to be the most  useful  and  safemethod to deal with oil pollution of any kind in view of the factthat  it  was  considered to be  most  eco-friendly.Genetically  engineered  strains though have  been  developed  tofight  oil spillage, in view of the potential danger involved  inusing  such  methods,  the governments have banned  it.  In  thiscontext,  the utilisation of such naturally occurring oil  eatingmicrobes assumes very great importance.The microbe Pseudomonas Sp was isolated from the oil-contaminatedsite. The potential nature of this strain in utilising crude  oilas  the sole source of energy was investigated. The  isolate  wasfound  to degrade oil at 1 to 3% level with an efficiency of  60-90%.   The  optimal  conditions  for  biodegradation   like   PH,temperature, PO4, and salinity requirements were also worked out.The  degree  of  oil biodegradation depends  on  the  quantum  ofemulsifying agent produced by the strain.When  there was minimum surface tension, the quantum  of  biomassand   biosurfactant  production  was  maximal  by  the   isolate.Immobilised cells produce increased amount of biosurfactant.  Thenature  of  biosurfactant  was  identified  as  rhamnolipid.  Theelectro-micrograph  of the oil-degrading strain showed  that  thecells  growing in high concentration of oil, exhibited  a  largerperiplasmic  space and cell membrane evagiation.The  antibiogram  of the strain also showed tolerance to  Hg  andphenol.  The conjugation study of this strain with E. Coli  CSH57revealed  that  the strain has the ability to transfer  only  theantibiotic resistance and not the oil-degrading character.  Fieldtrial test involving the adapted microbial strain at oil spillagesite  will  be  a promising approach  which  is  being  currentlyinvestigated.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Adult TV channel jinxed?from THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 16, Col. eFrom Our Special CorrespondentNEW DELHI, Sept. 26.The much-publicised adult TV channel, "Plus 21", is turning outto  be a non-starter and its proposed launch on October  1  looksextremely  unlikely  even as cable operators  are  besieged  withenquiries about its contents, timings and how it can be accessed.The  launch,  already  postponed several times,  may  be  delayedfurther  for  a host of reasons,  including  non-availability  ofhardware  and two court cases seeking a ban on the channel  underobscenity  laws. Sources in the cable industry say even  softwareis not ready, and even if the channel takes off in a few weeks itwould  not be able to offer the full range of programming it  hasbeen promising.At  least  three film-makers have contested the  channel's  claimthat they are making programmes for it and accused it of misusingtheir names. Film Director B. R. Ishaara has denied making even asingle episode of "Kamasutra", which the "Plus-21" channel isadvertising as his creation.Film actress and Director Neena Gupta too has dissociated herselffrom  the  serial and expressed surprise that her name  is  beingused  to promote the channel. According to her, she was asked  tomake the serial but midway she fell out with the channel and  hasnothing  to  do with it now. Another Director, Ajit  Dewani,  hasaccused  the  channel  of  illegally  appropriating  his   serial"Abhinetri."This  is  India's  first  own  "adult"  TV  channel  and  cableoperators  are  not  quite  sure if  they  can  beam  it  withoutviolating  the  Cable TV Regulation Act  1994,  which,  prohibitstelecasting any programme that "offends good taste or decency".The sort of steamy stuff, it has promised, has already provoked astrong  reaction  with  voluntary  organisations  threatening   anationwide agitation.Council threatens stirThe National Consumer Awareness Council, which represents over 80voluntary bodies, has gone to court and said it would take to thestreets  if the channel is allowed to go on air.  Besides,  cableoperators   in   some  cities  have  been  cautioned   by   local"watchdogs"  and  according to the Federation of  Indian  CableOperators' associations, which represents 25,000 operators acrossthe country, its members are very reluctant to take chances."We  will not beam the channel unless we have the  equipment  totrap its signal so that it is restricted to those homes which askfor  it. Once we have this equipment we would give a code to  thesubscriber  so that he can lock the channel to  prevent  childrenwatching it", says Ms. Roop Sharma, president of the federation.Unless  cable operators are able to "isolate" the  channel  andrestrict its use to individuals who have the code, it would be  afree-to-air channel which once beamed by a cable operator can  beseen  by  anyone. Major cable distributors such as  Hindujas  andSiticable are also reluctant to "risk" the ire of those who areopposed to "invasion" of their privacy.According to the promotional material distributed by the  channelit  would  be  on the air for four hours  every  night  (10  p.m.onwards)  and would feature "adult jokes, sex news,  titillatingmusic, adult songs, adult comedies and serials such as Kamasutra,Redlight,  Ek  Aur Silsila, Samjhauta, Brothel and  Bhog  Se  YogTak". It has also claimed that it would "prominently  feature"advertisements of "adult stuff".Cable  operators  say  such  advertising  on  an  Indian  channelviolates the advertising code which they are expected to  follow.They can also be hauled up for telecasting programmes which  havenot been censored as required under the Cinematograph Act.A  senior executive of the channel has, however, denied  that  itproposes  to air nudity and pointed out that in any case some  ofthe programmes on foreign TV networks beamed to Indian homes  arenot fit for family viewing.Even  as the channel appears to be in trouble even before it  haskicked  off,  there  is a sense of anticipation  among  the  morecurious  viewers  whose appetite has been whetted  by  the  mediahype.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Brahmothsavam fetches TTD Rs. 3.3 crfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 16, Col. dFrom Our Special CorrespondentTIRUPATI, Sept. 26.The  temple of Lord Venkateswara has netted an overall income  ofRs. 3.3 crores  during the nine-day Brahmothsavam which concludedon Monday.Collections  from the hundi accounted for Rs. 2.53  crores  whilethe  sale  of  different seva tickets fetched Rs.  53  lakhs  andladdus Rs. 24 lakhs.According  to the TTD, about five lakh pilgrims visited the  hilltemple  and 1.72 lakhs had free meals under the Nithya  Annadanamscheme.  The APSRTC, which pressed into service extra buses,  hasrun 16,000 trips to and fro on the the ghat road transporting  asmany as 5.63 lakh commuters.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India-TV: Renuke Shahane: Choosy about her rolesfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 32, Col. aWho  is  not  familiar with her warm,  toothy  smile  and  brightpersona on the small screen? Renuka Shahane lights up the  entireviewing  room  with her vivacious screen presence, be it  in  themuch-appreciated  "Surabi"  (with Siddharth Kak) or  the  much-watched  "Antakshari" (with Annu Kapoor). Renuka is  now  beingseen more and more in serials too. You just cannot miss her on TVany  given day of the week. She is "to hand" on one channel  oranother."To  think it has all come to me unsought!" notes Renuka, as  Icome face to face with this blithe spirit of the small screen  ather Shivaji Park home in the Dadar sector of Mumbai. But whateveris the matter, Renuka is not, right now, her known spirited self?She  is  out  of sorts because she is nursing  a  rather  painfulabscess.  I  encountered  her a couple  of  weeks  before  GaneshChaturthi.  And  the young lady is, literally, waiting  for  LordGanesa to come and go, so as to be able to get rid of the pain inwhich she obviously is."I  have  to be careful not in any way to upset my  tight  work-schedule  in planning to go through the minor  surgery  needed,"she  points out. "Therefore, this surgery has willy-nilly to  beon Ganpati immersion day, the day when we busy stars at last  get24 hours off."She  had braced herself for the mini-ordeal ahead and is  not  inthe  ideal  frame  of mind to answer my query  about  why  RenukaShahane seems to be doing only a handful of serials while others,who  came after her, look to be much busier. I put the  point  toher,  none  the less, and Renuka takes it in her  petite  stride,explaining  why,  if  she  is lagging behind,  she  is  doing  sostudiedly."I am not very ambitious by way of quantity, it is purely out ofchoice I have restricted myself," says Renuka. "According to mylights,  "too  much"  is not the yardstick by  which  a  viewershould  be judging a performer's calibre. I would rather be  seenin well-defined roles, in a few well-made serials, than be viewedin  every  other tele-offering, frantically running from  set  toset."It is important for me to be seen "doing" things in a  serialas a character rather than be merely appearing in it. That is thereason  I left "Yeh Huyi Na Baat." My character in it  was  notdeveloping  at  all, it seemed to be getting me nowhere.  On  theother hand, I have enjoyed doing Kishan Sethi's "Ghutan,"  evenif  all  the  major roles in this serial  are  played  by  matureartistes  like Raza Murad, Kiran Kumar and Smita Jaykar. Still  Ihave a role to play as the motivating daughter of Smita and  Razawho brings matters to a head."Renuka Shahane has been appreciated for her "quietly" effectiveperformance  in  "9  Malabar Hill," the  Siddharth  Sen  Gupta-directed  serial in which her's is the main role.  Notes  Renuka:"I've  been very happy with "Imtehaan" and  "Sailaab,"  bothdirected  by  Ravi Rai, who is a good script-writer too.  I  feltparticularly  happy with my role in "Imtehaan," it was  shapingup  really  well and we looked poised for more  exciting  things,when it was yanked off the screen at the end of the 26th episode.Did I feel disappointed!"Now  to the "role" in which she is so omnipresent on the  smallscreen!  There  seems  to be a rather mixed  reaction  to  RenukaShahane  as Annu Kapoor's bubbly co-host in "Antakshari."  Someargue  she  hogs  the show; others say she is  too  subdued;  yetothers feel her costuming, her get-up seem all wrong. But  Renukais  dismissive  of  the suggestion that either  she  or  Annu  isdomineering."You cannot," she reasons, "be dominant in a live musical showlike  "Antakshari"  where it is so much a matter  of  give-and-take. Our first priority here is to put the participants at ease.Annu  is very comfortable in Hindi, it is his mother tongue.  Andhe  sees to it that at no point does viewer interest in the  showflag,  at  no stage does any participant get a feeling  of  beingintimidated. The chalking out of the programme is done in a  verycongenial  and  friendly  atmosphere,  an  atmosphere  in   whichdirector Gajendra Singh, Annu and I, all three, take part in  thediscussion  freely. As for my costuming, it is the choice of  thesponsors,  I cannot help it if certain viewers feel it  does  notsuit me."For  Renuka,  everything in her professional  life  has  happenednaturally.  Even  that  Filmfare  award  for  her  Marathi  film,"Aboli," came to her just like that. "I had no inkling I wouldget  it ahead of so many talented and deserving  artistes,"  shesays, having grown up in a part of Mumbai known for its eruditionand achievement.This  must  explain why Renuka is so choosy about what  she  doeseven in a spot medium like TV. But viewers judge her,  instantly,by  what  they see. From the moment she was picked  up  by  GulanKripalani  to  play  Pankaj  Berry's  wife  in  that   rollickingbreakfast  serial, "P. C. Aur Mousi" (a show in which she  camein  rewarding contact with Farida Jalal) to now (when  the  wholeviewing world is still toasting her as the charming elder bahu ofRajshri's Hum Aapke Hain Koun), there is nothing Renuka has  goneafter for it to come to her."I am anxious only to the extent  ofbeing  conscientious  about  giving my one hundred  per  cent  toanything  in hand, be it my work or studies. Never have I  soughtthe easy way out where it comes to making the effort," she says.One thing has led to another and Renuka feels happy to have  comein live touch with some of the more creative talents of the smallscreen."I  value my work in Vijaya Mehta's "Lifeline,"  says  Renuka."During  the  doing of "Surabhi," Siddharth  Kak's  guideline,that  the  two  of us should not be talking down  to  people  butchatting to the camera, came as a most timely tip. I have  reasonto  be  grateful  to Annu Kapoor for  his  protectively  friendlysmoothing over of certain awkward moments before the camera whileworking  on  "Antakshari." I treasure,  too,  the  enlighteninghours  spent with director Pushkar Singh while doing  that  briefbut significant serial of just six episodes: "Akanksha"  (basedon  the  theme of adoption). Money, for me, is  not  everthing,"concludes  Renuka by way of justifying her laid-back attitude  tolife and career.Maybe  it is just the literary milieu in which she has  grown  upthat  enables  Renuka  Shahane to look upon  TV  star  status  assomething  that is not the end of the world. "For me, there  areother  attractions  in life," says  Renuka,  still  attractivelysingle. "I like doing theatre, seeing good plays, taking in goodcinema reading, devoting time to literature, even plain relaxing.All  this  is  invaluable for my well-being.  There  is  so  muchhappening, so much to absorb."A  sound head on slim shoulders - that is Renuka Shahane, the  TVstar with a difference.GIRIJA RAJENDRANCopyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Situation will be clear in 20 days: Waghelafrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 16, Col. aFrom Our Special CorrespondentNEW DELHI, Sept. 26.The political situation in Gujarat is expected to become clear inthe  next  20  days, immediately after the  by-elections  in  theState. This was the view of the Gujarat BJP dissident leader,  MrShankarsinh Waghela, who met the press here today on his way backto Ahmedabad from Lucknow.Mr  Waghela was confident that there would be no  difficulty  forthe  Mahagujarat Janata Party led by Mr Dilip Parikh  in  gettingthe  support of at least four or five of the 18 MLAs  "virtuallykept prisoner" by the BJP."In  any case the Mehta Governments inning's are over. There  isno  question  of the BJP making Mr. Suresh Mehta  Chief  Ministeragain.  From  the very start it was Mr. Keshubhai Patel  who  waschosen  for that chair, and again, the BJP will try to bring  himback as Chief Minister," Mr. Waghela said emphatically.He alleged that `private police' were used inside the Assembly onthat  fateful  September 18 and that  mediapersons  were  `beatenmercilessly'. He said that many journalists were later threatenedthat night and some feared for their lives. "The Deputy  Speakerwas also taken ill because threats were issued to him and in  thehospital  he  was  given  a heavy  dose  of  sedation  making  itimpossible  for him to chair the next day's  Assembly  session,"Mr.  Waghela charged, adding that "no one could prevent the  BJPGovernment  from forming a government in Gujarat if  they  remainsure  of their majority. They can go to Raj Bhawan  tomorrow  andclaim that they have the necessary support. Who can stop  them?"he asked.He added that on September 18, there were only 87 MLAs present inthe  House after police threw out the Opposition MLAs.  Accordingto him, only 87 votes were cast in favour of the so-called motionseeking a vote of confidence.He admitted that he had gone to Lucknow `to warn' the people  notto  believe  the BJP and its leadership, and not be taken  in  bytheir  promises.  He said that in Lucknow he did meet  `some  BJPleaders,'  but refused to identify them, saying `they would  losetheir  jobs'.  In  response to questions, he  admitted  that  the`promises'  made  to him by Mr Atal Behari  Vajpayee  after  lastSeptember's  episode  were  not kept by the  party.  He  implied,without saying this in so many words, that Mr Vajpayee was unableto have his say in the party.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: 14 airports to be developed for global operationsfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 15, Col. dFrom Our Special CorrespondentNEW DELHI, Sept. 26.With  the expansion of private airlines in the  domestic  sector,the  Government has decided to develop 14 airports including  the12  model  airports,  for limited  international  operations,  inaddition to the major airports.The  private  airlines  has  made it  necessary  to  provide  foradditional  parking  and  maintenance  facilities.  New  terminalbuildings  to serve the increased number of passengers are  beingcommissioned  and  airports  made  consumer  friendly,  with  theaugmentation  of passenger amenities for better baggage  handlingand check-in facilities.The  model  airports include Lucknow, Jaipur,  Nagpur,  Vadodara,Kozhikode,   Coimbatore,  Indore,  Hyderabad,  Patna,   Guwahati,Bhubaneswar,  Imphal, Goa and Ahmedabad. The airports  have  beenidentified  by AAI from the economic and tourism point  of  view.Modernisation  of  air  traffic  services  with  state-of-the-artcommunication,  navigation and surveillance system will be  takenup in a phased manner.New  airports  are  being constructed  particularly  in  interiorplaces  such as Tura in Meghalaya and Lengpuri in  Mizoram  underthe State plans, and Kargil and Kishtwar in Jammu and Kashmir andAndorth in Lakshadweep funded by the Central Government.At the Kozhikode airport, a new international terminal block withall  amenities for handling 400 passengers, was  commissioned  inJune  this year. At Ahmedabad, extension of runway from  9000  to11,500  feet  has been taken up. At Hassan, an  airport  will  bedeveloped for the 50-seater aircraft operation over 295 acres forRs. 50 crores in the first phase. In the second phase the airportwill  be extended to 9000 feet with Rs. 60 crores more to  enableBoeing 737 operation.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Dustin Hoffman: Cinema"s diminutive dynamofrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 25, Col. aThirty years after he became Hollywood's newest "Graduate",  heremains  one  of its most skilled practitioners. A  look  at  thememorable  screen moments of Dustin Hoffman,  honoured  recently,for lifetime achievement at the Venice Film Festival"Mrs.  Robinson, do you think we could say a few words  to  eachother first, this time""Mrs.   Robinson,  if  you  don't  mind  my  saying   so,   thisconversation is becoming a little strange"."Mrs. Robinson you're trying to seduce me aren't you?""Maybe we could do something else together, Mrs. Robinson. Wouldyou like to go to a movie?"The   increasingly  apprehensive  teenager  realises   that   themiddleaged  woman  (Anne Bancroft), who just happens  to  be  hisgirlfriend's  (Katherine Ross) mother, is in fact practising  thefine  art of seduction on him. Coming as it did, in  1967,  "TheGraduate",  unerringly tapped the mood of the swinging  Sixties,mirrored  on the soundtrack, in the classic Simon  and  Garfunkelsongs  -  and became a milestone film, earning that  year's  BestDirector   Oscar   for   Mike   Nichols.   Nominated   -   albeitunsuccessfully  -  was  the  chubby  faced  young  actor,  DustinHoffman,  a diminutive 5 ft 6 ins, but at 31 much older than  thecharacter  he portrayed. Much imitated (Kamal Hassan  played  theHoffman  character in a derivative Tamil film), "The  Graduate"continued to win new audiences in later decades via TV and video,as a seminal Sixties product.The film made Hoffman a star - and his style of studied, cerebralacting,  a  cult. Over the next three decades,  this  deliberate,sometimes eccentric practitioner of the now often derided art  ofemoting, has delivered some of cinema's most memorable moments.At  the Venice Film Festival, earlier this month, Dustin  Hoffmanwas  honoured  with  a special "Golden  Lion"  for  his  careerachievement  in  cinema. He quotes his guru  Lee  Straberg,  fromwhose  "Method"  school  of acting  so  many  Hollywood  heroesgraduated: "There is no such thing as a juvenile, a villain or ahero. We are all characters".After "The Graduate", his very next bash at the big screen  wasa character, as eccentric as they came: the crippled,  aggressive"Ratso",  who teams up with a gigolo (John Voight) as they  tryto  eke  out  a  living from the seedy  underside  of  New  York."Midnight Cowboy", became the first "X" rated film to win  anOscar - for its director John Schlesinger.But  the  awesome histrionic talents in  the  pint-sized  Hoffmanframe  were  on display for the first time in 1970 when  he  agedfrom a teenager - to 121 years, playing the only survivor of  theinfamous  Little Big Horn slaughter of American Indians. As  JackCrabb,  a boy brought up by the Cheyenne Indians,  Hoffman  plays"Little Big Man", a witness to almost a century of exploitationof  America's indigenous population by the whites. Arthur  Penn'sfilm   was  not  your  customary  hard  riding,   hard   drinking"Western",  but  possibly the most sensitive portrayal  of  the"Red" Indian way of life.The  ultra  violent "Straw Dogs" which featured  Hoffman  (withSusan  George)  in 1971 as an American research student  and  hiswife,  experiencing  the malevolence of the locals in  a  Cornishvillage  in  Britain, was one of director  Sam  Peckinpah's  mostcontroversial  films.  The British, for one refused to  accept  aplot where locals let loose a reign of terror including  multiplerape in a sleepy village. It was never allowed into this country.But the equally downbeat "Papillon" was. Based on a French bestseller,  the  story  followed the repeated attempts  of  a  penalcolony  inmate  (Steve  McQueen) to escape - aided  by  a  mousy,myopic buddy (Hoffman). It was a star vehicle - and little  else.High powered star power was in abundance, once more, when Hoffmanjoined  Robert  Redford, in "All the  President's  Men'  (1976),where  they  play the investigative duo Carl  Bernstein  and  BobWoodward,   who  cracked  the  Watergate  conspiracy  for   "TheWashington Post". The film had little to offer the  non-Americanviewer who in any case was not so obsessed with this true saga ofPresident Nixon's downfall."My  dear  boy  have you ever tried  acting?"  asked  the  lateShakespearean  thespian Laurence Olivier, of his co-star  Hoffmanduring  the making of the bizarre often very convoluted  thriller"Marathon  Man". But the old man's jibes apart, the film was  apoor  showcase for either of them - and a nauseating scene  wherethe neo Nazi Olivier does some unscheduled dental work on Hoffmanwas only one of many violent moments.But  acting talent was not a prerequisite for garnering Oscars  -charisma  and star power could do the job - as Hoffman and  MerylStreep  proved  in  1979, playing a separated  husband  and  wifebattling over their kid in "Kramer versus Kramer". This  "fourhanky"  film won Hoffman his first Best Actor Award - and  otherhonours  went to the film, to costar Streep, the director  RobertBenton and the scriptwriters.Never  one to rest on his laurels, Hoffman went on to take up  anunusual  challenge, that would have daunted most macho stars:  Inthe 1982 comedy "Tootsie" he appears in drag most of the  time,playing  an  indigent actor who takes up female roles to  make  aliving.  This unlikely critical success was followed by what  theindustry  termed  a  "fifty million  dollar  flop":  "Ishtar"teamed him with Warren Beatty. The two play a pair of second ratesongsters  writers  who  stumble on a spy  drama  in  the  Saharadesert. Their constant companion is a blind camel. A wit said  atthe time, the film's audience had to be blind as well - to  enjoythe film.The  1988  Hoffman  starrer couldn't have  been  more  different."Rain Man" found him playing an autistic man - incoherent  mostof  the  time - who is left $3 million  dollars.  His  avariciousyounger  brother  (Tom Cruise) is only left a vintage car  -  andhopes  to trick his sick brother out of his inheritance. They  goon a long journey in the jalopy - and by film's end, the  youngersibling  has learnt to appreciate the goodness of his  "savant"brother. In a year when "feel good" films were in short supply,"Rain  Man"  stormed the Academy Awards -  earning  Oscars  forHoffman, the film and the director Barry Levinson among others.It was a different type of family bonding a year later:  "FamilyBusiness"  was  about a bunch of  unlikely  crooks:  grandfather(Sean  Connery),  father  (Hoffman) and  son  (Mathew  Broderick)decide  to pull off a heist. It was a great comic idea -  but  itbarely worked.The Nineties saw Dustin Hoffman make fleeting appearances on  thescreen.  Spielberg's Peter Pan update, "Hook" cast him  as  thevillainous  title  character  - but there was little  to  do  forHoffman  the  actor  in this special  effects  costume  drama.  Aglimpse of what he could do with a good script was provided  lastyear  when  he appeared in "Outbreak" as a  conscientious  armydoctor  battling  against top brass  (Donald  Sutherland,  MorganFreeman) to control a rampaging viral disease. But encase Hoffmanmost  of the time in a protective headgear (and high tech  drama)and you curb his talents. He needs the pure acting environment tothrive.  Chances  are his latest vehicle might just  provide  himwith this. "American Buffalo", casts him alongside Dennis Franzof  "NYPD  Blue"  fame as a pair of crooks who try  to  pull  aconfidence trick on a friend - with disastrous consequences.  Thefilm  being  made earlier this year, is due to be seen  in  Indialater this year.If  his  appearances on screen are infrequent,  that  is  becauseDustin Hoffman can afford to pick and choose his roles. "I livedbelow the official American poverty line till I was 31" he  says(that  was  the year he appeared in "The Graduate").  Then  thearithmetic  of success changed and today Hoffman swears by a  newformula:  "Stardom equals freedom. It is the only equation  thatmatters' he says.As he slides into his sixties, it is an equation that adds up  tosome more cinematic delights to come from Dustin Hoffman.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996A zest for lifefrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 25, Col. eKhushboo  was  in Bombay last week. For old times'  sake  we  hadlunch  at a suburban restaurant. The restaurant was  too  crowdedfor  confrontations  and confessions. But in  between  soups  andsweet  dishes,  we  managed  to  cover  topics  ranging  over  26alphabets.***Amitabh  Bachchan, Aamir Khan, Akshay Kumar and Arvind  Swamy.  Icannot  think  beyond these performers. Amitabhji,  for  being  aphenomenon,  Aamir  for his sensitivity towards  his  characters.Akshay for his stamina and Arvind for his courteous behaviour.Bombay  - I just love the city. Biscuits - Even if I were  to  bewoken  up  at two in the morning and offered  biscuits,  I  wouldfinish the packet.Clothes  -  I  love  them,  specially  cotton  saris  and  salwarkameezes.  I like dressing up. My family and friends feel I  lookgood  in  modern  outfits, but I  prefer  myself  in  traditionalclothes.Dogs  -  I just love them. The Alsatian bitch I have at  home  isadorable. We got her when she was a week old. Today she is  four-and-a-half and my mom's chamchi. I cannot touch mummy when she isin the room. She is fiercely possessive about her.Entertainment  -  Films,  theatre, circus,  road  side  tamashas,anything, but life would be unbearable without entertainment.Family  and  friends - They have been with me during my  ups  anddowns  - Brinda, Anu, Subbu, Madhoo, Viji - life wouldn't be  thesame, if I lost any one of them.God - I am god fearing but not a religious fanatic. I respect allreligions and visit various shrines when I feel like.Holidays - I have never been on a holiday, a planned holiday.  Itis only when my shootings get cancelled at the last minute that Itake a few days off. My folks at home never take my proposal  fora holiday seriously. I have let them down too often.India - I am proud to be an Indian, proud of my culture. We  haveso  much variety in food and attire in all our States.  Not  manycountries can promise that.Jashn  Ali Khan - My three-year-old nephew. He is the love of  mylife.... my absolute jaan. On the day he was born, I insisted  onholding  him first. And I did. I remember the expression when  heopened  his  eyes. Right now he is in Indonesia and  I  miss  himbadly.  He gurgles on the phone. I love the way he calls me  Bua.Sometimes he calls me Khusphus.Kites  -  I love watching colourful kites in the  sky.  There  issomething romantic about them. Ever since childhood, my  brothersmade  me hold the manja-phirki, while they flew the kites.  Afterall these years, the practice has not changed.Love - I thrive on love and cannot survive without it. I can livewithout  oxygen, but not love. London - It is a city I have  onlydreamt of, never visited. Strange that I have travelled all  overEurope, except London.Mother - We fight so often, but I cannot live without her either.She  is  very important in my life and she knows  it.  She  takesadvantage  of this at times, supports my brothers  in  arguments,even when she knows they are in the wrong.Marriage  -  I  was  miserable  when  I  had  to  break  off  therelationship I had invested so much into. I can never forget thatday. It was the worst day of my life. I had to learn it the  hardway that nobody is perfect.Nagging - I hate being nagged, so I can guess what a torture I amto others.Oorvasi - She is Tamil Nadu's most versatile actress and has madea  name  for herself in all the South  Indian  languages.  Today,almost  every heroine-oriented script is written with Oorvasi  inmind. I truly admire her spontaneity.Perfection - I am not a perfectionist. No matter how hard I  try,I  can never attain perfection. Something, somewhere always  goeswrong. May be, It is temperament, but I am hoping I will be  ableto rectify this when I become a housewife.Quiz  Master Derek O'Brien of "Bournvita Quiz Contest" - He  istoo good! I try and watch the show whenever I can.Rickshaws - Whenever in Bombay, I love travelling by rickshaws. Idon't get to do it in Madras. I also enjoy the double-decker  busrides in Bombay. Down South, we don't have it.Sundar  -  He  is selfless, generous, mature and  my  whole  liferevolves around him. He is the man responsible for my confidence.The  motivating  factor to assert myself as a woman. I  love  himdeeply  and cannot think of a future without him. Shabana Azmi  -is  the woman I admire greatly. If I can acquire even an iota  ofthe fame and respect she has, I will consider myself lucky.Tantrums  -  A common feature with newcomers on  the  sets  thesedays.  Youngsters think its is fashionable to be  arrogant.  Realstars  don't  throw  their weight around. On  the  contrary,  thebigger the star, the more normal his behaviour.Ubin Fernandez - My hairdresser and friend. I call her  "aunty"and  she  has been my guide and companion for 14 years.  She  hasbeen an integral part of my career. She treats me like her  childand is fiercely loyal.Victory  - I hate the word failure. Last year, when I  was  goingthrough  a low phase, people said it was over for me. The  papersreferred  to me in the past tense. It hurt and I swore to  myselfthat I would get back. I did and that is a victory for me.Work  -  Work is worship. I would be completely lost  without  mywork.  I am addicted to it. I cannot sit idle even when I am  notwell.  When  I  am  not shooting, I  am  busy  cooking,  cleaningvessels,  floors and cupboards. For someone so active, my  weightis a mystery.X'mas  - I look forward to Christmas every year. Ubin aunty  getsme homemade rose cookies and I just love them.Youth - I like the feeling of youth. I may talk and behave maturebut at heart I am a teenager.Zest  - Is what keeps me going... When I want to, I can be  goal-oriented. I am determined when I am motivated.BHAWNA SOMAYAEditor, `g' MagazineCopyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: SPG cover: V.P. Singh reiterates demandfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 13, Col. aFrom Our Special CorrespondentNEW DELHI, Sept. 26.The  former  Prime Minister, Mr. V.P. Singh, has  reiterated  hisdemand  for immediate withdrawal of the Special Protection  Groupcover  to him and his immediate family members and said that  theissue  of  withdrawal  of  SPG cover  should  not  be  linked  toprovision of alternative security cover.Responding  to a letter written by the Prime Minister,  Mr.  H.D.Deve   Gowda,  urging  him  to  consider  opting  for  "Z   plus"alternative security cover, Mr. Singh has said that he will  keephis options open."As for the alternative security cover suggested by you I keep myoptions open for it will not be possible to accept an alternativecover if it puts the same burden on the treasury and the poor manas  the  SPG does at the moment must be costing  the  country  atleast  Rs.  60  crores a year for all the old  and  new  ex-PrimeMinisters,"  Mr.  Singh  has informed the  Prime  Minister  in  aletter.Mr.  Singh has said while he and his wife, Mrs. Sita Kumari,  aresigning  the letter, his two sons, Mr. Ajeya Singh and Mr.  AbhaiSingh, are at the moment abroad and will send similar requests onarrival. "As no SPG cover is given to them abroad, the decks  arecleared for immediate withdrawal of SPG".Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: End of the road for Narasimha Rao?from THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 13, Col. bFrom Harish KhareNEW DELHI, Sept. 26.With  legal troubles coming like a torrent, there seems to be  nopolitical  respite  for  the former Prime  Minister,  Mr.  P.  V.Narasimha Rao. Having already stepped down from the office of thepresident  of  the Congress Party, he will find his  position  asLeader  of  the  Congress  Parliamentary  Party  untenable  aftertoday's legal rebuffs - first the Delhi High Court's rejection ofhis  plea for an anticipatory bail and later the charge-sheet  inthe St. Kitts forgery case.That he becomes the first former Prime Minister to have to face acharge-sheet   is   in  itself  not   without   grave   politicalimplications.  There was no official Congress reaction;  nor  anyCongress leader wanted to say anything adverse about him. At  thesame time there was no enthusiasm to speak up in his defence.  Infact,  there  was a sense of sadness among the  Congress  leadersthat  Mr.  Narasimha  Rao should get  badly  embroiled  in  legalentanglements.After  Mr.  Rao stepped down as Congress president, much  of  theanger  and  bitterness  towards him has waned.  But  there  is  arealisation that he cannot escape paying a price for the  forces,some  clearly  unwholesome, he helped unleash  in  the  politicalsystem.Most  Congress  leaders have convinced themselves that it  was  adeliberate political strategy on the part of Mr. Narasimha Rao toentangle  rivals like Mr. L. K. Advani, Mr. Arjun Singh  and  Mr.Tiwari  in  the hawala case. That  case  generated  unprecedenteddivisiveness and bitterness in and outside the Congress,  leavingMr.  Rao with few friends and little goodwill once he  failed  tolead the party to victory in the Lok Sabha elections.If nothing else, there will be pressure on Mr. Rao to follow  theprecedent  set by other political leaders charge-sheeted  in  thehawala scandal. It would be recalled that Mr. Advani had resignedhis    Lok Sabha seat  in January this year after he was  charge-sheeted  (along with Mr. Arjun Singh, Mr. Madhavrao Scindia,  Mr.Balram Jakhar and others). Mr. Advani had said that he would  notcontest  the  Lok Sabha elections unless he was  cleared  of  the"trumped up charges." Similarly, Mr. Sharad Yadav of the JanataDal  was forced to step down as the leader of the Janata  Dal  inthe Lok Sabha.Subsequently,  the  Congress  itself  denied  nomination  to  the"charge-sheeted" leaders like Mr. V. C. Shukla, Mr. Jhakar, Mr.Scindia  and  Mr. Arvind Netam. The principle  invoked  was  thatanyone "charge-sheeted" ought to get himself/herself cleared ofthe  legal entanglement before the party would run the risk of  apolitical endorsement/association.The "charge-sheet" principle was invoked by Mr. Narasimha Rao'ssupporters  themselves last week after he was issued  summons  inthe  Lakhubhai Pathak case. A statement signed by  four  general-secretaries (Messrs B. P. Maurya, Janardhana Poojary,  MadhavsinhSolanki and R. K. Dhavan) had noted:  "the general feeling amongthe Congress leaders is that the issuing of summons by itself  isnot a reason for the Congress president to take this drastic step[of  relinquishing  the  office]. In a number  of  cases  personsagainst  whom  charges  have  been  framed  in  the  courts   arecontinuing in their posts."The  charge-sheet has come now. And though at the  last  CongressWorking  Committee, the party leadership had assured him that  hewould not stand alone in his legal battles, that scenario  standschanged  after the St. Kitts charge-sheet. Unless  Mr.  NarasimhaRao  demonstrates  an hitherto unsuspected fighting  ability  andpersonal  stamina, his political career can be said to have  cometo an abrupt end.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Urea scam: CBI may send team to Genevafrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 15, Col. cFrom Our Special CorrespondentNEW DELHI, Sept. 25.The  Central  Bureau of Investigation (CBI) is  giving  finishingtouches  to the requisite documents for pressing the  extraditionof  the  two top officials of the Turkish firm,  Karsan  Limited,from Switzerland.A  two-member CBI team had returned from Geneva about a week  agoand  had taken up the exercise of preparing the documents  to  besent to the Swiss authorities.According  to sources, the CBI may send its team to  Geneva  withthe  documents  seeking  extradition of  Karsan's  Chairman,  Mr.Tuncay Alankus and its Executive Director, Mr. Cihan Karanci. Theduo  was arrested by the Interpol earlier this month.  They  werestated to be still under detention in Geneva.There is no extradition treaty between India and Switzerland  butthe  request  can  be made under  the  Swiss-British  ExtraditionTreaty. The request has to reach the Swiss authorities within  30days of the arrest of the two accused.The  investigation  into the Rs. 133 crore urea  import  scam  islikely to pick up and the CBI may succeed in its efforts to tracethe flow of funds from Karsan's account in Pictet Bank, Geneva.The  Fertilizer  Ministry had refused to accept the  shipment  of9006  tonnes of urea dispatched by Karsan as the  fertilizer  wasmuch below international standards. In the deal to supply 2  lakhtonnes  of  urea to the National Fertilizer  Limited  (NFL),  theTurkish company took the full advance of $37 million, but  failedto supply the fertilizer by May as stated in the contract.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996Asian tariffs impede growth: World Bankfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 14, Col. dFrom Sridhar KrishnaswamiWASHINGTON, Sept. 26.India  continued to reap substantial benefits from the trade  andinvestment  liberalisation reforms undertaken after 1991 and  theSouth Asian economies that grew by about 5.3 per cent in 1995  isestimated  to grow around six per cent, according to  the  AnnualReport of the World Bank for 1996. Since 1991, the average exportgrowth  rate for the region has exceeded 10 per cent compared  toan average of 5.6 per cent for the years 1981-1990,but the exportof  goods  and non-factor services represented less than  15  percent  of domestic output, well below the average  for  developingcountries.  "Although recent reforms have succeeded in  loweringtrade barriers, South Asian tariffs remain far higher than  thosein  other  regions.  As a result, they remain  an  impediment  togrowth because in conjunction with other trade restrictions, theycreate distortions and can lead to resource misallocation,"  theAnnual Report observes.The  regional  perspectives of the Bank for South Asia  reveal  amixture of the positive fallouts of the reform process that  haveput  in place as well as in some of the  persisting  difficultiesthat  stand in the way of development either as a result  of  theperceived  lack  of reforms in particular areas or in  other  on-going  political and civil developments in specific nations.  TheReport,  in  talking about the conditions in Bangladesh  and  SriLanka, makes the point that political difficulties in the case ofBangladesh  and  in the continuation of the civil strife  in  Srilanka have contributed to dampening private sector dynamism  and,thereby, restraining growth.Reform process pays offOn  the positive side, the Annual Report takes note of  the  factthat   regional  cooperation  had  received  a  boost  with   theratification  of a trade agreement by members of the  South  AsiaAssociation of Regional Cooperation, or SAARC. The agreement thatincluded bilateral concessions brought about cuts in tariff ratesranging  from  10  to  100  per cent  in  more  than  220  items."Although  the trade impact is likely to be small given the  lowshare of intra-regional trade, the SAARC countries have indicatedtheir  intention to initiate negotiations towards establishing  afree trade area in the near future," the World Bank notes.The  Bank Assessment has been that the reform process and  activeengagement  in the world economy by the South Asian  nations  arenow paying off in terms of higher foreign investment with privatecapitals  accounting  for close to 50 per cent  of  the  resourceflows  to  the  region as opposed to 25 per  cent  in  1990.  Theaggregate  resource flows may have fallen in 1995 due to  declinein  overall  portfolio  flows following the  devaluation  of  theMexican  peso  in December 1994,but they were still  much  higherthan  in 1993. Foreign Direct Investment reached a record U.S.  $2.8  billions  and  although  India  was  the  largest  recipient(receiving about U.S. $ 2 billions) other nations also shared  inthe increase.The  countries of South Asia, the World Bank notes, also saw  thegrowth  of the export earnings outpace the increase in debt  withall  countries  improving the  debt-to-export  and  debt-to-grossnational  product  ratios. The economies of the region  were  theonly  group of developing countries not to have restructured  thedebt in the past decade and having incurred almost no arrears  toexternal  debtors. "But maintaining sound economic  fundamentalsand  pushing  ahead with economic reforms are  essential  if  theregion  is to take full advantage of the enormous  potential  forfurther  growth  in private capital flows to  the  region,"  theWorld Bank has said.Poor social indicatorsThe  incidence and depth of poverty may have declined  since  the1980s, but the number of poor has increased. The recent estimate,according to the World Bank, is that 43 per cent of the  region'spopulation  lives on incomes of less than U.S. $ 1 per  day;  andthat  South Asia, which accounts for 22 per cent of  the  world'spopulation,  accounted  for 40 per cent of the  world's  poor  aswell. Aside from the fact that this underscored the importance ofpolicies that raised rural incomes, the Bank argues that high andsustained growth rate that takes place in an environment of soundeconomic  management was essential for the reduction of  poverty."But growth is not by itself sufficient to reduce poverty. SouthAsia's  social indicators are very poor. Average life  expectancyat birth is sixty years, half the adult population is  illiterateand  children  under  the  age of  five  experience  the  highestmortality rate in the world... These regional averages,  however,mask  considerable  diversity, both across countries as  well  aswithin countries. Sri Lanka and some Indian States, for  example,have  social  indicators  that  are  comparable  with  those   incountries with a higher income per capita," the Bank says.The  annual report makes the point that achieving  major  povertyreduction  is  feasible;  but to attain  more  rapid  growth  andintegration in the world economy in the coming years, nations  inSouth  Asia will face tough policy challenges that would  includeaddressing  the  deficiencies  in  social  areas,  infrastructurebottlenecks,  reducing the still excessive trade  and  investmentbarriers  and  extending  the scope of  competition  in  domesticfactor  and  product  markets. "The Bank  continues  to  supportpolicies   that   promote  sustainable  growth,   develop   humanresources, extend the benefits to currently disadvantaged  groups(such as women), and overcome obstacles to the sustainability  ofgrowth,  particularly  in the environmental  and  human  resourceareas. The current operational strategy in the region  emphasisesways   to   achieve  these   objectives   through   participatoryapproaches,   decentralisation,  increased  involvement  by   theprivate sector and a sharper client focus," the Report adds.New action planOn  the role of the private sector, the World Bank has taken  theposition  that  in  South Asia, severe  absorptive  capacity  andimplementation  deficiencies  coupled with  financial  restraintshave resulted in chronic underinvestment in infrastructure  wherethe  public sector alone did not have the resources to  meet  theneeds  -  as, for instance, in the lack of available  finance  onterms  commensurate with the typical long gestation  and  revenueearning  capacity  of infrastructure projects.  "In  India,  forexample,  the  development of a long term  domestic  debt  marketrequires a number of significant policy reforms in the  financialsector,   particularly  as  regards  regulations  applicable   tocontractual  savings institutions. While such a reform  programmeis being formulated and until its key elements are implemented sothat  a  well-functioning  domestic  long-term  debt  market  canemerge, domestic financial institutions have to play a major rolein  supporting private investment in infrastructure," the  WorldBank notes.The Report, at a broader level, has to be seen in the context  ofthe  global  changes that are currently taking place and  in  thebackdrop of the recent trends that would include the rapid growthof  private  investments  and capital  availability  and  in  thelevelling   off  or  even  diminishing   official   developmentalassistance.  For instance, the total private flows to  the  majoremerging market economies totalled some U.S. $ 225 billions whilethe official flows amounted to only U.S. $ 14 billions. In  termsof  region,  the  Asia  Pacific accounted for  some  U.S.  $  123billions of private financial flows, and U.S. $ 10.4 billions  inofficial   flows  from  the  major  financial  agencies.   Seniorofficials  of the World Bank take the position that the  flow  ofprivate investment is not to be taken as some kind of a `threat'.For one thing the argument has been that private investment flowsare  directed  by  specificity  and  sector  dominated;  and  foranother,  the  point  is  being made that  the  flow  of  privateinvestment opens different arenas to the World Bank.One of the critical aspects of this year's annual meetings of theWorld Bank and the International Monetary Fund is in developing acomprehensive strategy to meet the needs of the heavily  indebtedpoor countries. Such a plan of action is said to be on the `brinkof  a  breakthrough', although serious questions  remain  on  theextent  to which the industrialised world is willing to go  alongwith finding additional resources to meet the challenge.India returns morePTI reports:India  returned  to the World Bank $ 723 millions  more  than  itreceived  from  the institution in fiscal 1996, ending  June  30,thanks to repayments and interest on past loans.The  Annual Report of the Bank shows that in fiscal  1996,  Indiahad undisbursed commitments of $ 9.43 billions. During the  year,the  Bank  made  new  commitments  of  $  2.978  billions   whiledisbursements   amounted  to  $  1.309  billions.  Against   thatdisbursement,  India paid the Bank $ 1.149 billions as  repaymentand  $  884  millions  as interest, leaving  the  country  $  723millions in the red.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Cauvery: Karnataka denies understandingfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 14, Col. cFrom Our Special CorrespondentBANGALORE, Sept. 26.The  Karnataka Major Irrigation Minister, Mr. K. N.  Nage  Gowda,clarified  on Thursday that no understanding was reached  on  anycontentious  issue relating to the Cauvery water  dispute  duringthe talks between the Governments of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.Mr.  Nage  Gowda told presspersons that what had  transpired  wasonly loud thinking. It was not correct to say that the States hadagreed to build an additional water gauging centre at Biligundlu,where  the  Central Water Commission-manned  gauging  centre  waslocated.Mr. Nage Gowda was endorsing the view expressed by the Tamil NaduPWD Minister, Mr. Durai Murugan, in Madras on Wednesday.The  Minister  said  there  was  also  no  understanding  on  notextending  the area under irrigation in the Cauvery  basin.  Thisissue  was linked to the quantum of water that was to  be  sharedbetween the two States, which had not been agreed upon. Mr.  NageGowda,  who convened a press conference in the morning,  said  hehad spoken to both the Karnataka Chief Minister, Mr. J. H. Patel,and  Mr. Durai Murugan. The Chief Minister had told him over  thephone  that  he did not say that both the States had come  to  anunderstanding  on  setting  up an additional  gauging  centre  atBiligundlu to monitor the water inflow.He clarified that the Tamil Nadu had stuck to its stand that  theMettur  reservoir was the reference point and it  had  maintainedthat  even  the Cauvery Tribunal had endorsed it.  The  KarnatakaGovernment  had  suggested  that  a  modern  gauging  centre   beestablished at Biligundlu on the Tamil Nadu-Karnataka border.Expressing   the  Government's  resentment  over   the   reportedstatement  of the Andhra Pradesh Irrigation Minister that  AndhraPradesh  was not getting an adequate quantity of water  from  theTungabhadra  dam, Mr. Nage Gowda said the release of  water  fromthat dam was monitored by the Tungabhadra Board, which was headedby  the  Chairman  of the Central  Water  Commission.  The  StateGovernments  of  Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh had no say  on  theissue. Farmers in Karnataka had not tapped water meant for AndhraPradesh.  The Tungabhadra Board had vindicated Karnataka's  standin  its  recent  letter. Tungabhadra water was  being  shared  byKarnataka  and  Andhra  Pradesh on the  basis  of  an  agreement.Karnataka  was getting two-thirds of the water and the  rest  wasbeing  used  by  Andhra Pradesh. Describing the  remarks  of  hisAndhra  Pradesh counterpart as unfortunate, Mr. Nage  Gowda  saidsuch  `unverified'  and `unwarranted' statements would  harm  thecordial  relations between the two States. If the Andhra  PradeshGovernment had complaints, it could raise them at the TungabhadraBoard meeting scheduled for October 15.He  termed as baseless the allegation of the Mysore  BJP  member,Mr.  Ramdas, that the Prime Minister, Mr. H. D. Deve  Gowda,  hadsettled contractors' bills relating to the Bagur-Navile tunnel ofthe  Hemavathy  project, worth Rs. 1.19 crores, two  days  beforeresigning  as Chief Minister. He maintained that these bills  hadnot been settled for the last four to five years.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: Bhatnagar prizes announcedfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 14, Col. bFrom Our Special CorrespondentNEW DELHI, Sept. 26.The  Council  of Scientific and Industrial  Research  (CSIR)  hasannounced the winners of the prestigious Shanti Swarup  BhatnagarPrizes for 1996.While Dr. V. S. Sunder of the Institute of Mathematical Sciences,has been selected for the category of mathematical sciences,  Dr.Thanu  Padmanabhan of the Inter-University Centre  for  Astronomyand Astrophysics, Pune, has been chosen for physical sciences.The  prizes for the chemical sciences are to be shared by Dr.  N.Chandrakumar  of the Central Leather Research Institute,  Madras,and  Dr. Mariappan Periasamy of the University of Hyderabad,  andthat for biological sciences by Dr. V. Prakash, Director, CentralFood Technological Research Institute, Mysore, and Dr.  GhanshyamSwarup  of  the  Centre  for  Cellular  and  Molecular   Biology,Hyderabad.The  prize  for  medical sciences is also to be  shared,  by  Dr.Vijayalakshmi  Ravindranath of the National Institute  of  MentalHealth and Neurosciences, Bangalore, and Dr. Shiv Kumar Sarin  ofthe  G.B.  Pant  Hospital, New Delhi, and  that  for  the  earth,atmosphere, ocean and planetary sciences by Dr. S. W. A. Naqvi ofthe National Institute of Oceanography, Goa, and Dr. S. S. Rai ofthe National Geophysical Research Institute, Hyderabad.Dr.  R. A. Mashelkar, CSIR Director General, said no prizes  werebeing  awarded for engineering sciences, as none of  the  entriescould  come  up to the high standards set for the  Shanti  SwarupBhatnagar prize.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HINDU                                     via NewsNetSeptember 27, 1996India: EC looking into BJP complaints against PMfrom THE HINDU, 27 September 1996, Pg. 13, Col. aFrom Our Special CorrespondentNEW DELHI, Sept. 26.The Election Commission is looking into complaints received  fromthe Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) against the Prime Minister,  Mr.H.  D.  Deve Gowda, charging him of violating the model  code  ofconduct  during  his  campaign for  the  Uttar  Pradesh  Assemblyelections.The BJP's complaints relate to Mr. Gowda's reported announcementsthat  his  Government was considering reservation  for  women  inCentral  Government jobs and also for extending  the  reservationbracket to poor among the forward castes. Mr. Gowda had  promisedthese in the course of his election meetings in U.P.The Commission has called for reports from the Cabinet Secretary,according  to  a  spokesman  of  the  Election  Commission.   Thespokesman  added  that  the Election Commission  has  received  areport  from  the  Doordarshan and that a full  report  from  theCabinet  Secretary  was expected by this week end.  The  ElectionCommission will take up the matter for a final verdict soon afterreceiving the report, the spokesman added.The  Commission  had  also taken up a  proposal  from  the  UttarPradesh Government to give extension to one of its officers,  Mr.Surendra  Mohan, who is due to superannuate on September  30.  Itwas  decided  that  such an extension was not in  order  and  thedecision was conveyed to the Government.In  another  instance of the  Commission's  intervention  towardsenforcing  the  model code, the Commission has  conveyed  to  theJammu  and  Kashmir Chief Secretary stating that a  September  23decision to set up a Directorate of Tourism was not in order  andthat such a decision must be left to the elected State Governmentthat is expected to be in place within the coming fortnight.Copyright 1996 The HinduBack to Headline List WT03-B05-5IA087-000634-B038-159http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it76.html 205.156.212.5 19970122024918 text/html 81716HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:47:06 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:13 GMTContent-length: 81529Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it76.html Sample Issue Copyright INDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNet January 10, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES A COALITION GOVERNMENT IS THE LIKELIEST OUTCOME (1593 words) ECONOMY: POWER SHORTAGES TAKE THEIR TOLL (682 words) DABHOL: MAHARASHTRA FINALLY APPROVES ENRON PROJECT (410 words) NEWS NARASIMHA RAO NAMES THE MONTH (114 words) VIOLENCE IS EXPECTED DURING THE ELECTIONS (183 words) TWO STATES DISPUTE THE SHARE OF A SINGLE RIVER (543 words) STOCKMARKET: THE MONETARY BRAKES ARE STILL ON (1325 words) BUSINESS: NEPC GOES INTO BATTLE FOR MODILUFT (1117 words) BUSINESS: HOW RELIANCE LOST ITS HALO WITH INDIAN INVESTORS (1149 words) BUSINESS: ITC'S MISFORTUNE MAY WORK TO BAT'S ADVANTAGE (607 words) TELECOM: BALL NOW IN SUPREME COURT (191 words) TELECOM: REBIDDING FOR THE BASIC CIRCLES IS LUKEWARM (279 words) TELCOM: TWENTY LICENCES AWARDED FOR MOBILE SERVICES (115 words) TELECOM: JOINT VENTURES MAY CHANGE THE MIXTURE (459 words) AVIATION: FOREIGN EQUITY OKAY, BUT NOT NOW (163 words) FOREIGN INVESTMENT: POWER SECTOR ATTRACTS THE MOST MONEY (209 words) FOREIGN INVESTMENT: MULTINATIONALS LAW PLANNED (137 words) POWER: ABB SEEKS STAKE IN POWER COMPANIES (176 words) HOTELS: MS SHOES LOSES HOTEL SITE (188 words) HOTELS: HOTEL LEELAVENTURE PULLS OUT OF HOTEL PROJECT (187 words) MEDIA: MALLYA MAKES MEDIA ENTRY (127 words) BJP ALLIANCES (40 words) HIGH COURT RULES ON ELECTION COMMISSION (56 words) JOSHI ACQUITTED ON VOTES CHARGE (35 words) ELECTION DISPUTE (78 words) SINGH RULES HIMSELF OUT (44 words) GANDHI ASSASSINATION FILE DISAPPEARS (53 words) SECRET ARMS AIR-DROP (66 words) HYUNDAI DECIDES AGAINST JV (43 words) SHIPYARD JV (34 words) RADIO PAGING JV (36 words) FORD JV TO BE LOCATED IN TAMIL NADU (33 words) DAEWOO TO SET UP CABLE UNIT IN INDIA (28 words) HINDUSTAN LEVER TIES UP WITH JOHNSON WAX (35 words) NIPPON DENRO ISPAT TIES UP WITH THAI UNION STEEL (38 words) PIRAMAL TAKES STAKE IN JENKINS BOTSWANA (30 words) MODERN GROUP PLANS TEXTILE TIE UPS (52 words) VOLVO TRUCKS SETS UP BASE IN INDIA (27 words) COCA-COLA PLANS BOTTLING JV (25 words) PROFIT SLOWDOWN FORECAST FOR RELIANCE (46 words) INDIA'S TRADE DEFICIT WIDENS (26 words) GOVERNMENT TO ALLOW FOREIGN MAJORS TO SET UP TRADING HOUSES (45 words) COAL STRIKE THREATENED (29 words) MMTC ASKS GOVERNMENT TO DO AWAY WITH DUTY FOR GOLD IMPORTS (59 words) LIQUIDITY IN INDIAN BOURSES IS THE LOWEST IN EMERGING MARKETS (44 words) SUGAR EXPORTS SET TO INCREASE (41 words) RBI INCREASES FOREX LIMITS (44 words) STOCK ISSUE FLOPS (68 words) FOREX INFLOWS FALL (53 words) FORD TO INVEST IN TWO JOINT VENTURES (47 words) STATE BANK OF INDIA NEGOTIATING TO SET UP INSURANCE SUBSIDIARY (45 words) CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996A COALITION GOVERNMENT IS THE LIKELIEST OUTCOMEIndia has had ten general elections since it became independent in1947. Four of them resulted in a change of government, but noneaffected the basic continuity of its policies. So Indians should beable to take the eleventh election -- likely to be held in April -- intheir stride. But there is an almost palpable nervousness in politicalcircles in New Delhi, for all the available evidence suggests that noparty will win the 273 seats needed to gain a majority in parliament.This election, therefore, is likely to be followed by a period ofhaggling between parties, from which a coalition may eventually emerge.Congress, which has ruled India for all but three and a half of thepast 48 years, is no stranger to electoral setbacks. In 1989, underRajiv Gandhi, it gained only 198 seats. In the last elections itimproved its tally to 219 (though subsequently it managed to increaseits strength). In 1977, after Mrs Indira Gandhi had declared anEmergency and jailed thousands of her opponents, the Congress won only153 seats. But on all these occasions, the party retained its dominanceof Indian politics, a dominance inherited from 75 years of leading thestruggle for independence. When coalitions of other parties formed thegovernment, the public saw them as temporary occupants for theycontained parties who had united only to oust Congress from power.Congress therefore remained the dominant force and continued to set theagenda for the country.This long era is drawing to a close. The reason why the next electionmay bring it to an end lies in India's first-past-the-post system ofvoting which systematically magnifies the proportion of seats gained bythe largest party in relation to its votes and diminishes the share ofseats of smaller parties. Congress has never secured an absolutemajority of the national vote. The closest it came to doing so was in1984 when Mrs Gandhi's assassination generated a huge wave of sympathyfor the party and gave it 49.1 per cent of the vote. On other occasionsthe Congress has received between 36.5 per cent (1977) and 47.8 percent (1957). However, this has usually been sufficient to give theparty a comfortable majority in parliament.The Congress party could easily have lost its dominance as far back asin 1984. In a string of 23 by-elections spread across the country inMay of that year, it received less than 37 per cent of the vote. Butthen Mrs Gandhi was assassinated with the consequences mentioned above.However, by 1989, when elections became due again, the party's vote haddropped to 37.8 per cent once more.Exactly the same thing happened in 1991, when Rajiv Gandhi wasassassinated in the middle of the elections after two-fifths of theconstituencies had gone to the polls. An analysis of the voting beforeand after the event shows that Congress gained around 5.5 per cent ofthe vote out of sympathy. This gave it 219 seats and over 38 per centof the vote. But that wave too has spent itself. Various by-electionsand, less ambiguously, the Congress' loss, between December 1994 andMarch 1995 of state elections in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, andMaharashtra, which had been its strongholds for the past four decades,have shown that even holding 32 per cent of the vote will not be easy.In a proportional representation system 32 per cent of the vote wouldhave given it around 180-185 seats -- or just enough to be sure ofemerging as the dominant partner in a future coalition government. Butunder the first-past-the-post system, even this figures seems beyondits reach. The voting system, which has so far worked in favour of theCongress, is likely to turn against it. The reason is that, while allof Congress's rivals are much smaller than it is, their vote is notspread evenly through the country but is concentrated in small parts ofit. Like inkdots on blotting paper, these local concentrations of thenon-Congress vote have now spread till they cover most of the country.In most areas, therefore, the Congress is in imminent danger of beingreduced to the second position, and in one, UP, which elects one-fifthof the parliament, it has already been pushed down to third place.Should this happen throughout the country, it is even possible that theCongress could end with not even a hundred seats. But such a debacle isunlikely. In two or three states where it fared poorly in 1991, thepolitical pendulum will have swung in its favour and this will give ita majority of the seats. Judging by recent state election results thestates most likely to swing towards Congress are Orissa in the east,Madhya Pradesh in central India, and the tiny Himalayan state ofHimachal Pradesh. The Congress is also expected to make significantgains in Rajasthan and Gujarat.It is also possible that a significant number of people will votedifferently in the national election from the way they did at the statelevel. These are middle class voters who generally tend to make uptheir minds at the last minute, and they may chose stability andcontinued economic reform.If all these factors work in favour of the Congress, it may win around160 seats. With its long term ally, the All India Dravida MunnetraKazhagam, a Tamil nationalist party from Tamil Nadu, the Congress couldcommand a stable 180 seats in parliament. While this would not besufficient for it to rule alone, it would virtually ensure that thenext coalition is led by it.This is not, of course, a view shared by the Congress's main rival, theHindu-revivalist BJP. A recent internal review of its poll prospects bythe party is supposed to have shown that the party expects to win noless than 260 seats (against the 119 that it has at present) and toform the next government with the help of smaller groups that willgravitate to it in quest of power. But this estimate flatters the BJPunduly. More than nine-tenths of its support is concentrated in fivelarge and two mini-states: Maharashtra, Gujarat, Rajasthan, MadhyaPradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi and Himachal Pradesh. This concentrationenabled it to get 23 per cent of the seats in parliament with 21 percent of the vote in 1991, but it will effectively prevent it fromadding many more seats to its tally in 1996. To do so it must breakinto new areas with enough votes to get past the post first. But astudy of past elections shows that while the party has succeeded indeepening its hold, it has not succeeded in broadening it. In 1989,when it put up 86 candidates outside its traditional strongholds, 85 ofthem lost their deposit. The most it can hope for in 1996 is to capturea few more marginal urban constituencies, where the lower middle class,from which it draws most of its support, predominates.Between the two of them therefore the two major contenders are notlikely to capture more than 300 seats in parliament. To whom will theremaining seats go? The short answer is that two states, West Bengaland Kerala, are dominated by the Communists (now the Left Front) whileanother three states, Bihar, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh are likely tostay with the Janata Dal and its electoral ally, the Telugu Desam. Allthese parties are part of a loose coalition called the National Front-Left Front (NF-LF) which succeeded in getting 118 seats in the 1991parliament. There is every likelihood that this coalition, despite itsinchoateness, will profit from the general disenchantment with Congressand the unwillingness of large segment of the population to support theBJP. It could end in a close third place with about 110-120 seats.Since neither the Congress nor the NF-LF is prepared to deal with theBJP, if the former (with the AIADMK) does manage to nose ahead with 160or so seats, a coalition between it and the Left Front, with all orpart of the NF is a likely outcome. Such a government will undoubtedlycarry on the reform policies of the Rao government. But the weakeningof the centre that coalition politics entails, will almost certainlycause a shift in the relative roles of the centre and states. Till nowit has been the centre that has made the running in reform. After thenext election the initiative will pass to the states, and the centrewill be left to hold the ring. This could mean that its role will be nomore than to pass enabling legislation that facilitates the states'search for private capital to finance its projects.However, if the Congress collapses and fails to get more than a hundredseats, the lead would pass to the BJP. Very likely the Congress wouldsplit and a part of it would join the BJP in its quest for a share ofpower. India would then enter, abruptly, a new era of two-partypolitics. For economic reforms this would be a bad outcome, for the BJPis a xenophobic party. While its top leaders say they welcome foreigninvestment in hi-tech and infrastructure areas, they have still torealise that foreign investors have requirements of their own, and thatcutting off Kentucky Fried Chicken could also cut off IBM and Sony.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ECONOMY:  POWER SHORTAGES TAKE THEIR TOLLIn recent weeks, both the finance minister, Dr Manmohan Singh, and thecommerce minister, Mr P.Chidambaram, have stressed repeatedly that thefundamentals of the economy are strong and there is no cause for worryabout its future. They are both right and wrong. The fundamentals arestrong: the gross domestic product grew by 6 per cent in 1994-95; therate of inflation has fallen sharply from over 10 per cent recorded atthe beginning of the year to below 7 per cent; the growth of exportshas been strong, and the trade deficit this year is not likely toexceed $4.5bn (1.3 per cent of GDP).But the strong fundamentals today are no guarantee that they willremain so in the coming months. A close look at the most recentstatistics suggests that the economy is weakening and could weakenfurther. Frequent revisions of the official statistics make allestimates of growth somewhat tentative, but the growth in industrialproduction, which was nearly 13 per cent in the first quarter of thisyear, fell to 8.6 per cent in July. Preliminary estimates, based onfigures for around half of all industry suggest that there have beenfurther falls during August and September. In the last of these monthsthe index for 24 industry groups seems to have risen by a bare 4 percent.Exports have been growing at 24.5 per cent in the first half of 1995-96, but a closer look at the month-by-month data shows that this toohas been declining -- from 33 per cent in July to 20 and 19 per cent inAugust and September, and 12 per cent in October. Fortunately, importstoo have declined, and even more sharply, so that the trade deficit canbe financed.Inflation has come down, partly as a result of tight monetary policy,and partly because of the almost total halt of foreign portfolioinvestment and other capital inflows. From an average of $1bn a monthbetween October 1993 and November 1994, these fell to an average of$100m in January to October 1995, and to a mere $39m in November. Therehas been a corresponding fall in the growth of money supply in theeconomy. By contrast the government's spending remains buoyant. Arecent study by the National Institute for Public Finance and Policyhas estimated that instead of coming down to 5.5 per cent of GDP thisyear, the centre's fiscal deficit could climb to 6.9 per cent againstthe 6.7 per cent recorded last year. This is probably a far toopessimistic a forecast, but there is no doubt that the high fiscaldeficit remains a source of future inflation.The reasons for the slowdown, both in industrial growth and exports,are not difficult to fathom. Thanks to a less than optimal south-west,and a poor north-east monsoon, the country is now in the grip of asevere power crisis. The output of hydroelectric power slumped by 19per cent in July to September over the same period of 1994. The poornorth-east monsoon ensures that this shortage will worsen in the comingmonths. There are power shortages everywhere, but the southern andwestern states in particular are reeling under the severest power cutsin almost a decade. These cuts have directly affected manufacturingindustries, and that in turn has begun to affect exports.Apart from this, the combination of a lax fiscal policy and a tightmonetary policy has raised interest rates to very high levels. This ishelping to slow down the economy. Another factor is the anxiety amonginvestors, both Indian and foreign, over the political outlook. Theworry is not just the normal one that precedes a general election, buthas to do with the probability that this election may bring into powera government that may not have the strength to complete the reformprogramme. This is causing some loss of confidence, whose symptoms arethe fall in the value of the rupee, the inability of the stockmarket torecover and feverish speculation in real estate.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996DABHOL:  MAHARASHTRA FINALLY APPROVES ENRON PROJECTAfter months of muscle flexing and dithering the Maharashtra governmenthas finally cleared Enron's power project at Dabhol. At the same timethe state government also cleared two other power projects in thestate, Reliance's 410 MW gas based plant at Patalganga and the NipponDenro Ispat-led consortium's 1082 MW coal-based plant at Bhadrawati.The three projects will add a total of nearly 5,000 MW of installedpower generating capacity in the state.While the clearance of the Dabhol project has ostensibly led to lowercapital costs reflected in a lower cost per unit of electricity, theMaharashtra chief minister Manohar Joshi did not release all thedetails of the renotiated deal. Under the revised terms offered by thegovernment and accepted in principle by Enron, the 695 MW first phaseand the 1390 MW second phase have been combined and total cost reducedby Rs10.56bn to Rs80.04bn. Enron has also been permitted to hive offits Rs15.8bn regassification plant into a separate company, a stepwhose implications are not yet clear.The plant will now be operated on naptha instead on LNG and the cost ofpower has been reduced from around Rs2.10 per kWh for the first phaseto Rs1.86 per kWh for both the phases. The annual escalation of around4 per cent has also been disallowed and Enron will supply power at thesame dollar rate for 17 years. However, costs have been calculated atRs32 to the dollar while the rupee is currently trading at over Rs35 tothe dollar and may decline further.In another important decision the Maharashtra State Electricity Boardwill now hold 30 per cent of the total equity in Enron's Dabhol projectfor Rs5.78bn. Equipment for the second phase will now not necessarilybe bought from Enron's partners General Electric and Bechtel but willbe on open tender for which Indian companies can also bid.Manohar Joshi claimed a savings of Rs250bn for the state over thelifespan of the project but in the absence of details this is difficultto verify. While welcoming the decision, Kenneth Lay, CEO of EnronCorporation, said, "We are willing to consider recommendations thatprovide for a mutually satisfactory project".The ruling Shiv Sena-Bharatiya Janata Party coalition in Maharashtrawill try to present the deal it has secured from Enron as a victory,but it is no secret that a wing of the BJP is unhappy about theoutcome.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NARASIMHA RAO NAMES THE MONTHThe elections to the Lok Sabha (the lower house of parliament) will bein April. Prime minister P.V. Narasimha Rao stated this on January 6,but declined to specify the dates. He also said that parliament willmeet once again in February to approve a vote-on-account for the year,the regular Union budget being postponed until after a new governmentsettles in. The dates for the elections are fixed by the electioncommission and the government in consultation with each other. Earlier,the election commission had announced that the elections would be heldin either February or April, the month of March being unsuitablebecause it coincides with the sowing season and universityexaminations.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996VIOLENCE IS EXPECTED DURING THE ELECTIONSThe airdropping of arms into a country is a worrisome development inthe best of times. When it comes just before a general election, thereis even greater cause for alarm. The discovery last month that smallarms, including several hundred AK47 rifles, were clandestinely droppednear an abandoned airfield at Purulia in West Bengal by foreignmercenaries has added a new element of uncertainty to the polls. Thoughthere is no clear indication so far whom the arms were meant for,speculation has centred around a Maoist faction in Bihar, aparamilitary Hindu religious organisation, or an attempt by a foreigncountry to instigate violence during the elections.Every successive election since the 1970s has witnessed increasingviolence in the form of intimidating voters or "capturing" pollingbooths by musclemen to stuff ballot boxes. In the past two years,elections have been better conducted because of the reforming zeal ofchief election commissioner T.N. Seshan. Now, the near certainty of ahung parliament may encourage more violence. The mysterious arms dropat Purulia has added a nasty edge to that possibility.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996TWO STATES DISPUTE THE SHARE OF A SINGLE RIVERIn the past the Indian subcontinent has witnessed wars over the use ofriver waters. More recently, though India has had disputes over thesharing of river waters with three of it neighbours -- Pakistan, Nepaland Bangladesh -- they have either been satisfactorily resolved or admitof a possible solution. Within the country, the sharing of river watershas led to conflict between neighbouring states through which a riverpasses. When conflicting positions could not be resolved by theconcerned states, a tribunal has been set up to adjudicate and awardthe sharing of waters.Of the five such cases referred to tribunals, four (Narmada, Krishnaand Godavari in the Deccan, and Ravi and Beas in the north) have beensorted out. The fifth, the sharing of the waters of the Cauvery, hasonce again become a bone of contention between Karnataka and TamilNadu, the two states which depend most heavily on its waters. TheCauvery is one of the most intensively used rivers in the world withsome 92 per cent of its waters being used for irrigation by a system ofdams and canals. The roots of the century-old dispute lie in the factthat, while Tamil Nadu has used most of the waters, Karnataka feels theirrigation potential in the state was not allowed to be properlydeveloped by the British.Karnataka wants a greater share of the waters and has been building upits irrigation potential which has led to a reduction in the existingsupply to Tamil Nadu. The matter is so linked to the prosperity andeven survival of farmers in the two states that neither can see theother's point of view. Coming as it does before the general election,there were fears that passions may be aroused on both sides leading tostreet violence as happened in 1991.Karnataka, through which the upper reaches of the river and itstributaries pass, was asked by the Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal torelease 205 tmc ft (thousand million cubic feet) of water to Tamil Naduannually but disputed this on every count. This year matters got worsesince the north-east monsoon (October to January) which normally givesover half the annual rain to Tamil Nadu, failed. Over 1.3 million acresof paddy were in danger of being lost. Tamil Nadu approached theSupreme Court to order Karnataka to release 11 tmc ft of waterimmediately to save the crop. The court passed on the buck to primeminister P.V. Narasimha Rao asking him to ask the states to come to asettlement, failing which he should do what he thought was best.Rao appointed a committee of experts and decided that Karnataka mustrelease 6 tmc ft at once. Karnataka chief minister Deve Gowda agreedreluctantly but there was an immediate backlash of anger in the state.Tempers also ran high in Tamil Nadu and Rao was put in the stickyposition of mediating between two warring sides on the eve of animportant general election. If violence had broken out the Congressparty's prospects would have been affected in both states. With tempersnow having cooled, Rao can have the satisfaction of having made thebest of a bad job.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996STOCKMARKET:  THE MONETARY BRAKES ARE STILL ONIn terms of value, Indian shares are currently attractive. For the long-term investor, the market should be bought. But in the short-term thereare some impediments to the start of a bull market. For one thing,money is very tight. This is increasingly threatening to stifleeconomic growth. For another, the manner in which stockmarket reformsare being conducted does not inspire confidence in investors.Money is tight because the government has taken the virtuous path ofborrowing to finance its deficit instead of monetising it as it used todo. This has kept inflation under check, but it is squeezing theprivate sector. Many companies are finding it difficult to get money,even at high cost. Financially sound companies are having to payinterest rates at over 21 per cent. Some of them had raised moneythrough equity issues in India and abroad when their shares were indemand; foolishly, many of them invested the proceeds in equities orreal estate. Companies are therefore short of money and many projectsare getting delayed. Even where they had received commitments to borrowfunds from domestic financial institutions (DFIs), they are finding thegoing tough. DFIs themselves are starved for funds and are delayingdisbursements of loans.The DFIs are scrambling to raise money primarily through the debtroute. ICICI, for example, managed to raise about Rs7bn recently,through a five year bond, but had to pay a coupon rate of 16 per centdespite the instrument being rated triple-A. That amount would sufficefor less than two months of its loan sanctions, after which it willneed to float another issue. All other DFIs are simultaneously planningissues and the total works out at Rs50bn. The main subscribers areprovident funds, but their additional annual inflow is only Rs6bn.The Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) hasissued a warning that unless the monetary situation is eased, theeconomy will slow down. Recently the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) hashelped a little by cutting CRR, in effect pumping some Rs25bn into thesystem.The second worry is the slow pace of stockmarket reforms. All thesystemic problems relating to settlement and delivery which plague theIndian capital market system have their root in the absence of acentral depository. The trading systems have been largely modernised,with the introduction of screen-based trading. However, post settlementdelays in registration of shares deter foreign investment. In a reportby James Capel entitled "Emerging markets investment strategies -- Q41995", the Indian market is given neutral weightage, despite scoringhigh on valuation, primarily because of poor liquidity of shares.Annual traded volume (on the assumption of 250 days trading) representsonly 8 per cent of market capitalisation. Compare that with the leader,Taiwan, which stands at 194 per cent, or South Korea (59 per cent).The government had, through an ordinance, introduced legislation pavingthe way for a central depository. Unfortunately, the bill never gotpassed in the upper house of parliament. It is to be re-promulgated. Ifit is not approved before the current parliament is dissolved, it willmean a six month wait.Sebi, the regulatory body, seems incapable of enforcing discipline. Itrecently suspended the largest merchant banker, SBI Capital Markets,for its role as lead manager to the controversial MS Shoes issue -- itdid not prevent misleading TV advertisements from appearing. SBICapital Markets has refused to accept Sebi's verdict and promises toappeal, right up to the Supreme Court if necessary. It knows thatjudicial delays make a mockery of any disciplinary action.In another episode, Sebi declared itself unable to prevent anothermerchant banker, which had defaulted on an underwriting commitment,from making a public issue. Sebi is also unable to take quick actionagainst companies consistently delaying transfer of shares. Though ithas instituted legal proceedings against five companies, the Indianlegal system is not capable of delivering justice quickly.As long as the capital market system is unable to cope with investmentneeds of millions of individual investors, it is inevitable that themutual fund industry will grow. The industry had recently beenrestricted to the public sector, mainly the banks and the UTI. Absenceof competition has bred complacency, and returns have been inadequate.Now Sebi has issued guidelines for the mutual fund industry. They spellout things such as the basis for computation of net asset values. Moreimportantly, they seek to link fees payable to asset managementcompanies to the performance of the funds. It is imperative that themutual fund industry grows in order to fill the vacuum left by thereduced role of the UTI.The UTI has been under a cloud recently. In September 1994, it hadbought shares of Reliance Industries as a price of Rs385 per share, ina private placement deal worth Rs7bn. The share now quotes at aroundRs200, entailing not only a sizeable monetary loss for UTI, but moreimportantly, a loss of investor confidence. More recently, it has beenembroiled in the Reliance switching of shares controversy, although ithas had the shares replaced subsequently.UTI's future is important for the stockmarket because it controls fundstotalling some Rs650bn. Its largest scheme, the US '64 scheme, is anopen ended one, in which it is largely exposed to the corporate sector.If, because of the tight money position faced by the companies, theymake redemption calls en masse, the resultant selling by UTI would hurtthe equity market.On a positive note, the figures for the seven months to October reveala healthy trend in many sectors where the market is well represented.Production of cement is up 9.7 per cent, of saleable steel 10.3 percent, and the auto sector is doing well with a 23.6 per cent increasein production of cars and 32.3 per cent in commercial vehicles.The boom in the auto sector is riding on the back of easier creditavailability from auto finance companies. Kotak Mahindra Finance (KMFL)has cut a good deal with Ford Motor Company, with which it has enteredinto two separate joint ventures. One will be to finance vehicles whichFord will produce in India. The equity will be held by Ford (55 percent), KMFL (35 per cent) and Mahindra and Mahindra (10 per cent),Ford's partner.The more interesting deal is the other JV, in which KMFL will hive offits existing (non-Ford) car financing business. In this, Ford will holda 40 per cent stake, bringing in Rs1.4bn, whilst KMFL will hold thebalance, bringing in Rs6m. Over the next eight years, Ford willincrease its commitment to Rs5bn, as will KMFL proportionately, leavingthe ratio the same. The deal makes KMFL a good share to pick up. KMFLwill also receive Rs4bn as royalty for Ford over the next ten years.In other corporate developments of interest, Yogi Deveshwar has takenover as Chairman of ITC, India's largest tobacco company, despite theobjections of BAT, the largest single holder with a 31 per cent stake.Devashwar's appointment was made possible with the backing ofgovernment-controlled financial institutions, holding 37 per cent. Hehas landed into a hot seat. At the start of the new year, thegovernment has re-opened an excise dispute and has claimed Rs8bn aspenalty for past excise defaults. The share price dipped from Rs242 toRs229 on release of the news, but quickly firmed up to end thefortnight at Rs233, on reports that BAT had set aside $60m to acquirean additional 6 per cent stake in the company (see page 15).The BSE is to reintroduce a forward trading mechanism from January 15.The market is hoping that this will bring back investors. But withinterest rates at such high level, forward trading will be expensive.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BUSINESS:  NEPC GOES INTO BATTLE FOR MODILUFTFive years ago, the Madras-based NEPC group was practically unknown. Itwas a new player in a new arena -- wind energy. And though the Khemkas,who own the group, were thinking big even then, most corporateobservers were prone to dismiss their grand plans as just so much wind.No longer. Last month, NEPC made an open offer for the Rs4bn (expected1995-96 turnover) ModiLuft. With the company's promoter S.K. Modi notonly marshalling his defences but also taking the battle to theopposition camp by threatening a suit claiming Rs25bn in damages, thisis a battle that has placed the Khemkas firmly on the front pages ofthe financial press.They have been there before. NEPC already has a successful airline --NEPC Airlines -- a division of flagship NEPC-Micon. Earlier last year,the company engineered a successful takeover of Damania Airways.Initially billed as a management takeover, the Khemkas were laterforced to make an open offer to ordinary Damania shareholders by theSecurities & Exchange Board of India (Sebi). Along the way, NEPC alsopicked up the Damania family holding in the company.With the acquisition of Damania, the NEPC-Damania combine became thelargest private sector operator in the aviation sector. The ModiLuftdeal, if it comes through, should make this position unassailable. Theonly big rival in the business -- East West -- is in no position to givechase.  The company is still recovering from the shock of what isalleged to be a gangland killing. Recently, its CEO, T. Wahid was shotdead on the streets of Bombay while returning from work.But ModiLuft is not going to fall in the Khemkas' bag without a battle.The Khemkas had initially offered to take over 47.32 per cent ofModiLuft's equity at a price of Rs29 per share. Curiously, the offerwas for exactly 47.32 per cent; the Khemkas weren't interested in alesser stake. Sebi is now looking into the legality of the offer whichS.K. Modi says is against the takeover code.Besides, says Modi, he and his family control 60 per cent of ModiLuft'sequity. So the question of the Khemkas picking up 47 per cent does notarise. NEPC chief Ravi Prakash Khemka, on the other hand, disputesModi's ownership figures. He claims to have done his homework and the47.32 per cent figure has been carefully calculated: he is aware of theownership pattern and is confident of getting that much. According toSebi's norms, ModiLuft will have to reveal its shareholders list by theend of January and the truth will out only then.But some of the Khemka calculations have already gone awry. TheModiLuft shares have spiralled past Rs29 (they were much lower when theoffer was announced) and the Khemkas are planning to raise their bid toRs35. This will mean an additional Rs180m to pick up the stake; at Rs29the deal would have cost Rs870m. Khemka had initially suggested thatsome large holders (including some foreign institutional investors)were going to unload their holdings in his favour. But that does notseem to be working out. Besides, NEPC has had its share of abortivetakeovers, particularly in the aviation arena. Last year, the promotersof Sahara, a rival private airline, accused the Khemkas of slantingtakeover stories in the press. The Khemkas, however, explained that itwas only some sharing of facilities that was being discussed and themedia had put two and two together to make five. Later there was talkof NEPC taking over two regional airlines -- UP Air and Gujarat Airways.But these apparently didn't go through because of a change in the stategovernment.But this time the Khemkas seem confident. Some critics, Modi amongstthem, suggest that the open offer is nothing more than a ploy designedprincipally to scupper ModiLuft's expansion plans. ModiLuft has offeredits collaborator Lufthansa a 40 per cent stake and Khemka had sentfeelers to Modi that this holding be offered to NEPC instead. Theswadeshi card has also been dragged out in this connection; note thatthe Singapore Airlines-Tata joint venture has proved stillborn becausethere are many who feel that foreign airlines should not be givensignificant holdings in the Indian aviation sector. Now it will be allthe more difficult for the government to approve Lufthansa's taking upa 40 per cent stake in ModiLuft. Which means, in sum, that the Khemkashave hamstrung what could potentially have been a major competitor.But if Modi does decide to sell, do the Khemkas have the wherewithal tobuy him out? On the face of it, yes. The NEPC group is extremely cashrich. The current value of the shares held by the Khemka family ingroup companies is over Rs3bn and finding the Rs1bn or so required tobuy 47 per cent of ModiLuft should not be a major problem. Ravi PrakashKhemka is, in fact, planning to fund the acquisition with his personalmoney without taking recourse to his group companies.But the group companies can well put up the funds if necessary. Theyare all in fine fettle. NEPC-Micon (which has a tie-up with Micon ofDenmark) is a leading producer of electricity from windpower with amarketshare of 80 per cent. NEPC Agro Foods, which was promoted in1991, has established its Trupti brandname which is used for a widerange of products from mineral water to basmati rice, packaged wheatflour and spices. The group also has a presence in textiles with NEPCTextiles (a textile unit in Coimbatore taken over in 1993) and paperwith NEPC Paper & Board (a paper mill in Muzzafarnagar, Uttar Pradesh,acquired in 1994). And it is now entering the cement business byacquiring the "sick" South India Cement in Karnataka at a cost ofRs145m. The group has also gone into media with its own satellitechannel.The Doubting Thomases, however, see in the Khemka saga manysimilarities with that of takeover tycoon P. Rajarathinam who hasfallen upon hard times, with creditors baying for his blood and hisempire under siege. Both came out of the blue, both are known to beclose to a particular Tamil Nadu politician and both have a habit ofventuring into unrelated takeovers. Khemka has another cross to bear:his younger brother Sashi Prakash has accused him of violating theForeign Exchange Regulation Act, forging share certificates and muchmore. As is evident from Manu Chhabria's spat with his brother Kishore,family squabbles often result in bringing high fliers down to earth.Will Ravi Prakash Khemka prove the exception?Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BUSINESS:  HOW RELIANCE LOST ITS HALO WITH INDIAN INVESTORSAttack is not always the best form of defence. Reliance Industries Ltd(RIL), which took umbrage at the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) suspendingits scrip for three days for a minor peccadillo, should attest to thatby now. By threatening to delist itself from the BSE and move to theNational Stock Exchange (NSE) and by sending a legal notice to afinancial daily investigating the matter seeking damages of Rs20bn, RILensured just the reverse of what it wanted.RIL is still listed on the BSE. But the company and its suspect dealsare being investigated by the Securities & Exchange Board of India(Sebi), the department of company affairs (DCA), the income-taxdepartment and the BSE. The press has now passed the baton to theinvestigative authorities, so there are no daily exposes. But RILclearly has its back to the wall. Opposition MPs have demanded thearrest of Dhirubhai Ambani; banks, financial institutions and insurancecompanies have been asked by the government to verify their portfolios(though RIL has not been named, this instruction is clearly targeted atthe company); and the initial sympathy for the Ambanis has beenreplaced by growing concern, confusion and disbelief at theirmanoeuvres. A public familiar only with ordinary equity and preferenceshares has learned some new categories. Consider:Duplicate shares: This is where it all started. One Rajul Vasa,Dhirubhai Ambani's physiotherapist, wrote to the company claiming thatshe had lost 26,650 RIL shares. She was issued duplicate shares whichshe proceeded to sell. Earlier, however, she had sold her originalshares, and at the time when the duplicates were being issued, thesewere with RIL's registrars -- Reliance Consultancy Services (RCS).Reliance made good the loss of Rs10.6m and thought it was a closedchapter. The BSE, however, decided to suspend it on this ground. RIL'sexplanation is that it followed all the norms in the issue of duplicateshares and the fact that the original shares were with RCS was notdetected because there was no system of cross-checking. There are norules or guidelines on this issue, says RIL.Switched shares: While the Rajul Vasa issue was hogging headlines, camethe revelation that Unit Trust of India (UTI), which had sent 2.4million RIL shares to RCS in 1991 for transfer, had got back 870,000shares which were not part of the lot it had sent. These switchedshares had been frozen by the special court looking into the securitiesscam. UTI took up the matter with RCS and the shares were replaced.It later emerged that switching was a common practice as far as RIL wasconcerned. By last count, more than 7 million shares have beenswitched. Involved are not just UTI alone, but Peerless and some banks.The motive behind the switching has still not been ascertained. RILsays all companies do it but other business houses disagree. The Sebi-DCA probe is now investigating this angle.Some feel that UTI and other bulk purchasers were used as a dumpingground for "tainted" shares (shares involved in the 1992 securitiesscandal). No transactions were allowed in such shares by the specialcourt, but UTI and other institutions would be unlikely to try and sellthem. This explanation has subsequently been replaced by another. Ithas been conclusively proved that Reliance investment companies andtrading associates were involved in all these transactions. The theoryis that Reliance trading companies sold large lots of shares but didnot have actual scrips in their possession (this is a normal practice).When they had to make delivery, they "borrowed" shares from Relianceinvestment companies. When these shares were sent to RCS, the originalsellers (the trading companies) replaced them with other shares whichthey had acquired in the meantime.How does this help? The Reliance investment companies hold shares whichthey bought a long time ago, some even at par value. If these shareswere sold, capital gains tax would have to be paid on the pricedifferential, which would work out to a huge amount. So these were usedfor delivery purposes and the shares actually sold were picked up fromthe markets at higher rates. The capital gains tax was thus nominal. Isthis legal income-tax avoidance or illegal evasion? That will probablybe a matter for the courts to decide.Fake shares: There are several strands to this. Bharatiya Janata Party(BJP) leader Jaswant Singh has written to the finance minister pointingout that two sets of RIL share certificates held by Syndicate Bank havethe same distinctive numbers but different certificate numbers. Thesewere among a lot of RIL shares sold by Syndicate Bank through astockbroking firm in 1989. The firm returned the certificates to thebank as these would be treated as bad delivery in the market. Accordingto government sources, it is not possible for two sets of certificatesto have the same distinctive numbers. The inevitable conclusion: one isa fake. RIL says that its records do not tally with those in thecertificates in the name of Syndicate Bank.There are also several RIL share certificates bearing distinctivenumbers that go beyond the official list of distinctive numbers of thepaid-up capital of the company. This gave rise to the suspicion thatthe company had issued more shares than its paid-up equity capital. RILhas an explanation for this, but not everyone is convinced.Apart from the shares, several other issues concerning Reliance arecreating controversy. An investigation is on into the possible riggingof the share prices of Reliance Polypropylene Ltd (RPPL) and ReliancePolyethylene Ltd (RPEL) before their merger with RIL. The big buyersprior to the merger were companies close to Reliance. Among the namesalso figures Rajul Vasa. Inevitably, Reliance has also got sucked intothe major controversy of the day -- the telecom tenders. Thecontroversial Himachal Futuristic Communications Ltd (HFCL) has beendiscovered to be another major buyer of RPPL/RPEL shares. HFCL sourcessay their purchases weren't significant and they actually made a losson the deal. True, it wasn't significant as far as the RPPL/RPEL equitygoes. But the investment of Rs167m was a big sum for a small company.Inevitably, opposition MPs have alleged that HFCL is only a front forReliance.Most of these charges will not hold water. But some action is bound tobe taken. RCF's licence may well be suspended and the tradingassociates and investment companies in the Reliance stable could beslapped with an income-tax notice. The real damage, however, is in oneof perceptions. Reliance, once the darling of the stockmarkets, is nowbeing looked upon with suspicion. Foreign investors are also aghastthat the system permits such machinations. For the Ambanis, BSE-bashinghas proved more damaging than they could ever have expected.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BUSINESS:  ITC'S MISFORTUNE MAY WORK TO BAT'S ADVANTAGEOn January 1, Yogi Deveshwar took over as chairman of ITC. He won thepost, despite opposition from principal shareholder BAT Industries,because of government support which manifested itself through thefinancial institutions. On January 2, it was another arm of thegovernment which gave him a New Year's gift. The commissioner ofcentral excise, Delhi, passed an order against the company claimingRs7,990m as duty due from ITC and its contract manufacturers. Inaddition, the commissioner imposed penalties on the company and six ofits erstwhile directors taking the total excise claim to over Rs8,700m.ITC will be going to the Customs, Excise and Gold Appellate Tribunal(Cegat) to appeal against the order, but in many ways the die seemscast. The case is actually of ancient vintage; the excise claims relateto the period between March 1, 1983 and February 28, 1987. Besides,according to excise officials, ITC has already moved both the Calcuttahigh court and the Supreme Court and lost.The issue, though it has done the rounds of the courts and governmentdepartments for several years now, is actually very simple. Exciseofficials claim that ITC cut its dealer and retailer margins andprinted a lower price on its cigarette packets. It paid excise on thisprinted price. The retailers, however, sold the packets to consumers ata higher rate to make up their margins. This was done with the fullknowledge of the company. The authorities feel that ITC should havepaid excise on this higher price. It is also claimed that the printedprice was fixed in such a way that the consumers would inevitably haveto pay more. For instance, the printed price on a ten-pack of the best-selling Wills Filter is today Rs11.75. But they are sold at Rs12 at alloutlets; nobody returns the loose change.Observers feel that the best ITC can hope for now is a reduction in theamount it has to pay. The payment could also be staggered. A precedenthas been set in the case of another cigarette manufacturer -- GodfreyPhillips India -- which faced similar excise claims and fines of Rs570m.In December, Cegat issued a partial stay of the excise order but askedthe company to pay around one-fourth the amount within three months. Ifthe same is done in ITC's case, the company will have to find Rs2bnquickly. Where is the money going to come from? ITC could sell some itsinvestments in sister companies and finance the rest from its profits.But this would mean weakening its hold on these companies and -- this isworse -- displeasing shareholders who may have to go without dividendsfor a couple of years.The other solution is to go hat in hand to BAT. But the UK parent willobviously demand its pound of flesh -- a greater representation on theboard, a greater say in the management and even an increase in equityto 51 per cent. According to the Economic Times, India's leadingfinancial daily, BAT has already begun to buy ITC shares in the marketand has earmarked $60m for this purpose. That strategy may not make toomuch sense, as control over ITC is not really a function of BAT'sholding; it depends on the stand the financial institutions take. Othernewspaper reports say that the ITC brass is now prepared to eat humblepie; it has given up plans to go into power and other sectors and willtoe the BAT line. The excise axe may cost ITC dear but BAT, for one,has some reason to cheer.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996TELECOM:  BALL NOW IN SUPREME COURTThe telecom licensing issue saw the proceedings at the winter sessionof parliament come to a total standstill as opposition members demandedan investigation into the "biggest scam of the times". Apart frompassing some vital bills (such as the approval of President's rule inUttar Pradesh), no work could be done during the entire session.The ball is now with the Supreme Court which has ordered a temporarystay on basic telecom licences. This means that the tenders for thefive circles already finalised have also been put on hold. However, thecourt allowed the government to go ahead with the retendering processfor the 13 other circles. The granting of contracts will only takeplace after the final hearing which is scheduled for January 9.The main argument of the petitioners in the case before the SupremeCourt is that public sector units have been discriminated against bynot allowing them to participate in the bidding, that the rules havebeen loaded in favour of the multinationals and the private sector, andthat some private parties -- principally Himachal FuturisticCommunications -- have been given undue advantages.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996TELECOM:  REBIDDING FOR THE BASIC CIRCLES IS LUKEWARMThe re-bidding for the 13 basic circles has received an extremely low-key response. Only five circles were bid for with six companiesparticipating in the process. In the first round, a total of 16companies participated with 81 bids being received for the 20 basiccircles on offer. The reason for the poor response is the uncertaintyover the entire issue. Companies are unwilling to commit themselvesbefore the Supreme Court judgement is delivered. Secondly, severalopposition parties have declared that they will cancel the entiretendering process if they come to power after the next elections andcompanies are not prepared to risk another Enron-type situation.Besides, many contend that the reserve prices set by the telecomdepartment are too high to leave room for profits.Of the circles thrown open for re-tendering, only Punjab attracted twobids. Essar-Bell Atlantic was the highest with a quote of Rs14,251m(levy quoted in terms of net present value). Bharti-STET bid Rs13,680m.The reserve price was Rs12,700m. The bidders in the other four circleswere Tata-Bell Canada Rs13,127m (Andhra Pradesh; reserve priceRs12,500m); RPG-NTT Rs36,051m (Tamil Nadu; Rs25,500m); Reliance-NynexRs10,537m (Gujarat; Rs10,500m); and Usha-Moscow Telecom Rs1,400.6m(Bihar; Rs1,400m).Several majors such as AT&T-Birla, which had bid for four circles lasttime, and US West-BPL, which had bid for five circles, stayed out ofthe bidding in this round. Also significant is the fact that the bidsare much lower than what Himachal Futuristic Communication Ltd hadquoted before it had to give up the circles because of the cap imposed.With several circles yet to be taken up, there is likely to be anotherround of bidding soon.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996TELCOM:  TWENTY LICENCES AWARDED FOR MOBILE SERVICESDespite the ongoing controversy and the opposition demand that theentire telecom privatisation process be put on hold until the SupremeCourt ruling, the government has awarded 20 licences to seven companiesfor operating cellular mobile telephone services. The licences, awardedon December 12, are for JT Mobile-Telia, Sweden (Andhra Pradesh andPunjab); Birla Communications-AT&T, US (Gujarat and Maharashtra);Escotel-First Pacific, Hong Kong (Uttar Pradesh west, Haryana andKerala), Koshika Telecom-Philipino Telecom, the Philippines (UttarPradesh west, Uttar Pradesh east, Orissa and Bihar); CellularCommunications-Airtouch, US (Tamil Nadu); Reliance Telecom-Nynex, US(Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Orissa, Bihar, North-east, Assam andHimachal Pradesh); and Bharti Telenet-STET, Italy (Himachal Pradesh).The other licences will be awarded shortly.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996TELECOM:  JOINT VENTURES MAY CHANGE THE MIXTUREIn another major change of norms, the department of telecommunications(DoT) is likely to allow consortia which have won licences to operatecellular mobile services in the country to change their composition.This has become necessary because of both the continuing confusion overthe award of licences and the fact that, despite all this, theprospects for business seem better. While those disenchanted with thechaos want to pull out others want to raise their stakes in the jointventures. This is being opposed by their Indian partners. Take the caseof Koshika Telecom which has been granted licences to operate cellularservices in four circles -- Uttar Pradesh (east), Uttar Pradesh (west),Orissa and Bihar. Koshika is a joint venture between Usha (India) andPhilipino Telephone Corporation, the largest cellular operator in thePhilippines. Usha (India) has dragged Philipino Telephone to Delhi highcourt alleging that the company is threatening to pull out unless it isallowed to hike its stake to 34 per cent. According to DoTstipulations, the foreign partner cannot dilute its holding to below 10per cent in the first three years. Thus, if Philipino does pull out,the Koshika licences will become invalid. While the Delhi high courthas restrained Philipino Telecom from reneging on the deal, it isrecognised that Indian courts may not be able to do much if the foreignpartner is indeed bent on pulling out. DoT may thus have to agree tothe substitution of some other foreign partner.According to Usha (India), Philipino Telephone has realised late in theday that the prospects in the Indian telecom sector are indeed verybright. Usha's counsel told the court that the foreign company is nowarm-twisting its Indian partner to get both a higher stake and agreater say in the management. Another successful bidder ModicomNetwork Private Ltd, which has won the circles of Punjab and Karnataka,has approached the government with an application that the 26 per centstake of its original partner -- Vanguard of the US -- be transferred toAustralian giant Telstra International. Telstra is already operatingcellular services in Calcutta (which was awarded much earlier) withB.K. Modi of Modicom, so it sees obvious synergies in a tie-up forPunjab and Karnataka. Incidentally, Telstra had tied up with Spic tobid for the current round of celular circles but its estimates were wayout of line. In Karnataka, Telstra-Spic bid Rs2,090m while winnerModicom quoted a figure of Rs13,930m.A change in partner is also on the cards in the Hinduja-HCL-SingaporeTelecom combine with Singapore Telecom expressing its desire to pullout. Both the Hindujas and Modicom desperately need another foreignpartner because of the experience requirements DoT has insisted on.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996AVIATION:  FOREIGN EQUITY OKAY, BUT NOT NOWThe government has decided in principle to allow up to 40 per centforeign equity holding in domestic airlines. But, in a curious rider,it will not be giving any such blanket permission until themodernisation programme for the aviation sector is completed. Theprogramme includes extension of runways, building of terminals andmodernisation of airports. As this is a subjective issue it means, ineffect, that the decision on foreign equity participation has beenpostponed indefinitely. However, according to the civil aviation andtourism ministry, approvals could still be given on a case-to-casebasis as has been done for Jet Airways. Among the applications whichhave queued up at the civil aviation ministry's door are those fromIndotik (of the Ravi Tikkoo group) and the Tata-Singapore Airlinesproposal. The government would also have had to decide on the proposalby ModiLuft to allow Lufthansa to take a 40 per cent stake, but theforeign carrier is apparently not interested at the moment.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996FOREIGN INVESTMENT:  POWER SECTOR ATTRACTS THE MOST MONEYThe infrastructure sector has been attracting the maximum foreigndirect investment (FDI) in the reform era. According to available data,the Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) approved a total FDI ofRs397bn in the period August 1991 to October 1995. Of this the powersector accounted for the lion's share with Rs60bn (15.11 per cent). Oilrefineries attracted Rs40bn. The total fuel sector (which includespower and oil refineries) added up to 27.01 per cent. The other bigchunk of FDI went for the telecommunications sector with a totalinvestment of Rs32.39bn (8.14 per cent). Of this, cellular mobiletelephone services accounted for Rs23.45bn (5.90 per cent). Theconsumer goods sector, though the public face of foreign investment,accounted for only 6.6 per cent (Rs26.27bn) of total FDI. Of this, foodprocessing provided the biggest chunk with Rs21.94bn (5.51 per cent).The figures, however, tell only half the story as they relate to theapprovals and not the actual investment. In sectors such as power, theFDI approval is very high. But most of the projects have been held upbecause of various snags and the actual fund inflow has been small. Onthe other hand, most of the investments in the food processing sectorhave already been made.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996FOREIGN INVESTMENT:  MULTINATIONALS LAW PLANNEDExisting multinational subsidiaries in the country are to be put on apar with those seeking entry. Currently, even 100 per cent foreign-owned companies can get into unallied lines of business by taking thetakeover/merger route. The government intends to introduce legislationto debar such companies from getting into new lines of business unlessthis is specifically mentioned in the articles and memoranda ofassociation. Under the current regulations, MNCs can enter new fieldsby amending their articles and their memoranda of association in ageneral body meeting. In the new scheme of things, central permissionwill also be required for such diversification. This has becomenecessary because some sectors are still barred for multinationals andsome areas are reserved for the small-scale sector. A few MNCs have,however, succeeded in getting a toehold through takeovers.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996POWER:  ABB SEEKS STAKE IN POWER COMPANIESThe $30bn power major Asea brown Boveri (ABB) is negotiating withseveral new power projects in the country to pick up an equity stake inthem. ABB's main intention is to sell its equipment to these projectsand it would have been happy doing just that. Having a stake, however,gives it the clear edge in equipment supply and is also an indicationof its long-term commitment. Negotiations are thus on with Videocon forits 1,000 MW Madras project, with Basicorp and GVK for theKrishnapattam project in Andhra Pradesh, with the Birla Powergencombine for the Bena project in Madhya Pradesh and with Eisenberg ofIsrael for the Yamunanagar project in Haryana. ABB is looking at a 5-20per cent stake in all these projects. Incidentally ABB already has a 20per cent stake in the 500 MW Pench project in Madhya Pradesh (SorosFunds holds the other 80 per cent) and 5 per cent in the 235 MWJegurupada project. It will also be picking up a stake in the 250 MWneyveli project.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996HOTELS:  MS SHOES LOSES HOTEL SITEFollowing his arrest after charges of price rigging prior to the publicissue of MS Shoes, the woes of promoter Pavan Sachdeva have beenmultiplying. In his latest setback, he has been unable to retain thefour-star hotel and shopping complex site in New Delhi. The publicissue was raising money for its development. MS Shoes failed to payRs130m of the Rs481m second instalment (including interest) by thedeadline of December 31. Hudco, which had sold him the land in thefirst place, will now put it up for retendering as there is noprovision for offering the site to the second highest bidder in case ofdefault by the highest bidder.This is not the first time that the beleaguered Sachdeva has failed tomeet his payment schedules. The second instalment was actually due onApril 30, 1995. But Sachdeva had moved the Delhi high court andobtained a stay. The court had ordered MS Shoes to make the payment ofRs415m (plus interest at 24 per cent) by December 31. Now that MS Shoeshas defaulted a second time, the stay stands automatically vacated.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996HOTELS:  HOTEL LEELAVENTURE PULLS OUT OF HOTEL PROJECTHotel Leelaventure has backed out of the project to develop the BombayMetropolitan Regional Development Authority (BMRDA) hotel-cum-convention centre in the Bandra-Kurla complex. Leela, which had won theproject with a bid of Rs11,330m, failed to make its initial paymentbecause of a technical hitch. Though the finance for the project hadbeen tied up, a consortium of financial institutions led by theIndustrial Finance Corporation of India (IFCI) refused to release fundsas BMRDA was unwilling to lease the land. While the institutions wantedan immediate lease, BMRDA maintained that the land would be licensed toLeela for the first three years and leased thereafter. This had beenspecified in the tender offer and BMRDA was unwilling to change any ofthe terms at the last moment. The tender had been a hotly contested onewith several multinationals tying up with Indian companies to submittheir bids. BMRDA will now float the tender again as some of thecombines which had submitted bids have since been wound up. However,with land prices having dropped 15-20 per cent, it is likely to end upthe loser.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996MEDIA:  MALLYA MAKES MEDIA ENTRYVijay Mallya has made an entry into the media arena with his purchaseof the tabloid Blitz. The paper has editions in English, Hindi and Urduwith a combined circulation of around 50,000. Apart from Blitz, Mallyais also negotiating with The Asian Age to launch a Bangalore edition ofthe daily newspaper. This is not Mallya's first foray in this sector.But his earlier venture with a business magazine styled Business Updateproved abortive. The UB group is also entering the electronic media. Acompany styled UB Communications has been set up. UB has entered into a50:50 cable TV venture with the US-based United International Holdings.This apart, UB has also acquired the Madras-based TV channel GoldenEagle Communications. Golden Eagle offers 24-hour Tamil programming.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BJP ALLIANCESThe Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) will contest 450 to 475 seats in thecoming Lok Sabha elections. The BJP will have an electoral alliancewith the Shiv Sena in Maharashtra and some regional parties in Punjab,Haryana, Assam and Bihar.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996HIGH COURT RULES ON ELECTION COMMISSIONThe Guwahati High Court has ruled that the Election Commission has noauthority to question the declaration given by finance ministerManmohan Singh that he is a resident of Assam. This sets to rest thecontroversy over whether Manmohan Singh was entitled to be elected tothe upper house -- the Rajya Sabha -- from Assam.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996JOSHI ACQUITTED ON VOTES CHARGEThe Supreme Court has acquitted Maharashtra chief minister ManoharJoshi on the charge of seeking votes in the name of religion. It has,however, held Shiv Sena chief Bal Thackeray guilty on the same charge.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ELECTION DISPUTEThe Election Commission and the government are at loggerheads over thetiming of the polls to the Rajya Sabha. Some 70 Rajya Sabha seats willfall vacant in April and the elections would normally have been held inlate March. While the government would like the schedule to bemaintained, the Election Commission feels that the polls should be heldafter the state assembly and the Lok Sabha elections. (Rajya Sabhamembers are elected by the state assemblies).Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SINGH RULES HIMSELF OUTFormer prime minister V.P. Singh has declared that he does not intendto stand in any parliamentary elections before November 1999. Singh wasbeing projected as a possible prime minister in case a coalitiongovernment came to power after the general elections this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996GANDHI ASSASSINATION FILE DISAPPEARSA key file pertaining to the Rajiv Gandhi assassination case hasdisappeared from the prime minister's office. This was all set tobecome a major scandal and a rallying point for both Sonia Gandhisympathisers and the opposition parties. However, it was elbowed out ofthe limelight by the telecom and Reliance controversies.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SECRET ARMS AIR-DROPA Russian-made AN-26 cargo plane has made a clandestine air-drop ofarms worth more than Rs100m in Purulia district of West Bengal. Thearms include AK-56 assault rifles, rocket launchers and anti-tankgrenades. The plane was later forced to land at Bombay by the IndianAir Force and the crew was taken into custody. It is still not clear,however, who the arms were intended for.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996HYUNDAI DECIDES AGAINST JVKorean automobile giant Hyundai has decided against a joint venture asa vehicle for its Indian investment. While the company will retain 60per cent of the equity in its Indian subsidiary, the other 40 per centwill be offered to the public.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SHIPYARD JVKvaerner, a $4bn Norwegian conglomerate, will take up a 40 per centequity stake in its joint venture with the state-owned HindustanShipyard. This will be increased to 60 per cent after two years.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996RADIO PAGING JVCasio Computer Company of Japan is setting up a joint venture withBharti Telecom and Japanese trading firm Mitsui to manufacture andmarket pagers in India. Casio will hold 51 per cent of the Rs200mcapital.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996FORD JV TO BE LOCATED IN TAMIL NADUThe Ford Motor joint venture with Mahindra & Mahindra to make theFiesta car will be located in Tamil Nadu. This is a blow to Maharashtrawhich was also pitching for the project.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996DAEWOO TO SET UP CABLE UNIT IN INDIADaewoo Corporation of South Korea is setting up an optical fibre cablemanufacturing unit in India with Usha Beltron. The initial investmentis expected to be around Rs500m.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996HINDUSTAN LEVER TIES UP WITH JOHNSON WAXHindustan Lever has tied up with Johnson Wax of the US to make a rangeof wax polishes, cleansers, air fresheners and pest repellents. Thiswill be a 50:50 partnership with a equity of Rs500m.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NIPPON DENRO ISPAT TIES UP WITH THAI UNION STEELNippon Denro Ispat has tied up with Thai Union Steel Company to set upa 1.2 million tonne sponge iron plant in Thailand. Nippon Denro is alsosetting up another one million tonne sponge iron project at Bahrain.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996PIRAMAL TAKES STAKE IN JENKINS BOTSWANAAjay Piramal group company Nicholas Piramal has taken a 60 per centstake in Jenkins Botswana, a drug manufacturing company in Botswana.This is the group's first major foray overseas.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996MODERN GROUP PLANS TEXTILE TIE UPSThe Modern group is holding talks with several foreign majors for jointventures in weaving, ready made garments, worsted woollen fabrics andmen's accessories. The potential collaborators include Lucky Goldstarof Korea, Itochu Corporation of Japan, Gaunt & Son of the UK, Rosi Spaof Italy and Edison Brothers of the US.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996VOLVO TRUCKS SETS UP BASE IN INDIAVolvo Trucks of Sweden has decided to set up a wholly-ownedmanufacturing base in India which will initially produce 4,000 trucksper annum. Government permission is awaited.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996COCA-COLA PLANS BOTTLING JVCoca-Cola is planning to bring in its bottlers from Singapore and thePhilippines as joint venture partners in its bottling and marketingoperations in India.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996PROFIT SLOWDOWN FORECAST FOR RELIANCEReliance Industries is likely to witness a slowdown in its profitgrowth, according to a survey of leading brokerages and security housesconducted by Reuters. The respondents estimated RIL's net profit growthat 23 per cent during fiscal 1995-96 against 85 per cent recorded in1994-95.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996INDIA'S TRADE DEFICIT WIDENSIndia's trade deficit in April-November has widened to $3.29bn. Whileexports have grown 24 per cent to $19.8bn, imports were 31 per centhigher at $23.1bn.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996GOVERNMENT TO ALLOW FOREIGN MAJORS TO SET UP TRADING HOUSESThe government has decided to allow foreign majors to set up wholly-owned trading houses. At present, only an investment up to 51 per centis allowed. There are over 100 applications pending with the governmentto set up 100 per cent owned trading houses.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996COAL STRIKE THREATENEDFive central trade unions have threatened a six-day strike in the coalsector from January 15. The unions are demanding the introduction of apension scheme for coal miners.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996MMTC ASKS GOVERNMENT TO DO AWAY WITH DUTY FOR GOLD IMPORTSThe state-owned MMTC has asked the government to do away with theconcessional duty for gold imports under baggage rules for non-residentIndians (NRIs). In the 1993 budget, NRIs were allowed to import up to 5kg of gold at a 50 per cent concessional duty. MMTC feels that the NRIimports are affecting its own gold jewellery sales.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996LIQUIDITY IN INDIAN BOURSES IS THE LOWEST IN EMERGING MARKETSLiquidity in Indian bourses is amongst the lowest in emerging markets,according to a study by fund manager Templeton. While marketcapitalisation in India is amongst the top 10 in emerging markets,liquidity is lower than even such countries as Pakistan, Poland andHungary.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SUGAR EXPORTS SET TO INCREASESugar exports are set to increase following the government's decisionto allow new export of 186,000 tonnes of sugar. This is in addition tothe 500,000 tonnes exported earlier in 1995. Exports are being resortedto because of a bumper harvest.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996RBI INCREASES FOREX LIMITSThe Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has granted the State Bank of India and65 other banks (including some foreign banks) higher limits onovernight exposure in the foreign exchange market. This is expected togive greater depth and stability to the forex market.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996STOCK ISSUE FLOPSA Rs20bn government of India stock issue has flopped with only 52 percent subscription being received. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) hadto subscribe to the balance. This is the third RBI issue for thegovernment to flop. Earlier, the 14 per cent 2005 paper issued onNovember 27 and the floating rate bond issue on December 5 had alsoreceived around 50 per cent subscription.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996FOREX INFLOWS FALLTotal forex inflows through foreign direct investment, portfolioinvestment and non-resident deposits totalled $2.35bn in April-Decemberthis year against $4.847bn in the same period last year. While foreigndirect investment is up from $756m to $1.25bn, portfolio investment hasslumped from $3.141bn to $850m and non-resident deposits have droppedfrom $950m to $250m.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996FORD TO INVEST IN TWO JOINT VENTURESFord Motor Credit Company of the US is to invest Rs1,500m in two jointventures with Kotak Mahindra Finance. The two auto finance ventureswill provide consumer finance for Ford vehicles (to be made in Indiafrom the last quarter of 1996) and non-Ford passenger carsrespectively.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996STATE BANK OF INDIA NEGOTIATING TO SET UP INSURANCE SUBSIDIARYThe State Bank of India is negotiating with NatWest of the UK andCredit Agric Nord-East of France to set up an insurance subsidiary.SBI, which has a network of 8,000 branches, will have an edge in thebusiness when the sector is thrown open.Back to Headline List WT03-B05-6IA087-000634-B038-184http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it184.html 205.156.212.5 19970122024935 text/html 19503HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:47:39 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:21 GMTContent-length: 19316Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it184.html Sample Issue Copyright INDIA BUSINESS & INVESTMENT REPORT via NewsNet November 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * POLITICAL CONDITIONS * PRESIDENT'S RULE IMPOSED IN UTTAR PRADESH (389 words) * ECONOMY AND FINANCE * RBI ANNOUNCES MONETARY POLICY (418 words) * REGULATION AND LEGISLATION * NEW GUIDELINES FOR FOREIGN INVESTMENT ANNOUNCED (322 words) * TELECOM * BASIC SERVICE PROVIDERS ACCEPT LETTER OF INTENT (180 words) * POWER * GOVT APPROVES COGENTRIX COUNTER-GUARANTEES (161 words) * ENTRY STRATEGY * GE'S INDIA BUSINESS STRATEGY (992 words) * CONFERENCES AND EXHIBITIONS * CONFERENCES AND EXHIBITIONS (115 words) CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS & INVESTMENT REPORT via NewsNetNovember 1996PRESIDENT'S RULE IMPOSED IN UTTAR PRADESHIn the assembly elections in Uttar Pradesh, no political party has secured a majority, which has resulted in president's rule in the state.  The National Conference has been elected to power in Jammu & Kashmir, while in Gujarat, the Mahagujarat Janata Party has assumed power.  Former Prime Minister Narsimha Rao continues to be involved in legal problems and has been accused in three different cases.The assembly elections in the state of Uttar Pradesh have resulted in a hungassembly with no political party securing a majority.  The governor hasimposed president's rule in the state.  Even though the Bharatiya Janata Party(BJP) has secured the highest number of seats, it falls short of a majority.Both the Congress-Bahujan Samaj Party and the Samajwadi Party-United Frontalliances, in an attempt to keep the BJP from assuming power, have been unableto arrive at a political understanding.The National Conference (NC) has been elected to power in the assembly elections in the state of Jammu & Kashmir.  The NC, which had an electoral alliance with the Janata Dal, secured a decisive two-thirds majority.  The new Chief Minister Dr. Farooq Abdullah has been sworn in and will head the first popular government in the state after seven years of political turmoil.The Mahagujarat Janata Party (MJP) has assumed power in the state of Gujaratending 35 days of President's rule.  Shankersinh Vaghela has been elected thenew Chief Minister of the state.  Earlier, Vaghela had broken away from thestate unit of the BJP which resulted in a split in the party and the dismissalof the BJP government in Gujarat.The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has charged former Prime MinisterNarsimha Rao, for his involvement in a bribery case.  A Delhi court has issueda non-bailable warrant against Rao for his role in a forgery case.  In a thirdcase involving cheating, Rao will have to appear before court on November 6.OUTLOOKThe conflict of interest between the Congress Party and the United Frontgovernment, dissent amongst the constituents of the UF government over theissue of supporting a Congress-BSP government in the state of Uttar Pradeshand the likelihood of former Congress Party members rejoining the party,suggests the possibility of the Congress Party withdrawing support from the UFgovernment.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS & INVESTMENT REPORT via NewsNetNovember 1996RBI ANNOUNCES MONETARY POLICYThe governor of the RBI has announced the monetary policy for the second halfof fiscal 1997.  The policy measures are expected to increase the money supplyin the economy.  The growth rate of industrial production in April-June 1996was lower than during the same period in the previous year.The Governor of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), C.  Rangarajan has announcedthe monetary policy for the second half of 1996-97.  The measures are expectedto increase the money supply in the Indian economy by approximately $4.3billion.  The RBI will reduce the cash reserve ratio by 2 percentage points.It will increase the target for export credit as a percentage of a bank's netcredit from 10% to 12% and reduce the maximum permissible interest rates fordeposits with a maturity of 30 days and upto 1 year from 11% to 10%.  Inaddition, banks have been allowed to lend their foreign currency non-resident(bank) deposits in foreign currency-denominated loans to corporations.  Theforeign exchange risk is to be borne by the borrowers.  The RBI has alsoimposed a cap of 15% interest on all post-shipment rupee export credits for aperiod of 90 days to 180 days.Industrial production of 172 industries, which account for a weight of 88% inthe overall index of industrial production, registered a growth of 9.9% duringApril-June 1996, compared to the same period in 1995.  This is lower than the15.5% growth recorded in April-June 1995.  The manufacturing, mining andelectric sectors recorded a deceleration in growth in April-June 1996,compared to the same period in 1995.  Basic goods grew by only 2% compared to13% during the previous year.  Growth in capital goods remained at 21.1%during April-June 1996, intermediate goods grew to 13.2% from 3.9%, consumerdurables grew by 21.1% and consumer non-durables grew by 12.2% from the sameperiod in 1995.The Central Statistical Organization (CSO) is likely to revise the overallgrowth rate of the Indian economy from 7%, stated in the Economic Surveyupdate, to about 6.3% for 1995-96.  This is primarily because of a negativegrowth of 3.19% in agricultural production during fiscal 1996.OUTLOOKAccording to sources in UNESCO, infrastructure investment in India is likelyto rise from the current level of $17 billion a year to about $30 billion byfiscal 2001.  It is estimated that the total infrastructure investmentrequirement over the next 5 years will be between $115 billion and $130billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS & INVESTMENT REPORT via NewsNetNovember 1996NEW GUIDELINES FOR FOREIGN INVESTMENT ANNOUNCEDThe government has announced new guidelines for foreign investment into India. Foreign companies will be allowed to set up wholly-owned subsidiaries in the consumer goods sector but will have to dilute their equity within a stipulated period. Policies on mutual funds and the privatization of coal-bed methane havebeen further liberalized.The Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) has stated that it will allowforeign companies to set up wholly-owned subsidiaries in the consumer goodssector.  However, these companies will have to dilute their equity andincrease the domestic equity base within a stipulated period of time.  Thisdivestment policy does not extend to wholly-owned subsidiaries which havealready received government approval or to those firms which have invested inareas where technology is not locally available.The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has announced a new policy for theprivatization of coal-bed methane (CBM).  The CBM projects will be taken outof the purview of the FIPB and will be subject to international bidding withproduction-sharing contracts, similar to the policy on oil and gasexploration.  This will affect the Reliance-Texaco proposal currently pendingapproval from the FIPB.The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) has announced that mutualfunds will get automatic clearance to launch new funds if the regulatory bodydoes not raise any query within 21 days of filing of offer documents.However, fund managers will have to abide by the prevalent SEBI guidelines,including portfolio disclosures, monthly trading reports and transactions.The FIPB will not clear wholly-owned marketing subsidiaries in the drugs andpharmaceuticals sector.  The only exception will be if the subsidiarymanufactures bulk drugs from the basic drug stage.OUTLOOKThe government will announce detailed guidelines and further amendments to theNational Highway Act of 1956 during the first week of November.  Regulatorypowers are expected to be vested with the National Highways Authority ofIndia.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS & INVESTMENT REPORT via NewsNetNovember 1996BASIC SERVICE PROVIDERS ACCEPT LETTER OF INTENTBasic services providers, except Basic Teleservices, a joint venture betweenRPG and NTT, have accepted the Letter of Intent (LOI) for operating basicservices.  As a result, Communications Minister Beni Prasad Verma hascancelled the licence earlier awarded to Basic Teleservices and the companywill have to forfeit $14.3 million that it submitted to the Department ofTelecommunication (DoT) in the form of bank guarantees.  The deadline foraccepting the LOI and paying the licence fee was October 18, 1996.Consortiums that did not pay the licence fees by the deadline will now berequired to pay the licence fees plus a penalty of an additional 5% above theprime lending rate of the State Bank of India, until licence fees are paid.Two million government employees, including approximately one million telecom,postal and telegraph workers had gone on a nationwide strike, demanding thegovernment remove the eligibility ceiling for payment of bonus.  The strike,which had paralyzed the functioning of the telecom department for a week, wascalled off after the government conceded to their demands.  Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS & INVESTMENT REPORT via NewsNetNovember 1996GOVT APPROVES COGENTRIX COUNTER-GUARANTEES The United Front government has approved counter-guarantees for theCogentrix-led Mangalore Power Company (MPC).  Cogentrix expects to obtainfinancial closure within 5 months.  The government has stated that Cogentrix,which owns a 60% stake in the 1000MW thermal project, will not be allowed todilute its stake below 33%.  China Light & Power owns the remaining 40%equity.  MPC has offered Karnataka State Electricity Board 40% of the totalequity in the company.  The counter-guarantees will cover capacity and energycharge payments for the project in the event that State Electricity Boards(SEB) default or are unable to make payments on time.The United Front government will grant autonomy to state governments forapproval of power projects.  The government will abolish the mandatoryclearance required from the Central Electricity Authority; state governmentswill be required to set up independent regulatory authorities to addresstariff-related issues.  State governments will also be empowered to giveenvironmental and forest clearances.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS & INVESTMENT REPORT via NewsNetNovember 1996GE'S INDIA BUSINESS STRATEGYScott Bayman of GE India, outlines the firm's India business strategy.Prior to the start of liberalization GE chairman and CEO Jack Welch visitedIndia and liked what he experienced.  After some intensive study, GE declaredIndia a priority country and began a period of investing.At a time when many companies maintained the conventional view of India -- acountry overpopulated, poor and bureaucratic; GE took a more optimisticposition.  We saw India as a country of almost 1 billion new consumers for ourproducts and services.  A country of very talented entrepreneurs and capableindustrialists with a highly educated, technical work force.  And a countrywhere English is the most common language.We set out on a strategy of forming alliances with a common purpose.  We sawIndia as the heart of a fourth pole offering profitable sales growth.  Wewanted synergistic partners for flow businesses like lighting, plastics andappliances.  By establishing our flow businesses and broadening our role, wehoped to leverage this expanded presence to help our project businesses suchas power generation and aircraft engines.  We wanted number one or number twopositions, or a clear plan to get there ...  taking advantage of synergieswith our businesses outside India.We moved quickly and formed four new operating joint ventures; two greenfields; and two using existing facilities.  These alliances combined GEPlastics with IPCL; GE Medical Systems with Wipro; GE Appliances with Godrej &Boyce and GE Lighting with Apar.In late 1993, GE Capital received permission for a 100% wholly owned holdingcompany.  Using this as a platform, we formed a joint venture with HDFC calledCountrywide Consumer Financial Services which provided personal financing tothe hundreds of thousands of Indian consumers purchasing TV's, stereos,appliances and other consumer durables.  Countrywide in turn, is forming jointventures with companies like Maruti to offer private label financing.  GECapital India also offers a range of services including equipment leasing andfinancing, working capital loans, export finance, project finance andstrategic investment.  It is also involved with GE Power systems in thedevelopment of independent power plants and other infrastructure projects.From this beginning, we have added joint ventures in motors, medical systemsand information services.  Earlier this year, we began a 100 per cent ownedsilicones business.  In addition, we are forming joint ventures to provideservices, overhaul and repair for the industrial and power generationaftermarket.Our big ticket items such as locomotives, aircraft engines, gas and steamturbines and aero derivative engines are supported through licenses such asBHEL and liaison offices.As you can see, GE does not follow a standard, one dimensional approach.  Welike partners and have a large number of joint ventures around the world.Whether or not a specific business is a joint venture of wholly ownedsubsidiary, is driven by the local market, the availability of strong,potential partners and local regulations.Our country priorities for India are clear.  The top priority for eachbusiness is to strengthen its growth strategies to widen leads overcompetitors or to gain the number one share position.  Part of our plan is tolook back to what GE did to build its global positions, and bring theselessons to India.Our strategy in India is and has been to choose strong partners each of whombring value to the venture.  This value add may be in the form of strong brandand distribution; or management talent and people resources; or existingmanufacturing capabilities in more mature industries; or the know how to buildfactories and develop markets for newer industries.  Most important, ourpartners share our values; our passion for growth and each has the highestintegrity.  These added values we look for from our partners are far moreimportant to us than investment dollars.Ownership structures may change over time for a variety of reasons includingone or the other partner not wishing to continue to invest in the business, orwishing to divest in order to invest in other more strategic opportunities.Our strategy is to continue to staff our businesses with Indians.  Currently,all but one of our businesses is led by either a local national or aNonresident Indian.  GE expatriates are here for their expertise and uniqueknowledge of GE's products, services or management practices.  We anticipatethe number of expats will decrease over time.Some of our businesses are fortunate to have joined hands with strong localbrands.  It is our strong desire to grow these brands while introducing the GEbrand for incremental sales, often in different market segments or withdifferent product positioning.We are bringing the latest technologies and products to India such as ribbonprocessing to lighting, compounding process for our world leading Lexanplastic and the latest GE Profile refrigerators and washing machines designedfor international standards and climates.  Wipro-GE Medical Systems inBangalore had the exclusive design responsibility and is the supplier for allglobal requirements for our latest ultra sound diagnostic product.Our strategy is to bring GE's management know-how to India.  We hold two best practices sharing sessions each year with all the businesses where we exchange ideas and lessons and importantly, talk about how to adapt these to the Indian Market.  Our partners frequently send teams from their other businesses to participate.A big focus of our cross business synergy is people development.  In 1995, wetrained over 900 managers, and this year, we will exceed 1000.  The coursesare the same as those developed and taught at Crotonville, our managementdevelopment center in the U.S.  Again, our partners' other businessesfrequently participate.We have implemented GE's early leadership development programs for technical,finance, information management and human resource specialists.  Theseprograms are available to all the businesses in India, and we currently have124 participants.Back to Headline List CopyrightINDIA BUSINESS & INVESTMENT REPORT via NewsNetNovember 1996CONFERENCES AND EXHIBITIONSInternational Trade Fair     Nov 14-27          New Delhi          Industry, agri., trade  ITPO               Fax: 011-331-183981Telephony in India           Nov 20-21          New Delhi          Telecom                 KWM                Fax: 408-625-3225Communications India         Dec 8-11           New Delhi     Cable & Satellite       EI                 Fax: 011-463-3506  Tex India '96                Dec 20-29          New Delhi          Textile products        ITPO               Fax: 011-331-183981PetroTech '97                Jan 9-12           New Delhi          Petroleum               CII                Fax: 011-462-6149Global India Conference      Jan 21-22          Bombay          Trade & investment      AIAI               Fax: 022-341-5685Engineering Trade Fair '97   Feb 9-15           New Delhi          Engineering             CII                Fax: 011-462-6149Plast India '97              Mar 2-7            New Delhi          Plastics                PIF                Fax: 022-637-0500Kissan '97                   Mar 5-9            Pune     Agri. equipment         ATF                Fax: 0212-323-239Global Telecom Show '97      Mar 12-15          New Delhi          Telecom                 Wisitex            Fax: 022-552-1339Back to Headline List WT03-B05-7IA087-000634-B038-231http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it85.html 205.156.212.5 19970122025018 text/html 175191HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:47:55 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:11 GMTContent-length: 175003Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it85.html Sample Issue Copyright INTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 2, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CAMEROON-ENVIRONMENT: FACING UP TO THE EUCALYPTUS MENACE (752 words) LATIN AMERICA-HUMAN RIGHTS: STILL PENDING AFTER ALL THESE YEARS (769 words) MOZAMBIQUE-ECONOMY: POLITICIANS FIRE AWAY AT BRETTON WOODS (1185 words) PALESTINE-HUMAN RIGHTS: EDITOR JAILED FOR DEFYING ARAFAT'S WISH (1432 words) CHILE: GDP GROWTH BEATS INFLATION FOR THE FIRST TIME (773 words) MALAYSIA-LABOR: MIGRANT WORKERS EXPLOITED (969 words) POPULATION: MEXICAN EMIGRATION UNAFFECTED BY NAFTA (785 words) U.S.-TRADE: NAFTA ASSAILED ON SECOND ANNIVERSARY (953 words) HONG KONG: COUNTDOWN TO HANDOVER ENTERS CRUCIAL PHASE (1091 words) PHILIPPINES: NEW YEAR'S REVELRY FATAL FOR SCORES OF FILIPINOS (668 words) VENEZUELA-DRUGS: CRIME BY WOMEN AND CHILDREN INCREASES (652 words) PAKISTAN-AFGHANISTAN: PROXY WAR TESTS DOMESTIC POLITICS (806 words) CAMEROON-AGRICULTURE: FARMERS AND CATTLE-OWNERS CLASH OVER LAND (732 words) EAST ASIA-POLITICS: IN JAPAN, SOUTH KOREA, PUBLIC LOSING FAITH (1212 words) DEVELOPMENT: THIRD WORLD GROWTH SLOW OVER LAST DECADE (704 words) ENVIRONMENT: GREEN CONVENTIONS YET TO PROVE EFFECTIVE (978 words) U.S.-MEXICO: CITIZENS' GROUP DEPLORES NAFTA FAILURES ON BORDER (818 words) CUBA-ECONOMY: NO READJUSTMENT WITHOUT BANKING REFORM (723 words) PANAMA: THE UNSETTLED ISSUE OF RETRIBUTION (614 words) MEXICO: SUBCOMMANDER MARCOS ANNOUNCES ZAPATISTA POLITICAL FRONT (610 words) JAMAICA-TOURISM: WINTER SEASON GETS OFF TO BAD START (650 words) BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA: SERB SEIZURES TEST NATO'S PEACEKEEPING ROLE (1088 words) SRI LANKA: CONSERVATIONISTS BATTLE ECO-TOURISM (799 words) CHINA-ENERGY: WIND HELPS POWER BOOMING ECONOMY (752 words) ANGOLA-POLITICS: BRINKMANSHIP CONTINUES (1024 words) IRAQ-SANCTIONS: MIXED SIGNALS CONFUSE SANCTIONS RENEWAL ISSUE (1047 words) ENVIRONMENT/LITHUANIA: NUCLEAR PLANT SAFETY RECORD WORRIES MANY (894 words) BURUNDI-HUMAN RIGHTS: END TO CYCLE OF POLITICAL KILLINGS SOUGHT (1235 words) CONGO-LABOR: SALARY PAYMENTS A BIG SURPRISE FOR PUBLIC SERVANTS (644 words) NIGERIA-MEDIA: ABIOLA'S NEWSPAPER BACK ON THE STREETS (734 words) CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996CAMEROON-ENVIRONMENT:  FACING UP TO THE EUCALYPTUS MENACEBy Tansa Musa   NKAMBE, Cameroon, Dec. 31 (IPS) -- The view from the third floorof the Central Hotel in this small town tucked away in Cameroon'sNorth West Province is dominated by dense forests occasionallybroken by rooftops.   It looks good, especially in a country which has been losing itstree cover at an annual rate of about 0.6 per cent.   But province officials are worried. The trees around Nkambe andother areas in the northwest are eucalyptus, noted for the largeamounts of water they absorb.   "We are dealing with an unnoticed crisis," says Raphael Kongor,an environmental officer in Nkambe. "People have been growingeucalyptus without regard for their water and food needs. Today weare having unusually harsh dry seasons because the eucalyptus treesare draining our waterways."   Area residents confirm that water is becoming increasinglyscarce here. "Our streams are now dry most of the year and ourwomen and children have to travel long distances in search ofwater," says Chona Patrick, a farmer in Nkambe. "And they also haveto go far, sometimes 15 to 20 kilometers away, to find fertilefarmland."   Eucalyptus was first introduced in the hilly grasslands of theNorth West Province by colonial administrators to meet their woodand fuel needs and protect their homes from windstorms during therainy season. Local villagers followed suit.   Since independence, Cameroon's government has encouraged theregulated growth of eucalyptus, according to Nelson Chomba, aforestry technician with the National Office for the Developmentof Forests.   "We encourage the planting of eucalyptus on barren, marginalland, usually hilltops, far away from water catchment areas and thesources of streams," Chomba told IPS. "We recommend that farmersplant the trees at least 50 to 100 meters away from such areas."   But it has proved hard to limit the planting of eucalyptus.   Unlike coffee, the main cash crop in the area, growingeucalyptus requires little labor and few supplies. "Plant it evenon rocky soil and it grows," says Kongor. "All you need to do isclear a tract around the plantation to protect it from dry-seasonbrush fires."   Moreover, it has a variety of uses. The branches make goodfuelwood. Mix the dried leaves with lime juice and you have a cheapcough mixture, while the trees themselves act as windbreaks and canalso be used to mark the boundaries of farms.   More importantly, however, there is money in eucalyptus. Itswood can be sold and, with the prices of traditional cash cropslike coffee and cocoa fluctuating on the world market, there ishardly a family in the districts of Donga-Mantung division, whichincludes Nkambe and neighboring Bui, that does not have aeucalyptus plantation or at least a few trees.   It has also spread southwards to the Western province and isgaining ground in the drier northern provinces of Adamawa and thenorth, especially since there is quick cash to be made by sellingeucalyptus poles to the national electricity corporation, SONEL,and the local telephone utility.   "Every year I make about 100,000 CFA francs (about $220) fromselling poles to SONEL alone,"says Chona. "I've been producingcoffee for a long time but I don't get so much money from that."   Patrick Bui, a farmer in Bui district, vows that nothing willstop him from growing eucalyptus. "Look," he says, pointing tobundles of firewood stacked along the main highway. "Do you knowhow much I make every day from these?"   "This gives me about 1,500 to 2,000 CFA francs (between $3.30and $4.40) every day, which I use to pay the fees for my threechildren in secondary school, buy (cooking) oil, soap and otherthings for my family and to contribute to my 'njangui' (informalsavings and loan cooperative)."   But the cost to the environment is high, says Kongor, whoexplains that the eucalyptus has roots that go deep into the soilto find water, which is why it should be grown on dry marginalland.   "Though the plant can help raise the water level, itsdestructive nature cannot be overlooked," he adds. "It drains thesoil of valuable nutrients and water that other plants and cropsneed to grow."   However, "It would be useless to call on farmers not to planteucalyptus trees, considering the importance of such a plantspecies in non-forest areas," says Kongor.   "Our only weapon is to educate the farmers about proper forestrytechniques and the need to diversify economic activity to otherproductive areas, like bee-farming."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996LATIN AMERICA-HUMAN RIGHTS:  STILL PENDING AFTER ALL THESE YEARSBy Daniel Gatti   MONTEVIDEO, Dec. 31 (IPS) -- "Your children are here, what prideyou must feel," exclaimed Hebe de Bonafini, leader of theArgentinean Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo, speaking in the name ofthe thousands who disappeared during the military dictatorship of1976-83.   For the first time in years, the annual Resistance Marchorganized by the group on Dec. 7 filled the central Plaza de Mayoto capacity.   "Three generations marched together," read the headline inArgentinean daily Pagina 12 the following day, as grandmothers,mothers and the children of the disappeared marched together.   "We children are here," declared a young member of Children forIdentity and Justice against Oblivion and Silence (HIJOS).   "For years they wanted us to be nobody's children. Today we arefighters. Our parents march with us," he added.   "Two decades later, the wound opened by the militarydictatorship and its atrocities is still open, and the question hasnot been resolved," said one protester.   Official and unofficial estimates state that between nine andthirty thousand people disappeared under the military dictatorshipthat began with Lt. Gen. Jorge Rafael Videla.   Human rights issues were front and center in Argentina in 1995,with one leading army officer, Martin Balza, admitting his guiltand distancing himself from the abuses of the military regime.Balza's gesture was preceded by confessions from several membersof army personnel involved in the violations, and was followed bymore gentle "mea culpas" from the navy and air force leaders.   The human rights issue also resurfaced in Chile, Brazil,Uruguay, Central America and Colombia.   In Chile, the ghost of the dictatorship reared its ugly headonce more as the issue of army power returned to the fore.   The public also followed the progress of the case of Gen. ManuelContreras and a parliamentary proposal to suspend the prosecutionof 600 military officers accused of assassinations, abductions andtorture during the 1973 to 1990 period.   In May, General Contreras and Brigadier Pedro Espinosa werefound guilty of masterminding the murder of former Chilean foreignminister Orlando Letelier in Washington, in 1976.   This verdict led Chilean human rights organizations to believethe end of military impunity might be in sight, but when it tookthree months to get Contreras into prison it became clear that thearmed forces still held great sway.   Former dictator Augusto Pinochet is currently Chilean militaryChief of Staff.   Suspicions were further confirmed when a parliamentary proposalsuggested putting a "full stop" to the prosecution of armypersonnel accused of human rights offenses, and the Senate votedearlier this month not to release information on the disappearancesand killings.   Brazil also saw a resurfacing of human rights cases from thesixties and seventies, and the current sitaton there earned thenation the title "the nation of impunity."   Around mid-year, Fernando Cardoso's government approvedcompensation payments to the families of the dozens of people whodisappeared under the dictatorship of 1964-85. Most of these caseswere never investigated and no one was ever punished.   Meanwhile, the group Human Rights Watch criticized the nation,saying that the climate of impunity was encouraging the MilitaryPolice and other security forces to commit "systematic breaches ofhuman rights."   The group condemned the possible executions of dozens of commoncriminals, militant rural workers and street children, especiallyin cities like Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo, and areas with landuse and ownership disputes.   "This country has a culture of impunity which it has draggedalong for decades, which feeds on the worsening social inequalitieswhich lead the most powerful to use soldiers and the police againstthe 'dangerous classes'," said one member of the Landless Movement.   This same "culture" is alive and well in Central America, wherethe dictatorships are disappearing within a generalized situationof civil violence. A report from the Committee for the Defense ofHuman Rights in Central America (CODEHUCA) condemned the resurgenceof death squads who target either their political opponents or"common criminals."   The situation which permits the incalculable number ofextra-judicial executions and the impunity of the murderers wearsaway at the official legal system and corrupts the politicalstructure the report said.   It said that the increasing regional crime rate feeds onpoverty, unemployment, and the fact that thousands of civiliansstill possess their weapons, often from when they fought in thecivil wars.   CODEHUCA calculated that there were around two million firearmsloose in Honduras, 300,000 in El Salvador and 250,000 in Guatemala,concluding that the isthmus nations "are sitting on a social timebomb without knowing when or how it's going to explode."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996MOZAMBIQUE-ECONOMY:  POLITICIANS FIRE AWAY AT BRETTON WOODSBy Gustavo Mavie   MAPUTO, Dec. 31 (IPS) -- Mozambique's politicians, divided fordecades by ideological differences and war, have now united againsteconomic policies they blame for increasing poverty in one of theworld's poorest nations.   "The (International Monetary Fund) IMF and the World Bank arenot interested in the economic development of Mozambique," chargesAntonio Palange of the opposition Democratic Union (UD), one ofthree parties that won parliamentary seats in the country's firstever multiparty elections, held in October 1994.   Palange recently joined other parliamentarians from the UD, theMozambique National Resistance (RENAMO, the largest oppositiongroup), and the ruling Front for the Liberation of Mozambique(FRELIMO) in lashing out at the government's "marriage" to theBretton Wood institutions "at the expense of the Mozambicanpeople."   This development is astonishing since Renamo has traditionallybeen considered an ally of the West and FRELIMO was once avowedlyMarxist.   Hoping to keep afloat an economy battered by prolonged civil warand a socialist experiment that kicked off with the end ofPortuguese rule in 1975, FRELIMO opted for a market economy in 1987at the behest of the international finance houses.   But instead of recovery and prosperity, the structuraladjustment program (SAP) has brought most Mozambicans only moremisery, critics note. Even the government is uneasy about somerecommendations of the Bretton Woods pair, such as selling statecompanies to curb government spending.   Most of the 500 parastatals sold so far have passed into foreignhands as few locals have the capital to purchase them, a fact whichhas convinced many here that privatization threatens nationalsovereignty.   The IMF and World Bank are urging a reluctant government to selloff the national carrier, LAM, the water and electricity companies,the national railways and ports, customs and the post andtelecommunications' utility.   But the government considers these enterprises of strategicimportance and prefers to turn them into financially autonomouspublic companies with private management.   In the meantime, the tariffs these utilities charge have soared,especially for energy. In state housing projects, for example,monthly electricity bills are more than 100 times as high asrentals.   Many here wonder exactly whom the policies touted by the BrettonWoods institutions are aimed at helping, and not just because oftheir social cost.   When Trade and Industry Minister Oldeniro Baloi announced thatthe World Bank had threatened to cut off funding unless Mozambiqueexported its cashew nuts unprocessed, this was perceived here asa bid to smash the many well-equipped factories that process thenuts, Mozambique's second largest export after prawns.   "There's no doubt that it's the wrong strategy tode-industrialize Mozambique in exchange for a fistful of dollars,"says Teodata Hunguana, a FRELIMO deputy who has held variousministerial posts. He believes selling its few products cheaply isa luxury Mozambique can ill afford.   The IMF is "the new ministry of colonies," quipped fellowFRELIMO deputy Sergio Vieira, also a former cabinet minister. "Letthe IMF keep its money. We should develop and modernize ouragriculture and protect our industry."   Fruits of the program remain so elusive that it has beenextended five years beyond its original duration of three years,leaving most people here with their "belts tightened right to thebone," notes Carlos Cardoso, the outspoken editor of Mediafax, anindependent daily.   Perhaps the bitterest pill for the 16 million inhabitants ofthis southern African state is the dramatic fall in their money'sbuying power, while prices and inflation gallop out of control.   In the last eight years, the value of the national currency, themetical, has plunged dramatically. In 1987, one U.S. dollar wasequivalent to 40 meticais at the official exchange rate and fortytimes more on the black market. Today it is worth 10,826 meticaisofficially and 11,500 on the black market.   Unemployment is rife but those with jobs are scarcely better offthan the jobless. Many earn little more than the $20 monthlyminimum wage, which is barely more than half the $34 needed to buya 50 kilogram bag of rice, a staple here.   At least 70 per cent of Mozambicans live below the poverty line,yet for years the government kept the minimum wage at 78,000meticais (seven U.S. dollars) in keeping with a wage freezerecommended by the Bretton Woods institutions. It only raised itthree months ago after trade unions threatened a general strike.   The pay hike infuriated IMF representative Sergio Leite whoslammed it as "completely unrealistic" and "inopportune." Leiteattacked waste by the government and warned at a press conferencethat "we are going to order more cuts in government expenditure."   Stung by what they deemed Leite's arrogance and disrespect fortheir country's sovereignty, local newspapers said he had insultedMozambique's workers and wondered how much he earned at the IMF.   Palange slammed "constant interference in Mozambique's economicdevelopment by the World Bank" and urged the government to end its"dependence on the IMF" as other African states have done afterrealizing that its programs "do more harm than good to theireconomies and social fabric."   Later, another IMF official said it was up to individualgovernments to fix minimum wages, but few here were placated.   While critics call for a more independent stance by thegovernment, Planning and Finance Minister Tomas Salomao saidrecently in parliament that it would be suicidal for Mozambique tocut ties with its backers. The Paris Club injected $1 billion intothe country in 1995 and foreign aid accounts or around half of the1996 budget, which totals slightly more than $605 million.   Of the 1996 budget, $316 million will go towards rehabilitatinginfrastructure destroyed during the civil war (1975-1992).Recurrent costs should swallow up $287 million.   The government's dependence on aid could be reduced if ittightened up on illegal exports, which rob the treasury of millionsof dollars and in which many state officials are allegedlyinvolved.   Official statistics show that between January and September,$600 million was spent on imports and only $126 million worth ofgoods were exported. But according to investigations by Mediafax,illegal exports topped $800 million, most of which was bankedabroad.   Salomao maintains that IMF's programs appear to be fruitlessonly because "they are difficult to put into practice," but criticsinsist that government members have been adhering to these programsrather than slash their own salaries and other benefits derivedfrom co-operation with the finance houses.   Neither the IMF's threats nor public disgruntlement have stemmedthe largely unchecked corruption and opulent lifestyles of thosein power and their associates. Almost all present and formermembers of government hold shares in privatized companies and newones that are being set up. Many have built luxury houses in poshcity neighborhoods in addition to country houses to which theyretreat on weekends and holidays.   Pajeros, Mercedes Benz, BMWs and other luxury vehicles litterthe streets, and yet "machibombas," minibuses on which the publicrelies for transport, are scarce.   Prime Minister Pascoal Mocumbi says an independent authority isto be set up to combat corruption, but most people here feel thisis empty talk.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996PALESTINE-HUMAN RIGHTS:  EDITOR JAILED FOR DEFYING ARAFAT'S WISHBy Deborah Horan   JERUSALEM, Dec. 31 (IPS) -- The release of a Palestiniannewspaper editor detained for six days after failing to prominentlydisplay a flattering article about Yasser Arafat has not easedfears of a further clampdown on freedom of speech in liberatedPalestine.   Maher al-Alameh, night editor of the Jerusalem-based Arabicdaily al-Quds, was freed yesterday after a week under interrogationin the Palestinian self-rule enclave of Jericho. He had beendetained Dec. 25 by the Palestinian Preventive Security (PPS).   His crime was failing to give enough prominence to flatteringcomments about Arafat made by the Greek Orthodox Patriarch ofJerusalem. The Patriarch, greeting Arafat in Bethlehem on ChristmasEve, had compared him to the revered second Caliph of Islam, Omarbin el-Khatab, who captured Jerusalem in AD 638.   All Palestinian newspapers received orders from Arafat's advisorNabil Abu Rudeineh to emphasize the Patriarch's comments on theirfront page. When al-Alameh put it on page 8 instead he was summonedto Jericho and detained.   After a week in detention, during which time al-Alameh, 50, sayshe was treated well, he was taken to Ramallah to meet Arafatyesterday morning. "He (Arafat) asked me why I did not put the news(on page one) concerning the Patriarch and the description ofArafat as Caliph Omar," al-Alameh told IPS.   Al-Alameh said he told Arafat that the reason was purelypractical. Eight per cent of the front page was electionadvertising and the rest -- "four columns and a color picture" --was all about Arafat and the full text of his speech in Bethlehem.   "I didn't mean to hurt his feelings. It was only because Ididn't have space," he said. "We can't publish all the news ofArafat on the front page. He (Arafat) was very polite. He said 'I'msorry' and kissed my head. He said, 'I don't like to arrest any ofmy brothers.'"   But the detention was seen as another serious blow to pressfreedom under Arafat. Members of the Paris-based media rights NGOReporters Without Borders tried to visit al-Alameh in Jericho butwere refused entry on the orders of PPS head Jibril Rajoub.   "I don't think it is a crime. It is a very, very silly pretextto arrest a person and the timing is very, very bad," said al-Alameh. "It comes on the eve of elections and of our claim we arebuilding a democratic entity."   "They must respect human rights," said Bassem Eid, thePalestinian representative of Reporters Without Borders. "The PPScannot go around kidnapping people."   "If you don't respect the freedom of the press," addedal-Alameh, "how can you build a democracy?" Arafat officialsdeclined to comment; Rajoub would merely confirm to IPS thatal-Alameh had been released.   Arafat has been making an effort to improve his troubledrelations with the Palestinian Christian community and to reassurewary Christians that they are welcome to stay under the newlyemerging Palestinian government in the West Bank and Gaza.   To further his initiative, Arafat asked all Arabic newspapersin Palestine to prominently display the comments of the Patriarchas evidence of the sympathy and support he was getting fromChristian leaders.   Al-Quds, published in east Jerusalem, is the largest Arabicdaily and has a circulation of 25,000. Its circulation in the WestBank has been stopped several times in the past after it publishedarticles critical of the Palestinian Authority's activities.   In August 1994, Arafat ordered the daily an-Nahar closed afterit ran a story entitled "I Am A Jordanian From Hebron" at a timewhen the Authority was experiencing strained relations with theHashemite Kingdom over the role each will play in Jerusalem.   Last May, Arafat closed down the opposition Hamas newspaperal-Watan for three months and jailed its editor for two years forprinting material that "harmed national unity." A recent press lawenacted by Arafat makes it a crime to print anything determined tobe damaging to "the national cause."   "The Palestinian Authority maintains that if you are criticizingthem, you are harming 'national unity,'" said Eid, who is opposedto the press law. "All we can hope for is that public opinion willforce them to change the policies."   "He (Arafat) doesn't have the right (to arrest members of thepress)," said al-Alameh, "but...we are a non-democratic system sohe has the ability to order the newspapers to print whatever hewants them to because they are afraid of action from Arafat. Allof them are in a cycle of fear."   On several occasions, newspapers have been prevented fromdistributing in Gaza after printing articles perceived asunfavorable to Arafat or the Palestinian Authority. Security menhave also visited an-Nahar and allegedly threatened staff.   The Palestinian Authority has also been criticized by humanrights organizations for arresting prominent figures in Gaza forspeaking out against government measures that have curbed speech.   Nine months ago, prominent Palestinian human rights activistRaji Sourani was arrested for producing a document that criticizedthe government's handling of human rights issues.   Earlier this month, Gaza psychiatrist and leading local activistEyad Sarraj was arrested in connection with criticisms of theAuthority's human rights policies made in an address to aninternational seminar on journalists and the peace processorganized by Inter Press Service under the European Union'sPeaceMedia program. The seminar had also been addressed by seniorPalestinian Authority officials and the editor of al-Watan.   Like al-Alameh, Sarraj was not formally arrested but was"invited" to go for "discussions" with security officials. Thediscussions turned into de facto detention.   "I was treated very well. It was not under the conditions of aprison," said al-Alameh, who was worried enough about the summonsfrom Rajoub to take a foreign journalist with him when he went.   "I was treated respectfully, kindly -- maybe because they knewI am famous and the international media covered my story. I thinkthis had pressure on them." But he was sure that had he refused thesummons he would have been forcibly taken. "I was threatened thatif I didn't go on my own they would kidnap me and put me in a caror they would tear me to pieces."   The article was politically sensitive for Arafat as it came onthe heels of a Catholic conference that focused on the state ofChristians in the Holy Land and amid accusations from severalChristian groups that their communities are afraid to stay in theWest Bank once it comes completely under Palestinian self-rule.   To counter these claims, which the Palestinian Authoritydismisses as propaganda propagated by pro-Israeli or pro-ZionistChristian groups, Arafat has been sprinkling his speeches withcomments aimed at making the Christian community feel more at ease.   He attended the Christian mass at the Church of the Nativity inBethlehem, where Christians believe Jesus Christ was born, and hasset a quota for Christian candidates running for seats in thePalestinian Council (parliament), to ensure they are represented.   Arafat's wife, Suha, a Greek Orthodox Palestinian Christian whoconverted to Islam to marry her husband in 1990, has also beenmaking an effort to quell Christians' perceived fears.   She visited the Church of the Nativity two days before Christmasand had their five-month-old baby girl blessed. Christians, whomake up about three per cent of the population of the West Bank,steadily left during the seven-year uprising against Israeli rulein search of better living conditions -- as did many Muslims.   But since the Oslo accord establishing Palestinian self-rule wassigned two years ago, some 40 prominent Bethlehem Christianfamilies have chosen to leave, increasing the feeling that they donot feel welcome under the Palestinian Authority.   Many Christians who left earlier, however, have said they planto return once the Palestinian enclaves attain full independencefrom Israel.   For Palestinians the most acute problem is the forthcomingelections on Jan. 20. The view here is that even if seriouscampaigns are mounted against Arafat's candidacy, Arafat's controlof the media will deny them equal space.   In the longer term the media controls are undermining thedemocratic system here, says al-Alameh.   "We haven't freedom of the press. We do not have the press whichforced (President Richard) Nixon to resign. We do not have thepress which forced (then Israeli prime minister Yitzhak) Rabin toresign." Rabin resigned after journalists uncovered the fact thathis wife had a then illegal foreign bank account.   "We haven't the press to make the Authority afraid of it. Wehave an Authority that makes the press afraid. It's a disaster.It's a catastrophe."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996CHILE:  GDP GROWTH BEATS INFLATION FOR THE FIRST TIMEBy Gustavo Gonzalez   SANTIAGO, Dec. 31 (IPS) -- Among Chile's economic achievementsin 1995, a rate of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth thatexceeded the rate of inflation is a particular source of pride forTreasury Minister Eduardo Aninat.   The Chilean GDP grew 8.2 per cent -- 8.3 per cent over the 1994level to $62 billion, while the consumer price index (CPI) grew byan estimated 8.1 per cent or a maximum of 8.2 per cent.   This is the first time since Chilean statistical records havebeen kept that GDP grew as much or more than the CPI underconditions of economic expansion and low inflation.   The 1995 growth in production "means that production has almostdoubled over the past 10 years," a satisfied Aninat toldjournalists as he presented economic data for the year on Dec. 28.   "Chile is included among the ten emerging economies with thebest records in the world this year," the minister added, andpointed out that investment amounted to 26 per cent of GDP.   Aninat's briefing ratified the findings of an EconomicCommission for Latin America (ECLA) report released last week thatlisted Chile as the region's best growth performer in 1995.   ECLA and other international organizations attribute the Chileansuccess to a combination of fiscal discipline, incentives fordomestic saving and foreign investment, and protection againstshort-term capital flows.   The Chilean stock market experienced only "a slight dizziness"in the first trimester of 1995 as a result of the so-called"tequila effect" that originated in Mexico's financial crisis andhit other countries hard, especially Argentina.   Chilean foreign investment is concentrated in productionactivities, mostly in the mining sector, and the country is hostto relatively little of the short-term or "volatile" capital whoseflight precipitated the Mexican and Argentinean crises.   It is true that Chile's strong economic performance this yearwas aided by good international market prices for the country'sprincipal exports, including copper, fish meal, and cellulose.   But this doesn't take credit away from Chile because prices rosethis year for almost all major Latin American exports, with theexception of soybeans and beef.   Although it confronts the same problems of inequality andinequity as does the rest of the region, Chile can also claim areal increase in GDP per capita, which Aninat says is between fiveand six per cent.   ECLA reports that Chilean GDP per capita grew 2.4 per cent in1994 and rose to 6.4 per cent this year, while the rest of LatinAmerica and the Caribbean suffered a decline in per capita GDP of1.1 per cent.   While the regional unemployment rate rose from 6.4 per cent lastyear to 7.4 per cent in 1995, Chile succeeded in reducing its ratefrom 6.3 per cent to 5.6 per cent, which still remains highcompared to the 4.1 per cent rate in 1993.   Real wages -- after factoring in inflation -- either fell orstagnated in almost all of the countries in the region in 1995 butthey rose by 4 per cent in Chile.   While offering this successful 1995 accounting, Aninat promisedthe poorest Chileans that "the economic model will continueincorporating a high level of equality and equity."   At the other extreme, the minister displayed the caution typicalof a government reluctant to engage in confrontations with businessby inviting the high-income sectors "to continue contributing tothe country's economic efforts."   Is Chile's economic success the product of a continuation ofneo-liberal policies inherited from General August Pinochet'sdictatorship (1973-90) or is it the fruit of combining a marketmodel with social redistribution policies?   This question continues to be debated, especially by thePinochet supporters on the right wing, who insist that the presentgovernment is merely profiting from the military regime's "sowing"and that business enterprise is to be credited for the economicgrowth.   To measure the reestablished democracy's economic performance,Aninat presented comparative statistics for the 1991-95 periodderived from ECLA and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).   Chile's average annual GDP growth rate over the period is 7.4per cent, the highest in Latin America and far above the comparablefigure for the region (2.8 per cent), all developing countries (5.8per cent) and the rest of the world (2.6 per cent).   Chile's average annual inflation rate over the period was 12.1per cent compared to 284.4 per cent for Latin America and 35.4 percent for all of the developing world.   Finally, real wages grew 4.3 per cent in Chile during the five-year period, while they increased by an average of only 1.9 percent in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico and Peru.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996MALAYSIA-LABOR:  MIGRANT WORKERS EXPLOITEDBy Kalinga Seneviratne   KUALA LUMPUR, Jan. 1 (IPS) -- Malaysia's rapid economic growthhas made it a magnet for migrant workers but exploitation byemployers has dashed many of their hopes of earning a decentliving.   Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad plans to make Malaysia a fullydeveloped nation by 2020, and economic expansion has led to aserious labor shortage which as prompted the country to open itsdoors to workers fleeing poverty and unemployment in other partsof Asia.   There are now an estimated two million guest workers in thisnation of 19.6 million people. Half of these migrants hold legalwork permits while the rest entered illegally, mainly throughThailand and Indonesia.   Indonesians initially dominated the market with cheap labor butBangladeshis are now a force to be reckoned with. There are now atleast 200,000 Bangladeshi workers in the country -- more than halfof them working in plantations and factories.   Malaysia has reached an agreement with Bangladesh to recruit50,000 skilled and semi-skilled workers -- including nurses anddoctors -- every year.   Increasing numbers of middle-class Malaysians are employingdomestic helpers mainly from the Philippines, Sri Lanka andBangladesh. Deputy Home Minister Ong Ka Ting has admitted theimmigration department has a backlog of at least 10,000applications for work permits for foreign maids.   Unscrupulous employers, however, are exploiting the desperationof many of the Asian workers fleeing from poverty at home.Bangladeshis, who come from one of the world's poorest countrieswith a per capita income of $180 a year, are the most vulnerable.   "Recruiting agencies promise them $300 a month if they come toMalaysia," says welfare worker S. Sinnappan. He says that manyyoung university graduates, lured by promotional photos and videos,end up getting only half this amount.   Most of the Bangladeshi plantation workers with whom Sinnappanworks had been promised jobs as technicians or engineers. They hadnever worked in plantations and were not used to the heavy work inthe palm-oil plantations.   "They paid the agencies as much as 6,000 ringgit (about $2,400)to come here. Many raised the money by mortgaging their land orhouse," he adds.   G. Rajasekaran, secretary-general of the Malaysian Trade UnionCongress, says they do not object to migrant labor, provided thegovernment makes sure there are still jobs left for Malaysians.   The government has drawn up regulations, but enforcement is veryweak, he says. "It has become so chaotic," he observed, "becauserecruitment is done through recruiting agents."   Rajasekaran says such agencies have mushroomed in recent yearsbecause it is an easy way to make big money without any capitaloutlay. "You just bring a person here, collect money from theperson who wants to work, and collect money from the company thatwants to employ him."   He says exploitation happens at both ends and has led tocorruption involving, for example, the forging of work permits andother documents. He favors government-to-government deals but isworried that an unregulated labor influx will undermine workingconditions.   "Despite impressive economic growth rates in the last fiveyears, wage levels and living standards of Malaysian workers --especially industrial workers -- have not gone up as much as theyshould have," he says, and the flood of foreign workers hasaffected the bargaining power of trade unions.   "If the government didn't allow foreign workers to come in, evenwithout collective bargaining, wage rates would have gone upbecause of supply and demand ," argues Rajasekaran.   He says that because of the comparatively low wage rates inMalaysia, as many as 60,000 Malaysians cross the border each dayto work in Singapore, where a factory worker gets about $380 permonth compared with $160 a month for the same job at home.   A task force on foreign labor has recommended a monthly wage of$140 but some firms pay only $110. Locals refuse to work for suchwages, and companies use this as an excuse to turn to foreignworkers. The government this month warned it would no longertolerate such exploitation.   Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim, who heads the cabinet'sCommittee on Foreign Workers, is concerned about the impact offoreign workers on employment opportunities for Malaysians.   "We will not accept foreign workers at the expense ofMalaysians, especially the younger generation, who are entering theemployment market. We want to ensure that priority is given toMalaysians for all employment opportunities," he said.   In his 1996 budget Anwar, who is also Minister of Finance,increased the levy on foreign workers by 100 per cent. He alsoannounced in August that foreign job seekers can now be recruitedonly as domestic helpers or shop assistants.   P. Arunasalam, secretary-general of the Electrical IndustryWorkers Union, urged the government to gradually phase out itslabor-intensive industries and instead train Malaysians to overcomethe shortage of skilled labor suited for high-technologyindustries.   He warns an increase in foreign labor will put more demands onthe government schooling system to take care of the workers'children. He says many foreign workers have already forced smalltraders in Malaysia to give up their trade at night markets.   "Huge sums of money remitted by the foreign workers to theirrespective countries of origin are a big drain on our country'seconomy," says Arunasalam. "In 1994 alone, $960 million was sentout of the country by one million workers."   Rajasekaram argues that because of the low wage rates cushionedby foreign labor, many Malaysian women are not encouraged to jointhe workforce. He cites an official report last year sayingMalaysia would have 729,000 more workers if more women wereencouraged to work.   Many Malaysians are now questioning the pace of development intheir country, while others think the problems of illegal migrationand exploitation of foreign labor should be addressed first.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996POPULATION:  MEXICAN EMIGRATION UNAFFECTED BY NAFTA   MEXICO CITY, Jan. 1 (IPS) -- The North American Free TradeAgreement (NAFTA), now two-years-old, has not had the expectedspectacular effect on the flow of migrants between Mexico and theUnited States, according to demographic experts.   Manuel Alva Hernandez, a researcher with the Colegio de Mexico,told IPS that "population movements generally follow very complexand slowly evolving trends, so that -- except in wartime -- theydon't happen suddenly."   He noted that NAFTA -- the trading block linking Canada, theUnited States and Mexico inaugurated on Jan. 1, 1994 -- has 374million inhabitants and an annual product of $7 trillion but "onlyratified an existing process of integration."   Alva Hernandez explained that there already had been aprivatizing trend in Mexico, along with significant productive andspeculative capital investment from the United States and othercountries, and that neither phenomenon had increased dramaticallyin the two years the treaty has been in effect.   Nor is there evidence, despite the economic crisis that hasbattered Mexico since December 1994, of a major increase in Mexicanmigration to the United States as it is often stimulated by familyor friendship ties along with work incentives, Alva Hernandezadded.   International migration into Mexico did not play a major rolein the country's demographics during the first half of thiscentury, nor did large numbers of Mexicans emigrate, although therewas a constant outflow, mostly to the U.S.   But a large increase in Mexican migration to the U.S. has beenevident in recent decades, especially the last 20 years, althoughthere has been no significant rise in migration into Mexico.   Hence, Mexico shows a negative migratory balance sheet with theoutside world and has lost 290,000 inhabitants annually in recentyears. This has reduced its internal population growth rate by anestimated 0.32 per cent.   Significant migration to the U.S. began in the middle of thenineteenth century after the U.S. occupied more than half of whatwas then Mexico and rose during the revolutionary period (1910-1919).   During these years, about 200,000 Mexicans moved to the borderstates of Texas, Arizona and California to work in agriculture, onrailroad lines and, to a lesser extent, in industry.   The first world war (1914-1918) and the international economiccrisis that broke out in 1929 and lasted through the followingdecade diminished the migratory flow, which rose again during thesecond world war (1939-1945), when labor was needed to replaceworkers enlisted in military service.   The documented and undocumented migration of Mexicans living inthe United States in 1950, 1960, and 1970 was 630,000, 834,000 and1,399,000, respectively.   Beginning in the 1970's, this number rose rapidly. In 1980, itwas over 2,500,00 and it reached 4,500,000 in 1990, a numberequivalent to slightly more than 5.4 per cent of Mexico's censuspopulation that year.   During this entire period, the relative proportion of urbanmigrants, non-agricultural workers and women within the totalpopulation of migrants increased.   This has changed the old U.S. stereotype of the Mexican migrantas a poorly educated rural laborer seeking seasonal or temporarywork.   A major contributor to this demographic change was the Mexicaneconomic crisis that began in 1980 and has become chronic sincethen, with only a partial interruption during the first half of thepresent decade.   A change in the U.S. economy that affected the magnitude andcomposition of demand for migratory labor also had an effect.   Yet another influence was the 1986 reform of U.S. immigrationlaw, which encouraged some migrants to seek U.S. residence andprovided for the employment of migrants in some productionactivities.   According to some Mexican analysts, including notedanthropologist Soledad Gonzalez Montes, "the development offunctional social networks that link places of origin withdestinations" played a special role in the new migration.   This analysis suggests that once the Mexican population in theUnited States reached a certain threshold, growing social networkslowered the costs and risks associated with international migrationand increased the probability that potential migrants would makethe move.   All of these factors gave the migratory movement a powerful pusheven as regional economic development created new departure pointsthroughout Mexico's territory and increased the number of migratingwomen and children.   The number of entire families and those seeking familyreunification also rose among migrants.   Gonzalez Montes pointed out "a growing concentration (ofmigrants) in the states of California and Texas and in themetropolitan areas of these and other (U.S.) states."   Statistics show that the length of stay of Mexican migrants inthe United States has grown and that almost two thirds of thosecovered by the 1986 legal residency program had been living in thatcountry for more than a decade.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996U.S.-TRADE:  NAFTA ASSAILED ON SECOND ANNIVERSARY   WASHINGTON, Dec. 31 (IPS) -- U.S. fans of the North AmericanFree Trade Agreement (NAFTA) are not celebrating.   Two years after the highly-touted accord between the UnitedStates, Canada, and Mexico, NAFTA has become a political liabilityand given ammunition to critics of similar free trade agreements.   Symptomatic was a cartoon appearing in today's New York Timeswhich depicted two men in a seedy-looking room in an urbanneighborhood. Across the street a decrepit apartment house is beingconsumed by flames. One of the men is seated on a sofa reading anewspaper's help-wanted classified advertisements. The page islined with the logos of fast-food joints like McDonalds andWendy's.   His friend, who has just walked in the door with a bottle oftequila, shouts, "Good news! Tequila is a dollar cheaper." Thecaption below reads "NAFTA finally pays off."   "Our predictions have proved correct; if anything, the situationhas worsened," declared William Bywater, president of the main U.S.Electronics Workers' Union (IUE) and one of NAFTA's staunchest foeson the pact's first anniversary.   "The collapse of the Mexican economy, the increase in drugtraffic, the flood of illegal immigrants, the loss of jobs in theU.S., and now the most recent specter of unsafe Mexican trucks onour highways have proved that we were right (in opposing NAFTA),"he said.   He was referring to the latest, and biggest, roadblock in theimplementation of NAFTA, the mid-December decision by theadministration of President Bill Clinton to indefinitely delay theliberalization of trucking rules that would have permitted U.S. andMexican truckers to operate more than 30 kilometers beyond eachothers' borders.   The new rules were to have taken effect this month but pressurefrom the powerful Teamsters Union apparently persuaded theadministration to place "greater emphasis on safety and security"for U.S. roadways. The administration has not yet indicated whenthose concerns might be cleared up.   Citing trade experts, the Washington Post said the decision, thefirst major failure of NAFTA's implementation, showed "how eagerthe administration is to reduce NAFTA's unpleasant politicalfallout, even by circumventing rules of an accord President Clintonchampioned."   But it's not only Clinton's political base that is unhappy.Pulled by television pundit and presidential hopeful PatrickBuchanan, Republicans, too, have moved against NAFTA.   Historically one of the most devoted free trade advocates in afree trade party, Republican presidential front-runner Sen. RobertDole came out three months ago against the consideration of any newtrade pacts this year. With that remark, he effectively buried 45years of staunch Republican support for any measure that would openup foreign markets to U.S. goods and investment.   He also buried the hopes of Caribbean Basin nations of achievingparity with NAFTA benefits and of Chile for becoming the firstnon-North American nation to be admitted to NAFTA this year. Giventhe sensitivity of the issue in next year's presidential election,those hopes are probably dead for next year as well.   NAFTA supporters say all this is unfair. During its first year,NAFTA had produced unprecedented gains in two-way trade for boththe United States and Mexico which, after all, was the reason forits approval.   The problem, they insist, was something completely unrelated tothe trade pact: the melt-down of the peso which began last Decemberwhen the incoming administration of Mexican President ErnestoZedillo botched a devaluation.   "Nonsense," say the foes, many of whom had warned that the pesowas kept deliberately overvalued during the NAFTA debate in theU.S. Congress in late 1993 so as not to give ammunition to criticswho warned that inevitable devaluations would spur the flight ofcapital and factories southwards.   Whatever the relationship between the peso's collapse and NAFTA,critics are now having a field day pointing to all of the brokenpromises made by NAFTA's boosters two years ago.   Clinton, for example, predicted that NAFTA would create 200,000U.S. jobs in its first two years. In fact, Gary Hufbauer of theInstitute for International Economics, the economist on whom theWhite House relied for Clinton's estimate, now admits that theUnited States has probably lost about 225,000 jobs net.   Indeed, Mexico is expected to end up with a trade surplus withthe United States this year of around $20 billion. U.S. exports toMexico have fallen to about their pre-NAFTA levels and, as yet,show few signs of levelling off.   Similarly, a new report to be released by the consumer groupPublic Citizen and the Mexico City-based Red Mexicana de AccionFrente al Libre Comercio (RMALC) finds that another major promiseof the NAFTA campaign, that public health and environmentalproblems along the U.S.-Mexico border would be improved as a resultof NAFta, have been dashed.   The 85-page report finds that "NAFTA has intensified severeproblems of water and air polution, hazardous waste dumping andincreased the incidence of certain diseases and birth defects inthe border region," according to Joan Claybrook, Public Citizen'spresident.   In spite of administration predictions that NAFTA-relatedinvestments would disperse industry in Mexico away from the borderto other regions, the maquiladoras which dominate borderenterprises have been one of the few sectors to experience a majorboom over the past two years.   The maquiladora workforce has grown 20 per cent since NAFTA tookeffect, according to the new report, at the same time that anestimated 1.6 million Mexicans have lost their jobs as a result ofthe economic crisis. More than 85 per cent of the maquiladoraworkers were employed near the border.   Worse, the economic crisis in Mexico has greatly reduced theability of the country's state and federal health and environmentalauthorities to deal with the increased industrial concentrationccording to the report.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996HONG KONG:  COUNTDOWN TO HANDOVER ENTERS CRUCIAL PHASEAnalysis by Yojana Sharma   HONG KONG, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- The countdown to the handover of HongKong to China has entered what is arguably its most crucial phasewith Beijing having handpicked its team to steer the colony throughthe final 18 months of British rule.   A preparatory committee of Hong Kong businessmen, academics,politicians and other public figures was officially approved byChina's Parliament, the National People's Congress, last week.   Together with high-ranking Chinese officials, led by foreignminister Qian Qichen, they are expected to move quickly to set inplace an embryo administration that will take charge on July 1,1997, when this vibrant economy becomes a Special AdministrativeRegion of China.   The formation of the Preparatory Committee, which has theblessing of Britain under the terms of the handover treaty signedby Britain and China in 1984, "signifies the formal start of givingup power by the British administration here," says Terry Cheng,editor of the daily Hong Kong Standard.   From now on, says Cheng, "things will move very fast and thepolitical environment will be quite changed by the end of the year(1996)."   The Committee is expected to begin its work almost immediately.Its most important task is seen as the election by mid-year by acommittee executive of Hong Kong's first post-1997 governor, toreplace Chris Patten, the 28th and last British governor of HongKong.   A short-list of names is already thought to have been drawn upby the Chinese authorities. The naming of the Governor-designatewill be an important milestone, analysts say.   The governor-in-waiting will then pick his Executive Council,bringing out into the open the nature of the first post-1997government. "The candidates will have an important bearing on thefuture running of the territory," noted Cheng.   However, some analysts say there will be few surprises with sucha small number of Hong Kong people appointed to the Committee. HongKong figures wanting to be appointed to the Committee are alreadyjockeying for position.   In particular, several delegations of business tycoons, many ofthem with business interests in China, visited Beijing in recentweeks to meet top Chinese officials and lobby for a place on theCommittee. Many of them succeeded, sparking strong criticism thatthe Committee is heavily skewed towards the business sector withentire sectors of the Hong Kong population completelyunrepresented.   No members of Hong Kong's pro-democracy Democratic Party, whichswept the Legislative Council polls in September, have beenappointed, leading to criticism that the Committee is packed with"yes-men" who will do Beijing's bidding rather than stand up forHong Kong's interests.   Hong Kong legislator Dr. Leong Che-Hung wonders how many HongKong representatives on the committee "can claim to represent HongKong people? How many have actually spoken the mind of Hong Kongpeople in the past? Paradoxically, records have shown that many ofthem have spoken or even acted against the wishes of Hong Kongpeople."   Defending China's decision to exclude the Democrats, Hong Konglegislator and Committee member David Chu said the Committee neededto work smoothly.   "The Chinese government will appoint people who can work withChina. There is just over a year to prepare the transition (toChinese rule) and the volume of work is quite big and some of thework quite controversial," he said.   The vast majority of appointees have already sat on aconsultative body set up by China known as the Preliminary WorkingCommittee (PWC), which wound up in early December to make way forthe Preparatory Committee. The PWC was seen as having littlecredibility with the Hong Kong public.   Meanwhile public opinion polls by three universities conductedby sociologist Lau Siu Kai, himself appointed to the Committee,found that Hong Kong people were quickly losing faith in thepolitical establishment pre- and post-1997.   Lau said the survey showed people had declining trust inpolitical institutions and leaders during the transition. "Thepower of the British authorities is waning and the legitimacy ofthe incoming Chinese authorities has yet to be established," hesaid.   Hong Kong Governor Chris Patten, who angered the Chinese withhis democratic reforms for the Colony also criticised theCommittee. "I think that...the lack of representativeness (of theCommittee) expresses China's attitude towards the territory.   "I think there will inevitably be quite a lot of feeling in HongKong that it's a great pity that China didn't show more trust foropinion in Hong Kong and wasn't prepared to tap as wide a sectionof opinion as possible," Patten told the British BroadcastingCorporation (BBC).   Analysts say that China still has its work cut out for itshoring up Hong Kong's confidence in the post-1997 government, withsome predicting a mass exodus in 1996 if the future governor andhis team appear to be a self-serving group who will not stand upto Beijing hardliners.   "As for the ordinary people...their perception of future travel,freedom, autonomy and rule of law will determine what course theywill take to cope with the changeover," said Cheng. "Some who havealready secured a right of abode elsewhere will leave next year ifthey do not perceive the developments positively."   Patten also warned: "If Chinese officials of the PreparatoryCommittee go on delivering the same sort of shocks that Hong Kongsuffered in the last few months...if people start to doubt whetherHong Kong really will have a high degree of independence after 1997then they may decide to go abroad."   Patten said there was little Britain could now do to reassurepeople about the future. "The closer we get to 1997 the more peoplewill focus on the reality which is that more and more reassuranceis needed from China."   Indirectly, Patten was also referring to Britain's declininginfluence in the last days of its rule, with the PreparatoryCommittee expected to be an important power center competing withthe Colonial administration in the final months.   "The Chinese will have far greater influence on governmentdecision-making," noted Cheng.   In particular once the name of the first post-1997 governor isannounced at mid-year, Patten will increasingly be seen as a lameduck. As Cheng explained, while the post-1997 Governor-designateand his team "will have no executive power...their views will bemuch sought after...for any policy directions for post-1997 HongKong."   Hong Kong Liberal Party legislator Allen Lee, who was amongthose appointed, admitted "at times the authority of the Hong Konggovernment would be affected (by the Committee) whether the HongKong government likes it or not."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996PHILIPPINES:  NEW YEAR'S REVELRY FATAL FOR SCORES OF FILIPINOSBy Johanna Son   MANILA, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- Not only do Filipinos observe theworld's longest Christmas season, they may well have the bloodiestbrand of New Year revelry too.   For days after Filipinos welcome the New Year withsuper-strength firecrackers like "Judas' Belt" and "Hiroshima",newspapers and television stations keep a tally of people killedor maimed by pyrotechnics at the height of holiday revelry.   "Tradition dies hard, as does the stupidity of some people,"commented Isyu, a popular tabloid that ran a picture of a doctorworking on the mangled hand of a firecracker victim grimacing inpain.   By this morning, newspapers reported that at least 23 personsdied and more than 800 persons were injured by firecrackers.   Holiday fever in the Philippines begins as early as in Octoberand ends the first Sunday of January, on the Roman Catholic Feastof the Three Kings. But yuletide celebrations reach their deafeningheight on the midnight of Dec. 31.   On New Year's Eve, emergency rooms of hospitals fill up withblast and burn victims. Parts of Manila turn into mini-war zones,where venturing out for a walk or drive is risky. Visibility dipsas smoke from exploded firecrackers engulfs the city.   At least six people were killed by stray bullets fired by NewYears revellers into the sky, and scores more across the countryhurt by bullets.   Thirteen fires broke out in the Philippine capital of Maniladuring the early hours of Jan. 1, at least three of them startedby firecrackers falling on roofs or into storehouses.   "Our insistence on exploding big firecrackers and firing gunsto welcome the new year must make other people wonder if we arereally a suicidal and homicidal race," said the Philippine DailyInquirer in its editorial today.   "Or perhaps it is our desire to be the winner in the pyrotechnicand noise Olympics: the bigger, the noisier, the deadlier, thebetter. We do everything to excess, in the process injuring andsometimes killing ourselves or other people," it added.   But though the casualty count remained sizable, governmentofficials took some comfort in that it was considerably lower thanlast year's toll.   Some 4,500 persons were injured last year, many of whom lostfingers or hands that were blasted away in accidents, by defectivefirecrackers or by those powerful enough to sound and hurt likesmall bombs. Health department officials attributed the lowercasualty toll to a national campaign to get Filipinos to use othernoisemakers instead of firecrackers.   "The casualty toll has gone down by up to 50 per cent. Ourprogram for people to use horns has paid off somewhat," said HealthSecretary Hilarion Ramiro, who went on television to appeal topeople to avoid lighting firecrackers.   Newspapers and radio stations reminded people to "be merry, notsorry" during the New Year celebrations. TV stations tried to drivethe message home by running graphic footage of bloodied victimsmaimed by firecracker blasts or burns.   The government in fact made arrangements with more than 50hospitals to treat up to 5,000 victims, with one hospitaldesignated as the National Registry for Firecracker-RelatedInjuries.   Largely unable to keep watch over firecracker factories, thegovernment has in recent years tried to dampen demand forpyrotechnics by promoting the use of horns and other noisemakersinstead. But one of the most commonly-cited, and perhaps effective,reasons for the lower casualty count this year has been the risingcost of pyrotechnics, some of which are smuggled into the country.Fancy firecrackers can cost well over $35 apiece.   Members of the Martinez family say its supply of firecrackersduring this New Year's eve was good for only 30 minutes of revelry."We cut down because they're really getting expensive," said DannyMartinez, a businessman.   "While Filipinos rich and poor have been known to burn theirmoney, this becomes harder to do and easier to avoid when thechoice gets down to having a good dinner or a few noises," remarkedthe Manila Times newspaper.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996VENEZUELA-DRUGS:  CRIME BY WOMEN AND CHILDREN INCREASESBy Wilmer Poleo Zarpa   CARACAS, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- Carmen Victoria lives in a marginalneighborhood west of Caracas. She had her first child when she was16 and her second child two years later. The fathers disappeared.   Now in her early thirties, Carmen Victoria is an inmate of theLos Teques women's prison 30 kilometers southwest of the capital.Her oldest son, Juan Carlos, 16, is also imprisoned in a youthreformatory. Both are charged with drug-related crimes.   There are many cases in Venezuela like those of Carmen Victoriaand Juan Carlos, especially in the largest cities such as Caracas,Maracay, Valencia, Barguisimeto and Maracaibo.   The phenomenon has begun to cause concern but reliablestatistics about its incidence are not yet available.   Nerio Rengifo, chief of the Judicial Technical Police'sAnti-Drug Division, acknowledges that the participation of womenand adolescents in criminal activity has grown significantly,especially in the lower rungs of the illegal drug industry.   Maribel Rodriguez, a sociologist with the Venezuelan Ministryof Education, explained that "the country's economic crisis has hitthe population with the fewest resources especially hard."   "In many families, children and youth find themselves compelledfor one reason or another, to leave school," she added.   Lack of opportunity for poor children, youths and adults leadto idleness which may encourage drug consumption or trafficking,she said. Rodriguez noted the absence of education, sports andcultural programs to help combat the problem.   Rengifo agreed with the sociologist and added that much dependedon a child's upbringing and the ties created between parents andchild.   "The situation is usually worse in poor neighborhoods where themajority of children grow up parentless or where mothers havechildren with different fathers," Rengifo said.   The police chief said, "The mother must leave the children alonefor the better part of the day while she looks for sustenance."   To this he added "the dearth of paternal role models to follow"and a repressed desire for betterment which he says makes the pooradolescent easy prey for any kind of criminal activity, with rolemodels found on every street and corner.   Guillermo Romero, president of the National Commission AgainstIllegal Drug Use (Conacuid) and the government's leading authorityon the issue agrees that the nuclear family is the basis foreducation in every sense, including learning to reject drugs.   For that reason, the National Plan for Prevention and Controlof Drug Production, Trafficking and Consumption emphasizesprevention and the paramount need to actively include thecommunity, Romero explained.   Community participation is given priority when developinginformation, training and education programs directed towardpreventing drug trafficking and consumption, Romero said.   The government, police and sociologists all agree thatprevention is the best tool. Commissioner Rengifo insisted that theproblem "will never be solved with repressive policies."   Police believed that the solution lies in "confronting the lackof family planning and fighting idleness by increasing activitiesin poor neighborhoods," he said   Conacuid has proposed reformulating all educational programs toinclude specific objectives referring to the prevention of drugtrafficking and consumption.   Romero announced plans for an epidemiological study that willserve as the basis for the National Plan because it will providea better understanding of the general problem and specificconditions in each neighborhood.   "Nevertheless, we have to be clear that this is an ethical andmoral problem, a problem for everyone, and that consequently thesolution should be supported by everyone," Romero opined.   Sociologist Ruth Taborda, who is also with the Ministry ofEducation, added that the involvement of minors with drugs requiresstronger action for "preventive intervention in the family, school,and community."   Taborda said that she had developed concrete initiatives andstrategies that are broadly divided into a teacher training programand a program to develop youth activists.   "Using specific projects, we're seeking to train teachers inpreventive activity and also to develop youth leaders in theschools," Taborda explained.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996PAKISTAN-AFGHANISTAN:  PROXY WAR TESTS DOMESTIC POLITICSBy Nasim Zehra   ISLAMABAD, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- Determined to be seen as a big playerin Afghanistan, Pakistan has urged President Burhanuddin Rabbanito smooth the way for talks on resolving the protracted war,ignoring Rabbani's own unconditional offer for peace parleys.   Foreign Minister Sardar Assef said in a televised interview overthe weekend that the "prime responsibility" for restoring peace inAfghanistan rests with Rabbani, and had nothing to say about thesudden raising of hopes for peace in Afghanistan.   Afghanistan's beleaguered president last month surprised Afghanwatchers by offering to travel out of his fortified capital to thestrongholds of his rivals for talks to end the fierce battle forpower that has devastated the country.   The Taliban student militia, who are Rabbani's biggestchallengers, are reported to be considering the offer. After anexpected initial rebuff, they now say they will make a decisionafter receiving details.   Commentators in Islamabad think Assef's silence on Rabbani'soffer may be the result of disquiet in Pakistan over the softeningof rigid stands by Rabbani and the Taliban. In Afghanistan's ethnicpower struggle, Pakistan is on the side of the Taliban who sweptout of seminaries in Pakistan in 1994 to threaten Rabbani's controlof Afghanistan.   Islamabad's support for the student militants has strained itspreviously cozy relations with Iran, which has thrown itsconsiderable weight behind Rabbani. Afghanistan is at the centerof a regional proxy war between neighbors bent on increasing theirpresence in the strategic area.   The Taliban control 11 of Afghanistan's 32 provinces, and sinceOctober have laid siege to Kabul. Afghanistan's historic capitalhas been nearly completely destroyed in the war that erupted a fewmonths after mujahiddin forces ousted the pro-communist governmentof Najibullah in April 1992.   Rival factions trained on each other the stockpiles ofsophisticated arms and ammunition supplied by the United States viaPakistan during the mujahiddin's 12-year war with the Afghangovernment.   Now fighting for control are the Persian-speakingTajik-controlled government of Rabbani ranged against the Uzbekwarlord General Rashid Dostam, the ethnic Pushtoon Hizbul Islamichief Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, and the Taliban student warriors.   On Dec. 30, eight Afghan civilians were killed and 41 injuredwhen a deadly new wave of shells and rockets smashed into Kabulfrom Taliban positions on Kabul's fringes. The InternationalCommittee of the Red Cross estimates factional fighting in andaround Kabul has killed more than a quarter million people.   Tens of thousands of civilians have fled Kabul and many areliving in refugee camps in Pakistan's north and northwest.Tolerated earlier, they are increasingly being viewed as a threatto internal security in Pakistan.   A wave of bomb attacks in Pakistan -- the worst being the blastin Peshawar on Dec. 21 and the bombing of the Egyptian Embassy inIslamabad on Nov. 19 -- are believed to be the fallout ofAfghanistan's lingering civil war.   Political observers warn of worsening law and order because ofPakistan's proxy military intervention in Afghanistan. While thereis no conclusive evidence, the involvement of the Rabbani regimein master-minding some attacks is also suspected. In September,Pakistan's embassy in Kabul was razed to the ground.   Hardliners are campaigning for a military retaliatory attack onthe Afghan government. "Pakistan should attack Rabbani's militarytarget to teach a lesson," said Nawabzada Nasrullah Khan, chairmanof the Kashmir Committee, at a press conference.   In his opinion, this would be acceptable to the world communitywhich has not demurred when Israel's military attacked Hezbollahtargets in south Lebanon. They are not attacks of aggression butfor the protection of its citizens, he explained.   However, as its response, Pakistan has only expelled thePeshawar-based member of the Afghan Council, Moosa Khan, andordered that all foreign non-governmental groups working withrefugees must be staffed either by their own nationals or byPakistanis.   Pakistan is awash with weapons and explosives, and it isvirtually impossible for the security forces to control the flowof arms and men across its borders. Many militant Islamic groupsabroad have originated in Pakistan.   Like the Taliban who have learned their lessons in warfare insouthwestern Baluchistan province, Islamic groups from Algeria toSudan and Egypt have roots in Pakistan's religious seminaries.During the war conducted by Afghan mujahiddin against theSoviet-backed Kabul regime, they received training in warfare andthe handling of explosives.   Meanwhile, the Benazir Bhutto government in Islamabad has beencracking down on the religious right to change Pakistan's imageabroad as a breeding ground for Islamic militants. Islamic radicalslast week expressed their outrage by calling a nationwide strikeagainst the government, accusing it of being un-Islamic.   Liberal Pakistanis worry about an Islamic takeover. The fearswere heightened by disclosures about an abortive coup planned inSeptember last year by a group of fundamentalist officers in thePakistan army.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996CAMEROON-AGRICULTURE:  FARMERS AND CATTLE-OWNERS CLASH OVER LANDby Tansa Musa   BAMENDA, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- The administrator of Wum, innorth-western Cameroon, had barely settled down to a day's workwhen 150 women from a neighboring village began chanting protestsongs outside his office demanding the release from detention ofone of their kith and kin.   Ekom David Achuo, the husband of one of the demonstrating women,had earlier caught four cows that had devoured three-quarters ofhis crop and marched them to the local police station, demandingan investigation and compensation from the animals' owner. Insteadthe police beat him up and detained him the whole day.   Rather than freeing Achuo, the administrator ordered the womenaway. Angrily they tore off their clothes, a common form ofultimate protest among African women, at which the official fled.   "We've had enough of this," fumed the leader of the group ofwomen. "They (the administration) have taken all our land and givenit to the Bororos (mainly cattle grazers in the region)."   "Now we have no more land to farm on. Even when we grow cropson what is left, they send their cows to destroy everything. Andeach time we complain, the administration does nothing about it,"she added.   Wum, like most of the province, has been the scene ofincreasingly violent conflicts over the past two decades betweenfarmers and immigrant cattle grazers.   The competition has been inflamed by unregulated farming andgrazing, rapid population growth, and alleged bias on the part ofthe local administration.   Cattle rearing was first introduced to this primarily farmingarea by Nigerian Fulani nomads (also known as Bororos) in the1930's. In time, cattle became a sign of wealth even among locals.   Northwestern Cameroon is mainly rough, hilly terrain and onlyfive per cent of the land is arable. The problem has beencompounded by shifting cultivation, a common practice among localfarmers whereby they exploit an area of land for three years, thenmove onto another, leaving the first one fallow.   In an area with no industries where 95 per cent of thepopulation of 1.8 million depend on subsistence agriculture, thepressure on the land has reached the point of violence betweencultivators and cattle owners.   According to Ali Tal, an agricultural expert here, farmer-grazerdisputes are a headache for both agricultural and veterinary(livestock) services.   Amos Chanji of the provincial livestock service in Bamendabelieves the solution lies in better land use by farmers and betterranching by cattle breeders. But Ali says efforts to teachsustainable farming and land use for high altitudes have failed.   "We are quite aware that there is a shortage of land here," saysDr. Idrissou Bapetel, veterinary officer for Wum. "We have triedto demarcate grazing land from farm land. But nobody, neither thefarmer nor the grazer, respects the demarcation line. So we'recaught in between the two. We just don't know what to do."   The clashes here have occasionally led to loss of property oreven life.   Three months ago, a man stabbed during a fight with acattle-owner near his farm died in the hospital; in Ndu, part ofthe neighboring Donga-Mantung Division, a herder burned down a hutholding a farmer's harvest for the whole year when the farmer'schildren stoned his cows for eating their crops.   The violence has been attributed to the way in whichadministrators have resolved the clashes. Often the Bororos, whoare usually richer than the farmers, bribe administrators in cashor cattle to rule in their favor.   Residents of Wat in Donga-Mantung say one major cattle-ownercomes before the courts at least six times a year, but alwaysemerges victorious.   "All he needs to do is give the divisional officer one of hismany cows and the case is settled," a resident told IPS. Butadministrators vehemently deny this.   "You know, in this situation it is difficult to satisfy the twosides. We try to let them understand that the two communities mustlive together. The society needs the crops of the farmers as wellas the cattle the grazers raise. So the two must cohabit," saysJames Yega, deputy divisional officer for Wum.   Yega blames most of the problems on farmers who considerthemselves the original owners of the land: "They say the Bororosare strangers encroaching on their land...But these people(Bororos) are also Cameroonians and have equal access to land."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996EAST ASIA-POLITICS:  IN JAPAN, SOUTH KOREA, PUBLIC LOSING FAITHAnalysis by Suvendrini Kakuchi   TOKYO, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- Corruption at the highest levels inpolitics and business in Japan and South Korea is nothing new, sayanalysts. It was ignored or tolerated by East Asian populationsriding a wave of more than a decade of rapid economic growth.   Not so anymore. In a less economically vibrant Japan and a morepolitically open South Korea, corruption is no longer viewed as anecessary evil. Indeed, it is seen as an obstacle to futuredevelopment -- hence the emphasis on change by the governmentleaders of both countries in their New Year messages yesterday.   "Setting straight the historical record in order to rectify pastwrongs will be a starting point in which we should take pride andit will also signal the birth of a new society," said South KoreaPresident Kim Young Sam.   He has vowed to leave no stone unturned to bring the guilty tojustice with regard to corruption and coup-related incidents forwhich two former presidents and several leading businessmen havebeen arrested and indicted over the past few months.   In Tokyo, where the government has been rocked by a series offinancial scandals, Japanese Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama spentmuch time on his government's plans to deregulate the economy insuch a way that bureaucrats would no longer have carte blanche overthe disbursement of public funds.   "By promoting structural reform, deregulation andliberalization, the outlook for the economy will be bright thisyear," Murayama said in his New Year message yesterday.   Both leaders urged public understanding as they try to make upfor past mistakes. They have to, say analysts, who feel thescandals have threatened to undermine years of economicdevelopment.   The Japanese population is just about fed up with the politicalestablishment, commented Japan's Yomuiri Shimbun newspaper in aneditorial after last month's arrest of former labor minister ToshioYamaguchi.   He faces charges of using his former position to secure 1.9billion yen ($19 million) in illegal loans from the now defunctTokyo Kyowa Credit Association and Anzen Credit Bank to helprelatives set up businesses that until recently raked in hugeprofits.   Not surprisingly, the Japanese public reacted with outrage whenthe 60-year-old Yamaguchi refused to answer questions fromprosecutors and even evoked his special parliamentary immunity,forcing the government to endorse his arrest at the last moment.   Yamaguchi, deputy secretary of the reformist New Frontier Party,continues to deny any wrongdoing, but in the eyes of a public tiredby reports of impropriety regarding present and former governmentofficials he is already deemed guilty, noted the newspaper AsahiShimbun.   Asahi Shimbun also expects that an even bigger scandal,involving the New York branch of the Daiwa Bank, will also seethose accused found guilty of mismanagement.   Last week, that bank's former manager Masahiro Tsuda wasindicted by a New York court on charges of defrauding the U.S.Federal Reserve by concealing $1.12 billion of trading losses.   In November, Federal and New York State banking regulatorsordered Daiwa to close its operations in the United States aftera grand jury accused banking officials of illegally covering uphuge trading losses.   The scandals have dealt a severe blow to Japan's image and muchof the heat has in turn been focused on the finance ministry forfailing to put adequate controls in place to preempt the illegalactivity.   The resignation of the ministry's top-ranking bureaucrat,administrative vice-finance minister Kyosuke Shin, is a reflectionof the turmoil caused by the bad-loan scandals, including themammoth bad debt problem faced by housing loan companies.   "I have decided to step down to let some fresh air into theministry as 1996 starts, at a time when the morale of ministryofficials has been shaken by a series of incidents," he said in hisresignation letter, which was accepted Dec. 29 by Finance MinisterMasayoshi Takemura.   Shinozawa, whose resignation becomes effective on Dec. 29, saidhis resignation should not be seen in the light of a failing on hispart with regard to any particular "incident."   Last month, the ministry unveiled a plan to spend billions ofdollars in public funds to shore up bankrupt housing loancompanies. Economic analysts applaud the initiative, but thetaxpayers are not enthusiastic about having to foot the bill forthe ministry's mistakes.   Observers expect the government will try to put a lid on thescandal by announcing reshuffles within the ministry. This,however, may not be acceptable in today's Japan where unemploymenthit a post-war high of 3.4 per cent in November.   According to Tokyo Business Today, a leading magazine on Japan'seconomy, politics and business have deep-rooted bonds in Japanesesociety -- ties forged for mutual gain.   "Money is not the only reward enjoyed by politicians who dofavors for companies," said the magazine. "Electoral support alsoplays a major part in the relationship. At election time companiesmobilize people, materials and money in support of the right sortof politician."   The business magazine says corruption goes deeper, withpoliticians campaigning for large budget allocations for certainministries "expecting in turn to be accommodated (by bureaucrats)when they put in a word for a favored company at contract time."   Analysts in Seoul say that in South Korea corruption issimilarly rampant, adding that the political upheavals now rockingthe country should not be viewed only in the context of the couptrials now taking place.   The coup trials involve former South Korean president Roh TaeWoo and his predecessor, who led the nation in the 1980's. Theyhave been arrested and charged for crimes ranging from bribery toinsurrection.   Roh, South Korea's first elected president and often consideredthe main instigator of democratic reform after decades of militaryrule, is under arrest for accumulating a $6.5 million slush fundfrom top business leaders.   But just as in Japan, those arrested remain defiant in the faceof public disenchantment. Such is the case with Chun, one of thenation's most formidable military dictators, who went on a hungerstrike to protest his arrest. He is now in hospital.   Japanese and South Korean leaders find it difficult to acceptfault for their actions because they have become so accustomed toa system which has earlier been considered part and parcel of EastAsian economic development.   South Korea's now dynamic conglomerates enjoy state protectionthrough subsidies and regulations. In return it has been thepractice to handsomely reward politicians, who use the money tofinance their political campaigns.   Meanwhile the economy has prospered, creating jobs -- one reasonwhy no fuss was made. Another reason is that the politicalestablishment used to be less open to criticism.   "The power of a democratically awakened people has a lot to dowith the impending fate of the two former presidents awaitingjustice," South Korean analyst Mary B. Kim wrote in The KoreaHerald.   Both Roh and Chun have been indicted on charges of corruptionand instigating a 1979 military coup that eventually carried themto power.   "To see these politicians in prison garb is a tremendous blowto the nation's confidence," said Mary B. Kim. "The only way SouthKoreans can redeem their loss is by hoping the current crisis willclean the bad, old system."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996DEVELOPMENT:  THIRD WORLD GROWTH SLOW OVER LAST DECADE   WASHINGTON, Dec. 30 (IPS) -- Despite a decade of reform, mostThird World economies grew at a per capita rate of only one percent or less from 1985 through 1994, according to the latestedition of the World Bank's annual Atlas.   Considered as a region, African economies performed the worstover the decade, with Cameroon claiming last place with a percapita growth rate of minus 6.6 per cent. But Nicaragua's economyalso declined dramatically, at a rate of minus 6.4 per cent.   Declines in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union were inmany cases even more dramatic, with growth rates ranging from minus0.9 per cent for Hungary and Poland to minus 18.6 per cent forGeorgia.   Western industrialized economies, on the other hand, grew at afairly consistent rate of between one and two per cent, althoughSweden turned in zero per capita growth over the decade andFinland's economy dipped at a 0.3 per cent per capita rate duringthe ten years.   As expected, the decade's star performers were Asian, withThailand turning in the strongest per capita growth rate of 8.2per cent, followed by South Korea at 7.8 per cent, and China andSingapore both at 6.9 per cent.   Botswana, the African leader, was next with a rate of 6.6 percent. Highest in Latin America was Chile, with a 6.2 per cent percapita growth rate.   The Atlas, a yearly publication which contains a wealth ofstatistical data on education, health, environmental quality,energy use, and economic performance, notes wide disparitiesbetween rich and poor nations.   For example, the average citizen of Luxembourg, rated as theworld's richest country and with a per capita gross domesticproduct (GDP) of $39,845, is almost 500 times richer than hisMozambican counterpart, whose per capita GDP share of $80 is theworld's lowest.   Using a different criterion called purchasing power parity (PPP)which measures the purchasing power in each country in equivalentU.S. dollars, the gap comes out somewhat smaller. Luxembourg's percapita PPP is $31,090, while Mozambique's is about $550.   In 1993, Luxembourg's energy consumption was 9,879 kilograms ofoil equivalent per person. That was about 1,400 times more than theenergy usage in the country at the other extreme, Somalia, whosecitizens consumed the equivalent of only seven kilograms of oilthat year.   Indeed, Africa remains by far the poorest continent in the worldin almost every respect. Sierra Leone has the highest infantmortality rate, with 164 children of every thousand succumbingduring their first year of life. In Japan and Sweden, which havethe lowest rates, only four and five children of every thousand,respectively, die before their first birthday.   Sierra Leone also had the lowest average life expectancy atbirth -- only 39 years. A cluster of other African nations andAfghanistan averaged in the mid-40s. In contrast, the average lifeexpectancy for people in developed countries rose from 71 in 1970to 77 in 1993.   The Atlas argues that education and high economic growth arelinked. Botswana, China, Indonesia, Korea and Singapore -- all withgrowth rates of over six per cent over the past decade -- have 96per cent or more of their primary-age children enrolled in school.   Despite Africa's relative poverty, child malnutrition isgenerally worse in South Asia. As measured by the percentage whichis found to be underweight, 68 per cent of the children inBangladesh are malnourished, as are 63 per cent of Indian children;50 per cent of Nepalis and 40 per cent of Pakistanis fall into themalnourished category.   Forty-six per cent of the children of Indonesia, one of theBank's star performers, were also found to be malnourished, as were42 per cent of Vietnamese children.   But the Bank does not have similar statistics on most of theworld's countries, including much of Africa, the Middle East, andthe former Soviet republics.   The Atlas also discloses that in most parts of the world womenmake up more than 30 per cent of the formal work force, but thatin 20 predominantly Muslim countries, they amount to less than 20per cent. In Bangladesh, women make up only eight per cent of thework force.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996ENVIRONMENT:  GREEN CONVENTIONS YET TO PROVE EFFECTIVEBy Pratap Chatterjee   WASHINGTON, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- The good environmental news for 1996is that industrialized countries yesterday halted the productionof chloroflourocarbons (CFCs), the chemicals that destroy themantle of ozone which surrounds the planet, protecting it from thesun's harmful ultra-violent radiation.   The bad environmental news for 1996 is that the production ofcarbon dioxide, another major contributor to the warming of theplanet, is much higher than predicted.   Does this mean that the ozone layer is improving even as globalwarming is getting worse? Not so far. Preliminary data for 1995show that both the ozone layer and the global climate have faredworse than expected.   This is despite the fact that two international environmentallaws, the 1987 Montreal Protocol for Substances that Deplete theOzone Layer and the 1992 Framework Convention on Climate Change,have been in place for some time to prevent these veryenvironmental disasters .   "In an ideal world, the good news would be just so. But climatechange and ozone depletion are not isolated phenomona. More carbondioxide warms the lower atmosphere and causes higher ozonedepletion," says Kalee Kreider from Ozone Action, aWashington-based environmental group.   Many companies have substituted ozone-depleting CFCs withhydrofluorocarbons (HFCs). But both chemicals contribute to globalwarming.   "Conventions work to eliminate specific chemicals.Unfortunately, the real world is complex and interactive soprogress on one chemical can be canceled out by increasedproduction of another chemical," adds Kreider.   Scientists from the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Agency(NASA) say that the data from 2,000 land-based weather-monitoringstations around the world show that 1995 was the hottest year ofthe 130 years for which information is available.   Meanwhile, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) reportedin September that the seasonal "hole" that opens up in the ozonelayer over Antarctic at the winter's end was roughly the area ofEurope, twice the previous year's size.   This is about the same size as the hole that was opened up theyear that Mount Pinatubo erupted in the Philippines. Scientistsblamed a rapid increase in the size of the ozone hole that year onthe ash and gases released by the volcano and predicted that thehole would soon return to a more normal size.   Scientists say that the problem with any prediction is thatthere are numerous assumptions involved, many of which often turnout to be wrong.   Activists say that the latest data also show that globalconventions are useless without effective regulation andenforcement.   Take global warming. In 1992, governments signed an agreementin Rio de Janiero to voluntarily cut back on the burning of fossilfuels, which produces carbon dioxide, to bring national emissionlevels down to those of 1990.   That relatively modest goal fell far short of the 60 per centcut in greenhouse emissions that scientists have warned is theminimum necessary to stabilize the global climate.   But even this target has proven elusive. Preliminary data for1995 shows that the United States produced 1,418 million metrictons of carbon emissions, 5.5 per cent more than it produced in1990.   Skip Laitner, of the Virginia-based American Council for anEnergy Efficient Economy, wrote recently that much of the targetcould have been met easily if U.S. consumers had invested more inenergy-efficient appliances and vehicles.   "The lagging efficiency gains are all the more ironic sinceearlier studies have shown that meeting the international goalswill increase both employment and economic productivity," he says.   But energy efficiency alone is not enough to check carbonemissions. Although fuel efficiency for U.S. cars rose from 5.7kilometers to 8.9 kilometers to the liter between 1969 and 1990,auto carbon emissions failed to come down.   Partly because of the associated cost-saving, U.S. drivers drove2.4 trillion kilometers in 1990, 50 per cent more than the1.6.trillion kilometers they logged in 1969. That pushed total fuelconsumption from 242 billion to 273 billion liters.   The United States is not the only country to miss the targets.Analysts say that Japan's carbon emissions will exceed their 1990levels by 5.75 per cent in the year 2000.   The Canadians have already announced that they will miss thetarget by 10 per cent, while unpublished memos from the EuropeanUnion show that it expects to be off by six to eight per cent.   The problems with fulfilling the climate change convention aretwo-fold. First, the convention is voluntary; second, governmentscontinue to pay out large subsidies to industries that rely onfossil fuels. The United States estimates that its subsidies forfossil fuels amount to between $10 billion and $15 billionannually. Estimates for global subsidies range as high as $230billion a year.   Or take the depletion of the ozone layer. Yesterday, companiesin industrialized countries officially stopped all production ofCFCs to comply with the Montreal protocol.   The problems with fulfilling this convention are also two-fold.First, the ban does not cover consumption. The result is a thrivingsmuggling racket.   CFC smuggling is already making headlines. Last month, theUnited States asked Costa Rica to extradite former Miami residentBruce Burrell, who was arrested in San Jose for allegedly tryingto smuggle 19,000 cylinders of CFCs into the U.S.   U.S. government spies working on a covert operation called"Operation Cool Breeze" discovered that an estimated five to tenthousand tons of CFCs are being smuggled in to this country eachyear.   Second, CFC substitutes, like HFCs, which are favored byindustry, also have an ozone-depleting effect.   This means that companies like Maytag and Sanyo continue tomarket refrigerators that deplete the ozone. It also means thatcompanies like Dupont can buy and stockpile CFCs fromnon-industrialized countries, which have another ten years tophase-out CFCs under the Montreal accord.   "What this shows is that nothing short of a global ban andstrong regulation will work," says Kreider.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996U.S.-MEXICO:  CITIZENS' GROUP DEPLORES NAFTA FAILURES ON BORDER   WASHINGTON, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- Citizens' groups in both the UnitedStates and Mexico are criticizing the failure of the North AmericanFree Trade Agreement (NAFTA) to improve public health and theenvironment along the two countries' border.   In a new report released here today, the Washington-based PublicCitizen organization and the Red Mexicana de Accion Frente al LibreComercio (RMALC) of Mexico City claim that promises by backers ofthe two-year-old free trade deal that the border would be cleanedup under the agreement have been betrayed.   "Not only is NAFTA not meeting these promises," said PublicCitizen president Joan Claybrook, a top consumer official in theadministration of former president Jimmy Carter. "It has actuallymade conditions worse than before it took effect two years ago."   The 100-page report, entitled "NAFTA's Broken Promises: TheBorder Betrayed", provides data on trends in the concentration ofmaquiladora industries in the border area, air and water pollution,hazardous waste, and birth defects attributable to environmentalcauses over the past two years.   Based on published records and interviews with more than onehundred experts and government officials, the report says that thepromise of improved border conditions relied on three developments.   It was expected that the maquiladoras would move away from theborder area into Mexico's interior, and that citizens and stateand local governments in the area would become wealthier given theexpected increase in two-way trade enabling them to devote moremoney to environmental clean-up and better health enforcement.   The optimistic predictions were also based on the belief thatstrong agencies created under NAFTA would also improve enforcementof environmental laws.   But none of these assumptions has been realized, according tothe report.   The dispersion of maquiladora industries was, according to theadministration of President Bill Clinton, one of the principal aimsof the accord. These industries, mostly assembly plants, not onlybring workers into already-crowded areas, but they also put strainson natural resources, like water, and use chemicals whichcontribute to water and air pollution.   "If NAFTA is not implemented incentives will continue under themaquiladoras to locate facilities in the border areas, thusexacerbating environmental pressures on the border, such as lossof habitat, adverse impacts to endangered and threatened species,and reductions in groundwater levels," according to oneadministration briefing paper.   But contrary to that prediction, the new report says that themaquiladora work force has actually grown by 20 per cent over thelast two years, from 546,000 to almost 700,000.   The increase in maquiladora employment, according to the report,is especially remarkable, given the fact that over the past yearsome 1.6 million Mexicans have lost their jobs as a result of thepeso's collapse and the tight, anti-inflationary policy followedby the government of President Ernesto Zedillo.   "As NAFTA opponents had predicted, the increased industrialconcentration has only intensified air and water pollution, dumpingof hazardous waste, and, most tragically, the rate of diseaseassociated with environmental degradation, including Hepatitis-A,cholera and birth defects," said Lori Wallach who directs PublicCitizen's Global Trade Watch.   As to the improvement of resources to deal with the pollutionand better regulate industries in the border area, the collapse ofthe Mexican peso has meant huge cutbacks in spending by bothMexico's federal and local governments. Mexican Foreign SecretaryJose Angel Gurria has said that Mexico has put on holdparticipation in border environmental projects because of theeconomic crisis, according to the report.   At the same time, the Republican-led U.S. Congress has also cutfunding for border programs, while the World Bank has rearrangedits loan portfolio to Mexico to the detriment of environmentalprograms.   The result is that while private investment in the border areahas risen sharply since NAFTA took effect, both public investmentand the resources needed to ensure that the public's interest inthe environmental quality of the area and the health of itscitizens have fallen, according to the report.   Nor have the new NAFTA-related institutions, mainly theCommission on Environmental Cooperation, the Border EnvironmentalCooperation Commission (BECC) and the North American DevelopmentBank (NADBank) even begun to fill the vacuum.   The Commission, for example, has not yet heard a single caseinvolving the failure of the Mexican government to enforce itsenvironmental laws, while the NADBank, established to providelow-interest loans for water and waste-treatment in bordercommunities, has yet to make its first loan.   Nor is its director, Alfredo Phillips Olmedo, very optimisticthat the situation will change soon. "We have come to theconclusion that it will be a more difficult process than originallyexpected for the bank to engage in substantial lending operationsin the short term," he recently told a public meeting.   Public Citizen is calling for passage of the NAFTAAccountability Act, a bill recently introduced by two prominentDemocratic foes of the trade pact. It calls for renegotiating keyparts of NAFTA.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996CUBA-ECONOMY:  NO READJUSTMENT WITHOUT BANKING REFORMBy Dalia Acosta   HAVANA, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- The tidal wave of radical change in Cubawill go full steam ahead in the new year with government plans fordeep banking reform to consolidate the economic readjustment.   The renewal, cooked up by the National Bank of Cuba (BNC), woulddo away with the state monopoly on banking, resurrecting structureswhich were seen as "un-socialist" for more than 30 years.   BNC president Francisco Soberon said a banking system is neededto offer rapid, secure and effective payment, channeling savingsto where they can be most efficiently used and guarantee thefunctioning of the economy.   Specialist sources said that the market economy, adoptedgradually, will force the nation to play a competitive financialgame which will be impossible to win if all the power is in onepair of hands.   The decentralization process began to gain ground two years agowhen the currency reserves reached rock bottom, forcing thegovernment to search around for loans and financing for theinvestments.   The first sign of the process really getting underway was thecreation of the International Bank of Commerce Ltd. (BICSA), inJanuary 1994, which took over the commercial arm of the BNC and istoday at the core of a budding corporation called New Bank Ltd.   BNC vice president Jose Rodriquez declared in November that thenew banking group was affiliated to the chain of currencyexchanges, CADECA S.A., the financial novelty with the most impactfor the average Cuban.   The National Financier Ltd. (FINSA) was also created to providemore flexible financing for businesses in Cuba, above all inshort-term loans.   However, the fact that all the new bodies will ultimately beunder the control of the New Bank has raised suspicions amongobservers.   Soberon and other authorities defend the need to separate thefunctions of the Central Bank and the Commercial Bank. They wantto see the creation of a Central Bank to control national financialactivity, alongside organisms like the Ministry of Finance andPrices.   Specialist sources state that the national banking system hasbeen forced to diversify its structures in order to respond tosimilar changes taking place in the economy.   The few large state-owned companies which dominated agriculturalproduction have given way to a mass of more than 3,000 cooperativebasic production units, 1,161 agricultural cooperatives and 86,000private agricultural producers.   Any way you look at it, the banking reform will have to plan itsaction in order to support the tendency towards self-employedworkers, small, medium-sized and private businesses.   For the time being, most of the pressure in Cuba is coming fromthe changes in foreign trade: the desperate need for credit openedthe nation up to foreign investment and commercial autonomy wasgranted to more than 240 national businesses.   The presence of representatives from 11 foreign banks on theisland has introduced the important ingredient of competition andrevealed the increasing interest awakened by the Cuban economicchanges.   However, the government is trying to keep control of a chunk ofthe internal market of banking business, just as they did withforeign investment.   Rodriguez said that "the foreign banks are not authorized tocarry out any banking activity in the country."   Their role is limited to "promoting the business of the island'sbanks," he said, and for the present, "there is no possibility ofgiving licenses to any foreign bank to offer other types ofservices in Cuba."   The Spanish Bilbao Vizcaya Bank (BBV) recently opened a branchin Cuba, offering financing for the Las Tunas area sugarproduction, in association with the PEMBA.   The Netherland Caribbean Bank is also there, along with theSpanish Exterior Bank, the Sabadel Bank and the Royal Bank ofCanada.   A party to celebrate the 45th anniversary of the Central Bankrecently was attended by representatives of 120 banks from 45countries, showing that despite the operative limitations, theforeign banks are very interested in the Cuban economy.   BNC workers said that this meeting opened new perspectives fora solution to the problem of the national foreign debt.   In the opinion of local economists, foreign debt is one of themain obstacles to the country entering fully into the capitalmarket and achieving economic growth. Not counting the money owedto the former Soviet Union, the foreign debt runs to $8.6 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996PANAMA:  THE UNSETTLED ISSUE OF RETRIBUTIONBy Silvio Hernandez   PANAMA CITY, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- Six years after the bloody U.S.invasion in December 1989, the Panamanian people are still pressingWashington for financial settlement for the death of some 2,500civilians.   "We will never forget," reads a notice erected in central PanamaCity by the relatives of the dead.   On Dec. 20, 1989, the United States launched a surprise attackon Panama City and Colon, with more than 30,000 soldiers, planes,helicopters and warships, in order to overthrow General ManuelNoriega.   The United States has invaded Panama fourteen times since 1856on the pretext of protecting "vital interests" or U.S. citizens inthe nation.   President of the Omar Torrijos Foundation, Alma Montenegro,described this attack as "the most bloody of all (U.S.) invasionsof Panama," and the Secretary General of the National WorkersCenter, Elberto Cobos, said that it left "deep wounds in thenational consciousness."   Demands for justice against the United States, proclamations,vigils and demonstrations each Dec. 20 "show that those deep woundsare not healing and will not heal until the US military presenceis ended."   The 1977 canal treaties dictate that all U.S. troops must bewithdrawn by Dec. 31, 1999, when all the military bases will behanded over to Panamanian jurisdiction along with the canal itself.   A controversial petition drawn up by President Bill Clinton lastSeptember, and sent to Panamanian President Ernesto PerezBalladares proposed "exploring" the possibility of the basesremaining active.   Cobos said that "the lesson" the Panamanians received on Dec.20, 1989 "is that they must strengthen their independence andconsolidate their sovereignty on the basis of the strict fulfilmentof the (1977) treaties."   Representative of the Committee for the Rescue of Sovereignty,Paola Herrera, told IPS that "the United States has aresponsibility for the events of Dec. 20 (1989) that cannot beby-passed."   Around 200 tradespeople, whose businesses were destroyed by theinvading army, and families of the victims, presented the U.S. witha demand for $300 million two years ago. Herrera said the demandhad not even been recognized by Washington, and that the amountclaimed was only a fraction of the cost of damage to the PanamanianState and infrastructure.   She stressed that the government of former president GuillermoEndara, who took over the post in a U.S. base in the canal zoneonly hours before the invasion, along with the present leader, "arealso responsible for not demanding war reparations."   She said the U.S. army stole "millions of dollars of equipmentfrom the old National Defense Forces (once they were defeated),destroying buildings, offices, and other state structures, and thegovernment passivity means they have never paid anything back."   The local justice system, "never called to trial the U.S.soldiers who committed crimes against unarmed Panamanian civilians,even though many of them were duly identified."   Meanwhile, "several members of the old National Defense Forcesare being tried for the death of two gringos (U.S. civilians)," whodied in the invasion.   The father of Carlos Puga, who died in the invasion, said, "Ihave not seen justice for my son...(he) died unarmed at the handsof the invading forces in an open violation of human rights."   He described the invasion as "genocide, for which the UnitedStates must be made to pay reparations."   The 135,000 member National Federation of Public Servants(FENASEP) has called for the trial of Endara and his vicepresidents, Ricardo Arias Calderon and Guillermo Ford, for being"accomplices of the 1989 invasion."   FENESEP spokesman, Maximo Gomez accused the trio of being "thecreators and accomplices of this invasion, proved by the fact thatthey took over power in a U.S. base."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996MEXICO:  SUBCOMMANDER MARCOS ANNOUNCES ZAPATISTA POLITICAL FRONTBy Eduardo Molina y Vedia   MEXICO CITY, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- Yesterday's announcement that theZapatista National Liberation Army (EZLN) will become a nationalpolitical front will not necessarily mean an end to guerrillatactics, said local experts in Mexico today.   Zapatista leader "Subcommander Marcos," addressed "the civil,indigenous, worker, rural worker, religious and non-partyorganizations and civil society," in "an act for the transition todemocracy."   The video was released to coincide with the second anniversaryof the Zapatista uprising two years ago yesterday.   Political analyst Maria Luz Casal, from the Independent NationalUniversity, told IPS that the rebel declaration would mean therenovation of the Zapatista's political arm the Zapatista NationalLiberation Front (FZLN).   "What has, until today, been the institutional role of theNational Democratic Convention (CND), which was made up of twoassemblies with 6,000 representatives in the insurgent zone, willnow go over to the FZLN," she said.   The CND had been criticized by the insurgents for its internaldivisions and squabbles, along with its inability to manage massmobilizations.   The CND brought together the smallest left-wing groups alongwith the "Church of the poor" and the radical wing of theRevolutionary Democratic Party (PRD) - a group which won 17 percent of the national vote in 1994.   It also included representatives of indigenous, humanrights,feminist and environmental non-government groups, along withindependent sympathizers.   Casal said, "the social base will not change when the FZLNsubstitutes the CND but they will try and minimize the role of thepreexisting political organizations and strengthen theorganizational function of the rebel leadership."   Christian Ahuerma of the Workers Movement Studies Center saidthe guerrilla declaration "is a new political gesture to indicatethat they are prepared to maintain the situation of detente andlook for new institutional solutions."   "In fact," he said, "the Zapatistas have been more a politicalthan military force since they began, though they werespectacularly catapulted onto the scene in a guerrilla outburst.   Ever since they came into the public eye on Jan. 1, 1994, in thesouthern Mexican state of Chiapas, the Zapatistas had been callingfor a democratic national front.   After two months of military confrontations in the conflictzone, the guerrilla and the government agreed to a ceasefire andan armed truce which led to an arduously slow peace process, stillunderway.   Yesterday's declaration, dubbed the "Fourth Declaration from theLacandona Jungle," called for a "peaceful, civil, independent anddemocratic, national Mexican organization."   The FZLN will be part of the year-old National LiberationMovement (MLN), defined as "a broad opposition force," whichrecently established its first principles and plans of action.   The FZLN "will not be a political party, because it will notfight to take power, but a civil political force in opposition theState party system."   The Zapatistas particularly object to the ruling InstitutionalRevolutionary Party (PRI), which has been in power since 1929 andhas suffered a series of scandals in the last year.   The rebels see the government attitude as "prepotent, racist andhumiliating," and have called for former president Carlos Salinasto be tried for "treason to the nation."   They criticized the "defrauding of popular will, the impositionof the neoliberal model which has plunged the population intopoverty and desperation, the sale of the nation to foreigners andthe close links with narcotraffic."   The proposal for a political front was established by popularvote in September when some 300,000 people voted in the "Nationalpoll for peace and democracy" organized by non-governmental groups.   One of its first actions will be to arrange an "intercontinentalsummit against neoliberalism," among the Zapatistas' internationalsupporters and sympathizers.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996JAMAICA-TOURISM:  WINTER SEASON GETS OFF TO BAD STARTBy Corinne Barnes   KINGSTON, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- It has been only three weeks since thewinter tourist season began but already hoteliers here are wringingtheir hands in despair.   Smaller hotels are on the verge of closing their doors unableto compete with the might and efficiency of the largerall-inclusive resorts.   But the landscape is not bright for all-inclusives either. Theyhad to offer discounted rates in order to attract the touristdollar as competition among the islands in the region becomes moreintense.   For Jamaica, the winter tourist season means valuable foreignexchange needed to service external debts and pay the country'shigh import bill. Tourism earns this northern Caribbean island someone billion U.S. dollars each year.   "Business is bad," says Gale Elmore, owner of a 17-room hotelin the country's northcoast resort town of Montego Bay.   Elmore's 40 year old Richmond Hill Hotel is struggling thisseason.   So far this season while all-inclusives are registeringoccupancy levels over 70 per cent, the smaller, more intimatefacilities have bookings of 25 per cent.   One hotel has reported that only four of its 24 rooms arecurrently occupied.   "I have no projections to March, nothing confirmed," saysAnthony Thompson, general manager of the Carib Isle hotel inRunaway Bay on the north coast.   "(Business) has not got any better in 15 years," says Thompson."Maybe we should really close our doors."   The non-all inclusive hoteliers complain that they have not beenable to carry out the necessary renovations and advertise theirproduct effectively to meet this year's winter season as they wereunable to borrow money as interest on loans are becomingunbearable.   Interest on loans now stand in the region of 47 per cent.   President of the Jamaica Hotel and Tourist Association (JHTA)Lionel Reid who was optimistic at the start of the season says heis also concerned that unless the situation changes these smallerhotels may be forced out of business.   "They (small hoteliers) are operating on bank borrowings and arenow at the wall," he says.   Reid says it is impossible for these hotels to remain viablewhen room rates being charged are what obtained 20 years ago.   As for Elmore, in order to keep her business open she has hadto strike a deal with the all-inclusive hotels in the area to allowtheir guests to eat at her hotel.   Reid says the situation now existing in the tourism industry isof concern to the wider population as the ripple effect will befelt throughout the entire economy.   If the small hotels are forced to fold, laid off workers arelikely to add to the unemployment level which is hovering at 15per cent.   The list of those affected is a long one and includes smallfarmers who supply fresh fruits and vegetables to these hotels, andrestaurants and vendors who depend on the non all-inclusive hoteltrade.   But the fight is not only between the small hotels and theall-inclusive. Intra-regionally, each island is struggling to fendoff the determined challenge mounted by its neighbors.   Jamaica, with its high crime rate (779 persons were murderedlast year), is being bypassed by tourists for other islandsperceived as unspoiled and safer.   The public relations department at the Jamaica Tourist Boardsays countries such as the Cayman Islands and Aruba which did nothave a presence in the market three years ago have increased theirprofiles through lavish advertising.   And Cuba which was not considered a serious competitor up to twoyears ago has been pumping millions of dollars into its tourismindustry and is expected to lure many visitors to its shores thisyear.   Between January and September 1995, some 68,000 tourists visitedJamaica. In 1994 the figure stood at 1.5 million, earning some $915million although projections for that year had been for 1.7 millionwith net earnings of $1.1 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA:  SERB SEIZURES TEST NATO'S PEACEKEEPING ROLEBy Jim Clark   SARAJEVO, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- NATO appeared to be in danger offailing its first major test of effectiveness in holding thefragile peace in Bosnia-Herzegovina, as concern grew for the safetyof a group of Bosnian Muslim civilians seized in a Serb-held suburbof Sarajevo.   The incident also showed up a potential gap between theresponsibilities of NATO's heavily armed forces and a putativeU.N.-led independent police force in the country. Both forces arebeing deployed in the country under the terms of the Dayton Accordsupposed to herald a permanent settlement to the conflict.   The Bosnian Serbs still control the western districts ofSarajevo, from where they bombarded the city during the 44 monthwar, but which must be handed over to the control of the Muslim-ledBosnian government. The ten all disappeared yesterday in the suburbof Ilidza, where opposition to the Dayton pact is strongest.   Bosnian civilians started to use the main roads out of the citythrough the suburbs after members of the 60,000-strong NATOimplementation force (IFOR) removed Serb checkpoints on theroadways. The seizures stopped the movements.   "We can confirm that 10 people are missing and we are pressingthe Bosnian Serb authorities to confirm their present location,"said Colonel Vladimir Ribnikov, chief of the U.N. civilian policeforce soon to deploy in Sarajevo.   Bosnian government minister Hasan Muratovic said the U.N.figures did not include four others seized yesterday by "Serbterrorists" on the road from Kiseljak through Ilidza to Sarajevo.   IFOR officers said they were concerned about the report but saidthe responsibility for their safety was a matter for the civilianauthorities.   NATO is limiting itself to implementing military aspects of theagreement and plans to leave routine policing to an internationalpolice force intended to tackle civilian problems. The force is yetto be deployed, and will be under the direction of the HighRepresentative for Bosnia-Herzegovina, former Swedish primeminister and European Union peace envoy Carl Bildt.   But who should be responsible when paramilitary forces commitcriminal acts, such as the weekend seizures, has not been definedas international efforts to grapple with the political aspects ofthe accord fall behind schedule.   NATO officers conceded that they are supposed to ensure freedomof movement, but still did not consider the activities ofparamilitary groups seizing travellers moving about the city astheir responsibility.   "We are not a police force, we are not mandated to take policeaction," British IFOR spokesman Brigadier Andrew Cumming told anews briefing in the rebel Bosnian Serb headquarters in Pale.   He attempted to play down the significance of the incidents,describing today as "another extraordinarily quiet day" in the(IFOR) theatre of operations. "The parties are continuing todemonstrate great cooperation and willingness to achieve the goalsof the Dayton agreement," he added.   The Bosnian Serbs, along with the Muslim-led government promisedto allow full freedom of movement to all citizens throughout Bosniawhen they signed the Dayton peace accord in Paris last month.   Muratovic told Bosnian TV that an appeal for the unconditionalrelease of the detained had been issued at a meeting attended bySerb, government and IFOR officials.   U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry said the former combatantshad not yet learnt how to deal with each other face to face. "Theyhave not yet been confronted with dealing with each other. That'sstill ahead of them," Perry said at an Italian airbase as heprepared for a tour of new U.S. encampments in Bosnia-Herzegovina.   Yet this kind of face to face confrontation is expected toincrease in frequency, especially as members of differentcommunities try to return to their homes in areas controlled byformer enemies, as specifically guaranteed by the Dayton accord.   The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) today kickedoff their program of refugee return by announcing a top-levelmeeting of 40 countries designed to marshal support and assistancefor a massive two-year scheme to see the first of 1.3 milliondisplaced persons back home in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Nearly twomillion more have sought refuge in neighboring Croatia, Serbia andother European countries.   In theory, IFOR is supposed to ensure that the returns can beorganized in peace, and the U.N. police force is supposed to ensuregeneral order while they are carried out. IFOR will not step inunless there is a military threat to civilians.   An IFOR media briefing in Sarajevo was told yesterday that "theessence of the IFOR commitment to this theatre, is to wrestauthority away from military, and into the hands of the civilianauthorities."   However NATO briefing papers say the IFOR mission will "help tocreate a secure environment" which includes "assisting in theobservation and prevention of interference with the movement ofcivilian populations, refugees and displaced persons."   The U.N. Security Council approved a U.N. civilian police forcefor Bosnia-Herzegovina last month. The 1,700 strong unit ofcivilian police officers from around the U.N. member nations willbe responsible for the control and recruitment of local police andproviding them with operational assistance.   Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali has said the force willcost about $90 million in the first six months, will to him butwill "subject to the coordination and guidance" of Bildt.   Bosnian Foreign Minister Mohammed Sacirbey told a pressconference in Brussels last month that his government was workingout a detailed plan with IFOR for the policing of the Serb suburbsof Sarajevo.   "The Bosnian government wants to do all it can to reassure thepeople in these areas," he said. "There will be joint policepatrols with the United Nations. There have always been Serbs,Croats and others, as well as Muslims, in our police force.   "But," he added, "we have agreed to increase the proportion ofSerbs to 30 per cent or more of the entire police force." It isexpected to be months before this combined force is effectivelyoperating.   Until then the informal arrangements must continue, even thoughthey are already failing in Sarajevo.   "IFOR was too quick to decide that security was satisfactory,"said Amir Hafdziomergaic, Muratovic's deputy. "Acts of Serbterrorism are not going to stop implementation of the Dayton peaceaccords, but they risk undermining the conditions in which it takesplace."   Muratovic said he may order Bosnian police to stop civiliansusing the roads unless escorted by IFOR troops. There are no plansfor IFOR convoys to see Sarajevans safely about their own city, aswere sometimes run by the U.N. during the war.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996SRI LANKA:  CONSERVATIONISTS BATTLE ECO-TOURISMBy Rita Sebastian   COLOMBO, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- An unsuspecting deer nibbles at aplastic bag caught on a prickly bush in Horton Plains, apicturesque reserve in Sri Lanka's central hills.   The animal does not know that it is flirting with death. Thenon-biodegradable plastic could choke its intestine, leading to apainful death.   Jagath Gunewardene of the non-governmental EnvironmentalFoundation blames the government policy of promotion of eco-tourismin Sri Lanka for the new problems that park officials are beingforced to contend with. At all times of the year, Horton Plains isswarming with tourists both local and foreign.   Dismissing them as nothing but "pleasure seekers," he says that90 per cent of visitors to the park and similar sanctuaries in SriLanka are insensitive and out to destroy what they have travelledfrom far and near to see.   The authorities have laid down strict rules to prevent visitorsfrom disturbing the plant and animal life in the park. Photographyat close range is prohibited, but that has not stopped touristsfrom hounding the deer for a good shot.   And by the time the last day tripper goes home, the naturereserve is littered with the remains of lunch and empty packets ofpotato crisps and soft drink bottles.   Conservationists say Horton Plains was created to preserve apart of Sri Lanka's tropical beauty for future generations, but theauthorities did not fully take into account man's carelessness andability to destroy.   "There has to be proper policing of tourists and their numbersmust be limited," says Deepthinka Kankanige of the Colombo-basedSociety for Environmental Education. On an average some 60 peoplevisit the park, but even that has been found too many for the staffwhose main job is to safeguard the park.   About 100 kilometers east of Colombo is Adam's Peak, a mountaintop that is venerated by Sri Lanka's Buddhist people, drawingmillions of devotees on a yearly pilgrimage. Many foreign touriststo Sri Lanka also scale the peak to catch spectacular views of thesunrise and the distant blue of the Indian Ocean.   But the beauty of Adam's Peak may be its ruin. Unregulated campsites have sprung up in the wilderness and trees are being strippedfor firewood for bonfires, which are a constant threat speciallyduring the dry season.   Kankanige says policing by Forest Department officials wouldhelp, but it is imperative tourist officials educate visitors.   Buses and private cars reaching Horton's Plain are beset bysouvenir sellers. While a lot of what is sold is bric-a-brac, rareand endemic fauna and flora from the park are also being peddledby enterprising locals.   Knowledgeable buyers to eco-tourism destinations in Sri Lankacan pick up rare species of plants, fish, butterflies and beetles,Gunewardene confirms. The poaching by locals if unchecked couldseriously endanger wildlife species, he adds.   Tourism officials in Colombo can only see the money eco-tourismis bringing in. "Wildlife sanctuaries, nature reserves andwaterfalls are a great tourist attraction," an official of theTourist Board says.   Asked if officials were taking adequate safeguards to protectthe areas from mass tourism, he admits that not enough has beendone but the authorities are aware of the importance of maintainingthe ecological balance.   A firm critic of the government's promotion of eco-tourism isDr. Ranjan Fernando, president of the Wildlife and NatureProtection Society. He feels the authorities are unwiselyexploiting the natural resource.   "The way the idea is being promoted in this country seems to bemerely exploiting the natural resources of the island," heunderlines.   Fernando cites the promotion of tourism in the catchment areasof reservoirs as evidence of official shortsightedness. Thecatchment areas are protected under Sri Lanka's Fauna and FloraProtection Act, but officials have thrown them open to tourists.   The government is motivated by short term interests in itspromotion of tourism, he thinks. Foreigners may bring in preciousforeign exchange now, but tourism in the long term will destroy theenvironmental balance, he believes.   "Tourism will disturb the ecological balance, which will takethousands of years to heal," he states.   In his opinion, eco-tourism is a contradictory concept and timeand again it has been shown that tourism is geared to changing thenatural way of life.   But officials in Colombo think otherwise. They think eco-tourismwill attract discerning visitors who are sensitive to nature andits importance in the cycle of life.   Eco-tourists are not looking for just the sun, sea and the sand,a Tourist Board official here said. Sri Lanka has earned notorietyas a destination for pedophiles. An influx of foreign tourists toSri Lanka's famed beaches, mostly from the west, has been seen asthe main reason for the spread of the Aids virus among the localpopulation.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996CHINA-ENERGY:  WIND HELPS POWER BOOMING ECONOMYBy Gao Fengfeng   BEIJING, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- China, whose coal-fired power plantshave sent pollution levels soaring, has turned to a cleaneralternative to help fuel its flourishing economy: wind energy.   The use of this environment-friendly and renewable energy inChina has already passed from the experimental stage to far-rangingapplication, especially in the grasslands for nomadic herdsmen andsome remote areas beyond the reach of the national power grid.   The country now has 130,000 small and medium-size wind-drivengenerators with a capacity of 17,000 kilowatts. More than 30factories produce 100-200 watt generators nationwide. Threequarters of these small generators are installed in the InnerMongolia grasslands.   Wind-driven generators enable people in remote areas to useelectric lamps, television sets, radios and other modernfacilities. Since wind power became available, more students frombackward regions are said to have gone to university to receivehigher education.   For larger application of wind power, there are 14 wind powerstations in China. They are equipped with 99 generators with atotal capacity of 14,600 kilowatts.   The country's wind power application is concentrated mainly inthe provinces of Xinjiang, Inner Mongolia, Guangdong, Liaoning andFujian.   As China has not yet mastered the modern technology ofmanufacturing large wind-driven generators it has to import them,mainly from Denmark, Germany, the United States, Belgium andSweden.   Officials say wind power will play an important role in China'seffort to redistribute power across the country.   There are about 120 million Chinese who still have no access toelectricity. Most of them live in the remote mountainous orpastoral regions where the installation of wind-driven generatorswill be less expensive than the extension of long-distance powertransmission lines from major power plants.   The Chinese power industry is currently dominated by coal-firedpower plants, which are blamed for much of the smog that hoversover the country's industrial regions.   "China's coal reserve is largely distributed in the west, whilemost of giant power plants are located in the more prosperouseast," says Yin Lian, a senior energy ministry official.   About one-fifth of railway freight volume is devoted to coalconsumed by thermal power generators. This puts a heavy burden onthe already clogged national rail transport system.   In this context, it makes both economic and ecological sense todevelop wind power in China. "As wind power demands less investmentand has far more flexibility in operation, it suits Chinaparticularly well," says Yin.   And China claims a rich wind power reserve of about 253 millionkilowatts which can be harnessed, according to long-rangeinvestigations conducted by meteorological experts.   Although the annual output of wind power still makes up only atiny portion of the country's total electricity output, the energyministry has worked out an ambitious plan that will enhance thetotal capacity of wind-driven generators in China to one millionkilowatts by the end of the century.   To meet this goal, the state has approved a provisionalregulation to give a more favorable price on wind power to theconsumers. And energy officials say the government is consideringa reduction of value-added tax, income tax, and import tariff inthe case of buying facilities from abroad.   "The rapid development of wind power cannot succeed withoutsupport from government, and it is particularly the case as windpower traditionally drew far less attention than conventional powersources," says Yin.   China hopes to raise public awareness of the importance of thisform of energy by hosting an international conference in Beijingin May. Local and foreign experts will discuss ways to give China'sfledgling wind power industry a further push.   China mainly imports giant and middle-size wind-drivengenerators ranging from 200 to 500 kilowatts. The conference isexpected to help China cut production cost and introduce technologyto produce its own generators.   Denmark tops the list of donors in this field, supplying 13 setsof 150 kilowatt wind-driven generators and one 100 kilowattgenerator for the Dabancheng wind power station in Xinjiang.   In 1994 it provided loans worth $16 million for building fourwind power projects in Xinjiang, Inner Mongolia, Dalian inLiaoning, and Guangdong. Up to now, China has made use of a totalof $26 million worth of loans from the Danish government.   "We welcome and encourage foreign funds to flow into China inthis regard, as China claims a great potential in developing windpower," says Yin, adding that the country's target for overall useof wind power is set for eight million kilowatts by 2020.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996ANGOLA-POLITICS:  BRINKMANSHIP CONTINUESBy Chris Simpson   LUANDA, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- U.N. Special Representative AliouneBlondin Beye says this should be Angola's year of "definitivepeace" following steady consolidation seen in 1995.   But Beye is almost alone in his optimism. Even the Christmasperiod in Angola was dominated by fresh allegations of offensivesand stiff warnings from both sides, while mediators struggled tokeep things in perspective.   The U.N., with some 6,200 blue helmets in Angola to monitormilitary demobilization under a year-old peace agreement, had beenhoping for a rapid post-Christmas breakthrough.   Visits by government officials and Beye to the Bailundoheadquarters of the opposition Union for the Total Liberation ofAngola on Dec. 21 and Dec. 23 respectively, were meant to pave theway for a resumption of military talks between the government andUNITA and a summit with President Jose Eduardo dos Santos andopposition leader Jonas Savimbi early in the New Year.   Beye took to the airwaves on Dec. 27 to give a generally upbeatresume on the peace process to date. He warned, however, that anyceasefire violations at this stage were unacceptable. He reservedparticular criticism for the media, warning that "hostilepropaganda" was continuing to sour the atmosphere.   Ironically, Beye's criticisms coincided with a fresh outburstof allegations from UNITA's radio station, Vorgan, whose "northerncorrespondent," Felix Miranda, alleged that a major governmentoffensive in the province of Uige had killed 40 people. Quotinglocal UNITA commanders, Miranda claimed heavy artillery and tankshad been deployed by the government.   As envoys from Russia, Portugal and the United States arrivedin Bailundo the same day for what was meant to have been a routinemeeting with UNITA, they were immediately confronted with news ofrenewed fighting.   Vorgan's accusations were later strongly backed by UNITA'ssecretary-general, Paulo Lukamba Gato, in interviews with the BBCand Voice of America. Gato stressed that the government's actionsruled out any prompt resumption of military talks given the lackof a "climate of confidence."   Vorgan repeated the allegations, claiming that government troopshad massacred civilians in areas it had occupied. But UNITA'sclaims were firmly denied by government spokesman Gen. HiginoCarneiro. Interviewed on local radio on Dec. 28, Carneiro accusedUNITA of indulging in cheap propaganda, adding that all UNITA'scurrent concerns were meant to have been addressed at the meetingwith the government in Bailundo a week earlier.   Subsequent visits by Beye and U.S. ambassador Donald Steinbergto the central highlands town of Bailundo on Dec. 28 and 29 wereaimed at winning UNITA over. They both met with Savimbi who hadbeen absent from the previous round of meetings.   Meanwhile, a Joint Commission delegation, including militaryrepresentatives from the government and UNITA, travelled to Uigeon Dec. 29 to investigate the movement's allegations.   The delegation has yet to publicize its findings, but U.N. anddiplomatic sources have hinted that UNITA's version of events isgreatly exaggerated and that UNITA is simply looking for anotherpretext to stay away from military talks with the government andkeep its troops out of the quartering areas.   UNITA's latest allegations have focused on the region ofQuitexe, 50 kilometers southwest of UNITA's northern stronghold ofNegage in the province of Uige. While the government holds theprovincial capital of Uige, UNITA controls most of the rest of theprovince, including the frontier with Zaire.   Uige has been tense throughout the peace process, despite U.N.efforts to improve free movement between government and UNITAareas. Sporadic clashes have been reported in the north, while thecivilian population has complained of harassment by the armies ofboth sides.   The United Nations is hoping to convene a new Joint Commissionmeeting as soon as possible. But as of Jan. 2, UNITA'srepresentative in Luanda was still in Bailundo, with no word yetfrom the movement on the resumption of the military talks, whichhave experienced a series of interruptions over the past fewmonths.   According to diplomatic sources in contact with UNITA, thecurrent problems should not be overstated. "UNITA is still inproblem-resolving mode," IPS was told. "But UNITA is worried aboutthe current crisis of confidence."   The government however is likely to react very critically tofurther delays. In an explicit warning to UNITA, a senior militarysource in Luanda warned recently that the current rate of progresswas unacceptable.   "It has gone extremely slowly. The only positive development sofar has been the deployment of U.N. forces and the construction ofthe quartering areas."   The same source accused UNITA of carrying out military actionscountrywide, of continuing recruitment campaigns and rearming. "Wehave more information than anyone else and we are always askingourselves 'What is the reason for this behavior'?" he said.   The government military is still denying having used mercenariesat any stage, stressing that the South African security firmExecutive Outcomes fulfilled the kind of training role alsoperformed by Portuguese instructors under the terms of the Bicessepeace accords of 1991, a peace agreement overturned when UNITAreturned to war a year later.   Military sources have also emphasized that "absolutely nothing"has happened in Uige, beyond a routine confrontation between tworival patrol groups. The government maintains that its actions inZaire province in November and December were a legitimate responseto persistent provocation by UNITA.   Looking forwards, senior generals remain publicly committed tothe Lusaka Protocol, the peace agreement signed in November 1994,but accept major disagreements persist, particularly on the issueof a new national army.   The Bicesse accords provided for 20,000 UNITA troops in aunified army. Some 2,500 came in and stayed in, leaving places foronly 17,500 more, many less than UNITA now wants. Governmentproposals for a "social reconstruction" wing focussing onrehabilitation and public works has met with little support fromUNITA, although it could provide employment for thousands moresoldiers.   In his New Year's address to the nation, dos Santos called forgreater diplomatic pressure on UNITA to force compliance with theLusaka protocol. There has been no explicit warning yet of whatmilitary action might be taken if UNITA does not show morecooperation.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996IRAQ-SANCTIONS:  MIXED SIGNALS CONFUSE SANCTIONS RENEWAL ISSUEAnalysis by Dilip Hiro   LONDON, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- The United Nations Security Council'sroutine 60-day renewal of sanctions against Iraq grows steadilymore problematic. The next reimposition, due on Jan. 8, must nowtake account of mixed signals on the subject coming from theregion.   A communique issued on Dec. 6 at the end of the six member GulfCooperation Council (GCC) summit in Muscat, Oman, backedcontinuation of the embargo until Iraq complied with all SecurityCouncil resolutions on the Gulf War. But some of the Gulf statesare in flexible mood.   Qatari ruler Sheikh Hamad ibn Khalif al-Thani, who pointedly didnot attend the summit closing ceremony, had brought to the GCC amessage of reconciliation from Iraqi President Saddam Hussein.   And in October, United Arab Emirates President Sheikh Zaid ibnal-Nahayan publicly called for a relaxation of the embargo againstIraq. The ruler of Oman, Sultan Qaboos ibn-Said, was also reportedto be favoring mending fences with Baghdad.   King Fahd of Saudi Arabia and Sheikh Jaber ibn Ahmad al-Sabahof Kuwait, the countries most affected by Saddam's disastrousinvasion and rapid defeat in 1990/1991, predictably remainedstaunchly opposed to any relaxation of the sanctions against Iraq.Firmly behind them was the United States. The three prevailed.   However there are some signs of a split within the Saudi rulingestablishment. Following his meeting with Egyptian president HosniMubarak in Cairo on Dec. 14, Prince Khalid ibn Sultan al-Saud, thejoint coalition commander during the 1991 Gulf War, declared thatthe U.N. sanctions had strengthened rather than weakened the Iraqiregime, and needed to be eased.   Signals coming from Amman are equally mixed. In this instanceJordan is uniquely placed. It is the only one of Iraq's neighborsallowed by the U.N. Security Council to have limited economicrelations with Baghdad. It is permitted to import 67,000 barrelsof oil per day from Iraq, which the latter sells at a discountprice and supplies by truck. The Iraqi government uses the incometo buy food and medicine for its citizens.   In mid-December a Jordanian delegation visited Baghdad tonegotiate an increase in supplies of oil for 1996. Though the Saudimonarch has by now forgiven King Hussein of Jordan for not joiningthe Gulf War against Iraq and has mended fences with Amman, he hasyet to offer oil supplies to Jordan.   But while the Jordanian king is unable to end his country'sdependence on Iraqi petroleum, he has recently taken to shoring upthe exiled opposition leaders of Iraq. In December he addressedthem at a meeting in Amman.   He proposed a federal set-up in Iraq which, in his view, wouldsatisfy the three main groups in the country: Kurds, Shias andSunnis. Since there are no clear geographical lines that divideSunni Muslims from Shia Muslims, the idea has been a non-starter.   What lies behind this move by King Hussein? Pressure by theUnited States. Having repeatedly failed to see Saddam overthrownby his own people, Washington has now seemingly opted for a fairlylong-term strategy of toppling his regime through a combination ofeconomic and political measures.   Since Jordan is the only overland gateway into and from Iraq,a country cut off from foreign air links, it has a key role to playif the U.S. plan is to succeed. And given Jordan's economic anddiplomatic dependence on Washington, it is imperative that itsmonarch must be seen to be doing something on this front.   Nonetheless, Saddam is taking King Hussein's move seriously.Just after Christmas Baghdad announced that Iraq's directinternational telephone links are being cut on the ground that itdoes not have enough foreign exchange to pay the bills.   Baghdad has also reduced the duration of its exit visa from 12months to one month, thus restricting further foreign travel forIraqi citizens.   And Saddam launched a new austerity campaign on Dec. 31 to haltthe decline of the Iraqi currency. He called for tax increases anda cut in the amount of bank notes in circulation. The dinar hasplunged to 2,500 against the dollar on the black market, againstan official rate of one dinar to $3.20.   As for the U.N. sanctions, Iraq's state-run newspapers yesterdayexuded confidence. Al-Thawra, the daily paper of the ruling Baathparty, as quoted by the state-run Iraqi News Agency, said sanctionswould be lifted in 1996 thanks to "friends and brothers" who wereaware of what it called Iraq's "real commitment" to U.N. SecurityCouncil resolutions.   In this decision the final report of the U.N.'s chief inspectorin Iraq, Rolf Ekeus, will carry great weight. Just beforeChristmas, Ekeus revealed that, tipped off by the Iraqi government,his inspectors had salvaged some crates from the Tigris river inBaghdad.   These contained gyroscopes for long range ballistic missiles,which are banned by the Security Council Resolution 687 of April1991. A preliminary study showed that the crates had been underwater for about three months.   The Iraqi government's explanation was it had caught anindividual who had brought these machines into the country and whenhe could not ship them out of Iraq he decided to dump the cratesinto the Tigris. Ekeus is investigating the matter, and it will besome weeks before he reaches a conclusion.   The U.N. has offered to allow Iraq to sell a limited quantityof oil to pay for medicine and humanitarian supplies, but Baghdadrefuses, saying U.N. conditions infringe on its sovereignty. Oilexports used to account for 90 per cent of Iraq's foreign revenues.   Ekeus's final report on Iraq's demolition of its weapons of massdestruction and long range missiles is unlikely to materializebefore the Security Council review of the sanctions by Jan. 8. Thechances are they will be renewed for another 60 days.   Thus the major losers in this 65 months old saga remain theIraqi population, who are suffering untold economic hardships,widely expected to culminate in a famine in the spring.   The average monthly wage is just 5,000 dinars, equivalent to twodollars and inadequate to cope with prices. Currently Iraqis payup to 60 dinars for bread, 1,200 dinars for a kilo of flour, and5,000 dinars for a kilo of meat. Most now survive on state rations.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996ENVIRONMENT/LITHUANIA:  NUCLEAR PLANT SAFETY RECORD WORRIES MANYBy Edvinas Butkus   VILNIUS, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- Even its senior management regardsLithuania's troubled Ignalina nuclear plant as being at risk ofsuffering a serious technical breakdown with potentially lethalconsequences.   "Despite the complexity of reactor technology, in the Ignalinaatomic power plant certain tasks are carried out with veryprimitive means," admits Dr. Povilas Vaisnys, director of theLithuanian state atomic energy security inspectorate (VATESI).   The reactors at Ignalina, 130 kilometers northeast of thecapital Vilnius, are of the same RBMK design as those used at theChernobyl plant in Ukraine, site of the world's worst nuclearaccident in 1986. It produces 80 per cent of Lithuania'selectricity.   The plant is scheduled for closure by 2010 when alternativepower sources must be in place. Yet despite extensive safetyimprovements at the plant, funded in part by the European Union andthe European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), aseries of accidents at the plant in late 1995 raised new concerns.   In the last incident, staff were routinely calibrating devicesto measure electron flow on Nov. 30, when engineer Vladimir Rusinovfrom the plant's atomic security center was forced againstregulations to enter an irradiated area when the measuring devicefailed to fit through its regular aperture.   Rusinov was said to have suffered no serious aftereffects. "Sucha level of radiation does not cause any reaction in the humanorganism and has no practical effects which can be measured by themodern medical devices at our disposal," Vaisnys said.   On Nov. 22, 12 tons of water from the pressurized tanks of theemergency core cooling system were accidentally released. Althoughemergency steps were taken at the time, the reactor was shut downthe next day after an automatic safety system failed.   Eleven days prior to that leak, there was a small fire in themachine room of Unit 1 after a pipe in the hydraulic systemcracked, also leading to a 24-hour reactor shut-down.   In August, two cranes became entangled during refueling at Unit2, and several days later a spent 150 kilogram fuel rod broke whilebeing lowered into the cooling pond and sank to the bottom. Earlierin August staff had to leave the reactor hall while a damaged fuelelement was removed from the core. No radiation was leaked into theatmosphere in any of the incidents.   But this series of minor accidents has impelled ViliusKazanavicius, former deputy prime minister of Soviet Lithuania, tovoice his concern that minor accidents now may lead to major oneslater.   In an article for a national daily at the beginning of December,Kaanavicius said the plant was still dependent on Russian-speakingand trained Russian migrant staff.   He said that in five years since independence from the SovietUnion, Lithuania had not trained new staff for the plant, which isrun now as it was when it opened by Russian engineers. Most of the3,300 staff at the plant are Russian.   "The Ignalina plant is ours, but it is run by others," saidKazanavicius. He saw another danger if the Russian staff had toleave the plant. He proposed that the plant be closed down as soonas possible.   There is also the danger that emergency procedures might not beable to counter deliberate sabotage bids. In November 1994,Lithuanian Kestutis Mazuika threatened to bomb the plant in thename of a fictitious terrorist group, NUC-41 W, unless the Swedishgovernment paid him $8 million. He was arrested and jailed when heturned up to collect the money.   A range of projects to improve safety at Ignalina have beencompleted or are still under way, including a 33 million ECUprogram funded by the EBRD. The plant is 200 kilometers from Minsk,500 from Warsaw, and 660 from Moscow or Stockholm.   Ignalina itself contributed the equivalent of a further $5million a year to the program, and aid has also been promised bySweden, Canada, Japan and the United States. The total being spenton safety improvements at the site is now around $100 million.   The managers of the plant are short of funds. They have eventried to file a law suit against the national Lietuvos Energijaelectricity company a few months ago to force the latter to paydebts for energy already generated and sold. Last year's forcedsuspension of two of the country's commercial banks has also heldup salary payments to plant staff.   According to a U.S. Department of Energy's report on "MostDangerous Reactors", published this summer, Ignalina could be evenmore dangerous than Chernobyl. Lithuania, however, denies this.VATESI safety expert Alexander Aleyev told IPS last month that theyregarded the U.S. report technically inaccurate and out of date.   Nevertheless Lithuania has set up a fund for the phased closureand decommissioning of Ignalina by 2010 which it is estimated willcost $600 million. Closure will not be easy and Deputy PowerMinister Saulius Kutas has said that Lithuania may considerconstructing a new nuclear plant to replace Ignalina, which hasallowed Lithuania to export power to Belarus and Russia.   Under an agreement signed with the Russian state power companyEnergiya, the Lithuanian State Power System is also exportingelectricity to Russia in return for supplies of nuclear fuel. Thetotal value of the contract, which ends on May 1, 1996, isestimated at $60 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996BURUNDI-HUMAN RIGHTS:  END TO CYCLE OF POLITICAL KILLINGS SOUGHTBy IPS Correspondents   PARIS, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- More than 1,000 people are killed bygovernment forces or paramilitary groups each month in Burundi, butthe world continues to turn a blind eye to such atrocities, sayNGOs working in the strife-torn country.   Most of those killed by the Tutsi-dominated security forces aremembers of the Hutu ethnic group from which the majority politicalparty, Front for Democracy in Burundi (FRODEBU), of PresidentSylvestre Ntibantunganya, draws its support.   "FRODEBU demands that the international community intervene, inwhatever form it can, including military or economic," said aspokesman for the party in Paris.   Ntibantunganya appealed for an end to the unrest in a New Year'sDay radio broadcast yesterday. He said Burundi faced "totalcollapse" unless the violence is stemmed and blamed "fanatics" fromthe Hutu majority, Tutsi minority and the Army.   "The new year must be a year in which all these phenomena areswept away and defeated," said Ntibantunganya, speaking on stateradio monitored by the British Broadcasting Corporation.   Over 100,000 people have been killed in Burundi since thecurrent civil conflict broke out in October 1993. More than 1,300have been killed since the start of November 1995, but theinternational community has persistently failed its victims by itssilence and inaction, Amnesty says.   Amnesty believes that many more massacres have gone unreportedin the inaccessible provinces of Bubanza and Cibitoke wherefighting between government forces and rebels has intensifiedduring 1995. Most victims are unarmed women, children and the aged.   "The government has shown itself incapable of preventing itssecurity forces from unlawfully killing unarmed civilians andcarrying out other human rights violations," said a spokesman forthe human rights NGO before the New Year holiday.   "The first thing to do is to send the Army back to thebarracks," said the FRODEBU spokesman, "because it is the sourceof instability in the country and made to respect the results ofthe 1993 elections (which produced a Hutu president). Otherwise,we are off to an interminable cycle of massacres and carnage."   "It is a tragedy that the international community -- includingforeign diplomats and representatives of the U.N. and theOrganization of African Unity -- has become a powerless spectator,"added Amnesty.   In Paris Christian Raggioli, chief of operations in Burundi forthe French NGO Medecins du Monde said that they and otherhumanitarian organizations have also been the target of attacks.   The International Committee of the Red Cross and several otheraid agencies suspended their activities in Burundi last month. TheU.N. World Food Program said food distribution to the north andnortheast had been suspended again today.   "Whether the armed people are bandits or para-military groupsof which side, we don't know," said Raggioli. "But we are worriedabout the security of our volunteers." Some 150,000 Rwandanrefugees and 80,000 Burundians in Burundi depend on food aid.   "Our objective is come to the aid of victims, whoever is theaggressor," he said, but if their staff were prevented fromreaching victims, it would have to consider quitting the country."We won't endorse the massacres," he said. "Today, the situationis almost untenable and it is possible that we will leave."   But the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees said today that theviolence appeared to be easing slightly. There were no reports ofviolence over the weekend, spokesman Ron Redmond told reporters inGeneva.   Amnesty has been collecting data on recent attacks. They citedan attack by government forces surrounding Gasarara in Kanyoshadistrict, Rural Bujumbura province, on Nov. 14 and killed at least430 unarmed civilians, virtually all of them Hutu.   The soldiers also looted property and set houses on fire. Thereare reports that some civilians were lured to assemble in a school,ostensibly for their own protection, and then shot or bayonettedto death.   In a letter to the provincial governor dated Nov. 20, theKanyosha district administrator said he had counted 421 dead: 40men, 73 women, 165 boys and 143 girls. An inquiry carried out bysecurity officials reportedly established that at least 430 peoplewere killed, while other sources claim that at least 500 peoplewere extrajudicially executed and many others "disappeared." Theresults of the inquiry have not been made public.   "One must put an end to the impunity of killers." said theFRODEBU spokesman. "As soon as those responsible are identified,they must be tried.   "The silence of the international community?" added Raggioli."Maybe they are waiting for more massacres. For them to react, theyare probably waiting for the killings to surpass those in Rwanda.In Rwanda, the killings already had to come to such proportionsbefore the international community stirred."   Nearly 300 unarmed civilians, most of them Hutu, were reportedlykilled by government forces Dec. 6-7 in the suburbs of the capitalBujumbura. At least 270 of the victims were killed in the suburbanarea of Sororezo Hill by soldiers using automatic weapons, rocketsand helicopter gunships.   The killings took place in the wake of what the Burundiauthorities said were clashes between government forces and rebelsbelonging to the Hutu-dominated, National Council for the Defenseof Democracy (CNDD).   The CNDD has denied involvement in the attacks. Some of theattacks by government forces appear to be a continuation ofattempts by the Tutsi-dominated security forces to rid Bujumburaof its Hutu population.   Hutu armed groups have also killed scores of Tutsi. For example,an armed gang attacked Campazi camp for displaced members of theTutsi ethnic group in Muruta district, Kirundo province and killedabout 40. Some of the killings by Tutsi militia have also beencarried out with the support or connivance of the security forces.   Further killings were reported in Kanyosha district on Nov. 26when soldiers attacked a group of youths playing football atNyamaboko primary school.   Some soldiers reportedly accused one youth from Rumonge of beinga member of a gang which sabotaged a power station in Rumonge. Theybeat and then shot the youth dead. Other youths fled in panic andwere pursued by the soldiers. Soldiers then went on the rampage inthe area and killed as many as 500 people.   Although most of the killings are carried out by governmenttroops, Burundi authorities complain that the Tutsi-led army isbeing demonized, a Bujumbura-based observer told AmnestyInternational.   Hutu-dominated and Tutsi armed groups appear to be almost incompetition to see who can kill the most members of rival groups,say Amnesty. On the nights of Nov. 1 and 2 at least four peoplewere shot dead and about 20 wounded by an armed gang in Buyenzi,a suburb of Bujumbura, said Amnesty researchers.   Prominent citizens continue to be targeted by members of thesecurity forces and armed groups. On Dec. 2 at least five Hutu weretaken away by soldiers in Mutanga-Nord suburb of Bujumbura.   They included Elie Ndikumana, an official of the Ministry ofPublic Works and Equipment, Dr. Gaspard Nzikobanyanka, NestorKatihabwa, a Burundi University student, Sylvestre Niyonzima anda nightwatchman named Donatien. Their bodies and the body ofanother person were found near Bujumbura airport several dayslater.   And during a counter-insurgency operation on Dec. 6-7 governmentforces also attacked the homes of several Hutu officials, includingthat of Augustin Nzojibwami, the Secretary General of FRODEBU,Fabien Sagatwa, Secretary of State for Security, and AntoinetteBazikwankana, a former presidency official.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996CONGO-LABOR:  SALARY PAYMENTS A BIG SURPRISE FOR PUBLIC SERVANTSBy Nana Rosine Ngangoue   BRAZZAVILLE, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- If you had gone a year without payand then got a windfall lump sum, how would you feel? Exuberantsay Congo's long-suffering but for now happy civil servants.   Bar owners and shop keepers are also smiling as traffic jams indowntown Brazzaville attest to the booming following thegovernment's payment in December of four months back pay owed topublic workers.   "They treated us like beggars. We'd become beggars. Now I'mhappy that we got four months salary in the space of a month,"rejoices Augustin Elenga, a journalist at the state-owned CongoleseInformation Agency.   Paid irregularly for nearly five years and not paid at all formore than twelve months, civil servants were on the cutting-edgeof Congo's economic and political malaise.   After multiparty polls in 1993 swept away an oppressive singleparty system, this central African state's new government, led bytechnocrat president Pascal Lissouba, claimed their predecessorshad drained the state's coffers and run up a foreign debt of $5billion.   Economic recovery was further hampered by ethnic-based politicalconflict that pitted government supporters against the opposition,killing 2,000 and displacing 20,000 other people at its height.Congo, with a population of just 2.5 million, seemed irretrievablylost to chaos.   "We endured the toughest of Calvaries. We were no longer living,we were surviving. When I think that my landlord evicted me andthat my children lost a year of schooling as we were unable to meetthe fees, I tell myself that I passed through a terrible time inmy life," recalls Kengue Cyr, a public servant.   For many, however, hope has returned with the big pay envelopeand a commitment to the regularization of salaries by thegovernment, one of the aims of a new three-year structuraladjustment program (SAP) agreed to in December by the governmentand the International Monetary Fund.   There has also been a series of talks between the government andopposition to ease the political crisis.   Congo's adjustment program comprises several measures tostimulate growth in a country where gross domestic product (GDP)registered minus 4.6 per cent in 1994, and to increase employment.From January, salaries and pensions of civil service are to be paidon time.   Economic recovery has also been shored up by new contractsbetween the state and oil production firms, increasing the state'sstake in the sector. Official statistics reveal that in 1996 oilis expected to bring in $315 million.   The effect of the public servants windfall is evident throughoutthe capital, with bars and other places of entertainment chockfull.   "There's a mad crowd here today because of the money circulatingin the capital. Before, we couldn't expect so many people," saysone barman here.   In people's homes there is also a tangible psychological relief.   "You can't tell how much we've relaxed now. We've paid all ourdebts, that's a great relief to me," says Honorine Samba, ateacher's wife.   But the sudden circulation of a great deal of money has alsotriggered inflation. In the city's markets, vendors are marking upprices and the cost of clothes in particular have soared.   "If this goes on, we won't be able to manage. Vendors don'trealize that the money we've just been paid is to pay our debts,"says Elenga, whose joy is tainted with apprehension about thefuture.   "It's true that I'm smiling, but this happiness is limited aswe're afraid they'll stop the payments and we'll be back at squareone," the journalist confides. "I hope that this good fortunelasts, but above all that we're paid all the outstanding salaries."   Prime Minister Jacques Joachim Yombi Opangault recently promisedthat regular salaries were back to stay. How far the promise willhold remains to be seen. Meanwhile, Brazzaville has once againbecome a sociable and happy town.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTER PRESS SERVICE INTERNATIONAL NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 2, 1996NIGERIA-MEDIA:  ABIOLA'S NEWSPAPER BACK ON THE STREETSBy Toye Olori   LAGOS, Jan. 2 (IPS) -- "You missed me because I was severelyAbachalized," explains a cartoon man in plaster on the back pageof the Concord, an independent newspaper which hit the streetstoday after an 18-month ban.   Owned by jailed Nigerian opposition politician Moshood Abiola,who is widely believed to have won Nigeria's 1993 presidentialelections, the paper was shut down in August 1994 by Gen. SaniAbacha.   The Guardian and Punch, also privately-owned, were also closedat the height of protests intended to force the military out ofpower and bring about installation of Abiola, jailed on treasoncharges after declaring himself president on the anniversary of theannulled election.   An unreserved apology to the head of state for any transgressionagainst either the government or the person of Abacha from thepaper's management brought the Guardian a reprieve in July 1995.   "I hope unlike the Concord and Punch that the Guardian will showgenuine remorse and reciprocate the government's gesture ofgoodwill," Abacha told the paper's management and members of theNewspaper Proprietor's Association of Nigeria.   But the Concord and Punch, among the largest circulation papersbefore the ban, refused to give in and remained proscribed untilOctober 1995.   Physical damage to its printing machines hampered the Concord'sresumption of operations, sources close to the newspaper say. Butits first issue back on the streets was as fearless and provocativeas ever.   Today's lead story focused on democracy and the war between themilitary government and the international community, while the backpage carried a six-column headline "Ogonis to Mourn Saro-Wiwa,others" a reference to the recent execution of the minority rightscampaigner that triggered international outrage.   The front page editorial announced: "We do not regard theunbanning as a special favor to be reciprocated with a show ofremorse and contrition, but as a belated undoing of what should nothave been done in the first place."   "If the Concord and other newspapers that were peremptorilybanned had breached the laws of the country, the authorities shouldhave prosecuted them in the law courts, unless they have no faithin the judiciary," the editorial reads.   The editorial thanked "all men and women of goodwill, at homeand abroad, whose appeals, according to General Sani Abacha, movedhim to lift the ban." But it notes that the appeals, howeverwell-intentioned, are ultimately subversive of the rule of law anddemocracy.   "They invest in persons to whom they are directed powers thatthey do not posses and ought not to possess, powers that, ineffect, set them above the constitution," the editorial insists.   The paper's tone has rekindled fears that it may be heading fora fresh collision with Abacha's regime.   "The Concord has to be tactical in its criticisms of thisgovernment or it might incur the wrath of the military and itssecurity operatives as is happening to some opposition newspapersnow," says Biola Alagoa, a journalist.   "If they (military government) cannot close the papers downbecause of the negative impact it will have on their image, theycan at least burn their buildings and equipment down to preventthem from publishing," Alagoa continues.   This seems an oblique reference to the fires that gutted thepremises of the newly-opened Guardian two weeks ago and the NewsMagazine on New Year's Eve.   The finger has been pointed at security agents as bothpublications were ardent critics of government. "This is thebeginning of new tactics to force opposition papers out ofcirculation. It is government of thuggery," Alagoa alleged.   Revealing that the fire at the News Magazine caused extensivedamage to vital documents, computers and other electronicequipment, editor-in-chief Dapo Olorunyomi shares Alagoa'ssuspicions.   "Though nothing was stolen, put in the context of the Guardianfire about two weeks ago, we suspect arson. Only our own floor wasburnt in the four-story building," Olorunyomi said.   Tell, another combative privately-owned news magazine has alsorepeatedly run afoul of the government. On Dec. 17, 55,000 copiesof the magazine were seized at the printers by security agents. Sixdays later, another 50,000 copies were seized six days latereditor-in-chief Nosa Igiebor was arrested and detained.   The Dec. 25 edition of the magazine was titled "Abiola'sFreedom: The World Waits for Abacha" while the New Year's Dayedition seized on Dec. 23 bore the title: "Abacha is Adamant;Terrorizes the Opposition".Back to Headline List WT03-B05-8IA087-000634-B038-290http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it93.html 205.156.212.5 19970122025133 text/html 220245HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:48:41 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:10 GMTContent-length: 220057Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it93.html Sample Issue Copyright INT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * POLITICAL FORECASTS * SCHEDULED AND POTENTIAL ELECTIONS FOR THE NEXT FIVE YEARS (592 words) REGIME STABILITY FOR THE NEXT FIVE YEARS (596 words) GLOBAL INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS CLIMATE (738 words) REGIONAL INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS CLIMATE (701 words) GLOBAL TURMOIL RISK (337 words) REGIONAL TURMOIL RISK (358 words) GLOBAL FINANCIAL TRANSFER RISK (423 words) REGIONAL FINANCIAL TRANSFER RISK (344 words) GLOBAL DIRECT INVESTMENT RISK (423 words) REGIONAL DIRECT INVESTMENT RISK (344 words) GLOBAL EXPORT MARKET RISK (423 words) REGIONAL EXPORT MARKET RISK (344 words) * ECONOMIC FORECASTS * REGIONAL CHANGE IN REAL GDP GROWTH (592 words) REGIONAL CHANGE IN INFLATION RATES (590 words) REGIONAL CHANGE IN CURRENT ACCOUNT (590 words) PER CAPITA GDP PERFORMANCE EXTREMES (320 words) GDP GROWTH PERFORMANCE EXTREMES (325 words) INFLATION PERFORMANCE EXTREMES (322 words) CAPITAL INVESTMENT PERFORMANCE EXTREMES (326 words) BUDGET BALANCE PERFORMANCE EXTREMES (326 words) UNEMPLOYMENT PERFORMANCE EXTREMES (330 words) DEBT SERVICE PERFORMANCE EXTREMES (328 words) CURRENT ACCOUNT PERFORMANCE EXTREMES (326 words) CURRENCY CHANGE PERFORMANCE EXTREMES (325 words) * SOCIAL FORECASTS * GLOBAL POPULATION CHANGE (428 words) REGIONAL POPULATION CHANGE (452 words) GLOBAL CHANGE IN AGRICULTURAL WORK FORCE (427 words) REGIONAL CHANGE IN AGRICULTURAL WORK FORCE (452 words) GLOBAL CHANGE IN SERVICE WORK FORCE (427 words) REGIONAL CHANGE IN SERVICE WORK FORCE (452 words) GLOBAL CHANGE IN INDUSTRIAL WORK FORCE (426 words) REGIONAL CHANGE IN INDUSTRIAL WORK FORCE (452 words) GLOBAL CHANGE IN PERCENT URBAN POPULATION (426 words) REGIONAL CHANGE IN PERCENT URBAN POPULATION (452 words) GLOBAL CHANGE IN PERCENT URBAN GROWTH (426 words) REGIONAL CHANGE IN PERCENT URBAN GROWTH (452 words) GLOBAL CHANGE IN PERCENT POPULATION UNDER 15 YEARS (426 words) REGIONAL CHANGE IN PERCENT POPULATION UNDER 15 YEARS (452 words) GLOBAL CHANGE IN INFANT DEATHS PER 1000 (426 words) REGIONAL CHANGE IN INFANT DEATHS PER 1000 (452 words) CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SCHEDULED AND POTENTIAL ELECTIONS FOR THE NEXT FIVE YEARSCOUNTRY             TYPE ELECTION  DATE OF NEXT***************************************************************Algeria             Presidential   Scheduled 12/2000Argentina           Legislative    Scheduled 5/1997                    Presidential   Scheduled 5/1999Australia           Parliamentary  Required by 3/1996Austria             Presidential   Scheduled 5/1998                    Legislative    Required by 10/1998Bangladesh          Parliamentary  Required by 2/1996                    Presidential   Scheduled 8/1996Belgium             Parliamentary  Required by 5/1999Bolivia             Presidential   Scheduled 6/1997                    Legislative    Scheduled 6/1997Botswana            Legislative    Scheduled 10/1999                    Presidential   Scheduled 10/1999Brazil              Legislative    Scheduled 10/1998                    Presidential   Scheduled 10/1998Bulgaria            Presidential   Scheduled 1/1997                    Legislative    Required by 12/1998Cameroon            Legislative    Scheduled 4/1997                    Presidential   Scheduled 10/1997Canada              Parliamentary  Required by 10/1998Chile               Legislative    Scheduled 12/1997                    Presidential   Scheduled 12/1999Colombia            Legislative    Scheduled 3/1998                    Presidential   Scheduled 5/1998Congo               Presidential   Scheduled 8/1997                    Legislative    Required by 10/1998Costa Rica          Presidential   Scheduled 2/1998                    Legislative    Scheduled 2/1998Cote d'Ivoire       Presidential   Scheduled 10/1999                    Legislative    Scheduled 11/1999Cuba                Legislative    Required by 2/1998Czech Republic      Legislative    Required by 6/1996                    Presidential   Scheduled 1998Denmark             Parliamentary  Required by 12/1998Dominican Republic  Presidential   Scheduled 5/1996                    Legislative    Scheduled 5/1998Ecuador             Legislative    Scheduled 5/1996                    Presidential   Scheduled 5/1996Egypt               Legislative    Required by 11/2000El Salvador         Legislative    Scheduled 3/1997                    Presidential   Scheduled 3/1999Finland             Legislative    Required by 3/1999                    Presidential   Scheduled 2/2000France              Legislative    Scheduled 9/1998                    Presidential   Scheduled 5/2002Gabon               Legislative    Set for 3/1996                    Presidential   Scheduled 12/1998Germany             Legislative    Required by 10/1998                    Presidential   Scheduled 5/1999Ghana               Presidential   Scheduled 11/1996                    Parliamentary  Scheduled 12/1996Greece              Legislative    Required by 10/1997                    Presidential   Scheduled 5/2000Guatemala           Presidential   Scheduled 11/2000                    Legislative    Scheduled 11/2000Guyana              Presidential   Scheduled 10/1997                    Legislative    Scheduled 10/1997Haiti               Presidential   Scheduled 12/2000                    Legislative    Required by 6/1999Honduras            Presidential   Scheduled 11/1997                    Legislative    Scheduled 11/1997Hungary             Legislative    Scheduled 5/1998                    Presidential   Scheduled 6/2000India               Parliamentary  Required by 5/1996                    Presidential   Scheduled 7/1997Indonesia           Legislative    Scheduled 6/1997                    Presidential   Scheduled 3/1998Iran                Legislative    Scheduled 4/1996                    Presidential   Scheduled 6/1997Ireland             Parliamentary  Scheduled 11/1997                    Presidential   Scheduled 11/1997Israel              Legislative    Scheduled 11/1996                    Presidential   Scheduled 3/1998Italy               Parliamentary  Required by 3/1999Jamaica             Parliamentary  Required by 3/1998Japan               Parliamentary  Required by 7/1997Kenya               Legislative    Required by 12/1997                    Presidential   Scheduled 12/1997Kuwait              Legislative    Scheduled 10/1996Malaysia            Legislative    Scheduled 4/2000Mexico              Legislative    Scheduled 8/1997                    Presidential   Scheduled 8/2000Morocco             Legislative    Scheduled 6/1999Netherlands         Parliamentary  Required by 5/1998New Zealand         Parliamentary  Required by 11/1996Nicaragua           Presidential   Scheduled 11/1996                    Legislative    Scheduled 11/1996Norway              Parliamentary  Scheduled 9/1997Pakistan            Legislative    Scheduled 10/1998                    Presidential   Scheduled 12/1998Panama              Presidential   Scheduled 5/1999                    Legislative    Scheduled 5/1999Papua New Guinea    Legislative    Required by 6/1997Paraguay            Legislative    Scheduled 5/1998                    Presidential   Scheduled 5/1998Peru                Presidential   Scheduled 4/2000                    Legislative    Scheduled 4/2000Philippines         Presidential   Scheduled 5/1998                    Legislative    Scheduled 5/1998Poland              Legislative    Required by 9/1997                    Presidential   Scheduled 11/2000Portugal            Presidential   Scheduled 1/1996                    Legislative    Required by 10/1999Puerto Rico         Legislative    Scheduled 11/1996Romania             Legislative    Scheduled 9/1996                    Presidential   Scheduled 9/1996Russia              Legislative    Required by 12/1999                    Presidential   Scheduled 6/1996Singapore           Parliamentary  Scheduled 8/1996South Africa        Legislative    Scheduled 1999                    Presidential   Scheduled 1999South Korea         Legislative    Required by 4/1996                    Presidential   Required by 12/1997Spain               Parliamentary  Set for 3/1996Sri Lanka           Legislative    Required by 8/2000                    Presidential   Scheduled 11/2000Suriname            Legislative    Required by 5/1996                    Presidential   Scheduled 9/1996Sweden              Parliamentary  Scheduled 9/1998Switzerland         Legislative    Scheduled 10/1999Syria               Legislative    Required by 8/1998                    Presidential   Scheduled 12/1998Taiwan              Legislative    Scheduled  3/1996                    Presidential   Scheduled 3/1996Thailand            Parliamentary  Required by 7/1999Trinidad & Tobago   Legislative    Required by 11/2000Tunisia             Legislative    Scheduled 3/1999                    Presidential   Scheduled 3/1999Turkey              Legislative    Required by 10/1996                    Presidential   Scheduled 5/2000Ukraine             Legislative    Required by 3/1998                    Presidential   Scheduled 6/1999United Kingdom      Parliamentary  Required by 4/1997United States       Legislative    Scheduled 11/1996                    Presidential   Scheduled 11/1996Uruguay             Presidential   Scheduled 11/1999                    Legislative    Scheduled 11/1999Venezuela           Presidential   Scheduled 12/1998                    Legislative    Scheduled 12/1998Vietnam             Legislative    Required by 7/1997Yemen               Legislative    Required by 4/1997                    Presidential   Scheduled 5/1998Zaire               Presidential   Scheduled 7/1997Zambia              Presidential   Scheduled 10/1996                    Legislative    Scheduled 10/1996Zimbabwe            Presidential   Scheduled 3/1996                    Legislative    Required by 4/2000Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIME STABILITY FOR THE NEXT FIVE YEARSI. Forecasts of change of 5-year regimeHONG KONG         Orderly Transition, 85%   *Indirect Control,75%INDONESIA         Suharto, 85%              *Senior Military,75%HUNGARY           Center Left, 85%          *Center Coalition,70%EL SALVADOR       Center Right, 75%         *Center Right,65%SOUTH AFRICA      ANC-National Unity, 80%   *Pragmatic ANC,60%BOLIVIA           MNR Coalition, 75%        *Centrist Coalition,55%COSTA RICA        Figueres Coalition, 55%   *PUSC,55%GERMANY           *Grand Coalition, 55%     *Grand Coalition,55%GUATEMALA         *Arzu, 60%                *Arzu,55%NICARAGUA         Chamorro, 60%             *Center-Left,55%UNITED KINGDOM    Conservatives, 50%        *Labour,55%ZAMBIA            Chiluba-MMD, 55%          *Liberal Democrat,55%ARGENTINA         Menem Reformist, 55%      *Menem Reformist,50%BRAZIL            Cardoso Coalition, 50%    *Cardoso Coalition,50%DOMINICAN REP.    *Opposition, 50%          *Opposition,50%FRANCE            Chirac-RPR, 85%           *Chirac-RPR,50%IRAQ              Saddam, 65%               *Military,50%KENYA             Moi, 65%                  *Moi/KANU,50%PANAMA            PRD Coalition, 75%        *United PRD,50%RUSSIA            Moderate Reform, 50%      *Conservatives,50%SOUTH KOREA       DLP, 60%                  *Strong President,50%SPAIN             Centrist PSOE, 50%        *PP,50%THAILAND          Banharn, 45%              *Civilian-Military,50%TURKEY            Center Right, 45%         *Center Right,50%UKRAINE           Moderate Reformers, 40%   *Reformist,50%BANGLADESH        BNP, 50%                  *Military,45%GREECE            Pasok, 55%                *New Democracy,45%HONDURAS          Reina, 70%                *PL,45%IRAN              Rafsanjani-Khamenei, 50%  *Pragmatists,45%PAKISTAN          PPP, 50%                  *Shifting Coalitions,45%PARAGUAY          *Moderate Colorado, 60%   *Moderate Colorado,45%ROMANIA           Iliescu, 50%              *Unstable Coalitions,45%VENEZUELA         Caldera-Populist, 55%     *Populist,45%JAPAN             *LDP, 40%                 *Reformist Coalition,40%NIGERIA           Conservative Abacha, 45%  *Moderate Civilian,40%PHILIPPINES       Ramos, 80%                *Centrist Successor,40%PORTUGAL          *PSD Minority, 40%        *PSD Minority,40%ZAIRE             *Unstable Transition, 40% *Limited Democracy,40%II. Forecast of no changeBELGIUM           Center Left, 45%          Center Left, 40%BOTSWANA          BDP, 55%                  BDP, 40%CUBA              Castro, 60%               Castro, 40%GUINEA            Authoritarian Conte, 50%  Conte, 40%IRELAND           Fine Gael Coalition, 55%  Fine Gael Coalition, 40%ITALY             Center Right, 45%         Center Right, 40%NEW ZEALAND       National, 65%             National Coalition, 40%NORWAY            Minority Labor, 50%       Labor Minority, 40%SURINAME          Venetiaan, 45%            Venetiaan, 40%TRINIDAD & TOBAGO UNC-NAR, 45%              PNM, 40%UNITED STATES     Clinton-GOP Harmony, 55%  Republican Majority, 40%ALGERIA           Civilian-Military, 50%    Civilian-Military, 45%AUSTRALIA         Keating, 50%              Keating, 45%BURMA             SLORC, 55%                SLORC, 45%CAMEROON          Biya, 60%                 RDPC, 45%COLOMBIA          Samper, 55%               Liberals, 45%DENMARK           SD-led Coalition, 55%     SD-led Coalition, 45%EGYPT             Mubarak, 60%              Mubarak, 45%ISRAEL            Labor Coalition, 55%      Labor Coalition, 45%NETHERLANDS       Left-Right Coalition, 60% Left-Right Coalition, 45%SUDAN             Military-NIF, 60%         Military-NIF, 45%SWEDEN            SAP, 55%                  SAP, 45%ANGOLA            MPLA-led Coalition, 60%   MPLA-led Coalition, 50%AUSTRIA           Grand Coalition, 50%      Grand Coalition, 50%CZECH REPUBLIC    Center Right, 65%         Center Right, 50%ECUADOR           Divided Government, 50%   Divided Government, 50%GABON             Bongo, 55%                Bongo, 50%HAITI             Pragmatic Populist, 65%   Pragmatic Populist, 50%INDIA             Congress (I) Party, 60%   Congress (I) Party, 50%JAMAICA           Patterson, 65%            Patterson, 50%LIBYA             Qaddafi, 70%              Qaddafi, 50%MALAYSIA          Mahathir, 75%             Mahathir, 50%PUERTO RICO       Rossello, 50%             Rossello, 50%SRI LANKA         PA, 70%                   PA, 50%SYRIA             Assad, 75%                Assad, 50%TAIWAN            Collective KMT, 85%       Collective KMT, 50%ZIMBABWE          Authoritarian Mugabe, 65% Liberal Mugabe, 50%CHILE             Center Left, 75%          Center Left, 55%FINLAND           SDP, 70%                  SDP, 55%MEXICO            Zedillo, 75%              Zedillo-PRI, 55%POLAND            Shared Power, 65%         Shared Power, 55%SINGAPORE         Goh Chok Tong, 75%        Goh Chok Tong, 55%CANADA            Liberals, 75%             Liberals, 60%CONGO             Lissouba, 75%             Lissouba, 60%GHANA             Rawlings, 60%             Rawlings, 60%KUWAIT            Al-Sabah Family, 75%      Al-Sabah Family, 60%URUGUAY           Colorado-Blanco, 70%      Colorado-Blanco, 60%BULGARIA          Center Left, 75%          Center Left, 65%CHINA             Pragmatists, 75%          Pragmatists, 65%COTE D'IVOIRE     Bedie-PDCI, 75%           Centrist, 65%GUYANA            PPP, 85%                  PPP, 65%MOROCCO           Hassan, 80%               Hassan, 65%OMAN              Qaboos, 85%               Qaboos, 65%PERU              Fujimori & Congress, 75%  Fujimori & Congress, 65%SAUDI ARABIA      Fahd, 75%                 Fahd, 65%SWITZERLAND       Centrist Coalition, 65%   Centrist Coalition, 65%PAPUA NEW GUINEA  Chan, 75%                 Shifting Coalitions, 70%VIETNAM           CPV Mainstream, 85%       CPV Mainstream, 70%YEMEN             Saleh-GPC, 85%            Saleh-GPC, 70%QATAR             al-Thani, 75%             al-Thani, 75%TUNISIA           Ben Ali, 85%              Ben Ali, 75%UAE               Union, 85%                Union, 80%Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GLOBAL INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS CLIMATEDashes indicate that no historical scores have been calculated.******************************************************************                    12/95        94        93        92        91******************************************************************GLOBAL AVERAGES        75        70        72        73        75****************************************************************** 1.  Portugal         100       100        90        90        87 2.  Singapore        100       100       100        97        97 3.  Spain            100       100        87        85        79 4.  Austria           99       100        97        96        96 5.  Taiwan            99       100        88        91        91 6.  Chile             97        94        93        94        79 7.  Ireland           97        96        93        94        94 8.  France            96        91        94        94        96 9.  Hong Kong         94        94        91        90        88 10.  Puerto Rico      93        97        96        97        99 11.  Denmark          91        94        90        90        94 12.  Netherlands      91        91        88        94        91 13.  Switz.           91        93        93        --        -- 14.  U.S.             91        90        93        85        90 15.  Belgium          90        93        88        91        90 16.  Germany          90        96        88        91        91 17.  U.K.             90        96        93        97        94 18.  Canada           88        85        90        82        84 19.  Thailand         88        88        93        93        65 20.  Finland          87        88        93        94        90 21.  Japan            87        88       100        79        82 22.  Norway           87        90        94        84        84 23.  Costa Rica       85        84        87        85        74 24.  Czech. Rep.      85        87        97        93        85 25.  Morocco          85        85        75        68        68 26.  Australia        84        88       100        88        82 27.  Hungary          84        81        79        87        90 28.  Panama           84        82        84        81        82 29.  El Salvador      82        81        71        72        69 30.  Italy            82        85        76        88        82 31.  New Zealand      82        81        81        75        82 32.  Peru             82        78        75        62        65 33.  Sweden           82        84       100        99        94 34.  Malaysia         79        78        87        85        78 35.  Paraguay         79        78       100        --        -- 36.  So. Africa       79        78        71        60        53 37.  Tunisia          79        75        69        65        62 38.  Uruguay          79        72        78        82        87 39.  Bolivia          78        75        78        75        78 40.  Dom. Rep.        78        75        76        68        74 41.  Gabon            78        78        79        79        84 42.  Guatemala        78        76        76        76        75 43.  Jamaica          78        79        76        78        82 44.  So. Korea        78        87        84        79        81 45.  Botswana         76        84        93        --        -- 46.  Mexico           76        79        75        81        74 47.  Trin & Tob       76        79        72        --        -- 48.  China            75        76        74        76        68 49.  P.N.G.           75        75        82        --        -- 50.  Kenya            74        63        69        68        63 51.  Oman             74        69        74        74        71 52.  S. Arabia        74        71        71        72        69 53.  U.A.E.           74        74        78        76        72 54.  C. d'Ivoire      72        65        59        59        66 55.  Ghana            72        72        76        --        -- 56.  Guyana           72        72        76        --        -- 57.  Qatar            72        87        84        --        -- 58.  Yemen            72        69        63        --        -- 59.  Colombia         71        69        68        69        68 60.  Cuba             71        84        85        --        -- 61.  Ecuador          71        69        74        66        60 62.  Honduras         71        72        78        78        68 63.  Sri Lanka        71        71        74        66        62 64.  Argentina        69        76        75        71        66 65.  Bulgaria         69        75        76        76        74 66.  Indonesia        69        66        66        68        74 67.  Israel           69        68        69        69        75 68.  Pakistan         69        71        66        74        65 69.  Philippines      69        63        60        65        54 70.  Zambia           69        71        60        71        51 71.  Brazil           68        57        54        60        50 72.  India            68        74        59        60        49 73.  Burma            66        68        68        --        -- 74.  Greece           66        66        69        68        72 75.  Poland           66        68        68        74        81 76.  Romania          66        72        68        59        59 77.  Zimbabwe         66        62        62        44        68 78.  Haiti            65        63        59        65        65 79.  Sudan            65        57        57        65        56 80.  Turkey           65        68        68        63        65 81.  Vietnam          65        65        76        66        59 82.  Guinea           63        63        63        76        75 83.  Kuwait           63        66        66        60        54 84.  Egypt            62        65        60        60        57 85.  Nicaragua        62        62        72        66        66 86.  Cameroon         60        63        63        59        63 87.  Libya            59        60        60        63        62 88.  Algeria          57        51        49        47        46 89.  Congo            57        65        69        --        -- 90.  Suriname         57        66        65        --        -- 91.  Syria            57        57        56        57        57 92.  Venezuela        57        59        66        71        72 93.  Ukraine          54        57        66        74        76 94.  Iran             53        53        65        68        60 95.  Bangladesh       51        53        56        --        -- 96.  Iraq             50        53        50        54        53 97.  Nigeria          49        47        50        51        51 98.  Russia           47        51        54        53        76 99.  Angola           43        47        54        --        --100.  Zaire            43        46        46        57        63Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS CLIMATEDashes indicate that no historical scores have been calculated.******************************************************************                      12/95        94     93        92         91******************************************************************GLOBAL AVERAGES          75        70     72        73         75******************************************************************No. & Cent. America Avg. 79        79     79        78         77    Puerto Rico          93        97     96        97         99    U.S.                 91        90     93        85         90    Canada               88        85     90        82         84    Costa Rica           85        84     87        85         74    Panama               84        82     84        81         82    El Salvador          82        81     71        72         69    Dom. Rep.            78        75     76        68         74    Guatemala            78        76     76        76         75    Jamaica              78        79     76        78         82    Mexico               76        79     75        81         74    Trin & Tob           76        79     72        --         --    Cuba                 71        84     85        --         --    Honduras             71        72     78        78         68    Haiti                65        63     59        65         65    Nicaragua            62        62     72        66         66******************************************************************South America Avg.       73        72     75        72         69    Chile                97        94     93        94         79    Peru                 82        78     75        62         65    Paraguay             79        78    100        --         --    Uruguay              79        72     78        82         87    Bolivia              78        75     78        75         78    Guyana               72        72     76        --         --    Colombia             71        69     68        69         68    Ecuador              71        69     74        66         60    Argentina            69        76     75        71         66    Brazil               68        57     54        60         50    Suriname             57        66     65        --         --    Venezuela            57        59     66        71         72******************************************************************European Union Avg.      90        91     89        91         89    Portugal            100       100     90        90         87    Spain               100       100     87        85         79    Austria              99       100     97        96         96    Ireland              97        96     93        94         94    France               96        91     94        94         96    Denmark              91        94     90        90         94    Netherlands          91        91     88        94         91    Belgium              90        93     88        91         90    Germany              90        96     88        91         91    U.K.                 90        96     93        97         94    Finland              87        88     93        94         90    Italy                82        85     76        88         82    Sweden               82        84    100        99         94    Greece               66        66     69        68         72*******************************************************************Non-EU Europe Avg.       71        74     76        74         77    Switz.               91        93     93        --         --    Norway               87        90     94        84         84    Czech. Rep.          85        87     97        93         85    Hungary              84        81     79        87         90    Bulgaria             69        75     76        76         74    Poland               66        68     68        74         81    Romania              66        72     68        59         59    Turkey               65        68     68        63         65    Ukraine              54        57     66        74         76    Russia               47        51     54        53         76******************************************************************Middle East Avg.         67        67     66        64         62    Morocco              85        85     75        68         68    Tunisia              79        75     69        65         62    Oman                 74        69     74        74         71    S. Arabia            74        71     71        72         69    U.A.E.               74        74     78        76         72    Qatar                72        87     84        --         --    Yemen                72        69     63        --         --    Israel               69        68     69        69         75    Kuwait               63        66     66        60         54    Egypt                62        65     60        60         57    Libya                59        60     60        63         62    Algeria              57        51     49        47         46    Syria                57        57     56        57         57    Iran                 53        53     65        68         60    Iraq                 50        53     50        54         53*******************************************************************Sub-Saharan Africa Avg.  64        64     65        63         63    So. Africa           79        78     71        60         53    Gabon                78        78     79        79         84    Botswana             76        84     93        --         --    Kenya                74        63     69        68         63    C. d'Ivoire          72        65     59        59         66    Ghana                72        72     76        --         --    Zambia               69        71     60        71         51    Zimbabwe             66        62     62        44         68    Sudan                65        57     57        65         56    Guinea               63        63     63        76         75    Cameroon             60        63     63        59         63    Congo                57        65     69        --         --    Nigeria              49        47     50        51         51    Angola               43        47     54        --         --    Zaire                43        46     46        57         63*******************************************************************Asia Avg.                77        78     79        78         74    Singapore           100       100    100        97         97    Taiwan               99       100     88        91         91    Hong Kong            94        94     91        90         88    Thailand             88        88     93        93         65    Japan                87        88    100        79         82    Australia            84        88    100        88         82    New Zealand          82        81     81        75         82    Malaysia             79        78     87        85         78    So. Korea            78        87     84        79         81    China                75        76     74        76         68    P.N.G.               75        75     82        --         --    Sri Lanka            71        71     74        66         62    Indonesia            69        66     66        68         74    Pakistan             69        71     66        74         65    Philippines          69        63     60        65         54    India                68        74     59        60         49    Burma                66        68     68        --         --    Vietnam              65        65     76        66         59    Bangladesh           51        53     56        --         --Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GLOBAL TURMOIL RISK                         18-MO          5-YR************************************************AUSTRALIA                Moderate       LowAUSTRIA                  Low            LowBELGIUM                  Low            LowBRAZIL                   Moderate       LowBULGARIA                 Moderate       LowCANADA                   Low            LowCHILE                    Low            LowCHINA                    Low            LowCOSTA RICA               Low            LowCZECH REPUBLIC           Low            LowDENMARK                  Low            LowFINLAND                  Moderate       LowFRANCE                   Low            LowGABON                    Moderate       LowGERMANY                  Low            LowHUNGARY                  Low            LowINDONESIA                Low            LowIRELAND                  Low            LowITALY                    Moderate       LowJAMAICA                  Moderate       LowJAPAN                    Low            LowMALAYSIA                 Low            LowMOROCCO                  Low            LowNETHERLANDS              Low            LowNEW ZEALAND              Low            LowNORWAY                   Low            LowOMAN                     Low            LowPORTUGAL                 Low            LowPUERTO RICO              Low            LowQATAR                    Low            LowROMANIA                  Moderate       LowSINGAPORE                Low            LowSOUTH KOREA              Low            LowSPAIN                    Low            LowSWEDEN                   Low            LowSWITZERLAND              Low            LowTAIWAN                   Low            LowTHAILAND                 Low            LowTRINIDAD & TOBAGO        Moderate       LowUNITED ARAB EMIRATES     Low            LowUNITED KINGDOM           Low            LowUNITED STATES            Low            LowURUGUAY                  Low            LowVIETNAM                  Low            LowZAMBIA                   Moderate       LowARGENTINA                High           ModerateBOLIVIA                  Moderate       ModerateBOTSWANA                 High           ModerateBURMA                    Moderate       ModerateCAMEROON                 Moderate       ModerateCONGO                    High           ModerateCOTE D'IVOIRE            Moderate       ModerateDOMINICAN REPUBLIC       Moderate       ModerateECUADOR                  Moderate       ModerateEGYPT                    Moderate       ModerateEL SALVADOR              Moderate       ModerateGHANA                    Moderate       ModerateGREECE                   Moderate       ModerateGUATEMALA                High           ModerateGUYANA                   Low            ModerateHAITI                    High           ModerateHONDURAS                 High           ModerateHONG KONG                Low            ModerateINDIA                    Moderate       ModerateIRAN                     Moderate       ModerateISRAEL                   Moderate       ModerateKUWAIT                   Low            ModerateMEXICO                   Moderate       ModerateNICARAGUA                Moderate       ModeratePANAMA                   Moderate       ModeratePARAGUAY                 Moderate       ModeratePERU                     Moderate       ModeratePHILIPPINES              High           ModeratePOLAND                   Moderate       ModerateRUSSIA                   Moderate       ModerateSAUDI ARABIA             Low            ModerateSOUTH AFRICA             Very High      ModerateSRI LANKA                High           ModerateSYRIA                    Low            ModerateTUNISIA                  Low            ModerateTURKEY                   Moderate       ModerateUKRAINE                  High           ModerateVENEZUELA                Moderate       ModerateYEMEN                    High           ModerateZIMBABWE                 Low            ModerateCUBA                     Moderate       HighGUINEA                   Moderate       HighKENYA                    Moderate       HighLIBYA                    Low            HighPAKISTAN                 Moderate       HighPAPUA NEW GUINEA         High           HighSURINAME                 High           HighALGERIA                  High           Very HighANGOLA                   Very High      Very HighBANGLADESH               Very High      Very HighCOLOMBIA                 High           Very HighIRAQ                     High           Very HighNIGERIA                  Very High      Very HighSUDAN                    Very High      Very HighZAIRE                    Very High      Very HighBack to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL TURMOIL RISK                         18-MO          5-YR*******************************************************No. & Cent. AmericaCANADA                   Low            LowCOSTA RICA               Low            LowJAMAICA                  Moderate       LowPUERTO RICO              Low            LowTRINIDAD & TOBAGO        Moderate       LowUNITED STATES            Low            LowDOMINICAN REPUBLIC       Moderate       ModerateEL SALVADOR              Moderate       ModerateGUATEMALA                High           ModerateHAITI                    High           ModerateHONDURAS                 High           ModerateMEXICO                   Moderate       ModerateNICARAGUA                Moderate       ModeratePANAMA                   Moderate       ModerateCUBA                     Moderate       High*******************************************************South AmericaBRAZIL                   Moderate       LowCHILE                    Low            LowURUGUAY                  Low            LowARGENTINA                High           ModerateBOLIVIA                  Moderate       ModerateECUADOR                  Moderate       ModerateGUYANA                   Low            ModeratePARAGUAY                 Moderate       ModeratePERU                     Moderate       ModerateVENEZUELA                Moderate       ModerateSURINAME                 High           HighCOLOMBIA                 High           Very High*******************************************************European UnionAUSTRIA                  Low            LowBELGIUM                  Low            LowDENMARK                  Low            LowFINLAND                  Moderate       LowFRANCE                   Low            LowGERMANY                  Low            LowIRELAND                  Low            LowITALY                    Moderate       LowNETHERLANDS              Low            LowPORTUGAL                 Low            LowSPAIN                    Low            LowSWEDEN                   Low            LowUNITED KINGDOM           Low            LowGREECE                   Moderate       Moderate*******************************************************Non-EU EuropeBULGARIA                 Moderate       LowCZECH REPUBLIC           Low            LowHUNGARY                  Low            LowNORWAY                   Low            LowROMANIA                  Moderate       LowSWITZERLAND              Low            LowPOLAND                   Moderate       ModerateRUSSIA                   Moderate       ModerateTURKEY                   Moderate       ModerateUKRAINE                  High           Moderate*******************************************************Middle EastMOROCCO                  Low            LowOMAN                     Low            LowQATAR                    Low            LowUNITED ARAB EMIRATES     Low            LowEGYPT                    Moderate       ModerateIRAN                     Moderate       ModerateISRAEL                   Moderate       ModerateKUWAIT                   Low            ModerateSAUDI ARABIA             Low            ModerateSYRIA                    Low            ModerateTUNISIA                  Low            ModerateYEMEN                    High           ModerateLIBYA                    Low            HighALGERIA                  High           Very HighIRAQ                     High           Very High*******************************************************Sub-Saharan AfricaGABON                    Moderate       LowZAMBIA                   Moderate       LowBOTSWANA                 High           ModerateCAMEROON                 Moderate       ModerateCONGO                    High           ModerateCOTE D'IVOIRE            Moderate       ModerateGHANA                    Moderate       ModerateSOUTH AFRICA             Very High      ModerateZIMBABWE                 Low            ModerateGUINEA                   Moderate       HighKENYA                    Moderate       HighANGOLA                   Very High      Very HighNIGERIA                  Very High      Very HighSUDAN                    Very High      Very HighZAIRE                    Very High      Very High*******************************************************AsiaAUSTRALIA                Moderate       LowCHINA                    Low            LowINDONESIA                Low            LowJAPAN                    Low            LowMALAYSIA                 Low            LowNEW ZEALAND              Low            LowSINGAPORE                Low            LowSOUTH KOREA              Low            LowTAIWAN                   Low            LowTHAILAND                 Low            LowVIETNAM                  Low            LowBURMA                    Moderate       ModerateHONG KONG                Low            ModerateINDIA                    Moderate       ModeratePHILIPPINES              High           ModerateSRI LANKA                High           ModeratePAKISTAN                 Moderate       HighPAPUA NEW GUINEA         High           HighBANGLADESH               Very High      Very HighBack to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GLOBAL FINANCIAL TRANSFER RISK                           18-MO        5-YR**********************************************  1.  AUSTRIA                 A+        A+  2.  IRELAND                 A+        A+  3.  JAPAN                   A+        A+  4.  SINGAPORE               A+        A+  5.  DENMARK                 A         A+  6.  TAIWAN                  A         A+  7.  FRANCE                  A+        A  8.  NETHERLANDS             A+        A  9.  OMAN                    A+        A 10.  PUERTO RICO             A+        A 11.  SPAIN                   A+        A 12.  UNITED KINGDOM          A+        A 13.  BELGIUM                 A         A 14.  CHILE                   A         A 15.  CZECH REPUBLIC          A         A 16.  FINLAND                 A         A 17.  HONG KONG               A         A 18.  MALAYSIA                A         A 19.  PORTUGAL                A         A 20.  THAILAND                A         A 21.  UNITED ARAB EMIRATES    A         A 22.  UNITED STATES           A         A 23.  TRINIDAD & TOBAGO       A-        A 24.  NORWAY                  A+        A- 25.  SWITZERLAND             A+        A- 26.  CANADA                  A-        A- 27.  GERMANY                 A-        A- 28.  NEW ZEALAND             A-        A- 29.  SAUDI ARABIA            A-        A- 30.  SOUTH KOREA             A-        A- 31.  CHINA                   B+        A- 32.  QATAR                   B         A- 33.  BOTSWANA                A         B+ 34.  COSTA RICA              A         B+ 35.  ITALY                   A-        B+ 36.  MOROCCO                 A-        B+ 37.  PANAMA                  A-        B+ 38.  SWEDEN                  A-        B+ 39.  SOUTH AFRICA            B+        B+ 40.  HUNGARY                 B         B+ 41.  SRI LANKA               B         B+ 42.  BURMA                   B-        B+ 43.  AUSTRALIA               A         B 44.  GHANA                   A-        B 45.  GUATEMALA               A-        B 46.  KUWAIT                  A-        B 47.  TUNISIA                 A-        B 48.  URUGUAY                 B+        B 49.  BULGARIA                B         B 50.  INDONESIA               B         B 51.  PHILIPPINES             B         B 52.  CUBA                    B-        B 53.  GABON                   B-        B 54.  HAITI                   B-        B 55.  POLAND                  B-        B 56.  LIBYA                   C+        B 57.  SURINAME                C+        B 58.  SYRIA                   C+        B 59.  BRAZIL                  C         B 60.  VIETNAM                 C         B 61.  PAPUA NEW GUINEA        A         B- 62.  PARAGUAY                A-        B- 63.  JAMAICA                 B+        B- 64.  ARGENTINA               B         B- 65.  EGYPT                   B-        B- 66.  GREECE                  B-        B- 67.  ISRAEL                  B-        B- 68.  NICARAGUA               B-        B- 69.  PERU                    B-        B- 70.  CAMEROON                C+        B- 71.  ZIMBABWE                C+        B- 72.  RUSSIA                  C         B- 73.  UKRAINE                 C         B- 74.  IRAN                    C-        B- 75.  MEXICO                  A-        C+ 76.  ZAMBIA                  B         C+ 77.  BOLIVIA                 B-        C+ 78.  COTE D'IVOIRE           B-        C+ 79.  DOMINICAN REPUBLIC      B-        C+ 80.  EL SALVADOR             B-        C+ 81.  INDIA                   B-        C+ 82.  YEMEN                   B-        C+ 83.  CONGO                   C+        C+ 84.  ROMANIA                 C+        C+ 85.  TURKEY                  C+        C+ 86.  PAKISTAN                B+        C 87.  COLOMBIA                B         C 88.  ECUADOR                 B-        C 89.  GUYANA                  B-        C 90.  KENYA                   B-        C 91.  BANGLADESH              C+        C 92.  GUINEA                  C+        C 93.  HONDURAS                C         C 94.  VENEZUELA               C-        C 95.  ALGERIA                 B-        C- 96.  SUDAN                   C-        C- 97.  IRAQ                    D         D+ 98.  ZAIRE                   D         D+ 99.  ANGOLA                  D+        D100.  NIGERIA                 D+        DBack to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL FINANCIAL TRANSFER RISK                            18-MO     5-YR***********************************************No. & Cent. America     PUERTO RICO              A+        A     UNITED STATES            A         A     TRINIDAD & TOBAGO        A-        A     CANADA                   A-        A-     COSTA RICA               A         B+     PANAMA                   A-        B+     GUATEMALA                A-        B     CUBA                     B-        B     HAITI                    B-        B     JAMAICA                  B+        B-     NICARAGUA                B-        B-     MEXICO                   A-        C+     DOMINICAN REPUBLIC       B-        C+     EL SALVADOR              B-        C+     HONDURAS                 C         C***********************************************South America     CHILE                    A         A     URUGUAY                  B+        B     SURINAME                 C+        B     BRAZIL                   C         B     PARAGUAY                 A-        B-     ARGENTINA                B         B-     PERU                     B-        B-     BOLIVIA                  B-        C+     COLOMBIA                 B         C     ECUADOR                  B-        C     GUYANA                   B-        C     VENEZUELA                C-        C***********************************************European Union     AUSTRIA                  A+        A+     IRELAND                  A+        A+     DENMARK                  A         A+     FRANCE                   A+        A     NETHERLANDS              A+        A     SPAIN                    A+        A     UNITED KINGDOM           A+        A     BELGIUM                  A         A     FINLAND                  A         A     PORTUGAL                 A         A     GERMANY                  A-        A-     ITALY                    A-        B+     SWEDEN                   A-        B+     GREECE                   B-        B-***********************************************Non-EU Europe     CZECH REPUBLIC           A         A     NORWAY                   A+        A-     SWITZERLAND              A+        A-     HUNGARY                  B         B+     BULGARIA                 B         B     POLAND                   B-        B     RUSSIA                   C         B-     UKRAINE                  C         B-     ROMANIA                  C+        C+     TURKEY                   C+        C+***********************************************Middle East     OMAN                     A+        A     UNITED ARAB EMIRATES     A         A     SAUDI ARABIA             A-        A-     QATAR                    B         A-     MOROCCO                  A-        B+     KUWAIT                   A-        B     TUNISIA                  A-        B     LIBYA                    C+        B     SYRIA                    C+        B     EGYPT                    B-        B-     ISRAEL                   B-        B-     IRAN                     C-        B-     YEMEN                    B-        C+     ALGERIA                  B-        C-     IRAQ                     D         D+***********************************************Sub-Saharan Africa     BOTSWANA                 A         B+     SOUTH AFRICA             B+        B+     GHANA                    A-        B     GABON                    B-        B     CAMEROON                 C+        B-     ZIMBABWE                 C+        B-     ZAMBIA                   B         C+     COTE D'IVOIRE            B-        C+     CONGO                    C+        C+     KENYA                    B-        C     GUINEA                   C+        C     SUDAN                    C-        C-     ZAIRE                    D         D+     ANGOLA                   D+        D     NIGERIA                  D+        D***********************************************Asia     JAPAN                    A+        A+     SINGAPORE                A+        A+     TAIWAN                   A         A+     HONG KONG                A         A     MALAYSIA                 A         A     THAILAND                 A         A     NEW ZEALAND              A-        A-     SOUTH KOREA              A-        A-     CHINA                    B+        A-     SRI LANKA                B         B+     BURMA                    B-        B+     AUSTRALIA                A         B     INDONESIA                B         B     PHILIPPINES              B         B     VIETNAM                  C         B     PAPUA NEW GUINEA         A         B-     INDIA                    B-        C+     PAKISTAN                 B+        C     BANGLADESH               C+        CBack to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GLOBAL DIRECT INVESTMENT RISK                              18-MO     5-YR********************************************  1.  AUSTRIA                 A+        A+  2.  CHILE                   A+        A+  3.  FRANCE                  A+        A+  4.  IRELAND                 A+        A+  5.  PORTUGAL                A+        A+  6.  SINGAPORE               A+        A+  7.  SPAIN                   A+        A+  8.  TAIWAN                  A+        A+  9.  DENMARK                 A-        A+ 10.  GERMANY                 A-        A+ 11.  HUNGARY                 A+        A 12.  BELGIUM                 A         A 13.  COSTA RICA              A         A 14.  HONG KONG               A         A 15.  MOROCCO                 A         A 16.  NETHERLANDS             A         A 17.  PERU                    A         A 18.  PUERTO RICO             A         A 19.  SWITZERLAND             A         A 20.  UNITED KINGDOM          A         A 21.  UNITED STATES           A         A 22.  AUSTRALIA               A-        A 23.  FINLAND                 A-        A 24.  JAPAN                   A-        A 25.  NEW ZEALAND             A-        A 26.  NORWAY                  A-        A 27.  HONDURAS                B+        A 28.  BRAZIL                  B-        A 29.  BOLIVIA                 A         A- 30.  CANADA                  A         A- 31.  JAMAICA                 A         A- 32.  PANAMA                  A         A- 33.  ECUADOR                 A-        A- 34.  ITALY                   A-        A- 35.  SWEDEN                  A-        A- 36.  ARGENTINA               B+        A- 37.  GABON                   B         A- 38.  CZECH REPUBLIC          A+        B+ 39.  PARAGUAY                A+        B+ 40.  THAILAND                A+        B+ 41.  DOMINICAN REPUBLIC      A         B+ 42.  GUYANA                  A         B+ 43.  BOTSWANA                A-        B+ 44.  CHINA                   A-        B+ 45.  COTE D'IVOIRE           A-        B+ 46.  EL SALVADOR             A-        B+ 47.  MALAYSIA                A-        B+ 48.  SOUTH KOREA             A-        B+ 49.  CUBA                    B+        B+ 50.  KENYA                   B+        B+ 51.  TRINIDAD & TOBAGO       B+        B+ 52.  ZIMBABWE                B+        B+ 53.  TUNISIA                 A+        B 54.  URUGUAY                 A+        B 55.  POLAND                  A         B 56.  GUATEMALA               A-        B 57.  INDONESIA               A-        B 58.  MEXICO                  A-        B 59.  ROMANIA                 A-        B 60.  ISRAEL                  B+        B 61.  OMAN                    B+        B 62.  PAPUA NEW GUINEA        B+        B 63.  BURMA                   B         B 64.  INDIA                   B         B 65.  QATAR                   B         B 66.  SOUTH AFRICA            B         B 67.  VIETNAM                 B         B 68.  BULGARIA                A-        B- 69.  PAKISTAN                A-        B- 70.  PHILIPPINES             A-        B- 71.  SRI LANKA               A-        B- 72.  COLOMBIA                B+        B- 73.  GHANA                   B+        B- 74.  ZAMBIA                  B+        B- 75.  GREECE                  B         B- 76.  IRAN                    C         B- 77.  CAMEROON                B+        C+ 78.  HAITI                   B+        C+ 79.  SUDAN                   B+        C+ 80.  TURKEY                  B+        C+ 81.  YEMEN                   B+        C+ 82.  CONGO                   B         C+ 83.  SAUDI ARABIA            B         C+ 84.  UKRAINE                 B         C+ 85.  UNITED ARAB EMIRATES    B         C+ 86.  SYRIA                   B-        C+ 87.  SURINAME                C+        C+ 88.  NICARAGUA               B+        C 89.  EGYPT                   B         C 90.  KUWAIT                  B-        C 91.  LIBYA                   C+        C 92.  ALGERIA                 B         C- 93.  GUINEA                  B         C- 94.  IRAQ                    B-        C- 95.  VENEZUELA               B-        C- 96.  BANGLADESH              C+        C- 97.  ANGOLA                  C         C- 98.  RUSSIA                  C         C- 99.  NIGERIA                 B         D100.  ZAIRE                   C+        DBack to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL DIRECT INVESTMENT RISK                         SHORT-TERM   FIVE-YEAR************************************************No. & Cent. America     COSTA RICA               A         A     PUERTO RICO              A         A     UNITED STATES            A         A     HONDURAS                 B+        A     CANADA                   A         A-     JAMAICA                  A         A-     PANAMA                   A         A-     DOMINICAN REPUBLIC       A         B+     EL SALVADOR              A-        B+     CUBA                     B+        B+     TRINIDAD & TOBAGO        B+        B+     GUATEMALA                A-        B     MEXICO                   A-        B     HAITI                    B+        C+     NICARAGUA                B+        C**********************************************South America     CHILE                    A+        A+     PERU                     A         A     BRAZIL                   B-        A     BOLIVIA                  A         A-     ECUADOR                  A-        A-     ARGENTINA                B+        A-     PARAGUAY                 A+        B+     GUYANA                   A         B+     URUGUAY                  A+        B     COLOMBIA                 B+        B-     SURINAME                 C+        C+     VENEZUELA                B-        C-**********************************************European Union     AUSTRIA                  A+        A+     FRANCE                   A+        A+     IRELAND                  A+        A+     PORTUGAL                 A+        A+     SPAIN                    A+        A+     DENMARK                  A-        A+     GERMANY                  A-        A+     BELGIUM                  A         A     NETHERLANDS              A         A     UNITED KINGDOM           A         A     FINLAND                  A-        A     ITALY                    A-        A-     SWEDEN                   A-        A-     GREECE                   B         B-**********************************************Non-EU Europe     HUNGARY                  A+        A     SWITZERLAND              A         A     NORWAY                   A-        A     CZECH REPUBLIC           A+        B+     POLAND                   A         B     ROMANIA                  A-        B     BULGARIA                 A-        B-     TURKEY                   B+        C+     UKRAINE                  B         C+     RUSSIA                   C         C-**********************************************Middle East     MOROCCO                  A         A     TUNISIA                  A+        B     ISRAEL                   B+        B     OMAN                     B+        B     QATAR                    B         B     IRAN                     C         B-     YEMEN                    B+        C+     SAUDI ARABIA             B         C+     UNITED ARAB EMIRATES     B         C+     SYRIA                    B-        C+     EGYPT                    B         C     KUWAIT                   B-        C     LIBYA                    C+        C     ALGERIA                  B         C-     IRAQ                     B-        C-**********************************************Sub-Saharan Africa     GABON                    B         A-     BOTSWANA                 A-        B+     COTE D'IVOIRE            A-        B+     KENYA                    B+        B+     ZIMBABWE                 B+        B+     SOUTH AFRICA             B         B     GHANA                    B+        B-     ZAMBIA                   B+        B-     CAMEROON                 B+        C+     SUDAN                    B+        C+     CONGO                    B         C+     GUINEA                   B         C-     ANGOLA                   C         C-     NIGERIA                  B         D     ZAIRE                    C+        D**********************************************Asia     SINGAPORE                A+        A+     TAIWAN                   A+        A+     HONG KONG                A         A     AUSTRALIA                A-        A     JAPAN                    A-        A     NEW ZEALAND              A-        A     THAILAND                 A+        B+     CHINA                    A-        B+     MALAYSIA                 A-        B+     SOUTH KOREA              A-        B+     INDONESIA                A-        B     PAPUA NEW GUINEA         B+        B     BURMA                    B         B     INDIA                    B         B     VIETNAM                  B         B     PAKISTAN                 A-        B-     PHILIPPINES              A-        B-     SRI LANKA                A-        B-     BANGLADESH               C+        C-Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GLOBAL EXPORT MARKET RISK                             18-MO     5-YR***************************************************  1.  AUSTRIA                 A+        A+  2.  CHILE                   A+        A+  3.  DENMARK                 A+        A+  4.  FINLAND                 A+        A+  5.  HONG KONG               A+        A+  6.  IRELAND                 A+        A+  7.  PORTUGAL                A+        A+  8.  SINGAPORE               A+        A+  9.  TAIWAN                  A+        A+ 10.  UNITED STATES           A+        A+ 11.  FRANCE                  A+        A 12.  NETHERLANDS             A+        A 13.  PUERTO RICO             A+        A 14.  SPAIN                   A+        A 15.  SWITZERLAND             A+        A 16.  UNITED KINGDOM          A+        A 17.  GERMANY                 A         A 18.  JAPAN                   A         A 19.  BELGIUM                 A+        A- 20.  CANADA                  A+        A- 21.  NORWAY                  A+        A- 22.  AUSTRALIA               A         A- 23.  COSTA RICA              A         A- 24.  MALAYSIA                A         A- 25.  MOROCCO                 A-        A- 26.  NEW ZEALAND             A-        A- 27.  PANAMA                  A-        A- 28.  CZECH REPUBLIC          A+        B+ 29.  UNITED ARAB EMIRATES    A+        B+ 30.  ITALY                   A         B+ 31.  SWEDEN                  A         B+ 32.  THAILAND                A         B+ 33.  SOUTH KOREA             A-        B+ 34.  HUNGARY                 B+        B+ 35.  QATAR                   B+        B+ 36.  SOUTH AFRICA            B+        B+ 37.  CUBA                    B         B+ 38.  GABON                   B         B+ 39.  PERU                    B         B+ 40.  OMAN                    A+        B 41.  EL SALVADOR             A-        B 42.  GUATEMALA               A-        B 43.  PAPUA NEW GUINEA        A-        B 44.  CHINA                   B+        B 45.  JAMAICA                 B+        B 46.  TRINIDAD & TOBAGO       B+        B 47.  HONDURAS                B         B 48.  BRAZIL                  B-        B 49.  ECUADOR                 B-        B 50.  VIETNAM                 B-        B 51.  SAUDI ARABIA            A         B- 52.  TUNISIA                 A         B- 53.  MEXICO                  A-        B- 54.  PARAGUAY                A-        B- 55.  URUGUAY                 A-        B- 56.  COLOMBIA                B+        B- 57.  DOMINICAN REPUBLIC      B+        B- 58.  GHANA                   B+        B- 59.  INDONESIA               B+        B- 60.  BOLIVIA                 B         B- 61.  BOTSWANA                B         B- 62.  COTE D'IVOIRE           B         B- 63.  ISRAEL                  B         B- 64.  KENYA                   B         B- 65.  BURMA                   B-        B- 66.  GUYANA                  B-        B- 67.  INDIA                   B-        B- 68.  POLAND                  B-        B- 69.  SRI LANKA               B-        B- 70.  SYRIA                   C+        B- 71.  IRAN                    C         B- 72.  SURINAME                C         B- 73.  PHILIPPINES             B+        C+ 74.  BULGARIA                B         C+ 75.  ARGENTINA               B-        C+ 76.  GREECE                  B-        C+ 77.  HAITI                   B-        C+ 78.  ROMANIA                 B-        C+ 79.  LIBYA                   C+        C+ 80.  SUDAN                   C         C+ 81.  KUWAIT                  A         C 82.  PAKISTAN                B+        C 83.  ZAMBIA                  B+        C 84.  TURKEY                  B         C 85.  YEMEN                   B         C 86.  ZIMBABWE                B         C 87.  EGYPT                   B-        C 88.  GUINEA                  B-        C 89.  NICARAGUA               B-        C 90.  CAMEROON                C+        C 91.  CONGO                   C+        C 92.  RUSSIA                  C+        C 93.  UKRAINE                 C         C 94.  ALGERIA                 B-        C- 95.  VENEZUELA               B-        C- 96.  IRAQ                    C         C- 97.  BANGLADESH              C-        C- 98.  ANGOLA                  D         D+ 99.  ZAIRE                   D         D100.  NIGERIA                 C-        D-Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL EXPORT MARKET RISK                         SHORT-TERM   FIVE-YEAR***************************************************No. & Cent. America     UNITED STATES            A+        A+     PUERTO RICO              A+        A     CANADA                   A+        A-     COSTA RICA               A         A-     PANAMA                   A-        A-     CUBA                     B         B+     EL SALVADOR              A-        B     GUATEMALA                A-        B     JAMAICA                  B+        B     TRINIDAD & TOBAGO        B+        B     HONDURAS                 B         B     MEXICO                   A-        B-     DOMINICAN REPUBLIC       B+        B-     HAITI                    B-        C+     NICARAGUA                B-        C********************************************South America     CHILE                    A+        A+     PERU                     B         B+     BRAZIL                   B-        B     ECUADOR                  B-        B     PARAGUAY                 A-        B-     URUGUAY                  A-        B-     COLOMBIA                 B+        B-     BOLIVIA                  B         B-     GUYANA                   B-        B-     SURINAME                 C         B-     ARGENTINA                B-        C+     VENEZUELA                B-        C-********************************************European Union     AUSTRIA                  A+        A+     DENMARK                  A+        A+     FINLAND                  A+        A+     IRELAND                  A+        A+     PORTUGAL                 A+        A+     FRANCE                   A+        A     NETHERLANDS              A+        A     SPAIN                    A+        A     UNITED KINGDOM           A+        A     GERMANY                  A         A     BELGIUM                  A+        A-     ITALY                    A         B+     SWEDEN                   A         B+     GREECE                   B-        C+********************************************Non-EU Europe     SWITZERLAND              A+        A     NORWAY                   A+        A-     CZECH REPUBLIC           A+        B+     HUNGARY                  B+        B+     POLAND                   B-        B-     BULGARIA                 B         C+     ROMANIA                  B-        C+     TURKEY                   B         C     RUSSIA                   C+        C     UKRAINE                  C         C********************************************Middle East     MOROCCO                  A-        A-     UNITED ARAB EMIRATES     A+        B+     QATAR                    B+        B+     OMAN                     A+        B     SAUDI ARABIA             A         B-     TUNISIA                  A         B-     ISRAEL                   B         B-     SYRIA                    C+        B-     IRAN                     C         B-     LIBYA                    C+        C+     KUWAIT                   A         C     YEMEN                    B         C     EGYPT                    B-        C     ALGERIA                  B-        C-     IRAQ                     C         C-********************************************Sub-Saharan Africa     SOUTH AFRICA             B+        B+     GABON                    B         B+     GHANA                    B+        B-     BOTSWANA                 B         B-     COTE D'IVOIRE            B         B-     KENYA                    B         B-     SUDAN                    C         C+     ZAMBIA                   B+        C     ZIMBABWE                 B         C     GUINEA                   B-        C     CAMEROON                 C+        C     CONGO                    C+        C     ANGOLA                   D         D+     ZAIRE                    D         D     NIGERIA                  C-        D-********************************************Asia     HONG KONG                A+        A+     SINGAPORE                A+        A+     TAIWAN                   A+        A+     JAPAN                    A         A     AUSTRALIA                A         A-     MALAYSIA                 A         A-     NEW ZEALAND              A-        A-     THAILAND                 A         B+     SOUTH KOREA              A-        B+     PAPUA NEW GUINEA         A-        B     CHINA                    B+        B     VIETNAM                  B-        B     INDONESIA                B+        B-     BURMA                    B-        B-     INDIA                    B-        B-     SRI LANKA                B-        B-     PHILIPPINES              B+        C+     PAKISTAN                 B+        C     BANGLADESH               C-        C-Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL CHANGE IN REAL GDP GROWTH                         1991-95     1996F   1997-2001   CHANGE******************************************************************GLOBAL AVERAGES              1.2       2.7       2.7      +1.5******************************************************************No. & Central America Avg.   2.3       2.4       2.6      +0.3Haiti                       -7.8       1.0       2.0      +9.8Cuba                        -6.9       2.0       2.2      +9.1Mexico                       0.9       2.0       3.5      +2.6Nicaragua                    1.1       2.4       2.7      +1.6Trinidad & Tobago            1.5       3.6       3.0      +1.5Jamaica                      1.4       2.0       2.8      +1.4Canada                       1.9       3.0       2.8      +0.9Puerto Rico                  2.2       2.8       2.8      +0.6United States                2.4       2.3       2.5      +0.1Guatemala                    4.1       4.0       4.0      -0.1Honduras                     3.1       2.0       3.0      -0.1El Salvador                  6.3       6.5       5.5      -0.8Dominican Republic           4.0       3.2       2.5      -1.5Costa Rica                   4.9       3.8       3.3      -1.6Panama                       6.6       4.0       3.8      -2.8******************************************************************South America Avg.           4.2       4.4       4.9      +0.8Brazil                       2.9       5.0       5.5      +2.6Colombia                     4.5       6.0       5.5      +1.0Paraguay                     3.2       3.8       4.0      +0.8Suriname                     1.3       1.3       1.6      +0.3Venezuela                    2.2       0.0       2.0      -0.2Bolivia                      4.2       3.5       3.8      -0.4Ecuador                      3.6       2.5       3.0      -0.6Peru                         5.6       8.0       5.0      -0.6Uruguay                      3.9       1.0       3.0      -0.9Chile                        7.0       6.5       5.5      -1.5Guyana                       7.5       6.5       6.0      -1.5Argentina                    6.3       3.0       4.5      -1.8******************************************************************European Union Avg.          0.3       2.4       2.2      +1.9Finland                     -0.6       5.0       4.5      +5.1Sweden                      -0.2       2.2       2.0      +2.2Spain                        1.3       2.8       3.2      +1.9Portugal                     1.2       3.0       2.8      +1.6France                       1.3       2.8       2.8      +1.5Italy                        1.4       3.2       2.8      +1.4Greece                       1.3       2.0       2.5      +1.2United Kingdom               1.3       3.5       2.5      +1.2Belgium                      1.4       2.8       2.3      +0.9Germany                      2.1       2.8       3.0      +0.9Austria                      1.9       2.8       2.5      +0.6Netherlands                  2.0       2.7       2.5      +0.5Denmark                      2.4       3.2       2.8      +0.4Ireland                      4.5       5.2       4.5       0.0******************************************************************Non-EU Europe Avg.          -3         2.2       2.9      +6.1Ukraine                    -13.8      -5.0       2.5    + 16.0Russia                     -11.0       1.0       2.0    + 13.0Romania                     -3.8       3.0       3.5      +7.3Hungary                     -3.0       2.0       4.0      +7.0Czech Republic              -2.8       5.1       4.0      +6.8Bulgaria                    -3.9       1.3       2.8      +6.7Poland                       1.9       5.0       5.0      +3.1Switzerland                  0.5       2.5       2.3      +1.8Turkey                       2.6       4.5       3.5      +0.9Norway                       3.5       3.5       3.0      -0.5******************************************************************Middle East Avg.             2.8       3.5       4.0      +1.2Iraq                        -7.6       1.0       1.5      +9.1Morocco                      1.4       5.0       5.5      +4.1Qatar                       -0.7      -2.0       3.0      +3.7Libya                       -1.1       1.5       2.0      +3.1Algeria                      0.8       2.5       3.5      +2.7Oman                         3.7       4.8       6.0      +2.3Iran                         4.3       5.0       6.0      +1.7Yemen                        3.4       4.0       5.0      +1.6Tunisia                      4.1       4.0       5.5      +1.4Kuwait                       1.8       5.0       3.0      +1.2Saudi Arabia                 1.8       2.0       2.5      +0.7Egypt                        3.2       4.2       3.6      +0.4United Arab Emirates         2.0       1.0       2.0       0.0Israel                       5.8       4.5       5.0      -0.8Syria                        7.5       7.0       6.0      -1.5******************************************************************Sub-Saharan Africa Avg.      0.6       2.6       4.3      +3.7Zaire                       -8.5     -10.0       1.0      +9.5Cameroon                    -5.4       3.0       3.5      +8.9Cote d'Ivoire                0.4       6.0       8.0      +7.6Zimbabwe                     0.9       5.0       6.3      +5.4Zambia                      -1.0       2.8       4.0      +5.0Sudan                       -1.7       2.0       3.0      +4.7South Africa                 0.6       3.5       5.0      +4.4Congo                        0.2       1.5       4.0      +3.8Kenya                        1.8       4.0       5.0      +3.2Gabon                        1.2       1.7       2.5      +1.3Angola                       0.9       1.5       2.0      +1.1Guinea                       3.7       4.0       4.5      +0.8Nigeria                      2.0       0.0       2.5      +0.5Ghana                        4.6       4.8       5.0      +0.4Botswana                     6.7       5.2       4.9      -1.8******************************************************************Asia & Pacific Avg.          3.5       4.0       4.1      +0.6Philippines                  2.3       6.0       6.0      +3.7India                        4.0       6.0       5.5      +1.5Australia                    2.7       4.0       3.8      +1.1Japan                        1.4       2.0       2.5      +1.1Vietnam                      8.1       9.0       9.2      +1.1New Zealand                  2.7       3.1       3.5      +0.8Pakistan                     4.8       5.0       5.2      +0.4Sri Lanka                    5.3       5.3       5.6      +0.3Burma                        5.9       6.5       6.0      +0.1Indonesia                    7.0       7.2       6.7      -0.3Taiwan                       6.5       7.0       6.2      -0.3Bangladesh                   4.4       4.5       4.0      -0.4Malaysia                     8.5       8.9       8.0      -0.5South Korea                  7.5       8.5       7.0      -0.5Thailand                     8.2       8.1       7.4      -0.8Hong Kong                    5.0       4.8       4.0      -1.0Singapore                    8.0       7.5       7.0      -1.0Papua New Guinea             6.3       3.0       5.0      -1.3China                       11.4      10.0       9.5      -1.9Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL CHANGE IN INFLATION RATES                         1991-95   1996F   1997-2001   CHANGE***************************************************************GLOBAL AVERAGES             27.6       5.0       4.1     -23.5***************************************************************No. & Central America Avg.   4.3       4.6       4.1      -0.2Nicaragua                  560.0      10.0      16.0    -544.0Jamaica                     42.1      20.0      15.0     -27.1Haiti                       25.2      26.0      12.0     -13.2Mexico                      21.0      30.0      12.0      -9.0Guatemala                   15.3       9.0       8.0      -7.3Honduras                    20.0      25.0      15.0      -5.0Dominican Republic          16.8      17.0      12.0      -4.8El Salvador                 12.3       7.5      10.0      -2.3Trinidad & Tobago            7.4       7.0       5.8      -1.6Costa Rica                  18.8      20.0      18.0      -0.8Puerto Rico                  3.7       3.5       3.5      -0.2Canada                       2.3       2.0       2.5      +0.2United States                3.3       3.4       3.7      +0.4Panama                       1.4       2.5       3.0      +1.6Cuba                        11.2      20.0      15.0      +3.8***************************************************************South America Avg.         656        15.3      10.7    -645.0Brazil                    1268.7      15.0      10.0   -1259.0Suriname                   176.4      85.0      40.0    -136.0Peru                       113.1      12.0       8.0    -105.0Uruguay                     62.8      45.0      20.0     -42.8Argentina                   42.7       2.8       3.2     -39.5Ecuador                     39.1      20.0      15.0     -24.1Paraguay                    19.2      18.0      12.0      -7.2Chile                       13.9       8.0       7.0      -6.9Colombia                    24.8      20.0      18.0      -6.8Bolivia                     11.7       7.5       7.0      -4.7Guyana                       8.3      12.0      16.0      +7.7Venezuela                   40.9      75.0      50.0      +9.1***************************************************************European Union Avg.          4.2       3.0       2.8      -1.3Portugal                     7.3       3.8       3.3      -4.0Greece                      13.7       7.5      10.0      -3.7Sweden                       4.4       3.0       2.8      -1.6Spain                        5.1       4.5       3.8      -1.3Italy                        5.2       5.0       4.0      -1.2Austria                      3.3       2.3       2.5      -0.8Germany                      3.3       2.2       2.5      -0.8Netherlands                  2.7       1.8       2.2      -0.5United Kingdom               3.3       3.3       3.0      -0.3France                       2.3       2.0       2.2      -0.1Ireland                      2.5       2.3       2.5       0.0Belgium                      2.5       2.2       2.8      +0.3Denmark                      2.0       2.7       2.5      +0.5Finland                      2.3       2.6       3.0      +0.7***************************************************************Non-EU Europe Avg.         258        39.5      21.1    -237.0Ukraine                   1357.4     100.0      50.0   -1307.0Russia                     531.9      60.0      30.0    -502.0Romania                    161.3      28.0      20.0    -141.0Bulgaria                   130.8      60.0      25.0    -106.0Poland                      42.8      20.0      12.0     -30.8Turkey                      76.7      85.0      50.0     -26.7Czech Republic              21.7      11.0       6.0     -15.7Hungary                     25.9      25.0      16.0      -9.9Switzerland                  3.2       2.5       1.8      -1.4Norway                       2.4       2.6       2.5      +0.1***************************************************************Middle East Avg.            16.9      13.7      11.5      -5.4Iraq                       148.0      50.0      40.0    -108.0Yemen                      107.0     120.0      80.0     -27.0Algeria                     26.4      12.0       8.0     -18.4Iran                        29.1      20.0      20.0      -9.1Kuwait                       5.7       2.0       2.5      -3.2Israel                      12.9      12.0      10.0      -2.9Morocco                      6.0       4.0       3.8      -2.2Egypt                       12.7       7.8      12.0      -0.7Qatar                        3.5       3.7       3.0      -0.5United Arab Emirates         5.0       5.5       5.0       0.0Oman                         5.2       4.8       5.8      +0.6Tunisia                      5.9       7.0       7.0      +1.1Saudi Arabia                 1.6       2.5       3.0      +1.4Libya                       18.4      50.0      20.0      +1.6Syria                       13.2      20.0      20.0      +6.8***************************************************************Sub-Saharan Africa Avg.     94.4      65.0      18.3     -76.2Zaire                     2870.5    2000.0     100.0   -2771.0Angola                     622.0     200.0      50.0    -572.0Zambia                     125.3      35.0      25.0    -100.0Sudan                      104.5      60.0      50.0     -54.5Kenya                       28.0      10.0      10.0     -18.0Nigeria                     49.4      70.0      35.0     -14.4Zimbabwe                    27.4      25.0      20.0      -7.4Cote d'Ivoire                9.5       6.0       5.0      -4.5Cameroon                     7.3       9.0       4.0      -3.3South Africa                11.7      10.0       9.0      -2.7Guinea                       9.9       5.0       7.5      -2.4Congo                        5.6       8.0       4.5      -1.1Gabon                        6.5       5.0       6.0      -0.5Botswana                    13.2      13.2      17.0      +3.8Ghana                       19.5      27.0      24.0      +4.5***************************************************************Asia & Pacific Avg.          4.1       3.4       4.0      -0.1Vietnam                     24.4      15.0      13.0     -11.4Philippines                 10.5      10.0       7.0      -3.5Indonesia                    9.0      10.0       7.0      -2.0China                       13.9      14.0      12.0      -1.9India                       10.5       8.0      10.0      -0.5Singapore                    2.7       2.8       2.6      -0.1Thailand                     4.9       5.3       4.8      -0.1New Zealand                  2.0       2.2       2.0       0.0South Korea                  6.3       5.3       6.3       0.0Japan                        1.4       0.5       1.5      +0.1Taiwan                       3.8       4.0       4.2      +0.4Hong Kong                    9.4       9.8      10.0      +0.6Malaysia                     4.0       3.5       4.8      +0.8Pakistan                    11.2      10.0      12.0      +0.8Australia                    2.1       3.2       3.5      +1.4Papua New Guinea             6.6      20.0       8.0      +1.4Bangladesh                   4.1       9.0       7.0      +2.9Burma                       27.0      25.0      30.0      +3.0Sri Lanka                   11.0      11.0      14.0      +3.0Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL CHANGE IN CURRENT ACCOUNT                           1991-95   1996F    1997-2001   CHANGE****************************************************************GLOBAL AVERAGES              0.50     -9.00     -5.60     -6.20****************************************************************No. & Cent. America Avg.   -52.60   -126.3     -88.10    -35.60Mexico                     -18.90     -5.00    -10.00     +8.90Canada                     -20.19    -15.00    -12.00     +8.19Cuba                         0.59      0.50      0.80     +0.21Nicaragua                   -0.55     -0.40     -0.46     +0.09Panama                      -0.15     -0.15     -0.10     +0.05Guatemala                   -0.60     -0.75     -0.60      0.00Honduras                    -0.24     -0.20     -0.25     -0.01Puerto Rico                  0.06      0.06      0.05     -0.01Haiti                       -0.09     -0.10     -0.11     -0.02Costa Rica                  -0.41     -0.60     -0.50     -0.09El Salvador                 -0.16     -0.25     -0.25     -0.09Jamaica                     -0.06      0.00     -0.15     -0.09Trinidad & Tobago            0.13      0.02      0.01     -0.12Dominican Republic          -0.26     -0.35     -0.40     -0.14United States              -57.90   -144.00   -100.00    -42.10****************************************************************South America Avg.          -2.80     -6.60     -4.40     -1.70Colombia                    -0.90      1.00      2.00     +2.90Chile                       -0.47      0.00      0.20     +0.67Bolivia                     -0.38     -0.15     -0.20     +0.18Peru                        -2.13     -3.00     -2.00     +0.13Guyana                      -0.19     -0.20     -0.14     +0.05Suriname                    -0.02     -0.01      0.03     +0.05Ecuador                     -0.42     -0.50     -0.40     +0.02Uruguay                     -0.13     -0.20     -0.15     -0.02Paraguay                    -0.67     -1.20     -1.40     -0.73Venezuela                    0.59      0.00     -1.00     -1.59Argentina                   -5.70     -6.00     -7.50     -1.80Brazil                      -2.30    -10.00     -5.00     -2.70****************************************************************European Union Avg.         -2.80      5.30      4.00     +6.80Germany                    -11.98     10.00      0.00    +11.98Sweden                      -2.34      5.00      5.00     +7.34France                       4.92     10.00     12.00     +7.08United Kingdom             -10.27     -1.00     -5.00     +5.27Finland                     -1.69      1.30      1.00     +2.69Spain                      -12.00     -5.00    -10.00     +2.00Netherlands                  9.29     13.00     10.50     +1.21Portugal                    -0.21      0.00      1.00     +1.21Ireland                      2.85      3.50      3.00     +0.15Greece                      -1.07     -1.00     -1.20     -0.13Denmark                      3.95      4.20      3.50     -0.45Austria                     -1.41     -3.50     -2.00     -0.59Italy                       -3.38      6.00     -5.00     -1.62Belgium                     10.20     12.00      6.00     -4.20****************************************************************Non-EU Europe Avg.           4.60      2.80      1.10     -3.50Poland                      -3.07     -2.50     -2.00     +1.07Norway                       3.70      5.00      4.50     +0.80Hungary                     -2.11     -2.80     -1.80     +0.31Romania                     -0.87     -1.00     -0.80     +0.07Bulgaria                    -0.54     -0.65     -0.55     -0.01Czech Republic               0.52      0.28      0.40     -0.12Ukraine                     -1.31     -1.50     -1.50     -0.19Turkey                      -0.31      1.50     -1.50     -1.19Russia                       5.26      3.00      0.00     -5.26Switzerland                 14.79      8.00      5.00     -9.79****************************************************************Middle East Avg.            -3.50     -0.10     -1.20     +2.30Saudi Arabia               -13.26      0.00     -5.00     +8.26Kuwait                      -3.34      4.00      3.00     +6.34Iraq                        -3.20     -2.00     -1.00     +2.20Iran                        -1.83      1.00     -1.00     +0.83Algeria                      0.56     -0.50      1.00     +0.44Israel                      -2.43     -3.50     -2.00     +0.43Tunisia                     -0.66     -0.50     -0.30     +0.36Libya                       -0.91     -0.50     -0.80     +0.11Egypt                        1.98      3.10      2.00     +0.02Oman                        -0.79     -1.00     -0.80     -0.01United Arab Emirates         0.51     -1.00      0.50     -0.01Syria                       -0.28     -0.60     -0.42     -0.14Yemen                       -0.15     -0.30     -0.30     -0.15Qatar                       -0.63     -1.30     -0.80     -0.17Morocco                     -0.32     -0.60     -0.50     -0.18****************************************************************Sub-Saharan Africa Avg.      0.00     -1.10     -0.70     -0.70Nigeria                     -0.32     -1.00      1.00     +1.32Zaire                       -0.84     -0.50     -0.40     +0.44Cameroon                    -0.49     -0.20     -0.15     +0.34Kenya                       -0.02      0.20      0.30     +0.32Gabon                       -0.11      0.18      0.20     +0.31Congo                       -0.52     -0.30     -0.25     +0.27Sudan                       -0.64     -0.50     -0.40     +0.24Zambia                      -0.32     -0.15     -0.10     +0.22Ghana                       -0.43     -0.22     -0.27     +0.16Angola                      -0.70     -0.50     -0.60     +0.10Zimbabwe                    -0.35     -0.45     -0.35      0.00Cote d'Ivoire               -0.83     -0.11     -0.90     -0.07Guinea                      -0.19     -0.40     -0.35     -0.16Botswana                     0.22      0.07     -0.02     -0.24South Africa                 0.40     -1.80     -1.50     -1.90****************************************************************Asia & Pacific Avg.         70.00     60.90     45.80    -24.20Thailand                    -7.75     -8.70     -6.00     +1.75South Korea                 -5.28     -8.00     -4.00     +1.28Indonesia                   -3.59     -4.00     -3.00     +0.59Malaysia                    -3.39     -3.90     -2.90     +0.49Vietnam                     -0.78     -0.80     -0.50     +0.28Pakistan                    -2.30     -2.70     -2.20     +0.10Sri Lanka                   -0.51     -0.50     -0.46     +0.05New Zealand                 -1.02     -1.00     -1.00     +0.02Papua New Guinea             0.18      0.14      0.20     +0.02Burma                       -0.26     -0.30     -0.25     +0.01Bangladesh                   0.00     -0.20      0.00      0.00India                       -2.62     -2.50     -3.00     -0.38China                        3.42      3.50      2.00     -1.42Singapore                    5.83      7.00      4.00     -1.83Hong Kong                    4.87      3.50      3.00     -1.87Taiwan                       8.23      6.00      5.70     -2.53Philippines                 -2.41     -5.00     -5.00     -2.59Australia                   -5.45    -18.00    -12.00     -6.55Japan                      113.34    100.00     75.00    -38.30Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PER CAPITA GDP PERFORMANCE EXTREMES  1 SWITZERLAND             35372     51 SYRIA               2613  2 JAPAN                   32714     52 RUSSIA              2589  3 DENMARK                 27119     53 TURKEY              2528  4 UNITED ARAB EMIRATES    25436     54 PANAMA              2472  5 NORWAY                  25427     55 COSTA RICA          2447  6 UNITED STATES           24637     56 UKRAINE             2357  7 SWEDEN                  24439     57 POLAND              2257  8 AUSTRIA                 23348     58 THAILAND            2154  9 FRANCE                  22982     59 PERU                2018 10 GERMANY                 21834     60 CUBA                1944 11 BELGIUM                 21356     61 TUNISIA             1752 12 NETHERLANDS             20938     62 COLOMBIA            1538 13 FINLAND                 20158     63 PARAGUAY            1511 14 CANADA                  19640     64 JAMAICA             1495 15 SINGAPORE               19132     65 ALGERIA             1380 16 ITALY                   18996     66 ECUADOR             1313 17 UNITED KINGDOM          17571     67 DOMINICAN REPUBLIC  1269 18 HONG KONG               17322     68 EL SALVADOR         1242 19 AUSTRALIA               17234     69 BURMA               1241 20 QATAR                   13805     70 GUATEMALA           1143 21 IRELAND                 13786     71 PAPUA NEW GUINEA    1132 22 IRAN                    13665     72 ROMANIA             1126 23 SPAIN                   13119     73 CONGO               1125 24 NEW ZEALAND             12796     74 MOROCCO             1113 25 ISRAEL                  12551     75 CAMEROON             916 26 SURINAME                10922     76 PHILIPPINES          861 27 TAIWAN                  10593     77 INDONESIA            806 28 PUERTO RICO             10131     78 BOLIVIA              804 29 KUWAIT                  10111     79 EGYPT                798 30 PORTUGAL                 8769     80 ANGOLA               774 31 IRAQ                     8089     81 YEMEN                727 32 SOUTH KOREA              7915     82 COTE D'IVOIRE        682 33 ARGENTINA                7418     83 GUINEA               668 34 GREECE                   7185     84 SRI LANKA            599 35 SAUDI ARABIA             7126     85 HONDURAS             558 36 OMAN                     5712     86 GUYANA               538 37 LIBYA                    5702     87 ZIMBABWE             474 38 GABON                    5584     88 NICARAGUA            436 39 BULGARIA                 5116     89 ZAMBIA               414 40 URUGUAY                  4220     90 CHINA                405 41 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO        3990     91 PAKISTAN             403 42 MEXICO                   3717     92 SUDAN                402 43 HUNGARY                  3425     93 GHANA                379 44 CHILE                    3392     94 NIGERIA              338 45 MALAYSIA                 3270     95 INDIA                311 46 CZECH REPUBLIC           3052     96 KENYA                260 47 SOUTH AFRICA             3013     97 VIETNAM              223 48 BRAZIL                   2927     98 HAITI                214 49 VENEZUELA                2755     99 BANGLADESH           207 50 BOTSWANA                 2629     100 ZAIRE               198Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GDP GROWTH PERFORMANCE EXTREMESRANK,COUNTRY,REAL GDP GROWTH (%)********************************************************************  1 CHINA                   11.4     51 VENEZUELA               2.2  2 MALAYSIA                 8.5     52 GERMANY                 2.1  3 THAILAND                 8.2     53 NETHERLANDS             2.0  4 VIETNAM                  8.1     54 NIGERIA                 2.0  5 SINGAPORE                8.0     55 UNITED ARAB EMIRATES    2.0  6 GUYANA                   7.5     56 AUSTRIA                 1.9  7 SOUTH KOREA              7.5     57 CANADA                  1.9  8 SYRIA                    7.5     58 POLAND                  1.9  9 CHILE                    7.0     59 KENYA                   1.8 10 INDONESIA                7.0     60 KUWAIT                  1.8 11 BOTSWANA                 6.7     61 SAUDI ARABIA            1.8 12 PANAMA                   6.6     62 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO       1.5 13 TAIWAN                   6.5     63 BELGIUM                 1.4 14 ARGENTINA                6.3     64 ITALY                   1.4 15 EL SALVADOR              6.3     65 JAMAICA                 1.4 16 PAPUA NEW GUINEA         6.3     66 JAPAN                   1.4 17 BURMA                    5.9     67 MOROCCO                 1.4 18 ISRAEL                   5.8     68 FRANCE                  1.3 19 PERU                     5.6     69 GREECE                  1.3 20 SRI LANKA                5.3     70 SPAIN                   1.3 21 HONG KONG                5.0     71 SURINAME                1.3 22 COSTA RICA               4.9     72 UNITED KINGDOM          1.3 23 PAKISTAN                 4.8     73 GABON                   1.2 24 GHANA                    4.6     74 PORTUGAL                1.2 25 COLOMBIA                 4.5     75 NICARAGUA               1.1 26 IRELAND                  4.5     76 ANGOLA                  0.9 27 BANGLADESH               4.4     77 MEXICO                  0.9 28 IRAN                     4.3     78 ZIMBABWE                0.9 29 BOLIVIA                  4.2     79 ALGERIA                 0.8 30 GUATEMALA                4.1     80 SOUTH AFRICA            0.6 31 TUNISIA                  4.1     81 SWITZERLAND             0.5 32 DOMINICAN REPUBLIC       4.0     82 COTE D'IVOIRE           0.4 33 INDIA                    4.0     83 CONGO                   0.2 34 URUGUAY                  3.9     84 SWEDEN                 -0.2 35 GUINEA                   3.7     85 FINLAND                -0.6 36 OMAN                     3.7     86 QATAR                  -0.7 37 ECUADOR                  3.6     87 ZAMBIA                 -1.0 38 NORWAY                   3.5     88 LIBYA                  -1.1 39 YEMEN                    3.4     89 SUDAN                  -1.7 40 EGYPT                    3.2     90 CZECH REPUBLIC         -2.8 41 PARAGUAY                 3.2     91 HUNGARY                -3.0 42 HONDURAS                 3.1     92 ROMANIA                -3.8 43 BRAZIL                   2.9     93 BULGARIA               -3.9 44 AUSTRALIA                2.7     94 CAMEROON               -5.4 45 NEW ZEALAND              2.7     95 CUBA                   -6.9 46 TURKEY                   2.6     96 IRAQ                   -7.6 47 DENMARK                  2.4     97 HAITI                  -7.8 48 UNITED STATES            2.4     98 ZAIRE                  -8.5 49 PHILIPPINES              2.3     99 RUSSIA                -11.0 50 PUERTO RICO              2.2     100 UKRAINE              -13.8Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996INFLATION PERFORMANCE EXTREMESRANK,COUNTRY,INFLATION********************************************************************  1 JAPAN                  1.4     51 BOLIVIA                11.7  2 PANAMA                 1.4     52 SOUTH AFRICA           11.7  3 SAUDI ARABIA           1.6     53 EL SALVADOR            12.3  4 DENMARK                2.0     54 EGYPT                  12.7  5 NEW ZEALAND            2.0     55 ISRAEL                 12.9  6 AUSTRALIA              2.1     56 BOTSWANA               13.2  7 CANADA                 2.3     57 SYRIA                  13.2  8 FINLAND                2.3     58 GREECE                 13.7  9 FRANCE                 2.3     59 CHILE                  13.9 10 NORWAY                 2.4     60 CHINA                  13.9 11 BELGIUM                2.5     61 GUATEMALA              15.3 12 IRELAND                2.5     62 DOMINICAN REPUBLIC     16.8 13 NETHERLANDS            2.7     63 LIBYA                  18.4 14 SINGAPORE              2.7     64 COSTA RICA             18.8 15 SWITZERLAND            3.2     65 PARAGUAY               19.2 16 AUSTRIA                3.3     66 GHANA                  19.5 17 GERMANY                3.3     67 HONDURAS               20.0 18 UNITED KINGDOM         3.3     68 MEXICO                 21.0 19 UNITED STATES          3.3     69 CZECH REPUBLIC         21.7 20 QATAR                  3.5     70 VIETNAM                24.4 21 PUERTO RICO            3.7     71 COLOMBIA               24.8 22 TAIWAN                 3.8     72 HAITI                  25.2 23 MALAYSIA               4.0     73 HUNGARY                25.9 24 BANGLADESH             4.1     74 ALGERIA                26.4 25 SWEDEN                 4.4     75 BURMA                  27.0 26 THAILAND               4.9     76 ZIMBABWE               27.4 27 UNITED ARAB EMIRATES   5.0     77 KENYA                  28.0 28 SPAIN                  5.1     78 IRAN                   29.1 29 ITALY                  5.2     79 ECUADOR                39.1 30 OMAN                   5.2     80 VENEZUELA              40.9 31 CONGO                  5.6     81 JAMAICA                42.1 32 KUWAIT                 5.7     82 ARGENTINA              42.7 33 TUNISIA                5.9     83 POLAND                 42.8 34 MOROCCO                6.0     84 NIGERIA                49.4 35 SOUTH KOREA            6.3     85 URUGUAY                62.8 36 GABON                  6.5     86 TURKEY                 76.7 37 PAPUA NEW GUINEA       6.6     87 SUDAN                 104.5 38 CAMEROON               7.3     88 YEMEN                 107.0 39 PORTUGAL               7.3     89 PERU                  113.1 40 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO      7.4     90 ZAMBIA                125.3 41 GUYANA                 8.3     91 BULGARIA              130.8 42 INDONESIA              9.0     92 IRAQ                  148.0 43 HONG KONG              9.4     93 ROMANIA               161.3 44 COTE D'IVOIRE          9.5     94 SURINAME              176.4 45 GUINEA                 9.9     95 RUSSIA                531.9 46 INDIA                 10.5     96 NICARAGUA             560.0 47 PHILIPPINES           10.5     97 ANGOLA                622.0 48 SRI LANKA             11.0     98 BRAZIL               1268.7 49 CUBA                  11.2     99 UKRAINE              1357.4 50 PAKISTAN              11.2     100 ZAIRE               2870.5Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CAPITAL INVESTMENT PERFORMANCE EXTREMESRANK,COUNTRY,CAPITAL INVESTMENT (% OF GDP)********************************************************************  1 GUYANA                49.5       51 CONGO                  19.4  2 THAILAND              40.8       52 NORWAY                 19.4  3 SINGAPORE             39.2       53 CZECH REPUBLIC         19.3  4 SOUTH KOREA           36.6       54 FRANCE                 19.3  5 MALAYSIA              36.3       55 VIETNAM                19.2  6 BOTSWANA              35.3       56 EGYPT                  19.0  7 INDONESIA             34.5       57 NEW ZEALAND            18.9  8 CHINA                 32.2       58 KENYA                  18.8  9 JAMAICA               31.3       59 CANADA                 18.7 10 LIBYA                 30.1       60 BELGIUM                18.4 11 JAPAN                 30.0       61 PAKISTAN               18.4 12 HONG KONG             29.4       62 GHANA                  18.3 13 ALGERIA               27.9       63 VENEZUELA              18.1 14 KUWAIT                26.9       64 ANGOLA                 17.9 15 RUSSIA                26.6       65 ARGENTINA              17.9 16 TUNISIA               26.5       66 GREECE                 17.8 17 GABON                 25.4       67 ITALY                  17.7 18 AUSTRIA               24.9       68 OMAN                   17.5 19 SRI LANKA             24.8       69 PERU                   17.5 20 UNITED ARAB EMIRATES  23.9       70 FINLAND                17.4 21 TURKEY                23.7       71 EL SALVADOR            16.7 22 SWITZERLAND           23.6       72 SOUTH AFRICA           16.3 23 HONDURAS              23.5       73 IRELAND                16.2 24 CHILE                 23.3       74 COLOMBIA               15.8 25 TAIWAN                23.1       75 UNITED KINGDOM         15.6 26 ISRAEL                23.0       76 DENMARK                15.3 27 PHILIPPINES           23.0       77 PUERTO RICO            15.1 28 SYRIA                 22.9       78 CUBA                   15.0 29 PANAMA                22.8       79 YEMEN                  15.0 30 SURINAME              22.8       80 ZIMBABWE               15.0 31 PORTUGAL              22.6       81 GUATEMALA              14.8 32 MOROCCO               22.4       82 SUDAN                  14.7 33 DOMINICAN REPUBLIC    22.2       83 UNITED STATES          14.2 34 PARAGUAY              22.2       84 GUINEA                 14.1 35 IRAN                  21.8       85 ROMANIA                13.9 36 PAPUA NEW GUINEA      21.7       86 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO      13.6 37 CAMEROON              21.5       87 BANGLADESH             13.0 38 INDIA                 21.5       88 IRAQ                   13.0 39 AUSTRALIA             21.4       89 SWEDEN                 12.9 40 COSTA RICA            21.1       90 URUGUAY                12.8 41 SPAIN                 21.0       91 BURMA                  12.0 42 NICARAGUA             20.8       92 BOLIVIA                11.5 43 SAUDI ARABIA          20.6       93 NIGERIA                10.4 44 BRAZIL                20.1       94 QATAR                   9.8 45 MEXICO                20.1       95 UKRAINE                 9.7 46 GERMANY               20.0       96 ZAMBIA                  9.7 47 ECUADOR               19.9       97 BULGARIA                8.6 48 HUNGARY               19.8       98 COTE D'IVOIRE           8.6 49 NETHERLANDS           19.8       99 ZAIRE                   8.0 50 POLAND                19.8       100 HAITI                  5.6Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BUDGET BALANCE PERFORMANCE EXTREMESRANK,COUNTRY,BUDGET BALANCE (% OF GDP)*********************************************************************  1 SINGAPORE            10.0      51 ISRAEL                   -3.3  2 PUERTO RICO           9.7      52 VENEZUELA                -3.3  3 BOTSWANA              5.5      53 ZIMBABWE                 -3.3  4 PANAMA                4.6      54 ZAMBIA                   -3.6  5 THAILAND              2.5      55 CANADA                   -3.8  6 JAMAICA               2.2      56 FRANCE                   -3.8  7 HONG KONG             2.0      57 PAPUA NEW GUINEA         -3.8  8 CHILE                 1.8      58 NICARAGUA                -3.9  9 NEW ZEALAND           1.4      59 UNITED STATES            -3.9 10 ECUADOR               1.0      60 SYRIA                    -4.1 11 MEXICO                1.0      61 POLAND                   -4.3 12 ARGENTINA             0.5      62 AUSTRIA                  -4.4 13 UNITED ARAB EMIRATES  0.4      63 GUATEMALA                -4.6 14 INDONESIA             0.2      64 SUDAN                    -4.8 15 PARAGUAY              0.0      65 UNITED KINGDOM           -5.2 16 URUGUAY              -0.1      66 TURKEY                   -5.3 17 HONDURAS             -0.4      67 ALGERIA                  -5.6 18 SOUTH KOREA          -0.5      68 GABON                    -5.6 19 PHILIPPINES          -0.6      69 SPAIN                    -5.6 20 CZECH REPUBLIC       -0.7      70 PORTUGAL                 -5.7 21 SURINAME             -0.7      71 INDIA                    -5.8 22 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO    -0.7      72 SWEDEN                   -5.8 23 JAPAN                -0.8      73 BELGIUM                  -6.0 24 MALAYSIA             -0.8      74 HUNGARY                  -6.2 25 TAIWAN               -0.8      75 SOUTH AFRICA             -6.2 26 COLOMBIA             -0.9      76 BANGLADESH               -6.9 27 IRAN                 -0.9      77 PAKISTAN                 -6.9 28 CHINA                -1.1      78 RUSSIA                   -7.9 29 BRAZIL               -1.3      79 BULGARIA                 -8.0 30 EGYPT                -1.4      80 FINLAND                  -8.1 31 IRELAND              -1.5      81 GUYANA                   -8.1 32 SWITZERLAND          -1.5      82 SRI LANKA                -8.1 33 NORWAY               -1.7      83 CONGO                    -9.0 34 GHANA                -1.8      84 NIGERIA                  -9.1 35 DOMINICAN REPUBLIC   -1.9      85 ITALY                    -9.6 36 BOLIVIA              -2.0      86 OMAN                    -10.0 37 KENYA                -2.0      87 QATAR                   -10.7 38 AUSTRALIA            -2.2      88 VIETNAM                 -11.6 39 EL SALVADOR          -2.2      89 HAITI                   -12.0 40 ROMANIA              -2.2      90 COTE D'IVOIRE           -12.1 41 GERMANY              -2.3      91 SAUDI ARABIA            -12.1 42 PERU                 -2.3      92 GREECE                  -12.2 43 CAMEROON             -2.5      93 UKRAINE                 -14.1 44 COSTA RICA           -2.5      94 LIBYA                   -17.8 45 GUINEA               -2.5      95 CUBA                    -18.1 46 DENMARK              -2.8      96 ZAIRE                   -18.7 47 MOROCCO              -2.8      97 YEMEN                   -21.7 48 NETHERLANDS          -2.8      98 ANGOLA                  -22.6 49 TUNISIA              -3.0      99 KUWAIT                  -50.5 50 BURMA                -3.1      100 IRAQ                  -116.8Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996UNEMPLOYMENT PERFORMANCE EXTREMESNG = NegligibleInformation on countries not listed was unavailable.********************************************************************RANK,COUNTRY,UNEMPLOYMENT********************************************************************  1 KUWAIT                NG       51 ARGENTINA                10.8  2 OMAN                  NG       52 ITALY                    10.8  3 QATAR                 NG       53 FRANCE                   11.1  4 SAUDI ARABIA          NG       54 HUNGARY                  11.2  5 UNITED ARAB EMIRATES  NG       55 CUBA                     11.3  6 TAIWAN                 1.6     56 DENMARK                  11.4  7 HONG KONG              2.2     57 GABON                    12.0  8 SINGAPORE              2.4     58 GUYANA                   12.0  9 SOUTH KOREA            2.5     59 HONDURAS                 12.3 10 JAPAN                  2.6     60 TURKEY                   12.6 11 CHINA                  2.8     61 SRI LANKA                13.1 12 THAILAND               3.0     62 EGYPT                    13.3 13 INDONESIA              3.2     63 PANAMA                   14.2 14 PAKISTAN               3.3     64 PARAGUAY                 14.4 15 CZECH REPUBLIC         3.4     65 POLAND                   14.5 16 SWITZERLAND            3.5     66 IRAN                     14.6 17 MALAYSIA               3.7     67 IRELAND                  15.4 18 AUSTRIA                4.1     68 FINLAND                  15.5 19 COSTA RICA             4.6     69 TUNISIA                  15.6 20 RUSSIA                 4.9     70 BULGARIA                 15.8 21 BRAZIL                 5.0     71 BURMA                    16.1 22 PAPUA NEW GUINEA       5.1     72 JAMAICA                  16.7 23 BOLIVIA                5.4     73 PUERTO RICO              16.8 24 COTE D'IVOIRE          5.4     74 MOROCCO                  17.9 25 PORTUGAL               5.5     75 EL SALVADOR              18.1 26 CHILE                  5.6     76 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO        18.5 27 NORWAY                 5.6     77 IRAQ                     18.7 28 SWEDEN                 6.3     78 MEXICO                   18.8 29 UNITED STATES          6.6     79 SURINAME                 19.6 30 SYRIA                  7.0     80 CAMEROON                 19.7 31 NETHERLANDS            7.3     81 CONGO                    20.0 32 ECUADOR                8.0     82 SPAIN                    20.2 33 GUATEMALA              8.0     83 VIETNAM                  20.8 34 ROMANIA                8.2     84 INDIA                    22.0 35 VENEZUELA              8.2     85 DOMINICAN REPUBLIC       22.8 36 GERMANY                8.4     86 BOTSWANA                 25.0 37 URUGUAY                8.4     87 ALGERIA                  29.8 38 NEW ZEALAND            9.1     88 SUDAN                    30.0 39 COLOMBIA               9.2     89 SOUTH AFRICA             32.1 40 ISRAEL                 9.2     90 KENYA                    33.0 41 UNITED KINGDOM         9.2     91 NIGERIA                  33.4 42 PERU                   9.3     92 ZAMBIA                   35.6 43 GREECE                 9.4     93 BANGLADESH               39.2 44 PHILIPPINES            9.4     94 ZAIRE                    39.2 45 UKRAINE                9.4     95 GUINEA                   40.0 46 ANGOLA                 9.5     96 YEMEN                    40.4 47 BELGIUM               10.0     97 ZIMBABWE                 44.0 48 CANADA                10.0     98 HAITI                    47.0 49 GHANA                 10.0     99 NICARAGUA                53.6 50 AUSTRALIA             10.1Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DEBT SERVICE PERFORMANCE EXTREMESNG= NegligibleInformation on countries not listed was unavailable.*********************************************************************RANK,COUNTRY,DEBT SERVICE RATIO*********************************************************************  1 JAPAN                   NG          50 ZAIRE               22.0  2 QATAR                   NG          51 ISRAEL              22.4  3 SINGAPORE               NG          52 SPAIN               22.4  4 UNITED ARAB EMIRATES    NG          53 SURINAME            23.1  5 HONG KONG                1.0        54 FINLAND             23.5  6 SAUDI ARABIA             1.0        55 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO   23.6  7 TAIWAN                   2.1        56 BULGARIA            23.8  8 AUSTRIA                  2.4        57 BELGIUM             24.0  9 BOTSWANA                 3.7        58 BRAZIL              24.2 10 IRAN                     4.1        59 FRANCE              24.2 11 IRELAND                  4.3        60 SYRIA               24.4 12 LIBYA                    4.9        61 VENEZUELA           24.5 13 SOUTH KOREA              6.5        62 ANGOLA              24.8 14 MALAYSIA                 7.0        63 CAMEROON            25.0 15 SUDAN                    8.6        64 JAMAICA             25.0 16 HAITI                    8.8        65 INDIA               26.6 17 YEMEN                    9.4        66 ITALY               26.6 18 PUERTO RICO             10.0        67 CANADA              26.8 19 ROMANIA                 10.0        68 NETHERLANDS         27.0 20 POLAND                  10.6        69 NIGERIA             27.6 21 CZECH REPUBLIC          10.8        70 UNITED STATES       27.6 22 OMAN                    11.9        71 MEXICO              27.8 23 NORWAY                  12.1        72 CONGO               28.4 24 CHINA                   12.6        73 GHANA               28.8 25 THAILAND                12.9        74 ZIMBABWE            29.3 26 SRI LANKA               13.1        75 PAPUA NEW GUINEA    30.6 27 PARAGUAY                13.2        76 COTE D'IVOIRE       30.8 28 NICARAGUA               13.6        77 PAKISTAN            30.8 29 PERU                    13.8        78 GREECE              31.4 30 SOUTH AFRICA            14.2        79 KENYA               32.2 31 EGYPT                   14.9        80 ZAMBIA              32.2 32 DOMINICAN REPUBLIC      15.0        81 ECUADOR             32.3 33 EL SALVADOR             15.0        82 INDONESIA           32.4 34 GUATEMALA               15.6        83 SWEDEN              32.4 35 GUINEA                  15.7        84 COLOMBIA            32.5 36 PORTUGAL                15.8        85 NEW ZEALAND         33.6 37 BANGLADESH              16.0        86 PANAMA              33.7 38 DENMARK                 16.6        87 SWITZERLAND         34.8 39 BURMA                   16.9        88 MOROCCO             35.0 40 GABON                   18.4        89 HUNGARY             35.3 41 RUSSIA                  19.6        90 HONDURAS            36.6 42 GERMANY                 19.8        91 BOLIVIA             37.0 43 VIETNAM                 19.9        92 TURKEY              37.7 44 UKRAINE                 20.2        93 ARGENTINA           38.1 45 COSTA RICA              20.4        94 URUGUAY             39.0 46 AUSTRALIA               20.9        95 IRAQ                40.0 47 TUNISIA                 20.9        96 UNITED KINGDOM      41.4 48 CHILE                   21.6        97 ALGERIA             68.5 49 PHILIPPINES             21.7        98 GUYANA              74.8Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CURRENT ACCOUNT PERFORMANCE EXTREMESRANK,COUNTRY,CURRENT ACCOUNT (% OF GDP)********************************************************************  1 SINGAPORE               10.2        51 JAMAICA             -1.5  2 SWITZERLAND              6.0        52 SOUTH KOREA         -1.5  3 BOTSWANA                 5.8        53 GABON               -1.8  4 IRELAND                  5.8        54 AUSTRALIA           -1.9  5 BELGIUM                  4.6        55 ARGENTINA           -2.2  6 EGYPT                    4.6        56 NEW ZEALAND         -2.3  7 HONG KONG                4.6        57 SPAIN               -2.3  8 TAIWAN                   3.9        58 INDONESIA           -2.4  9 PAPUA NEW GUINEA         3.5        59 EL SALVADOR         -2.5 10 NORWAY                   3.4        60 PANAMA              -2.5 11 CUBA                     2.9        61 DOMINICAN REPUBLIC  -2.6 12 NETHERLANDS              2.9        62 ECUADOR             -2.8 13 DENMARK                  2.8        63 ISRAEL              -3.5 14 JAPAN                    2.8        64 CANADA              -3.6 15 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO        2.7        65 POLAND              -3.6 16 CZECH REPUBLIC           1.9        66 LIBYA               -3.7 17 RUSSIA                   1.7        67 ROMANIA             -3.7 18 UNITED ARAB EMIRATES     1.6        68 PHILIPPINES         -4.1 19 ALGERIA                  1.4        69 CAMEROON            -4.3 20 IRAN                     1.4        70 TUNISIA             -4.4 21 VENEZUELA                1.3        71 PERU                -4.5 22 CHINA                    0.9        72 GUINEA              -4.7 23 FRANCE                   0.4        73 PAKISTAN            -4.7 24 SOUTH AFRICA             0.4        74 SRI LANKA           -4.8 25 PUERTO RICO              0.2        75 VIETNAM             -5.0 26 BANGLADESH               0.1        76 GUATEMALA           -5.1 27 KENYA                    0.0        77 COSTA RICA          -5.3 28 TURKEY                   0.0        78 MALAYSIA            -5.5 29 ITALY                   -0.2        79 MEXICO              -5.5 30 BRAZIL                  -0.3        80 HUNGARY             -5.7 31 PORTUGAL                -0.3        81 BOLIVIA             -5.8 32 NIGERIA                 -0.4        82 HAITI               -5.9 33 BURMA                   -0.5        83 SUDAN               -5.9 34 SYRIA                   -0.6        84 THAILAND            -6.2 35 AUSTRIA                 -0.7        85 OMAN                -6.8 36 GERMANY                 -0.7        86 GHANA               -7.0 37 SURINAME                -0.8        87 ZIMBABWE            -7.0 38 CHILE                   -0.9        88 HONDURAS            -7.8 39 INDIA                   -0.9        89 QATAR               -8.2 40 UNITED STATES           -0.9        90 ZAMBIA              -8.7 41 URUGUAY                 -0.9        91 COTE D'IVOIRE       -9.0 42 MOROCCO                 -1.0        92 PARAGUAY            -9.5 43 UNITED KINGDOM          -1.0        93 ANGOLA              -9.9 44 COLOMBIA                -1.1        94 SAUDI ARABIA       -11.0 45 BULGARIA                -1.2        95 ZAIRE              -12.4 46 UKRAINE                 -1.3        96 CONGO              -18.9 47 GREECE                  -1.4        97 IRAQ               -20.4 48 SWEDEN                  -1.4        98 NICARAGUA          -29.3 49 YEMEN                   -1.4        99 KUWAIT             -39.9 50 FINLAND                 -1.5        100 GUYANA            -42.5Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CURRENCY CHANGE PERFORMANCE EXTREMESRANK,COUNTRY,CURRENCY CHANGE AVERAGE (%)********************************************************************  1 JAPAN                    9.1        51 BOTSWANA            -7.4  2 SINGAPORE                4.8        52 PAKISTAN            -7.4  3 SWITZERLAND              2.7        53 GREECE              -8.1  4 BURMA                    2.4        54 ISRAEL              -8.3  5 BELGIUM                  2.2        55 BOLIVIA             -8.4  6 NETHERLANDS              2.2        56 GUINEA              -8.6  7 GERMANY                  2.1        57 PARAGUAY           -10.0  8 NEW ZEALAND              2.1        58 CZECH REPUBLIC     -11.0  9 AUSTRIA                  2.0        59 DOMINICAN REPUBLIC -11.0 10 DENMARK                  1.5        60 COLOMBIA           -11.9 11 FRANCE                   1.5        61 INDIA              -12.9 12 MALAYSIA                 1.2        62 CHINA              -13.2 13 THAILAND                 0.7        63 HUNGARY            -13.6 14 TAIWAN                   0.5        64 EGYPT              -13.7 15 HONG KONG                0.0        65 COSTA RICA         -13.9 16 IRAQ                     0.0        66 CONGO              -18.2 17 OMAN                     0.0        67 COTE D'IVOIRE      -18.2 18 PANAMA                   0.0        68 CAMEROON           -18.3 19 QATAR                    0.0        69 GABON              -18.4 20 SAUDI ARABIA             0.0        70 MEXICO             -19.8 21 SYRIA                    0.0        71 ARGENTINA          -20.0 22 UNITED ARAB EMIRATES     0.0        72 KENYA              -20.0 23 IRELAND                 -0.3        73 POLAND             -20.9 24 KUWAIT                  -0.4        74 VIETNAM            -21.1 25 NORWAY                  -0.6        75 ZIMBABWE           -21.3 26 MOROCCO                 -0.9        76 NIGERIA            -25.0 27 AUSTRALIA               -1.0        77 HAITI              -26.0 28 PHILIPPINES             -1.1        78 ECUADOR            -26.6 29 PORTUGAL                -1.5        79 GHANA              -28.4 30 EL SALVADOR             -1.9        80 VENEZUELA          -30.4 31 SOUTH KOREA             -1.9        81 URUGUAY            -39.6 32 TUNISIA                 -1.9        82 JAMAICA            -40.0 33 UNITED KINGDOM          -2.0        83 GUYANA             -41.8 34 UNITED STATES           -2.1        84 ALGERIA            -42.1 35 PUERTO RICO             -2.2        85 HONDURAS           -45.8 36 BANGLADESH              -3.1        86 SUDAN              -55.1 37 CANADA                  -3.5        87 ZAMBIA             -55.3 38 INDONESIA               -3.8        88 YEMEN              -71.8 39 FINLAND                 -4.0        89 TURKEY             -76.3 40 LIBYA                   -4.4        90 PERU               -88.9 41 PAPUA NEW GUINEA        -4.5        91 ROMANIA           -164.1 42 SRI LANKA               -4.6        92 BULGARIA          -181.6 43 SPAIN                   -4.8        93 RUSSIA            -221.2 44 CUBA                    -5.1        94 UKRAINE           -266.9 45 GUATEMALA               -5.1        95 IRAN              -373.6 46 SWEDEN                  -5.3        96 NICARAGUA         -598.1 47 CHILE                   -5.4        97 ANGOLA            -994.2 48 SOUTH AFRICA            -6.4        98 BRAZIL           -1058.1 49 ITALY                   -7.0        99 SURINAME         -1524.0 50 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO       -7.3        100 ZAIRE          -10734.7Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GLOBAL POPULATION CHANGE                             1995     2000F     CHANGE*************************************************************GLOBAL AVERAGE                                  +0.03*************************************************************LIBYA                        5.27      6.53     +4.8IRAN                        69.70     85.80     +4.6SAUDI ARABIA                18.31     22.05     +4.1ISRAEL                       5.73      6.88     +4.0NIGERIA                    117.58    140.80     +4.0ZAIRE                       44.77     53.21     +3.8COTE D'IVOIRE               14.38     17.06     +3.7ZIMBABWE                    11.81     14.01     +3.7BOTSWANA                     1.54      1.82     +3.7UNITED ARAB EMIRATES         1.33      1.57     +3.7OMAN                         2.05      2.41     +3.5ANGOLA                      10.06     11.81     +3.5ZAMBIA                       9.57     11.20     +3.5YEMEN                       11.49     13.46     +3.4NICARAGUA                    4.56      5.33     +3.4QATAR                        0.56      0.65     +3.4SYRIA                       14.23     16.56     +3.3GHANA                       17.59     20.40     +3.2HONDURAS                     5.97      6.91     +3.2CONGO                        2.60      3.01     +3.1PAKISTAN                   130.53    150.76     +3.1GUATEMALA                   10.62     12.17     +2.9KENYA                       29.37     33.63     +2.9BOLIVIA                      8.52      9.74     +2.9IRAQ                        20.79     23.77     +2.9SUDAN                       29.56     33.74     +2.8PARAGUAY                     4.90      5.58     +2.8VIETNAM                     75.00     85.20     +2.7MALAYSIA                    20.30     23.01     +2.7ALGERIA                     28.24     31.81     +2.5INDIA                      943.40   1062.70     +2.5SOUTH AFRICA                42.05     47.37     +2.5BANGLADESH                 123.41    138.71     +2.5TURKEY                      63.26     71.10     +2.5GUINEA                       6.54      7.35     +2.5MOROCCO                     27.67     31.03     +2.4VENEZUELA                   21.73     24.32     +2.4EGYPT                       59.24     66.26     +2.4PAPUA NEW GUINEA             4.17      4.66     +2.3ECUADOR                     11.51     12.85     +2.3PHILIPPINES                 68.71     76.51     +2.3COSTA RICA                   3.34      3.72     +2.3BURMA                       46.60     51.73     +2.2DOMINICAN REPUBLIC           7.95      8.80     +2.1CAMEROON                    13.07     14.46     +2.1CANADA                      29.62     32.66     +2.1HAITI                        7.18      7.91     +2.0SINGAPORE                    2.99      3.29     +2.0TUNISIA                      8.91      9.80     +2.0BRAZIL                     165.69    182.01     +2.0MEXICO                      94.89    104.20     +2.0PANAMA                       2.66      2.92     +2.0KUWAIT                       1.53      1.67     +1.9COLOMBIA                    35.38     38.65     +1.9PERU                        23.41     25.43     +1.7EL SALVADOR                  5.73      6.21     +1.7INDONESIA                  197.59    213.89     +1.7CHILE                       14.25     15.39     +1.6THAILAND                    60.49     65.12     +1.5AUSTRALIA                   18.19     19.40     +1.3CHINA                     1232.32   1314.27     +1.3ARGENTINA                   34.57     36.70     +1.2SRI LANKA                   18.07     19.17     +1.2SURINAME                     0.43      0.46     +1.2AUSTRIA                      8.16      8.62     +1.1SWITZERLAND                  7.09      7.47     +1.1NEW ZEALAND                  3.52      3.70     +1.1CUBA                        11.17     11.74     +1.0UNITED STATES              262.77    275.91     +1.0TRINIDAD & TOBAGO            1.28      1.34     +1.0SOUTH KOREA                 44.87     46.93     +0.9TAIWAN                      21.47     22.41     +0.9SWEDEN                       8.95      9.32     +0.8GREECE                      10.51     10.92     +0.8NETHERLANDS                 15.51     16.08     +0.7FRANCE                      58.45     60.44     +0.7GUYANA                       0.82      0.85     +0.6PUERTO RICO                  3.83      3.95     +0.6FINLAND                      5.14      5.29     +0.6NORWAY                       4.35      4.45     +0.5GERMANY                     81.84     83.76     +0.5URUGUAY                      3.17      3.24     +0.5JAMAICA                      2.45      2.50     +0.4IRELAND                      3.58      3.64     +0.4POLAND                      38.75     39.43     +0.4JAPAN                      125.49    127.50     +0.3DENMARK                      5.21      5.28     +0.3UNITED KINGDOM              58.26     59.05     +0.3BELGIUM                     10.09     10.22     +0.3GABON                        1.11      1.12     +0.2UKRAINE                     52.26     52.83     +0.2RUSSIA                     150.51    152.02     +0.2SPAIN                       39.31     39.70     +0.2CZECH REPUBLIC              10.35     10.40     +0.1PORTUGAL                     9.84      9.80     -0.1ITALY                       56.71     56.06     -0.2BULGARIA                     8.79      8.67     -0.3HUNGARY                     10.23     10.09     -0.3ROMANIA                     22.58     22.13     -0.4HONG KONG                    5.54      5.24     -1.1Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL POPULATION CHANGE                             1995     2000F    CHANGE*******************************************************No. & Cent. America                             +0.06NICARAGUA                    4.56      5.33     +3.4HONDURAS                     5.97      6.91     +3.2GUATEMALA                   10.62     12.17     +2.9COSTA RICA                   3.34      3.72     +2.3DOMINICAN REPUBLIC           7.95      8.80     +2.1CANADA                      29.62     32.66     +2.1HAITI                        7.18      7.91     +2.0MEXICO                      94.89    104.20     +2.0PANAMA                       2.66      2.92     +2.0EL SALVADOR                  5.73      6.21     +1.7CUBA                        11.17     11.74     +1.0UNITED STATES              262.77    275.91     +1.0TRINIDAD & TOBAGO            1.28      1.34     +1.0PUERTO RICO                  3.83      3.95     +0.6JAMAICA                      2.45      2.50     +0.4*******************************************************South America                                   +0.06BOLIVIA                      8.52      9.74     +2.9PARAGUAY                     4.90      5.58     +2.8VENEZUELA                   21.73     24.32     +2.4ECUADOR                     11.51     12.85     +2.3BRAZIL                     165.69    182.01     +2.0COLOMBIA                    35.38     38.65     +1.9PERU                        23.41     25.43     +1.7CHILE                       14.25     15.39     +1.6ARGENTINA                   34.57     36.70     +1.2SURINAME                     0.43      0.46     +1.2GUYANA                       0.82      0.85     +0.6URUGUAY                      3.17      3.24     +0.5*******************************************************European Union                                  +0.02AUSTRIA                      8.16      8.62     +1.1SWEDEN                       8.95      9.32     +0.8GREECE                      10.51     10.92     +0.8NETHERLANDS                 15.51     16.08     +0.7FRANCE                      58.45     60.44     +0.7FINLAND                      5.14      5.29     +0.6GERMANY                     81.84     83.76     +0.5IRELAND                      3.58      3.64     +0.4DENMARK                      5.21      5.28     +0.3UNITED KINGDOM              58.26     59.05     +0.3BELGIUM                     10.09     10.22     +0.3SPAIN                       39.31     39.70     +0.2PORTUGAL                     9.84      9.80     -0.1ITALY                       56.71     56.06     -0.2*******************************************************Non-EU Europe                                   +0.01TURKEY                      63.26     71.10     +2.5SWITZERLAND                  7.09      7.47     +1.1NORWAY                       4.35      4.45     +0.5POLAND                      38.75     39.43     +0.4UKRAINE                     52.26     52.83     +0.2RUSSIA                     150.51    152.02     +0.2CZECH REPUBLIC              10.35     10.40     +0.1BULGARIA                     8.79      8.67     -0.3HUNGARY                     10.23     10.09     -0.3ROMANIA                     22.58     22.13     -0.4*******************************************************Middle East                                     +0.18LIBYA                        5.27      6.53     +4.8IRAN                        69.70     85.80     +4.6SAUDI ARABIA                18.31     22.05     +4.1ISRAEL                       5.73      6.88     +4.0UNITED ARAB EMIRATES         1.33      1.57     +3.7OMAN                         2.05      2.41     +3.5YEMEN                       11.49     13.46     +3.4QATAR                        0.56      0.65     +3.4SYRIA                       14.23     16.56     +3.3IRAQ                        20.79     23.77     +2.9ALGERIA                     28.24     31.81     +2.5MOROCCO                     27.67     31.03     +2.4EGYPT                       59.24     66.26     +2.4TUNISIA                      8.91      9.80     +2.0KUWAIT                       1.53      1.67     +1.9*******************************************************Sub-Saharan Africa                              +0.13NIGERIA                    117.58    140.80     +4.0ZAIRE                       44.77     53.21     +3.8COTE D'IVOIRE               14.38     17.06     +3.7ZIMBABWE                    11.81     14.01     +3.7BOTSWANA                     1.54      1.82     +3.7ANGOLA                      10.06     11.81     +3.5ZAMBIA                       9.57     11.20     +3.5GHANA                       17.59     20.40     +3.2CONGO                        2.60      3.01     +3.1KENYA                       29.37     33.63     +2.9SUDAN                       29.56     33.74     +2.8SOUTH AFRICA                42.05     47.37     +2.5GUINEA                       6.54      7.35     +2.5CAMEROON                    13.07     14.46     +2.1GABON                        1.11      1.12     +0.2*******************************************************Asia                                            +0.01PAKISTAN                   130.53    150.76     +3.1VIETNAM                     75.00     85.20     +2.7MALAYSIA                    20.30     23.01     +2.7INDIA                      943.40   1062.70     +2.5BANGLADESH                 123.41    138.71     +2.5PAPUA NEW GUINEA             4.17      4.66     +2.3PHILIPPINES                 68.71     76.51     +2.3BURMA                       46.60     51.73     +2.2SINGAPORE                    2.99      3.29     +2.0INDONESIA                  197.59    213.89     +1.7THAILAND                    60.49     65.12     +1.5AUSTRALIA                   18.19     19.40     +1.3CHINA                     1232.32   1314.27     +1.3SRI LANKA                   18.07     19.17     +1.2NEW ZEALAND                  3.52      3.70     +1.1SOUTH KOREA                 44.87     46.93     +0.9TAIWAN                      21.47     22.41     +0.9JAPAN                      125.49    127.50     +0.3HONG KONG                    5.54      5.24     -1.1Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GLOBAL CHANGE IN AGRICULTURAL WORK FORCE                      1995     2000F     CHANGE**********************************************************GLOBAL                                     -1**********************************************************BANGLADESH             65        57        -8MOROCCO                50        44        -6TUNISIA                32        26        -6SOUTH AFRICA           30        25        -5BOLIVIA                50        46        -4CAMEROON               74        70        -4OMAN                   60        56        -4THAILAND               62        58        -4VIETNAM                65        61        -4NETHERLANDS             6         3        -3PHILIPPINES            46        43        -3ALGERIA                22        20        -2COSTA RICA             27        25        -2MALAYSIA               22        20        -2MEXICO                 28        26        -2NIGERIA                54        52        -2PAKISTAN               54        52        -2SAUDI ARABIA           16        14        -2SRI LANKA              46        44        -2SUDAN                  80        78        -2BRAZIL                 31        30        -1CANADA                  4         3        -1ECUADOR                35        34        -1EGYPT                  34        33        -1GABON                  65        64        -1HAITI                  66        65        -1HONDURAS               62        61        -1INDONESIA              55        54        -1ITALY                  10         9        -1JAMAICA                32        31        -1JAPAN                   7         6        -1LIBYA                  18        17        -1NICARAGUA              44        43        -1PANAMA                 27        26        -1POLAND                 28        27        -1RUSSIA                 19        18        -1ANGOLA                 75        75         0ARGENTINA              12        12         0AUSTRALIA               6         6         0AUSTRIA                 8         8         0BELGIUM                 3         3         0BULGARIA               20        20         0BURMA                  65        65         0CHILE                  19        19         0CHINA                  60        60         0COLOMBIA               30        30         0CONGO                  75        75         0COTE D'IVOIRE          85        85         0CUBA                   20        20         0DENMARK                 6         6         0DOMINICAN REPUBLIC     49        49         0EL SALVADOR            40        40         0FINLAND                 9         9         0GERMANY                 6         6         0GHANA                  55        55         0GUATEMALA              60        60         0GUINEA                 82        82         0GUYANA                 34        34         0HONG KONG               1         1         0HUNGARY                16        16         0IRAN                   33        33         0IRAQ                   30        30         0KENYA                  75        75         0KUWAIT                  2         2         0PAPUA NEW GUINEA       82        82         0PARAGUAY               44        44         0PORTUGAL               20        20         0PUERTO RICO             3         3         0QATAR                  10        10         0ROMANIA                28        28         0SINGAPORE               1         1         0SOUTH KOREA            21        21         0SURINAME               30        30         0SWEDEN                  3         3         0SWITZERLAND             6         6         0SYRIA                  32        32         0TAIWAN                 16        16         0TRINIDAD & TOBAGO      11        11         0UKRAINE                21        21         0UNITED ARAB EMIRATES    5         5         0UNITED KINGDOM          1         1         0URUGUAY                11        11         0VENEZUELA              16        16         0YEMEN                  64        64         0ZAIRE                  75        75         0ZAMBIA                 85        85         0ZIMBABWE               74        74         0BOTSWANA               49        50        +1INDIA                  65        66        +1IRELAND                14        15        +1NEW ZEALAND            10        11        +1NORWAY                  6         7        +1PERU                   37        38        +1UNITED STATES           3         4        +1FRANCE                  7         9        +2GREECE                 24        26        +2ISRAEL                  4         6        +2SPAIN                  14        16        +2TURKEY                 48        50        +2CZECH REPUBLIC          8        12        +4Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL CHANGE IN AGRICULTURAL WORK FORCE                           1995      2000     CHANGE********************************************************No. & Cent. America                              0COSTA RICA                  27        25        -2MEXICO                      28        26        -2CANADA                       4         3        -1HAITI                       66        65        -1HONDURAS                    62        61        -1JAMAICA                    32a        31        -1NICARAGUA                   44        43        -1PANAMA                      27        26        -1CUBA                        20        20         0DOMINICAN REPUBLIC          49        49         0EL SALVADOR                 40        40         0GUATEMALA                   60        60         0PUERTO RICO                  3         3         0TRINIDAD & TOBAGO           11        11         0UNITED STATES                3         4        +1********************************************************South America                                   -1BOLIVIA                     50        46        -4BRAZIL                      31        30        -1ECUADOR                     35        34        -1ARGENTINA                   12        12         0CHILE                       19        19         0COLOMBIA                    30        30         0GUYANA                      34        34         0PARAGUAY                    44        44         0SURINAME                    30        30         0URUGUAY                     11        11         0VENEZUELA                   16        16         0PERU                        37        38        +1********************************************************European Union                                  +0NETHERLANDS                  6         3        -3ITALY                       10         9        -1AUSTRIA                      8         8         0BELGIUM                      3         3         0DENMARK                      6         6         0FINLAND                      9         9         0GERMANY                      6         6         0PORTUGAL                    20        20         0SWEDEN                       3         3         0UNITED KINGDOM               1         1         0IRELAND                     14        15        +1FRANCE                       7         9        +2GREECE                      24        26        +2SPAIN                       14        16        +2********************************************************Non-EU Europe                                    0POLAND                      28        27        -1RUSSIA                      19        18        -1BULGARIA                    20        20         0HUNGARY                     16        16         0ROMANIA                     28        28         0SWITZERLAND                  6         6         0UKRAINE                     21        21         0NORWAY                       6         7        +1TURKEY                      48        50        +2CZECH REPUBLIC               8        12        +4********************************************************Middle East                                     -1MOROCCO                     50        44        -6TUNISIA                     32        26        -6OMAN                        60        56        -4ALGERIA                     22        20        -2SAUDI ARABIA                16        14        -2EGYPT                       34        33        -1LIBYA                       18        17        -1IRAN                        33        33         0IRAQ                        30        30         0KUWAIT                       2         2         0QATAR                       10        10         0SYRIA                       32        32         0UNITED ARAB EMIRATES         5         5         0YEMEN                       64        64         0ISRAEL                       4         6        +2********************************************************Sub-Saharan Africa                              -2SOUTH AFRICA                30        25        -5CAMEROON                    74        70        -4NIGERIA                     54        52        -2SUDAN                       80        78        -2GABON                       65        64        -1ANGOLA                      75        75         0CONGO                       75        75         0COTE D'IVOIRE               85        85         0GHANA                       55        55         0GUINEA                      82        82         0KENYA                       75        75         0ZAIRE                       75        75         0ZAMBIA                      85        85         0ZIMBABWE                    74        74         0BOTSWANA                    49        50        +1********************************************************Asia                                            -1BANGLADESH                  65        57        -8THAILAND                    62        58        -4VIETNAM                     65        61        -4PHILIPPINES                 46        43        -3MALAYSIA                    22        20        -2PAKISTAN                    54        52        -2SRI LANKA                   46        44        -2INDONESIA                   55        54        -1JAPAN                        7         6        -1AUSTRALIA                    6         6         0BURMA                       65        65         0CHINA                       60        60         0HONG KONG                    1         1         0PAPUA NEW GUINEA            82        82         0SINGAPORE                    1         1         0SOUTH KOREA                 21        21         0TAIWAN                      16        16         0INDIA                       65        66        +1NEW ZEALAND                 10        11        +1Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GLOBAL CHANGE IN SERVICE WORK FORCE                      1995     2000      CHANGE***********************************************************GLOBAL                                     -1***********************************************************NEW ZEALAND            69        48       -21NORWAY                 72        51       -21KUWAIT                 62        44       -18EL SALVADOR            45        29       -16FRANCE                 62        46       -16ISRAEL                 67        51       -16FINLAND                63        48       -15SRI LANKA              41        26       -15SINGAPORE              52        38       -14URUGUAY                70        57       -13GABON                  15         6        -9INDONESIA              31        22        -9MEXICO                 53        45        -8IRAN                   46        40        -6ECUADOR                44        39        -5HONDURAS               26        21        -5SOUTH AFRICA           41        36        -5BURMA                  14        10        -4MOROCCO                35        31        -4GREECE                 48        45        -3UNITED STATES          72        69        -3AUSTRALIA              76        75        -1CHINA                  10         9        -1GHANA                  26        25        -1LIBYA                  51        50        -1POLAND                 40        39        -1SAUDI ARABIA           56        55        -1TAIWAN                 43        42        -1ANGOLA                 10        10         0ARGENTINA              57        57         0BOTSWANA               20        20         0BULGARIA               47        47         0COLOMBIA               46        46         0CONGO                  10        10         0COTE D'IVOIRE           7         7         0CUBA                   37        37         0CZECH REPUBLIC         45        45         0DENMARK                67        67         0DOMINICAN REPUBLIC     33        33         0GUATEMALA              24        24         0GUINEA                  7         7         0GUYANA                 21        21         0HONG KONG              68        68         0HUNGARY                47        47         0INDIA                  15        15         0IRAQ                   48        48         0ITALY                  58        58         0KENYA                  13        13         0NIGERIA                27        27         0PANAMA                 61        61         0PAPUA NEW GUINEA        9         9         0PARAGUAY               22        22         0PUERTO RICO            53        53         0QATAR                  20        20         0ROMANIA                34        34         0SOUTH KOREA            52        52         0SURINAME               55        55         0SWEDEN                 69        69         0SWITZERLAND            61        61         0THAILAND               25        25         0TRINIDAD & TOBAGO      56        56         0UKRAINE                46        46         0UNITED ARAB EMIRATES   10        10         0UNITED KINGDOM         74        74         0VENEZUELA              56        56         0VIETNAM                22        22         0YEMEN                  14        14         0ZAIRE                  12        12         0ZAMBIA                  9         9         0ZIMBABWE               16        16         0AUSTRIA                56        57        +1BOLIVIA                33        34        +1CANADA                 75        76        +1EGYPT                  46        47        +1HAITI                  25        26        +1IRELAND                57        58        +1JAMAICA                40        41        +1NETHERLANDS            66        67        +1NICARAGUA              43        44        +1PAKISTAN               33        34        +1PERU                   44        45        +1RUSSIA                 42        43        +1COSTA RICA             38        40        +2GERMANY                53        55        +2MALAYSIA               38        40        +2PHILIPPINES            34        36        +2PORTUGAL               45        48        +3SPAIN                  53        56        +3SUDAN                  10        13        +3TUNISIA                37        40        +3TURKEY                 32        35        +3JAPAN                  57        61        +4OMAN                   27        31        +4SYRIA                  36        40        +4BRAZIL                 38        43        +5CAMEROON               14        19        +5BELGIUM                63        69        +6CHILE                  38        45        +7BANGLADESH             21        32        11ALGERIA                48        66        18Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL CHANGE IN SERVICE WORK FORCE                      1995      2000     CHANGE************************************************************No. & Cent. America                        -4EL SALVADOR            45        29       -16MEXICO                 53        45        -8HONDURAS               26        21        -5UNITED STATES          72        69        -3CUBA                   37        37         0DOMINICAN REPUBLIC     33        33         0GUATEMALA              24        24         0PANAMA                 61        61         0PUERTO RICO            53        53         0TRINIDAD & TOBAGO      56        56         0CANADA                 75        76        +1HAITI                  25        26        +1JAMAICA                40        41        +1NICARAGUA              43        44        +1COSTA RICA             38        40        +2************************************************************South America                              +3URUGUAY                70        57       -13ECUADOR                44        39        -5ARGENTINA              57        57         0COLOMBIA               46        46         0GUYANA                 21        21         0PARAGUAY               22        22         0SURINAME               55        55         0VENEZUELA              56        56         0BOLIVIA                33        34        +1PERU                   44        45        +1BRAZIL                 38        43        +5CHILE                  38        45        +7************************************************************European Union                             -2FRANCE                 62        46       -16FINLAND                63        48       -15GREECE                 48        45        -3DENMARK                67        67         0ITALY                  58        58         0SWEDEN                 69        69         0UNITED KINGDOM         74        74         0AUSTRIA                56        57        +1IRELAND                57        58        +1NETHERLANDS            66        67        +1GERMANY                53        55        +2PORTUGAL               45        48        +3SPAIN                  53        56        +3BELGIUM                63        69        +6************************************************************Non-Eu Europe                              +1NORWAY                 72        51       -21POLAND                 40        39        -1BULGARIA               47        47         0CZECH REPUBLIC         45        45         0HUNGARY                47        47         0ROMANIA                34        34         0SWITZERLAND            61        61         0UKRAINE                46        46         0RUSSIA                 42        43        +1TURKEY                 32        35        +3************************************************************Middle East                                 0KUWAIT                 62        44       -18ISRAEL                 67        51       -16IRAN                   46        40        -6MOROCCO                35        31        -4LIBYA                  51        50        -1SAUDI ARABIA           56        55        -1IRAQ                   48        48         0QATAR                  20        20         0UNITED ARAB EMIRATES   10        10         0YEMEN                  14        14         0EGYPT                  46        47        +1TUNISIA                37        40        +3OMAN                   27        31        +4SYRIA                  36        40        +4ALGERIA                48        66        18************************************************************Sub-Saharan Africa                         +0GABON                  15         6        -9SOUTH AFRICA           41        36        -5GHANA                  26        25        -1ANGOLA                 10        10         0BOTSWANA               20        20         0CONGO                  10        10         0COTE D'IVOIRE           7         7         0GUINEA                  7         7         0KENYA                  13        13         0NIGERIA                27        27         0ZAIRE                  12        12         0ZAMBIA                  9         9         0ZIMBABWE               16        16         0SUDAN                  10        13        +3CAMEROON               14        19        +5************************************************************Asia                                       -1NEW ZEALAND            69        48       -21SRI LANKA              41        26       -15SINGAPORE              52        38       -14INDONESIA              31        22        -9BURMA                  14        10        -4AUSTRALIA              76        75        -1CHINA                  10         9        -1TAIWAN                 43        42        -1HONG KONG              68        68         0INDIA                  15        15         0PAPUA NEW GUINEA        9         9         0SOUTH KOREA            52        52         0THAILAND               25        25         0VIETNAM                22        22         0PAKISTAN               33        34        +1MALAYSIA               38        40        +2PHILIPPINES            34        36        +2JAPAN                  57        61        +4BANGLADESH             21        32        11Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GLOBAL CHANGE IN INDUSTRIAL WORK FORCE                      1995      2000     CHANGEGLOBAL                                     +1**************************************************************ALGERIA                30        14       -16CHILE                  43        36        -7BELGIUM                34        28        -6SPAIN                  33        28        -5TURKEY                 20        15        -5BRAZIL                 31        27        -4CZECH REPUBLIC         47        43        -4SYRIA                  32        28        -4BANGLADESH             14        11        -3JAPAN                  36        33        -3PORTUGAL               35        32        -3GERMANY                41        39        -2IRELAND                29        27        -2PERU                   19        17        -2AUSTRIA                36        35        -1BOTSWANA               31        30        -1CAMEROON               12        11        -1INDIA                  20        19        -1SUDAN                  10         9        -1ANGOLA                 15        15         0ARGENTINA              31        31         0BULGARIA               33        33         0CANADA                 21        21         0COLOMBIA               24        24         0CONGO                  15        15         0COSTA RICA             35        35         0COTE D'IVOIRE           8         8         0CUBA                   43        43         0DENMARK                27        27         0DOMINICAN REPUBLIC     18        18         0EGYPT                  20        20         0GUATEMALA              16        16         0GUINEA                 11        11         0GUYANA                 45        45         0HAITI                   9         9         0HONG KONG              31        31         0HUNGARY                37        37         0IRAQ                   22        22         0JAMAICA                28        28         0KENYA                  12        12         0MALAYSIA               40        40         0NICARAGUA              13        13         0OMAN                   13        13         0PAPUA NEW GUINEA        9         9         0PARAGUAY               34        34         0PUERTO RICO            44        44         0QATAR                  70        70         0ROMANIA                38        38         0RUSSIA                 39        39         0SOUTH KOREA            27        27         0SURINAME               15        15         0SWEDEN                 28        28         0SWITZERLAND            33        33         0TRINIDAD & TOBAGO      33        33         0UKRAINE                33        33         0UNITED ARAB EMIRATES   85        85         0UNITED KINGDOM         25        25         0VENEZUELA              28        28         0YEMEN                  22        22         0ZAIRE                  13        13         0ZAMBIA                  6         6         0ZIMBABWE               10        10         0AUSTRALIA              18        19        +1CHINA                  30        31        +1GHANA                  19        20        +1GREECE                 28        29        +1ITALY                  32        33        +1PAKISTAN               13        14        +1PANAMA                 12        13        +1PHILIPPINES            20        21        +1TAIWAN                 41        42        +1LIBYA                  31        33        +2NETHERLANDS            28        30        +2NIGERIA                19        21        +2POLAND                 32        34        +2UNITED STATES          25        27        +2BOLIVIA                17        20        +3SAUDI ARABIA           28        31        +3TUNISIA                31        34        +3BURMA                  21        25        +4THAILAND               13        17        +4VIETNAM                13        17        +4ECUADOR                21        27        +6HONDURAS               12        18        +6IRAN                   21        27        +6GABON                  20        30        10INDONESIA              14        24        10MEXICO                 19        29        10MOROCCO                15        25        10SOUTH AFRICA           29        39        10URUGUAY                19        32        13FRANCE                 31        45        14ISRAEL                 29        43        14SINGAPORE              47        61        14FINLAND                28        43        15EL SALVADOR            15        31        16SRI LANKA              13        30        17KUWAIT                 36        54        18NEW ZEALAND            21        41        20NORWAY                 22        42        20Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL CHANGE IN INDUSTRIAL WORK FORCE                      1995      2000      CHANGE***********************************************************No. & Cent. America                        +4CANADA                 21        21         0COSTA RICA             35        35         0CUBA                   43        43         0DOMINICAN REPUBLIC     18        18         0GUATEMALA              16        16         0HAITI                   9         9         0JAMAICA                28        28         0NICARAGUA              13        13         0PUERTO RICO            44        44         0TRINIDAD & TOBAGO      33        33         0PANAMA                 12        13        +1UNITED STATES          25        27        +2HONDURAS               12        18        +6MEXICO                 19        29        10EL SALVADOR            15        31        16***********************************************************South America                              -2CHILE                  43        36        -7BRAZIL                 31        27        -4PERU                   19        17        -2ARGENTINA              31        31         0COLOMBIA               24        24         0GUYANA                 45        45         0PARAGUAY               34        34         0SURINAME               15        15         0VENEZUELA              28        28         0BOLIVIA                17        20        +3ECUADOR                21        27        +6URUGUAY                19        32        13***********************************************************European Union                             +1BELGIUM                34        28        -6SPAIN                  33        28        -5PORTUGAL               35        32        -3GERMANY                41        39        -2IRELAND                29        27        -2AUSTRIA                36        35        -1DENMARK                27        27         0SWEDEN                 28        28         0UNITED KINGDOM         25        25         0GREECE                 28        29        +1ITALY                  32        33        +1NETHERLANDS            28        30        +2FRANCE                 31        45        14FINLAND                28        43        15***********************************************************Non-EU Europe                              -1TURKEY                 20        15        -5CZECH REPUBLIC         47        43        -4BULGARIA               33        33         0HUNGARY                37        37         0ROMANIA                38        38         0RUSSIA                 39        39         0SWITZERLAND            33        33         0UKRAINE                33        33         0POLAND                 32        34        +2NORWAY                 22        42        20***********************************************************Middle East                                +1ALGERIA                30        14       -16SYRIA                  32        28        -4EGYPT                  20        20         0IRAQ                   22        22         0OMAN                   13        13         0QATAR                  70        70         0UNITED ARAB EMIRATES   85        85         0YEMEN                  22        22         0LIBYA                  31        33        +2SAUDI ARABIA           28        31        +3TUNISIA                31        34        +3IRAN                   21        27        +6MOROCCO                15        25        10ISRAEL                 29        43        14KUWAIT                 36        54        18***********************************************************Sub-Saharan Africa                         +2BOTSWANA               31        30        -1CAMEROON               12        11        -1SUDAN                  10         9        -1ANGOLA                 15        15         0CONGO                  15        15         0COTE D'IVOIRE           8         8         0GUINEA                 11        11         0KENYA                  12        12         0ZAIRE                  13        13         0ZAMBIA                  6         6         0ZIMBABWE               10        10         0GHANA                  19        20        +1NIGERIA                19        21        +2GABON                  20        30        10SOUTH AFRICA           29        39        10***********************************************************Asia                                       +1BANGLADESH             14        11        -3JAPAN                  36        33        -3INDIA                  20        19        -1HONG KONG              31        31         0MALAYSIA               40        40         0PAPUA NEW GUINEA        9         9         0SOUTH KOREA            27        27         0AUSTRALIA              18        19        +1CHINA                  30        31        +1PAKISTAN               13        14        +1PHILIPPINES            20        21        +1TAIWAN                 41        42        +1BURMA                  21        25        +4THAILAND               13        17        +4VIETNAM                13        17        +4INDONESIA              14        24        10SINGAPORE              47        61        14SRI LANKA              13        30        17NEW ZEALAND            21        41        20Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GLOBAL CHANGE IN PERCENT URBAN POPULATION                           1995      2000     CHANGEGLOBAL                                          +9***********************************************************COTE D'IVOIRE               42        34        -8VENEZUELA                   91        85        -6GHANA                       35        31        -4TUNISIA                     57        53        -4UNITED ARAB EMIRATES        82        78        -4UNITED KINGDOM              89        85        -4GREECE                      64        61        -3SWEDEN                      84        81        -3SWITZERLAND                 63        60        -3GUATEMALA                   40        38        -2IRELAND                     58        56        -2URUGUAY                     89        87        -2BANGLADESH                  18        17        -1CAMEROON                    42        41        -1CANADA                      78        77        -1CONGO                       42        41        -1FINLAND                     60        59        -1GERMANY                     86        85        -1GUINEA                      27        26        -1NORWAY                      76        75        -1PARAGUAY                    49        48        -1SOUTH AFRICA                50        49        -1SUDAN                       23        22        -1UNITED STATES               76        75        -1YEMEN                       31        30        -1ZIMBABWE                    30        29        -1ANGOLA                      29        29         0AUSTRALIA                   85        85         0BULGARIA                    69        69         0BURMA                       25        25         0CHINA                       27        27         0CUBA                        72        72         0FRANCE                      73        73         0IRAQ                        70        70         0JAMAICA                     54        54         0NEW ZEALAND                 84        84         0PAPUA NEW GUINEA            16        16         0PUERTO RICO                 75        75         0QATAR                       78        78         0RUSSIA                      74        74         0SINGAPORE                  100       100         0SURINAME                    72        72         0TURKEY                      64        64         0UKRAINE                     67        67         0ARGENTINA                   87        88        +1BELGIUM                     96        97        +1BRAZIL                      77        78        +1EL SALVADOR                 45        46        +1GUYANA                      35        36        +1HAITI                       29        30        +1HONG KONG                   94        95        +1JAPAN                       77        78        +1NETHERLANDS                 89        90        +1OMAN                        12        13        +1POLAND                      63        64        +1ROMANIA                     55        56        +1SRI LANKA                   22        23        +1SYRIA                       51        52        +1HUNGARY                     66        68        +2ISRAEL                      92        94        +2ITALY                       70        72        +2PANAMA                      54        56        +2PORTUGAL                    35        37        +2SPAIN                       79        81        +2ZAIRE                       44        46        +2ALGERIA                     54        57        +3AUSTRIA                     59        62        +3COLOMBIA                    71        74        +3COSTA RICA                  48        51        +3DENMARK                     85        88        +3DOMINICAN REPUBLIC          62        65        +3ECUADOR                     58        61        +3EGYPT                       44        47        +3INDIA                       26        29        +3IRAN                        58        61        +3KENYA                       25        28        +3MEXICO                      74        77        +3NICARAGUA                   61        64        +3PAKISTAN                    33        36        +3PERU                        71        74        +3PHILIPPINES                 44        47        +3TAIWAN                      75        78        +3BOLIVIA                     52        56        +4CHILE                       85        89        +4GABON                       47        51        +4MALAYSIA                    45        49        +4NIGERIA                     37        41        +4SOUTH KOREA                 74        78        +4TRINIDAD & TOBAGO           66        70        +4VIETNAM                     20        24        +4HONDURAS                    45        50        +5INDONESIA                   32        37        +5KUWAIT                      96       101        +5LIBYA                       70        75        +5SAUDI ARABIA                78        83        +5THAILAND                    23        28        +5BOTSWANA                    27        33        +6CZECH REPUBLIC              73        79        +6MOROCCO                     47        53        +6ZAMBIA                      42        52        10Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL CHANGE IN PERCENT URBAN POPULATION                           1995      2000      CHANGE**********************************************************No. & Cent. America                             +0GUATEMALA                   40        38        -2CANADA                      78        77        -1UNITED STATES               76        75        -1CUBA                        72        72         0JAMAICA                     54        54         0PUERTO RICO                 75        75         0EL SALVADOR                 45        46        +1HAITI                       29        30        +1PANAMA                      54        56        +2COSTA RICA                  48        51        +3DOMINICAN REPUBLIC          62        65        +3MEXICO                      74        77        +3NICARAGUA                   61        64        +3TRINIDAD & TOBAGO           66        70        +4HONDURAS                    45        50        +5**********************************************************South America                                   +1VENEZUELA                   91        85        -6URUGUAY                     89        87        -2PARAGUAY                    49        48        -1SURINAME                    72        72         0ARGENTINA                   87        88        +1BRAZIL                      77        78        +1GUYANA                      35        36        +1COLOMBIA                    71        74        +3ECUADOR                     58        61        +3PERU                        71        74        +3BOLIVIA                     52        56        +4CHILE                       85        89        +4**********************************************************European Union                                   0UNITED KINGDOM              89        85        -4GREECE                      64        61        -3SWEDEN                      84        81        -3IRELAND                     58        56        -2FINLAND                     60        59        -1GERMANY                     86        85        -1FRANCE                      73        73         0BELGIUM                     96        97        +1NETHERLANDS                 89        90        +1ITALY                       70        72        +2PORTUGAL                    35        37        +2SPAIN                       79        81        +2AUSTRIA                     59        62        +3DENMARK                     85        88        +3**********************************************************Non-EU Europe                                   +0SWITZERLAND                 63        60        -3NORWAY                      76        75        -1BULGARIA                    69        69         0RUSSIA                      74        74         0TURKEY                      64        64         0UKRAINE                     67        67         0POLAND                      63        64        +1ROMANIA                     55        56        +1HUNGARY                     66        68        +2CZECH REPUBLIC              73        79        +6**********************************************************Middle East                                     +3TUNISIA                     57        53        -4UNITED ARAB EMIRATES        82        78        -4YEMEN                       31        30        -1IRAQ                        70        70         0QATAR                       78        78         0OMAN                        12        13        +1SYRIA                       51        52        +1ISRAEL                      92        94        +2ALGERIA                     54        57        +3EGYPT                       44        47        +3IRAN                        58        61        +3KUWAIT                      96       101        +5LIBYA                       70        75        +5SAUDI ARABIA                78        83        +5MOROCCO                     47        53        +6**********************************************************Sub-Saharan Africa                              +3COTE D'IVOIRE               42        34        -8GHANA                       35        31        -4CAMEROON                    42        41        -1CONGO                       42        41        -1GUINEA                      27        26        -1SOUTH AFRICA                50        49        -1SUDAN                       23        22        -1ZIMBABWE                    30        29        -1ANGOLA                      29        29         0ZAIRE                       44        46        +2KENYA                       25        28        +3GABON                       47        51        +4NIGERIA                     37        41        +4BOTSWANA                    27        33        +6ZAMBIA                      42        52        10**********************************************************Asia                                            +*BANGLADESH                  18        17        -1AUSTRALIA                   85        85         0BURMA                       25        25         0CHINA                       27        27         0NEW ZEALAND                 84        84         0PAPUA NEW GUINEA            16        16         0SINGAPORE                  100       100         0HONG KONG                   94        95        +1JAPAN                       77        78        +1SRI LANKA                   22        23        +1INDIA                       26        29        +3PAKISTAN                    33        36        +3PHILIPPINES                 44        47        +3TAIWAN                      75        78        +3MALAYSIA                    45        49        +4SOUTH KOREA                 74        78        +4VIETNAM                     20        24        +4INDONESIA                   32        37        +5THAILAND                    23        28        +5Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GLOBAL CHANGE IN PERCENT URBAN GROWTH                             1995      2000    CHANGEGLOBAL                                           -.1**********************************************************IRAQ                         4.4       1.5      -2.9COTE D'IVOIRE                4.7       2.0      -2.7UNITED ARAB EMIRATES         5.0       2.8      -2.2BOLIVIA                      4.0       2.5      -1.5TUNISIA                      3.4       2.0      -1.4VENEZUELA                    3.4       2.2      -1.2CAMEROON                     5.4       4.3      -1.1SUDAN                        4.1       3.0      -1.1SYRIA                        4.1       3.0      -1.1CHINA                        4.3       3.3      -1.0ZIMBABWE                     5.9       5.0      -0.9LIBYA                        6.3       5.5      -0.8GUATEMALA                    3.5       2.8      -0.7VIETNAM                      3.4       2.7      -0.7BRAZIL                       3.3       2.7      -0.6MEXICO                       2.9       2.3      -0.6SOUTH KOREA                  3.4       2.8      -0.6HAITI                        3.8       3.3      -0.5EL SALVADOR                  2.2       1.8      -0.4SWITZERLAND                  1.5       1.1      -0.4JAMAICA                      2.1       1.8      -0.3KUWAIT                       5.0       4.7      -0.3URUGUAY                      1.0       0.7      -0.3BURMA                        2.6       2.4      -0.2DOMINICAN REPUBLIC           3.9       3.7      -0.2GHANA                        4.3       4.1      -0.2GUINEA                       5.8       5.6      -0.2NETHERLANDS                  0.6       0.4      -0.2NICARAGUA                    3.9       3.7      -0.2POLAND                       1.3       1.1      -0.2THAILAND                     4.5       4.3      -0.2ARGENTINA                    1.7       1.6      -0.1BANGLADESH                   6.2       6.1      -0.1GREECE                       1.3       1.2      -0.1IRELAND                      0.6       0.5      -0.1PAKISTAN                     4.5       4.4      -0.1PAPUA NEW GUINEA             4.4       4.3      -0.1PHILIPPINES                  3.8       3.7      -0.1SWEDEN                       0.5       0.4      -0.1UNITED STATES                1.2       1.1      -0.1ANGOLA                       5.8       5.8       0.0AUSTRALIA                    1.5       1.5       0.0CUBA                         0.8       0.8       0.0FINLAND                      0.4       0.4       0.0GERMANY                      0.5       0.5       0.0GUYANA                       0.9       0.9       0.0ITALY                        0.6       0.6       0.0JAPAN                        0.7       0.7       0.0NEW ZEALAND                  0.8       0.8       0.0NORWAY                       1.0       1.0       0.0PANAMA                       2.8       2.8       0.0PARAGUAY                     4.4       4.4       0.0PUERTO RICO                  1.9       1.9       0.0QATAR                        4.1       4.1       0.0RUSSIA                       0.2       0.2       0.0SURINAME                     2.9       2.9       0.0TAIWAN                       2.0       2.0       0.0UNITED KINGDOM               0.3       0.3       0.0BELGIUM                      0.2       0.3      +0.1COLOMBIA                     2.9       3.0      +0.1DENMARK                      0.2       0.3      +0.1FRANCE                       0.4       0.5      +0.1ISRAEL                       2.1       2.2      +0.1PERU                         2.9       3.0      +0.1PORTUGAL                     1.4       1.5      +0.1SPAIN                        1.1       1.2      +0.1YEMEN                        7.3       7.4      +0.1AUSTRIA                      1.0       1.2      +0.2CANADA                       1.2       1.4      +0.2CONGO                        4.5       4.7      +0.2EGYPT                        2.5       2.7      +0.2HUNGARY                      0.9       1.1      +0.2SRI LANKA                    1.5       1.7      +0.2UKRAINE                      0.1       0.3      +0.2CHILE                        2.1       2.4      +0.3CZECH REPUBLIC               1.7       2.0      +0.3HONDURAS                     5.3       5.6      +0.3MALAYSIA                     4.8       5.1      +0.3NIGERIA                      5.7       6.0      +0.3SAUDI ARABIA                 6.5       6.8      +0.3TURKEY                       5.6       5.9      +0.3ZAIRE                        4.8       5.1      +0.3BULGARIA                     0.7       1.1      +0.4COSTA RICA                   3.8       4.2      +0.4ECUADOR                      4.4       4.8      +0.4INDIA                        3.1       3.5      +0.4MOROCCO                      3.8       4.3      +0.5SINGAPORE                    1.7       2.2      +0.5HONG KONG                    1.4       2.0      +0.6OMAN                         8.2       8.8      +0.6IRAN                         5.0       5.9      +0.9ROMANIA                      1.2       2.3      +1.1BOTSWANA                     8.8      10.0      +1.2ALGERIA                      4.9       6.4      +1.5GABON                        5.8       7.3      +1.5SOUTH AFRICA                 2.8       4.4      +1.6TRINIDAD & TOBAGO            1.7       3.3      +1.6KENYA                        7.7       9.5      +1.8INDONESIA                    5.1       7.8      +2.7ZAMBIA                       3.8       6.5      +2.7Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL CHANGE IN PERCENT URBAN GROWTH                             1995      2000     CHANGE****************************************************************No. & Cent. America                              -.2GUATEMALA                    3.5       2.8      -0.7MEXICO                       2.9       2.3      -0.6HAITI                        3.8       3.3      -0.5EL SALVADOR                  2.2       1.8      -0.4JAMAICA                      2.1       1.8      -0.3DOMINICAN REPUBLIC           3.9       3.7      -0.2NICARAGUA                    3.9       3.7      -0.2UNITED STATES                1.2       1.1      -0.1CUBA                         0.8       0.8       0.0PANAMA                       2.8       2.8       0.0PUERTO RICO                  1.9       1.9       0.0CANADA                       1.2       1.4      +0.2HONDURAS                     5.3       5.6      +0.3COSTA RICA                   3.8       4.2      +0.4TRINIDAD & TOBAGO            1.7       3.3      +1.6****************************************************************South America                                    -.4BOLIVIA                      4.0       2.5      -1.5VENEZUELA                    3.4       2.2      -1.2BRAZIL                       3.3       2.7      -0.6URUGUAY                      1.0       0.7      -0.3ARGENTINA                    1.7       1.6      -0.1GUYANA                       0.9       0.9       0.0PARAGUAY                     4.4       4.4       0.0SURINAME                     2.9       2.9       0.0COLOMBIA                     2.9       3.0      +0.1PERU                         2.9       3.0      +0.1CHILE                        2.1       2.4      +0.3ECUADOR                      4.4       4.8      +0.4****************************************************************European Union                                   0.0NETHERLANDS                  0.6       0.4      -0.2GREECE                       1.3       1.2      -0.1IRELAND                      0.6       0.5      -0.1SWEDEN                       0.5       0.4      -0.1FINLAND                      0.4       0.4       0.0GERMANY                      0.5       0.5       0.0ITALY                        0.6       0.6       0.0UNITED KINGDOM               0.3       0.3       0.0BELGIUM                      0.2       0.3      +0.1DENMARK                      0.2       0.3      +0.1FRANCE                       0.4       0.5      +0.1PORTUGAL                     1.4       1.5      +0.1SPAIN                        1.1       1.2      +0.1AUSTRIA                      1.0       1.2      +0.2****************************************************************Non-EU Europe                                    +.1SWITZERLAND                  1.5       1.1      -0.4POLAND                       1.3       1.1      -0.2NORWAY                       1.0       1.0       0.0RUSSIA                       0.2       0.2       0.0HUNGARY                      0.9       1.1      +0.2UKRAINE                      0.1       0.3      +0.2CZECH REPUBLIC               1.7       2.0      +0.3TURKEY                       5.6       5.9      +0.3BULGARIA                     0.7       1.1      +0.4ROMANIA                      1.2       2.3      +1.1****************************************************************Middle East                                      +.2IRAQ                         4.4       1.5      -2.9UNITED ARAB EMIRATES         5.0       2.8      -2.2TUNISIA                      3.4       2.0      -1.4SYRIA                        4.1       3.0      -1.1LIBYA                        6.3       5.5      -0.8KUWAIT                       5.0       4.7      -0.3QATAR                        4.1       4.1       0.0ISRAEL                       2.1       2.2      +0.1YEMEN                        7.3       7.4      +0.1EGYPT                        2.5       2.7      +0.2SAUDI ARABIA                 6.5       6.8      +0.3MOROCCO                      3.8       4.3      +0.5OMAN                         8.2       8.8      +0.6IRAN                         5.0       5.9      +0.9ALGERIA                      4.9       6.4      +1.5****************************************************************Sub-Saharan Africa                               +.3COTE D'IVOIRE                4.7       2.0      -2.7CAMEROON                     5.4       4.3      -1.1SUDAN                        4.1       3.0      -1.1ZIMBABWE                     5.9       5.0      -0.9GHANA                        4.3       4.1      -0.2GUINEA                       5.8       5.6      -0.2ANGOLA                       5.8       5.8       0.0CONGO                        4.5       4.7      +0.2NIGERIA                      5.7       6.0      +0.3ZAIRE                        4.8       5.1      +0.3BOTSWANA                     8.8      10.0      +1.2GABON                        5.8       7.3      +1.5SOUTH AFRICA                 2.8       4.4      +1.6KENYA                        7.7       9.5      +1.8ZAMBIA                       3.8       6.5      +2.7****************************************************************Asia                                             -.1CHINA                        4.3       3.3      -1.0VIETNAM                      3.4       2.7      -0.7SOUTH KOREA                  3.4       2.8      -0.6BURMA                        2.6       2.4      -0.2THAILAND                     4.5       4.3      -0.2BANGLADESH                   6.2       6.1      -0.1PAKISTAN                     4.5       4.4      -0.1PAPUA NEW GUINEA             4.4       4.3      -0.1PHILIPPINES                  3.8       3.7      -0.1AUSTRALIA                    1.5       1.5       0.0JAPAN                        0.7       0.7       0.0NEW ZEALAND                  0.8       0.8       0.0TAIWAN                       2.0       2.0       0.0SRI LANKA                    1.5       1.7      +0.2MALAYSIA                     4.8       5.1      +0.3INDIA                        3.1       3.5      +0.4SINGAPORE                    1.7       2.2      +0.5HONG KONG                    1.4       2.0      +0.6INDONESIA                    5.1       7.8      +2.7Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GLOBAL CHANGE IN PERCENT POPULATION UNDER 15 YEARS                           1995      2000     CHANGEGLOBAL                                          -1*****************************************************ZIMBABWE                    48        39        -9KUWAIT                      43        35        -8SOUTH AFRICA                39        31        -8LIBYA                       47        40        -7MEXICO                      38        31        -7HONDURAS                    47        41        -6IRAQ                        48        42        -6MOROCCO                     40        35        -5VENEZUELA                   38        33        -5BOLIVIA                     42        38        -4CHINA                       28        24        -4PHILIPPINES                 39        35        -4SPAIN                       19        15        -4DOMINICAN REPUBLIC          38        35        -3INDIA                       36        33        -3IRAN                        47        44        -3JAPAN                       17        14        -3NICARAGUA                   46        43        -3PANAMA                      35        32        -3ALGERIA                     44        42        -2BELGIUM                     18        16        -2BRAZIL                      35        33        -2ECUADOR                     39        37        -2HAITI                       40        38        -2MALAYSIA                    36        34        -2RUSSIA                      22        20        -2AUSTRIA                     18        17        -1CANADA                      21        20        -1FINLAND                     19        18        -1FRANCE                      20        19        -1GERMANY                     16        15        -1GUATEMALA                   45        44        -1GUYANA                      33        32        -1JAMAICA                     33        32        -1KENYA                       49        48        -1PAKISTAN                    44        43        -1PERU                        38        37        -1SUDAN                       45        44        -1THAILAND                    29        28        -1ANGOLA                      45        45         0ARGENTINA                   30        30         0AUSTRALIA                   22        22         0BANGLADESH                  44        44         0BULGARIA                    20        20         0BURMA                       41        41         0CONGO                       46        46         0CUBA                        23        23         0DENMARK                     17        17         0EL SALVADOR                 44        44         0HONG KONG                   21        21         0NEW ZEALAND                 23        23         0NIGERIA                     47        47         0PUERTO RICO                 28        28         0QATAR                       50        50         0SINGAPORE                   23        23         0SRI LANKA                   35        35         0SURINAME                    45        45         0SWITZERLAND                 16        16         0UNITED ARAB EMIRATES        31        31         0YEMEN                       49        49         0CHILE                       31        32        +1COSTA RICA                  36        37        +1CZECH REPUBLIC              21        22        +1ISRAEL                      31        32        +1ITALY                       16        17        +1NETHERLANDS                 18        19        +1NORWAY                      19        20        +1PARAGUAY                    40        41        +1SOUTH KOREA                 24        25        +1SYRIA                       48        49        +1TAIWAN                      26        27        +1TRINIDAD & TOBAGO           32        33        +1UKRAINE                     21        22        +1UNITED KINGDOM              19        20        +1UNITED STATES               22        23        +1URUGUAY                     26        27        +1ZAMBIA                      48        49        +1COLOMBIA                    34        36        +2COTE D'IVOIRE               47        49        +2GHANA                       45        47        +2HUNGARY                     19        21        +2OMAN                        47        49        +2PAPUA NEW GUINEA            40        42        +2POLAND                      25        27        +2SWEDEN                      18        20        +2TUNISIA                     37        39        +2ZAIRE                       45        47        +2BOTSWANA                    48        51        +3CAMEROON                    45        48        +3GABON                       40        43        +3GREECE                      19        22        +3ROMANIA                     22        25        +3SAUDI ARABIA                43        46        +3VIETNAM                     39        42        +3INDONESIA                   37        41        +4IRELAND                     27        31        +4PORTUGAL                    20        24        +4TURKEY                      35        39        +4EGYPT                       40        45        +5GUINEA                      47        52        +5Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL CHANGE IN PERCENT POPULATION UNDER 15 YEARS                           1995      2000     CHANGENo. & Cent. America                             -1****************************************************************MEXICO                      38        31        -7HONDURAS                    47        41        -6DOMINICAN REPUBLIC          38        35        -3NICARAGUA                   46        43        -3PANAMA                      35        32        -3HAITI                       40        38        -2CANADA                      21        20        -1GUATEMALA                   45        44        -1JAMAICA                     33        32        -1CUBA                        23        23         0EL SALVADOR                 44        44         0PUERTO RICO                 28        28         0COSTA RICA                  36        37        +1TRINIDAD & TOBAGO           32        33        +1UNITED STATES               22        23        +1****************************************************************South America                                   -1VENEZUELA                   38        33        -5BOLIVIA                     42        38        -4BRAZIL                      35        33        -2ECUADOR                     39        37        -2GUYANA                      33        32        -1PERU                        38        37        -1ARGENTINA                   30        30         0SURINAME                    45        45         0CHILE                       31        32        +1PARAGUAY                    40        41        +1URUGUAY                     26        27        +1COLOMBIA                    34        36        +2****************************************************************European Union                                   0SPAIN                       19        15        -4BELGIUM                     18        16        -2AUSTRIA                     18        17        -1FINLAND                     19        18        -1FRANCE                      20        19        -1GERMANY                     16        15        -1DENMARK                     17        17         0ITALY                       16        17        +1NETHERLANDS                 18        19        +1UNITED KINGDOM              19        20        +1SWEDEN                      18        20        +2GREECE                      19        22        +3IRELAND                     27        31        +4PORTUGAL                    20        24        +4****************************************************************Non-EU Europe                                   +1RUSSIA                      22        20        -2BULGARIA                    20        20         0SWITZERLAND                 16        16         0CZECH REPUBLIC              21        22        +1NORWAY                      19        20        +1UKRAINE                     21        22        +1HUNGARY                     19        21        +2POLAND                      25        27        +2ROMANIA                     22        25        +3TURKEY                      35        39        +4****************************************************************Middle East                                     -1KUWAIT                      43        35        -8LIBYA                       47        40        -7IRAQ                        48        42        -6MOROCCO                     40        35        -5IRAN                        47        44        -3ALGERIA                     44        42        -2QATAR                       50        50         0UNITED ARAB EMIRATES        31        31         0YEMEN                       49        49         0ISRAEL                      31        32        +1SYRIA                       48        49        +1OMAN                        47        49        +2TUNISIA                     37        39        +2SAUDI ARABIA                43        46        +3EGYPT                       40        45        +5****************************************************************Sub-Saharan Africa                              -1ZIMBABWE                    48        39        -9SOUTH AFRICA                39        31        -8KENYA                       49        48        -1SUDAN                       45        44        -1ANGOLA                      45        45         0CONGO                       46        46         0NIGERIA                     47        47         0ZAMBIA                      48        49        +1COTE D'IVOIRE               47        49        +2GHANA                       45        47        +2ZAIRE                       45        47        +2BOTSWANA                    48        51        +3CAMEROON                    45        48        +3GABON                       40        43        +3GUINEA                      47        52        +5****************************************************************Asia                                            -2CHINA                       28        24        -4PHILIPPINES                 39        35        -4INDIA                       36        33        -3JAPAN                       17        14        -3MALAYSIA                    36        34        -2PAKISTAN                    44        43        -1THAILAND                    29        28        -1AUSTRALIA                   22        22         0BANGLADESH                  44        44         0BURMA                       41        41         0HONG KONG                   21        21         0NEW ZEALAND                 23        23         0SINGAPORE                   23        23         0SRI LANKA                   35        35         0SOUTH KOREA                 24        25        +1TAIWAN                      26        27        +1PAPUA NEW GUINEA            40        42        +2VIETNAM                     39        42        +3INDONESIA                   37        41        +4Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GLOBAL CHANGE IN INFANT DEATHS PER 1000                           1995      2000     CHANGEGLOBAL                                          -1*******************************************************ZIMBABWE                    74        51       -23ZAIRE                      111        90       -21HAITI                      109        91       -18PHILIPPINES                 51        35       -16CHINA                       52        38       -14THAILAND                    37        23       -14SAUDI ARABIA                52        39       -13EGYPT                       76        65       -11MALAYSIA                    26        15       -11KENYA                       74        64       -10OMAN                        37        27       -10BRAZIL                      60        52        -8PAPUA NEW GUINEA            63        55        -8SRI LANKA                   22        14        -8SYRIA                       43        35        -8ARGENTINA                   29        22        -7BANGLADESH                 107       101        -6IRAQ                        67        61        -6BOTSWANA                    39        34        -5COTE D'IVOIRE               95        90        -5JAMAICA                     17        12        -5RUSSIA                      27        22        -5YEMEN                      113       108        -5BOLIVIA                     74        70        -4GERMANY                      7         3        -4GHANA                       83        79        -4GUINEA                     139       135        -4ISRAEL                       9         5        -4PAKISTAN                   102        98        -4UNITED ARAB EMIRATES        22        18        -4CAMEROON                    77        74        -3ITALY                        8         5        -3NEW ZEALAND                  9         6        -3PORTUGAL                    10         7        -3SOUTH KOREA                 16        13        -3UKRAINE                     21        18        -3SINGAPORE                    6         4        -2SURINAME                    31        29        -2TRINIDAD & TOBAGO           17        15        -2TUNISIA                     34        32        -2URUGUAY                     17        15        -2ZAMBIA                      85        83        -2AUSTRALIA                    7         6        -1CANADA                       7         6        -1COSTA RICA                  11        10        -1FRANCE                       7         6        -1HONG KONG                    7         6        -1PUERTO RICO                 14        13        -1SPAIN                        7         6        -1UNITED KINGDOM               7         6        -1UNITED STATES                9         8        -1VIETNAM                     46        45        -1AUSTRIA                      7         7         0BELGIUM                      7         7         0BURMA                      114       114         0CHILE                       15        15         0COLOMBIA                    28        28         0EL SALVADOR                 41        41         0GREECE                       9         9         0IRELAND                      7         7         0JAPAN                        4         4         0KUWAIT                      13        13         0NICARAGUA                   53        53         0SWEDEN                       6         6         0SWITZERLAND                  7         7         0TAIWAN                       6         6         0DENMARK                      7         8        +1DOMINICAN REPUBLIC          52        53        +1HUNGARY                     13        14        +1NETHERLANDS                  6         7        +1PANAMA                      17        18        +1POLAND                      13        14        +1CUBA                        10        12        +2FINLAND                      5         7        +2GUYANA                      49        51        +2NORWAY                       6         8        +2QATAR                       22        24        +2CZECH REPUBLIC               9        12        +3INDONESIA                   67        70        +3BULGARIA                    12        16        +4GABON                       95        99        +4VENEZUELA                   28        32        +4ANGOLA                     145       151        +6GUATEMALA                   54        60        +6HONDURAS                    45        51        +6LIBYA                       63        70        +7MEXICO                      27        34        +7PARAGUAY                    25        33        +8CONGO                      111       120        +9TURKEY                      49        58        +9ROMANIA                     20        30        10ALGERIA                     52        63        11ECUADOR                     39        51        12SOUTH AFRICA                47        60        13MOROCCO                     50        64        14NIGERIA                     75        90        15PERU                        54        69        15INDIA                       78        95        17SUDAN                       80        97        17IRAN                        60        79        19Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L BUSINESS CLIMATE INDICATORS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REGIONAL CHANGE IN INFANT DEATHS PER 1000                           1995      2000     CHANGE********************************************************No. & Cent. America                             +1HAITI                      109        91       -18JAMAICA                     17        12        -5TRINIDAD & TOBAGO           17        15        -2CANADA                       7         6        -1COSTA RICA                  11        10        -1PUERTO RICO                 14        13        -1UNITED STATES                9         8        -1EL SALVADOR                 41        41         0NICARAGUA                   53        53         0DOMINICAN REPUBLIC          52        53        +1PANAMA                      17        18        +1CUBA                        10        12        +2GUATEMALA                   54        60        +6HONDURAS                    45        51        +6MEXICO                      27        34        +7********************************************************South America                                   -2BRAZIL                      60        52        -8ARGENTINA                   29        22        -7BOLIVIA                     74        70        -4SURINAME                    31        29        -2URUGUAY                     17        15        -2CHILE                       15        15         0COLOMBIA                    28        28         0GUYANA                      49        51        +2VENEZUELA                   28        32        +4PARAGUAY                    25        33        +8ECUADOR                     39        51        12PERU                        54        69        15********************************************************European Union                                  -2GERMANY                      7         3        -4ITALY                        8         5        -3PORTUGAL                    10         7        -3FRANCE                       7         6        -1SPAIN                        7         6        -1UNITED KINGDOM               7         6        -1AUSTRIA                      7         7         0BELGIUM                      7         7         0GREECE                       9         9         0IRELAND                      7         7         0SWEDEN                       6         6         0DENMARK                      7         8        +1NETHERLANDS                  6         7        +1FINLAND                      5         7        +2********************************************************Non-EU Europe                                    0RUSSIA                      27        22        -5UKRAINE                     21        18        -3SWITZERLAND                  7         7         0HUNGARY                     13        14        +1POLAND                      13        14        +1NORWAY                       6         8        +2CZECH REPUBLIC               9        12        +3BULGARIA                    12        16        +4TURKEY                      49        58        +9ROMANIA                     20        30        10********************************************************Middle East                                     +3SAUDI ARABIA                52        39       -13EGYPT                       76        65       -11OMAN                        37        27       -10SYRIA                       43        35        -8IRAQ                        67        61        -6YEMEN                      113       108        -5ISRAEL                       9         5        -4UNITED ARAB EMIRATES        22        18        -4TUNISIA                     34        32        -2KUWAIT                      13        13         0QATAR                       22        24        +2LIBYA                       63        70        +7ALGERIA                     52        63        11MOROCCO                     50        64        14IRAN                        60        79        19********************************************************Sub-Saharan Africa                              +3ZIMBABWE                    74        51       -23ZAIRE                      111        90       -21KENYA                       74        64       -10BOTSWANA                    39        34        -5COTE D'IVOIRE               95        90        -5GHANA                       83        79        -4GUINEA                     139       135        -4CAMEROON                    77        74        -3ZAMBIA                      85        83        -2GABON                       95        99        +4ANGOLA                     145       151        +6CONGO                      111       120        +9SOUTH AFRICA                47        60        13NIGERIA                     75        90        15SUDAN                       80        97        17********************************************************Asia                                            -2PHILIPPINES                 51        35       -16CHINA                       52        38       -14THAILAND                    37        23       -14MALAYSIA                    26        15       -11PAPUA NEW GUINEA            63        55        -8SRI LANKA                   22        14        -8BANGLADESH                 107       101        -6PAKISTAN                   102        98        -4NEW ZEALAND                  9         6        -3SOUTH KOREA                 16        13        -3SINGAPORE                    6         4        -2AUSTRALIA                    7         6        -1HONG KONG                    7         6        -1VIETNAM                     46        45        -1BURMA                      114       114         0JAPAN                        4         4         0TAIWAN                       6         6         0INDONESIA                   67        70        +3INDIA                       78        95        17Back to Headline List WT03-B05-9IA087-000634-B039-19http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it75.html 205.156.212.5 19970122025150 text/html 33783HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:49:56 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:14 GMTContent-length: 33596Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it75.html Sample Issue Copyright THE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNet JANUARY, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FREE BUSINESS NEWS FROM FINLAND (92 words) CONGRESSIONAL MEMBER ORGANIZATIONS ARE VALUABLE INFO SOURCES (240 words) BENCHMARKING STUDIES FROM AUSTRALIA (99 words) MEXICO CHANGES TELECOMMUNICATIONS LAW (96 words) GERMAN & U.S. FINANCIAL MARKETS COMPARED (70 words) U.S. FIRMS LEAD IN FRANCHISING GROWTH (82 words) UPDATE YOUR COUNTRY REPORT LIBRARY (202 words) VENEZUELAN ECONOMIC AND BUSINESS NEWS (40 words) CD-ROM PROVIDES DATA ON EUROPEAN FIRMS (63 words) LITHUANIAN INVESTMENT INFO & ASSISTANCE (83 words) POLAND PROMISES AGGRESSIVE CAPITALISM (85 words) ASK THE EDITOR: SOVIET SPACE TECHNOLOGY (223 words) CAUCUSES WITH DIRECT FOREIGN INTERESTS (461 words) CAUCUSES WITH INDIRECT FOREIGN INTERESTS (296 words) AUTOMATION IN THE THIRD WORLD (82 words) FREE STATISTICS FROM AUSTRIA (74 words) A LOOK AT TECHNOLOGY COMPANIES IN ASIA (47 words) REPORTS EXAMINE WORLD TRADE, U.S. EXPORTS (62 words) NUCLEAR SAFETY IN FORMER SOVIET UNION (78 words) BUILDING PEACE AND DEMOCRACY IN AFRICA (102 words) JOINT VENTURES BETWEEN U.S. & INDIAN FIRMS (72 words) STUDIES FOCUS ON ASIA (110 words) SOURCE FOR COTTON INFORMATION (116 words) WORLDWIDE INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE (65 words) REFERENCES FOR DOING BUSINESS IN MALAYSIA (191 words) RUSSIAN FAR EAST REFERENCE GUIDE (78 words) BUSINESS AND INVESTMENT NEWS FROM VIETNAM (74 words) BUSINESS NEWS FROM ICELAND (77 words) CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996FREE BUSINESS NEWS FROM FINLANDWith the advent of a new, FREE monthly newsletter you can get regular reports on commercial, economic, political, and other developments in Finland. FINLAND FOLIO is jointly published by the Finnish Consulate General in New York, the Finland Trade Center, the Finnish American Chamber of Commerce, and the Finnish Tourist Board.  The first issue, December 1995, features articles on mergers, new Finnish products, and many other subjects. For a FREE subscription contact Finland Folio, Consulate General of Finland, 866 UN Plaza, Suite 250, New York, NY  10017, 212-750-4400; fax 212-750-4418.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996CONGRESSIONAL MEMBER ORGANIZATIONS ARE VALUABLE INFO SOURCESCongressional member organizations-including caucuses and informal groups-can be valuable information resources for the savvy business researcher, yielding wealths of foreign and domestic industry, regional, and other intelligence. Currently 165 such groups grace Capitol Hill and although the member Senators and Representatives themselves are generally tough to approach, all have at least one-often several-staff members who are highly approachable. The level of cooperation with which you'll be greeted will vary.  In many cases you'll encounter an open-door to virtually all the information on hand and available to members themselves. In other cases, your caucus staff contact may simply be a launching pad, referring you to his stable of information resources on Capitol Hill, in government agencies, and in private sector organizations. In some cases, you'll find that the group from which you're soliciting information will have actually published reports.  While these were likely prepared for internal distribution, modest persuasion can often pry them loose. On pages 4-5 of this issue of THE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT you'll find a directory of "Congressional Member Organizations with International Focus."  We've divided the entries into two categories: Those with direct foreign interests, such as a focus on a specific foreign country or region, and  Those with indirect foreign interests, such as industry-oriented caucuses that are concerned with-for example-competition from abroad. For each, we provide contact information including at least one staff member directly concerned with caucus interests.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996BENCHMARKING STUDIES FROM AUSTRALIAFour new studies from Australia's Bureau of Industry Economics (BIE) benchmark various industry sectors. INTERNATIONAL BENCHMARKING OVERVIEW 1995 covers various infrastructure industries including electricity, rail freight, telecommunications, posts and shipping, aviation, and gas supply. INTERNATIONAL BENCHMARKING-WATERFRONT 1995 compares the performance of Australian ports with those in other countries.  Special attention is devoted to coal, container, and noncontainerized bulk cargo handling. Two additional benchmarking studies, just released, are INTERNATIONAL BENCHMARKING-SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY and INTERNATIONAL BENCHMARKING-RAIL FREIGHT 1995. All are FREE from Publications Officer, BIE, GPO Box 8939, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia; phone 011-61-6-276-2347; fax 011-61-6-276-1846.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996MEXICO CHANGES TELECOMMUNICATIONS LAWMexico has revamped its telecommunications regulatory authority and laws governing telephone and broadcasting companies.  The changes have major impacts on U.S. and other firms seeking to participate in these service industries.  An increase in foreign ownership limits and authority to privatize the satellite industry are but two of many key changes. A FREE report on the changes, SPECIAL REPORT ON MEXICO:  1995 FEDERAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS LAW AND REORGANIZATION OF THE SECRETARIA DE COMUNICACIONES Y TRANSPORTES, is available from the Planning and Negotiations Division, International Bureau, Federal Communications Commission, 2000 M Street, N.W., Washington, DC  20554, 202-418-2150.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996GERMAN  & U.S.  FINANCIAL  MARKETS  COMPAREDWhich is best?  Germany's bank-dominated financial system or that of the United States where financial markets dominate? A detailed comparison of the two systems is contained in a recent study, A WELFARE COMPARISON OF INTERMEDIARIES AND FINANCIAL MARKETS IN GERMANY AND THE UNITED STATES, Working Paper No. 95-3.  It costs $3 from the Working Papers, Department of Research, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 10 Independence Mall, Philadelphia, PA  19106.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996U.S. FIRMS LEAD IN FRANCHISING GROWTHA new study by the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC) describes the development of franchising in the United States and its expansion into international markets.  Franchising is practiced by more than 60 different industries in nearly all countries of the world, and U.S. franchisors lead the way in virtually every category. For a FREE copy of INDUSTRY AND TRADE SUMMARY:  FRANCHISING, Order No. 2921, contact the Office of the Secretary, ITC, 500 E Street, S.W., Washington, DC  20436, 202-205-1809; fax 202-205-2104.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996UPDATE YOUR COUNTRY REPORT LIBRARYStaff specialists at U.S. embassies throughout the world draft BACKGROUND NOTES on the countries to which they are assigned.  These include information on the country's land, people, history, government, political conditions, economy, foreign relations, and United States policy. Also included in these brief reports are a profile, travel notes, map, list of government officials, and a bibliography. During 1995 the BACKGROUND NOTES listed below with the order numbers were updated.  Each costs $1 from the Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA  15220-7954, 202-512-1800; fax 202-512-2250. To stay current on BACKGROUND NOTES as they are issued, subscribe to List ID "BGN."  The service costs $34 per year.  A complete set of current offerings, Order No. 844-002-00000-9, also costs $34. Brazil, Order No. 884-002-10516-1; Canada, Order No. 884-002-10528-5; Cote d'Ivoire, Order No. 884-002-10522-6; Denmark, Order No. 884-002-10519-6; Germany, Order No. 884-002-10529-3; , Order No. 884-002-10525-1; Japan, Order No. 884-002-10530-7; Malta, Order No. 884-002-10523-4; Mauritania, Order No. 884-002-10526-9; Mexico, Order No. 884-002-10527-7; Nepal, Order No. 884-002-10520-0; New Zealand, Order No. 884-002-10521-8; Pakistan, Order No. 884-002-10517-0; Panama, Order No. 884-002-10518-8; Portugal, Order No. 884-002-10531-5; Sri Lanka, Order No. 884-002-10515-3; and United Nations, Order No. 884-002-10524-2.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996VENEZUELAN ECONOMIC AND BUSINESS NEWSTap into a wealth of FREE business, economic, political, and social news from Venezuela. VENEZUELA UP TO DATE is a quarterly publication.  It's available from the Embassy of Venezuela, 1099 30th Street, N.W., Washington, DC  20007, 202-342-6849; fax 202-342-6820.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996CD-ROM PROVIDES DATA ON EUROPEAN FIRMSEUROPAGES CD-ROM lists 150,000 companies in 25 European countries.  Entries include detailed financial data, product and service descriptions, and complete contact information.  Paid advertising supplements the listings by providing even more details. The multilingual CD-ROM (in English, French, German, Spanish, and Italian) costs 1,295 French francs from Eur dit S.A., 9 Avenue de Friedland, 75008 Paris, France; phone 011-33-1-5377-5409; fax 011-33-1-4289-3473.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996LITHUANIAN INVESTMENT INFO & ASSISTANCEThere's a new source for information and personal assistance relating to joint ventures and other investments in Lithuania. The Lithuanian Investment Agency provides FREE information on joint venture opportunities, sites and factories, the labor market, production facilities, financial incentives, and more.  It offers FREE assistance in finding a potential business partner; making company, industry, and government agency contacts; and establishing a legal entity in Lithuania. Contact the Lithuanian Investment Agency, Sv. Jono St. 3, 2600 Vilnius, Lithuania; phone 011-370-2-627438; fax 011-370-2-220160.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996POLAND PROMISES AGGRESSIVE CAPITALISMPrivate businesses-rather than restructured state enterprises-promise to be the main engine of economic renewal in Poland and its East European neighbors. A new Harvard Business School text uses detailed case studies from Polish shipbuilding, clothing, consulting, food, banking, and publishing enterprises to compare restructured state enterprises with those of private enterprise. STARTING OVER IN EASTERN EUROPE, 256 pages, costs $27.95 in major bookstores or from Harvard Business School Press, Customer Service Department, 60 Harvard Way, Box 230-5, Boston, MA  02163, 800-545-7685.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996ASK THE EDITOR:  SOVIET SPACE TECHNOLOGY"Dear Editor:  I am seeking information sources on the aerospace activities of the former Soviet Union.  I am particularly interested in privatization and technologies available for sale or licensing.  Do you have any suggestions?  T.L. " The following organizations, survivors of the breakup of the Soviet Union or successors to Soviet organizations, may help you in your quest. Russian Center for the Conversion of the Aerospace Sector35 Myasnitskaya ul.101959 Moscow, RussiaPhone:  011-7-95-207-9367; fax 011-7-95-207-5925Mission:    Conversion of aerospace facilities into profitable manufacturing enterprises. Russian Space Agency42 Schepkina ul.129857 Moscow, RussiaPhone:  011-7-95-288-9905; Fax:  011-7-95-251-8702Mission:    Coordinates Russian space activities. Association for the Advancement of Space Science and Technology84/32 Profsoyuznaya ul.117810 Moscow, RussiaPhone:  011-7-95-333-2445; fax 011-7-95-330-1200Mission:    Development and privatization of space technology. Space Science and Production Center of Russia18 Novozavodskaya ul.121087 Moscow, RussiaPhone:  011-7-95-145-9884; fax 011-7-95-142-5921Mission:    Design and manufacturing of launch vehicles, spacecraft, boosters, and reentry vehicles. Lavochkin Science and Production Association24 Leningradskoye sh.141400 Khimki, RussiaPhone:  011-7-95-573-5565; fax 011-7-95-573-3595Mission:    Leading developer of unmanned spacecraft. Lunokhod24 Leningradskoye sh.141400 Khimki, RussiaPhone:  011-7-95-573-0075; fax 011-7-95-571-2345Mission:    Spinoff of Lavochkin Science and Production Association (see above).  Produces and markets high-tech products including communications systems for spacecraft, temperature control devices, and others.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996CAUCUSES WITH DIRECT FOREIGN INTERESTSAd Hoc Congressional Committee for Irish Affairs2235 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-0503Staff Contacts:    Elaine Simek, 202-225-3965John P. Mackey, 202-225-5021Dan Michaelis, 202-225-7896William Tranghese, 202-225-5601 Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus2135 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-0503Staff Contact:    Laura Efurd, 202-225-4906 Congressional Border Caucus2312 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-0503Staff Contacts:    Jose Luis Sanchez, 202-225-4831Quinn D. Dodd, 202-225-2365 Congressional Caucus on Armenian Issues420 Cannon House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-1702Staff Contact:    Ted Loud, 202-225-4671 Congressional Caucus on India and Indian-Americans420 Cannon House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-1702Staff Contact:    Ted Loud, 202-225-4671 Congressional Competitiveness Caucus511 Hart Senate Office BuildingWashington, DC  20510-3701Staff Contacts:    Ed Gressner, 202-224-2651Ken Cunningham, 202-224-3744Fariborz S. Fatemi, 202-225-4146Laurie Fenton, 202-225-2543 Congressional Friends of Human Rights Monitors1432 Longworth House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-3219Staff Contact:    Robert Zachritz, 202-225-6465 Congressional Human Rights Caucus2217 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-0503Staff Contact:    Alexandra Arriagas, 202-225-3531 Congressional Jobs and Fair Trade Caucus2104 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-1702Staff Contact:    Jamie Wimberly, 202-225-4146 Congressional Missile Defense Caucus2452 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-1702Staff Contacts:    Nancy Lifset, 202-225-2011Hugh Brady, 202-225-5501Vicky Middleton, 202-225-5672Pete Rose, 202-225-5071 Congressional Task Force to End the Arab Boycott2211 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-0503Staff Contacts:    Clare Coleman, 202-225-6616Peter Gioia, 202-225-3931 Congressional Task Force on International HIV/AIDS2349 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-0503Staff Contact:    Rita Patel, 202-225-3106 Congressional Travel and Tourism Caucus2234 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-0503Staff Contacts:    Debra S. Korth, 202-225-5665Jim Berard, 202-225-6211 Congressional U.S.-Former Soviet Union Energy Caucus442 Cannon House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-1702Staff Contacts:    Robert J. Grasso, 202-225-2831Doug Ritter, 202-225-2011 Friends of Ireland1330 Longworth House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-3219Staff Contacts:    John Simmons, 202-225-3701Trina Vargo, 202-224-2638 House Albanian Issues Caucus1433 Longworth House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-3219Staff Contacts:    Jason Steinbaum, 202-225-2464Kevin Tyne, 202-225-3371 House Republican Israel Caucus1318 Longworth House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-3219Staff Contact:    E.R. Gregory, 202-225-4272 House/Senate International Education Study Group444 Russell Senate Office BuildingWashington, DC  20510-3502Staff Contact:    Suzanne Day, 202-224-5630 National Security Caucus227 Cannon House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-1702Staff Contact:    Jessica Wiley, 202-225-5452 Peace Accord Monitoring Group1433 Longworth House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-3219Staff Contact:    Jason Steinbaum, 202-225-2464 Senate Anti-Terrorism Caucus520 Hart Senate Office BuildingWashington, DC  20510-3701Staff Contact:    Gregg Rickman, 202-224-6542 Senate Tourism Caucus343 Russell Senate Office BuildingWashington, DC  20510-3502Staff Contact:    Dana Johnson, 202-225-5183Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996CAUCUSES WITH INDIRECT FOREIGN INTERESTSAuto Parts Task Force2230 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-0503Staff Contacts:    Craig Kramer, 202-225-4961 Congressional Automotive Caucus2187 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-0503Staff Contact:    Larry Rosenthal, 202-225-3611 Congressional Aviation and Space Caucus2350 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-0503Staff Contact:    Elizabeth Sarrett, 202-225-4261 Congressional Bearing Caucus343 Cannon House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-1702Staff Contact:    Ronald Lefrancois, 202-225-4476 Congressional Footwear Caucus235 Cannon House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-1702Staff Contact:    John Weinfurter, 202-225-8273 Congressional Oil and Gas Forum2334 Russell Senate Office BuildingWashington, DC  20510-3502Staff Contact:    David Stricklin, 202-225-5201 Congressional Soybean Caucus2463 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-0503Staff Contact:    Patrick J. Souders, 202-225-5271 Congressional Steel Caucus2309 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-0503Staff Contact:    Karen Buttaro, 202-225-3876 Manufacturing Task Force318 Cannon House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-1702Staff Contact:    Bill McCann, 202-225-3411 Northeast Agricultural Caucus2246 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-0503Staff Contact:    Eric Webster, 202-225-3665 Senate Coal Caucus173 A Russell Senate Office BuildingWashington, DC  20510-3502Staff Contact:    Rob Mangas, 202-224-4343 Senate Footwear Caucus322 Hart Senate Office BuildingWashington, DC  20510-3701Staff Contact:    Eben Adams, 202-224-2523 Senate Steel Caucus530 Hart Senate Office BuildingWashington, DC  20510-3701Staff Contact:    Bill Morley, 202-224-4254 Small Business Survival Caucus1210 Longworth House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-3219Staff Contact:    Jenny Lemke, 202-225-5456 Textile Steering Committee217 Russell Senate Office BuildingWashington, DC  20510-3502Staff Contact:    Alfred Bundrick, 202-224-5972 Western Caucus2466 Rayburn House Office BuildingWashington, DC  20515-0503Staff Contact:    Allen Freemyer, 202-225-0453 Western States Senate Coalition135 Russell Senate Office BuildingWashington, DC  20510-3502Staff Contact:    Robert Dibble, 202-224-5251Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996AUTOMATION IN THE THIRD WORLDA new report by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) focuses on the spread of automation and its impact on the manufacturing sector in underdeveloped countries. CHOICES IN INDUSTRIAL AUTOMATION examines automation both in terms of products and processes.  It analyzes trends in government policies, industry strategies, and international support measures for developing countries. The 95-page report, Order No. PPD.274(SPEC.).E, is FREE from the Documents Unit, Room F-355N, UNIDO, P.O. Box 300, A-1400 Vienna, Austria; phone 011-43-1-211-315538; fax 011-43-1-232156.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996FREE STATISTICS FROM AUSTRIAThe new edition of the Austrian Central Statistical Office's (OSTAT's) FACTS & FIGURES provides a wealth of statistics, through 1995, on topics ranging from agriculture and banking to transportation and tourism. For a FREE copy of the 32-page pocket-size reference, contact OSTAT, Hintere Zollamtsstrasse 2b, 1033 Vienna, Austria; phone 011-43-1-71128; fax 011-43-1-715-6828.  For a list of all statistical publications, request a copy of the FREE catalog of publications, PUBLIKATIONSANGEBOT, from the same source.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996A LOOK AT TECHNOLOGY COMPANIES IN ASIAA new study examines the dramatic growth of high-tech companies in various Asian countries including Japan, Singapore, India, and others. The 72-page National Science Foundation (NSF) report, ASIA'S NEW HIGH-TECH COMPETITORS, is FREE from NSF, Publications Unit, Room P-15, 4201 Wilson Boulevard, Arlington, VA  22230.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996REPORTS EXAMINE WORLD TRADE, U.S. EXPORTSTwo new reports by the U.S. Department of Commerce will help you forecast trends in global trade and U.S. exports. U.S. GLOBAL TRADE OUTLOOK:  1995-2000, Order No. 003-009-00650-3, costs $8. NATIONAL EXPORT STRATEGY ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS, Order No. 003-009-00645, costs $7.50. Both are available from Superintendent of Documents, P.O. Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA  15220-7954, 202-512-1800; fax 202-512-2250.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996NUCLEAR SAFETY IN FORMER SOVIET UNIONA new study suggests that nuclear reactor safety is deteriorating in the former Soviet Union and will continue to do so unless official attitudes change and major corrections are made. NUCLEAR ENERGY SAFETY CHALLENGES IN THE FORMER SOVIET UNION assesses the problem and makes recommendations to correct nuclear reactor problems. The 94-page report costs $19.95 from CSIS Books, Center for Strategic and International Studies, 1800 K Street, N.W., Suite 400, Washington, DC  20006, 202-887-0200; fax 202-775-3199.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996BUILDING PEACE AND DEMOCRACY IN AFRICATwo new reports by the U.S. Institute of Peace focus on efforts to build peace and democracy in Africa. AFRICAN CONFLICT RESOLUTION:  THE U.S. ROLE IN PEACEMAKING, 192 pages, $14.95, assesses various ways to improve the U.S. contribution to African efforts to prevent, manage, and resolve violent conflicts. STATE BUILDING AND DEMOCRACY IN SOUTHERN AFRICA, 400 pages, $19.95, examines Botswana, Zimbabwe, and South Africa-three countries which each have different track records in establishing conditions in which democracy can grow. Both books are available from the U.S. Institute of Peace Press, P.O. Box 605, Herndon, VA  22070, 800-868-9064; fax 703-689-0660.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996JOINT VENTURES BETWEEN U.S. & INDIAN FIRMSA new directory by the U.S. Embassy to India provides information on more than 1,600 joint ventures and other collaborations between U.S. and Indian firms. A detailed index lets users locate information by company, topic, industry, or region.  INDO-U.S.A. COLLABORATIONS DIRECTORY also includes a detailed analysis of direct investment in India by U.S. companies. The 300-page reference costs $17.80 from the Commercial Service, Bombay, Department of State, Washington, DC  20521-6240.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996STUDIES FOCUS ON ASIATwo new studies examine factors affecting the relationship between the United States and Asian countries. ASIAN VALUES AND THE UNITED STATES:  HOW MUCH CONFLICT?, 42 pages, suggests that although some differences over values exist, as well as irritation with U.S. pressures, common threads are developing between East and West that are more significant than the differences. TRILATERAL FORUM ON NORTH PACIFIC SECURITY explores the regional and international security issues of Japan, Russia, and the United States with the goal of increasing prospects for stability. Each costs $10.95 from CSISBooks, Center for Strategic and International Studies, 1800 K Street, N.W., Suite 400, Washington, DC  20006, 202-775-3119; fax 202-775-3199.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996SOURCE FOR COTTON INFORMATIONThe International Cotton Advisory Committee (ICAC) publishes many authoritative items relating to cotton and textile production and trade.  Recent offerings include: COTTON:  WORLD STATISTICS, 89 pages, $125, includes production, area, yield, consumption, imports, exports, and stocks.  Projections for 1996 and 1997 are provided. WORLD COTTON TRADE, 90 pages, $150, is an analysis of world trade by region. WORLD TEXTILE DEMAND, 131 pages, $250, contains analyses and projections of world end-use consumption of textiles, mill use, and production of cotton and chemical yarn and fabric for more than 100 countries. These and other studies are available from ICAC, 1629 K Street, N.W., Suite 702, Washington, DC  20006, 202-463-6660; fax 202-463-6950; e-mail "secretariat@icac.org".Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996WORLDWIDE  INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTUREDetailed information on the information infrastructures of countries throughout the world are contained in a just-released report, WORLD TELECOMMUNICATION DEVELOPMENT REPORT:  INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURES. The report contains 150 pages of detailed textual information plus 100 pages of statistical tables.  It costs 100 Swiss francs from the International Telecommunications Union, Sales and Marketing Service, Place des Nations, 1211 Geneva 20, Switzerland; phone 011-41-22-730-5111; fax 011-41-22-733-7256.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996REFERENCES FOR DOING BUSINESS IN MALAYSIAA collection of four publications will help you get started investing in or marketing to Malaysia. MALAYSIAN INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY MEMBERS' DIRECTORY, 135 Malay dollars, is an annual directory of member organizations listing addresses and contact numbers, nature of business, and major foreign shareholders of companies. BUSINESS GUIDE TO KUALA LUMPUR AND THE KLANG VALLEY, 90 Malay dollars, is a fold-up map that serves as a guide to key government and private sector organizations in Kuala Lumpur and the Klang Valley.  Also included is a directory giving addresses and contact information for more than 600 organizations. INVESTMENT MAP OF MALAYSIA, 80 Malay dollars, is a fold-up map guide to the availability of resources and infrastructural facilities in the country as well as by states. 26 WAYS:  UNDERSTANDING MALAYSIA'S BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT, 55 Malay dollars, is a collection of 26 articles which look at the activities of foreign investors in Malaysia.  Serves as a guide to business customs. All are available from the Malaysian International Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Wisma Damansare, 10th Floor, Jalan Semantan, 50490 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; phone 011-603-254-2677; fax 011-603-255-4946.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996RUSSIAN FAR EAST REFERENCE GUIDEIf you're planning to do business in the Russian Far East, a new 180-page reference may provide valuable guidance. POCKET HANDBOOK OF THE RUSSIAN FAR EAST:  A REFERENCE GUIDE includes a survey of the entire region.  It includes statistical charts and tables, territorial and city maps, a hotel guide, information on elected officials, economic surveys, and more. The GUIDE costs $37.50 from RUSSIAN FAR EAST UPDATE, P.O. Box 22126, Seattle, WA  98122, 206-447-2668; fax 206-628-0979.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996BUSINESS AND INVESTMENT NEWS FROM VIETNAMValuable information on business and investment developments in Vietnam is contained in VIET NAM OPPORTUNITIES, a weekly newsletter. Each issue includes sector-by-sector information on specific business opportunities, news of U.S. and other foreign firms' plant openings and other activities, interviews with key government officials, and much more. Subscriptions cost $270 per year from VINA USA Business Liaison Corporation, 10 East 22nd Street, Suite 200, New York, NY  10160-1788, 212-673-5041; fax 212-673-1955.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INTERNATIONAL INFORMATION REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY, 1996BUSINESS NEWS FROM ICELANDIndustries of Iceland; news of foreign investment, the country's trade, finance, and economy; and profiles of specific companies are contained in the quarterly English-language journal, ICELAND BUSINESS. Included in the current issue are articles on the first foreign brokerage firm to open in Iceland, fisheries trends, telecommuting, ties with Eastern Europe, and much more. Subscriptions cost $29.29 (airmail) or $19.95 (surface mail) from Iceland Business, Hofdabakki 9, 112 Reykjavik, Iceland; phone 011-354-567-5700l; fax 011-354-587-4066.Back to Headline List WT03-B05-10IA087-000634-B039-51http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it135.html 205.156.212.5 19970122025235 text/html 133323HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:50:09 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:24 GMTContent-length: 133135Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it135.html Sample Issue Copyright INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNet October 23, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES BELGIUM'S 1997 BUDGET (1504 words) NEW ZEALAND: TWO FERRIES PURCHASE UPDATE (271 words) VIETNAM: DISTRIBUTION CHANNELS FOR IMPORTED GOODS (1276 words) JAPAN: SANITATION MEASURES FOR IMPORTED OYSTERS (707 words) ECUADOR: INTRODUCTION TO PETROLEUM CORP BID COMMITTEE (933 words) JAPAN: 1ST ASIA-PAC INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEM SEMINAR (747 words) FRANCE: EUROPEAN CHILDREN'S WEAR MARKET UPDATE (594 words) FRANCE: PREMIERE VISION TRADE SHOW (663 words) RAPID GROWTH IN VIETNAM'S COMPUTER SERVICES SECTOR (328 words) VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: OIL PRODUCTION AND EXPORTS - PRICE RECORD (274 words) VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: FOREIGN TRADE - NON-OIL EXPORTS UP (201 words) VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: MARKET EXCHANGE RATE - APPRECIATION OF THE BOLIVAR (296 words) VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: BRADY BOND TRANSACTIONS - CHANGE IN DOWNWARD TREND (233 words) VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: CARACAS STOCK EXCHANGE CAPITALIZATION INDEX - RECORD HIGH (229 words) VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: MONETARY STABILIZATION INSTRUMENTS - RATES CONTINUE DOWN (242 words) VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: MONEY SUPPLY/M2 - EXPANDS SLOWLY (229 words) VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: CURRENT INTEREST RATES - NEGATIVE RATES CONTINUE (210 words) VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: CONSUMER PRICE INDEX - STUBBORN, BUT ON THE DECLINE (292 words) VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: INT'L RESERVES - SURPASS 1996 GOALS (226 words) VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: FOREIGN EXCHANGE TRANSACTIONS - INFLOWS UP (245 words) VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: SUMMARY (220 words) AUSTRALIA: VETERINARY CONFERENCE AND EXHIBITION (156 words) VIETNAM ESTABLISHES 2ND NAT'L TELECOM COMPANY (505 words) VIETNAM ISSUES 1ST LICENSE FOR TRANSPORTATION & DELIVERY SERVICES TO FOREIGN DISTRIBUTION FIRM (466 words) GUATEMALA PASSES ELECTRICITY LAW (704 words) TURKEY PUTS FORWARD A "BALANCED BUDGET" FOR 1997 (1031 words) HUNGARY: BUDAPEST STOCK EXCHANGE SURPASSES 3700 (89 words) HUNGARY: PERSONAL FOREX SAVINGS FALL IN NINE MONTHS (239 words) HUNGARY: DEVALUATION EXHAUSTS ITS EXPORT-PROMOTING EFFECT (293 words) HUNGARY: GOVERNMENT PUBLISHES THREE-YEAR FORECAST (247 words) HUNGARY: CONSTRUCTION OUTPUT 3% DOWN IN 12 MONTHS TO AUGUST (167 words) HUNGARY: PRIVATE RESEARCH INSTITUTE FORECASTS 2.5% GDP GROWTH IN 1997 (493 words) HUNGARY: GOV'T FORECASTS 1 PERCENT GDP GROWTH IN 1996 (224 words) AUSTRALIA: HOSPITAL & HEALTHCARE 97 EXHIBITION (180 words) GEORGIA: EXCHANGE RATE OF THE LARI HELD AT 1.27 LARI TO ONE USD (136 words) GEORGIA: FOREIGN INVESTMENT REACHES USD 53 MILLION SINCE INDEPENDENCE (509 words) GEORGIA: DUTCH FIRM PLANS US$ 10 MLN INVESTMENT IN MINERAL WATER INDUSTRY (123 words) FRENCH FOREIGN MINISTER VISITS GEORGIA (130 words) TURKEY AND GEORGIA CONTINUE CONSULTATIONS ON RAILWAY LINE CONSTRUCTION (206 words) GEORGIA: PROJECTED BUDGET DEFICIT FOR 1997: 163.7 MILLION LARI (USD 129.2 MILLION) (159 words) LATVIAN TRADE FAIRS IN 1997 (1032 words) CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996BELGIUM'S 1997 BUDGETfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in BRUSSELSINTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY------------------------1.  THE BELGIAN PARLIAMENT APPROVED THE COALITION'S L997BUDGET OCTOBER 4 ON A STRAIGHT PARTY VOTE.THE BUDGET, BASED ON A CONSERVATIVE L997 GROWTH FORECASTOF 2.1 PERCENT (NET), INCLUDES BF80 BILLION (USDOLS 2.55BILLION) OF MEASURES AIMED AT CUTTING THE BUDGET DEFICITTO 2.9 PERCENT, BELOW THE 3 PERCENT MAASTRICHT CRITERIONFOR EMU.  IT ALSO INCLUDES BF 367 BILLION IN REVENUEFROM ASSET SALES TO REDUCE THE CUMULATIVE DEBT BY FOURPERCENTAGE POINTS TO L27 PERCENT OF GDP BY THE END OF1997.  PRIMARY FEDERAL SPENDING IS TO BE CUT BY F L7BILLION, INCLUDING CUTS IN SUBSIDIES TO PUBICCOMPANIES, IN INTERNATIONAL AID AND MILITARY SENDING.SOME CUTS ARE MORE REAL THAN OTHERS, THEVAST MAJORITYHOWEVER INVOLVES CUTS AGAINST BASEINE EXPENDITUREPROJECTIONS.2.  SOCIAL SECURTY SPENDING WILL BE CUT BY BF 23BILLION, INCLUDNG HEALTH CARE SAVINGS, REDUCED CHILDALLOWANCE RTES, AND A GRADUAL INCREASE IN THERETIREMENT AG OF WOMEN TO 65 YEARS (MATCHING THAT FORMEN).  EDERAL REVENUES ARE PROJECTED TO INCREASE BY BF3 BILLION, INCLUDING EXCISE AND PETROL TAX INCREASS,AS WELL AS TAX CHANGES ON SOME SAVINGS INSTRUMNTS.WHILE MOST COMMENTATORS THINK THE L997 BUDGT IS AREALISTIC ONE, THEY ALSO POINT OUT THAT PIME MINISTERDEHAENE SEEMED UNABLE TO ESCAPE FRO THE DEMANDS OF HISCOALITION PARTNERS, MAKING IT VIRTUALLY IMPOSSIBLE TOUSE THE SPECIAL POWERS GRANTED IN THE SUMMER ALLOWINGHIM TO BY-PASS PARLIAMENT.  END INTRODUCTION ANDSUMMARY.MACROECONOMIC ASSUMPTIONS-------------------------3.  WHILE SOME OF THIS COALITION'S EARLIER BUDGETS ERREDIN BEING BASED ON OVERLY OPTIMISTIC MACROECONOMICASSUMPTIONS, THIS CANNOT BE SAID FOR THE L997 BUDGET:-- NET GDP GROWTH L.2 PERCENT IN L996 AND 2.1 PERCENT IN   L997;-- INFLATION L.9 PERCENT FOR BOTH L996 AND L997;-- SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATE FOR L997: 4.1 PERCENT;-- PRIMARY SURPLUS (I.E., NET OF INTEREST EXPENDITURES):   6 PERCENT OF GDP;-- TOTAL FEDERAL DEFICIT BF 212 BILLION, I.E., 2.7   PERCENT OF GDP, TO WHICH THE DEFICITS OF THE SOCIAL   SECURITY SYSTEM AS WELL AS THOSE OF THE REGIONS AND   COMMUNITIES HAVE TO BE ADDED, BRINGING THE OVERALL   TOTAL TO 2.9 PERCENT OF GDP.BOTH THE GDP AND SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES SEEM TO BEPRUDENT, E.G., THE OECD AS WELL AS THE EUROPEANCOMMISSION USE 2.5 PERCENT NET GROWTH AND 5 PERCENTSHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES IN THEIR FORECASTS FORBELGIUM.SPENDING GROWTH HELD BELOW INFLATION------------------------------------4.  OVERALL, THESE ASSUMPTIONS RESULT IN THE FOLLOWINGKEY EXPENDITURE FIGURES FOR THE 1997 BUDGET (IN BILLIONSBF):                  1996       1997   PCT.  PERCENTAGE OF                                    INCR.  GDP (1997)PROGRAM EXPEND.    788.0     811.2   1.2     8.1SOC. SECURITY    1,492.6   1,514.3   1.4    15.1INTEREST           668.0     676.4   1.2     6.7REGIONAL TRANSF.   829.8     886.4   6.8     8.8EU TRANSFERS        91.2      82.9  -9.2     8.3TOTAL:           3,869.6   3,971.2   2.6    38.85.  INDIVIDUAL BUDGET FIGURES FOR THE VARIOUS MINISTRIES(E.G. DEFENSE, DEVELOPMENT AID, FOREIGN AFFAIRS) WILLONLY BECOME AVAILABLE AROUND NOVEMBER - TOTAL PROGRAMSPENDING IS BUDGETED TO DECREASE FROM 39.4 PERCENT OFGDP IN 1996 TO 38.8 PERCENT IN 1997.-NEW RECEIPTS------------6.  THE TOTAL REVENUES AS A PERCENTAGE OF GDP WILL BEMAINTAINED IN L997 AT THE SAME LEVEL AS IN L996 (APOLITICAL TENET OF THE CHRISTIAN-DEMOCRATIC COALITIONPARTNERS).  NEW FISCAL MEASURES ARE INCLUDED IN THE L997BUDGET, INCLUDING A BF 7.3 BILLION INCREASE IN PETROLTAXES, BF 3.7 BILLION EXCISE TAXES ON BEER AND A BF L.2BILLION TURNOVER TAX LEVIED ON THE BANK'S SMALL SAVINGSACCOUNTS HELD BY INDIVIDUALS, AND BF 5.5 BILLION THROUGHCOMBATTING FISCAL FRAUD.  A MORE STRUCTURAL MEASURE INTHIS CATEGORY IS THE CONTINUED NON-INDEXATION OF TAXBRACKETS FOR THE SECOND YEAR IN A ROW.MOST OF THESE MEASURES ARE INTENDED TO OFFSET CONTINUINGDECLINES IN FISCAL RECEIPTS FROM A REDUCTION IN THETOTAL SALARY MASS AND MEASURES SUCH AS A CUT INEMPLOYERS' SOCIAL SECURITY CONTRIBUTION FOR LOWER WAGES.EXPENDITURE RESTRAINT.AGAIN-----------------------------7.  THE BUDGET CONCLAVE PRODUCED BF L7 BILLION INEXPENDITURE CUTS, THE MOST IMPORTANT ONES BEING AREVISED SUBSIDY TO THE POSTAL SYSTEM (BF 5.3 BILLION), ABF 5.8 BILLION CUT IN THE SUBSIDIES TO PUBLIC COMPANIES,A BF L BILLION REDUCTION EACH IN FOREIGN AID AND DEFENSE(FROM BF 98 BILLION TO BF 97 BILLION), AND A BF LBILLION FROM THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR NUCLEAR WASTE.PUBLIC INVESTMENT WAS ALSO CUT BY BF 700 MILLION,BRINGING IT TO ONLY L.5 PERCENT OF GDP, LESS THAN HALFTHE EUROPEAN UNION AVERAGE.  THIS MEANS THAT SUCCESSIVEBELGIAN GOVERNMENTS HAVE REDUCED THEIR PUBLICINVESTMENTS BY TWO-THIRDS SINCE THE LATE SEVENTIES, ANDBY 50 PERCENT SINCE THE EARLY EIGHTIES.  NEVERTHELESS,THERE ALSO SEEMS TO BE SOME ROOM FOR EXTRA EXPENDITURES,SUCH AS A BF 2.5 BILLION INCREASE IN THE JUSTICEMINISTRY BUDGET (TIED TO THE REFORM OF BELGIUM'S JUSTICESYSTEM) AND A BF 2 BILLION (OVER 4 YEARS) INCREASE INAIRBUS SUBSIDIES.SOCIAL SECURITY---------------8.  THE L997 CUTS MAINLY AFFECT HEALTH CARE EXPENDITURES(BF L9.6 BILLION) AND UNEMPLOYMENT (BF 2.5 BILLION).OTHER MEASURES REFORMING DIFFERENT ELEMENTS OF THESYSTEM SUCH AS FAMILY ALLOWANCES AND PENSIONS ARE FARMORE MODEST IN L997, ALTHOUGH THEY ARE EXPECTED TO HAVESTRONGER IMPACT IN LATER YEARS, TOTALLING BF 34 BILLION(IN L997 FRANCS) BY THE YEAR 2000.  YET, IT IS HERE THATTHE COALITION SEEMS TO HAVE EXPERIENCED MOST OF ITSDIFFICULTIES, CAUSING A DELAY BY ALMOST TWO MONTHS INTHE ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE L997 BUDGET.  (ALTHOUGH THEGOVERNMENT DID MEET THE CONSTITUTIONAL DEADLINE OFOCTOBER 1, THE DRAFT BUDGET FOR THE NEXT YEAR ISTRADITIONALLY FINALIZED BY THE END OF JULY). THE DEHAENEGOVERNMENT HAD ASKED FOR AND OBTAINED SPECIAL POWERSALLOWING IT TO BYPASS PARLIAMENT ESPECIALLY IN VIEW OF ASTRUCTURAL REFORM OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY SYSTEM, BUT THECOALITION REMAINS GRIDLOCKED OVER FUNDAMENTAL ISSUESSUCH AS REFORMING THE PUBLIC SECTOR PENSIONS, TAXINGFAMILY ALLOWANCES, AND MAKING UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS MORELIMITED IN TIME.DEBT MANAGEMENT---------------9.  A 4 PERCENTAGE POINT GDP DECREASE IN THE CUMULATIVEDEBT/GDP RATIO WILL BE ACHIEVED IN L997 MAINLY THROUGH AREDUCTION OF THE FOREIGN CURRENCY DEBT, PAID FOR BY THESALE OF EXTRA GOLD BY THE NATIONAL BANK OF BELGIUM (NBB)(BF 222 BILLION) AND A CONTINUED SALE OF PUBLIC ASSETSIN ENTERPRISES SUCH AS CREDIT COMMUNAL, THE MUNICIPALLYOWNED BANK, AND ASLK-CGER, THE BANK AND INSURANCECOMPANY (BF 70 BILLION IN ALL).  ANOTHER BF 75 BILLIONIS SUPPOSED TO COME FROM A MORE EFFECTIVE MANAGEMENT OFPUBLIC ASSETS (E.G., INVESTING THEM IN BONDS RATHER THANPLACING THEM WITH FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS).  THUS, THEBELGIAN GOVERNMENT WILL BE ABLE TO REDUCE THE CUMULATIVEDEBT FROM L37 TO L27 PERCENT OF GDP IN FIVE YEARS TIME.BY MAINTAINING A SUFFICIENTLY HIGH LEVEL OF PRIMARYSURPLUS, IT WILL ACHIEVE A STEADY DECREASE OF THEDEBT/GDP RATIO, WHEREBY MORE AND MORE ROOM WILL BECOMEAVAILABLE FOR PROGRAM (I.E., NON-INTEREST) GOVERNMENTEXPENDITURE, AND THE PUBLIC DEBT WILL BE REDUCED TO 60PERCENT OF GDP OVER AN ACCEPTABLE PERIOD OF TIME.COMMENTS--------10.  ACCORDING TO DEHAENE'S ECONOMIC CHIEF OF STAFF,THIS IS THE BUDGET WHICH IS POLITICALLY MOST ACCEPTABLEAT THE MOMENT.  ANYTHING MORE FUNDAMENTAL, SUCH AS ADRASTIC REFORM OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY SYSTEM, WASIMPOSSIBLE TO ACHIEVE IN SUCH A SHORT TIME SPAN.  THESPECIAL BUDGET POWERS EXPIRE IN JULY 1997, BUT ALREADYBY APRIL 1997 FOR SOCIAL SECURITY.  HENCE, THEINEVITABLE REFORM OF THE CIVIL SERVICE PENSION SYSTEMMAY HAVE BEEN POSTPONED FOR NOW, BUT 'SOMETHING' NEEDSTO BE DONE BEFORE EASTER 1997, SINCE IT IS TREATED AS ASOCIAL SECURITY ISSUE FIRST, AND ONLY THEN AS A BUDGETPROBLEM.11.  PETER PRAET, CHIEF ECONOMIST AT THE GENERALE DEBANQUE, MORE OR LESS CONFIRMS THIS VIEW, WHEN HE CALLEDTHE BUDGET "POLITICALLY VERY BALANCED".  HE COMMENTEDTHAT IT NEEDED TO BE POLITICALLY MORE UNBALANCED TOADDRESS THE FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS.  PRAET POINTS OUT THATTWO-THIRDS OF THE CURRENT BUDGET DEFICIT CAN BEATTRIBUTED TO STRUCTURAL FACTOR REASONS, SUCH AS THEFACT THAT THE BELGIAN ECONOMY IS ACTUALLY GROWING BELOWITS GROWTH POTENTIAL.  MOST OUTSIDE OBSERVERS AGREE THATTHE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT ACTED WISELY BY STARTING FROMVERY CONSERVATIVE ASSUMPTIONS, THAT THERE ARE FEWER STOPAND GO MEASURES IN THIS BUDGET THAN BEFORE, AND THATMANY OF THE MORE STRUCTURAL EFFORTS WILL HAVE ABENEFICIAL LONG TERM EFFECT.12.  THE BELGIAN GOVERNMENT TRIES TO PRESENT ITSELF INITS BEST POSSIBLE SHAPE BEFORE THE START OF EMU.  ITWILL STILL NEED A POLITICAL DELIBERATION TO MAKE THE EMUGRADE CONCERNING CUMULATIVE DEBT, BUT BY SHOWING'SIGNIFICANT PROGRESS' IN THAT FIELD TOO (FROM 137 TO127 PERCENT OF GDP), IT WILL AT LEAST HAVE CONFORMED TOTHE LANGUAGE (IF NOT THE SPIRIT) OF THE MAASTRICHTTREATY.BLINKENCopyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996NEW ZEALAND: TWO FERRIES PURCHASE UPDATEfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in WELLINGTONIt has been public knowledge for at least two years that TranzRail (formerly known as New Zealand Rail) has been consideringupgrading two of its ferries servicing the Cook Strait betweenNew Zealand's North and South Islands.  The company has nowconfirmed its intentions to replace two of its existing ferrieswith two new ships by the year 2000.  Each new ferry will carrybetween 750 and 1,000 people as well as cars and cargo.  Theferries will be roll-on, roll-off in design.  Tranz Rail's ferryupgrade is part of a pending NZ$485 million (US$330 million)expenditure plan to take place over the next seven years.It is an almost certainty that Tranz Rail will appoint a Europeanshipbuilder to this project.  Negotiations are currently takingplace with four European shipbuilders.  In a phone conversationwith the U.S. Commercial Service in Wellington, a spokesman forthe company explained that a number of U.S. shipbuilders wereapproached for this project but not one was interested due to the"roll-on, roll-off" requirement.  Further, "that any U.S.companies specializing in maritime electronic systems would bemost likely working with those shipbuilders".Further information on this major project should be directed to:Mr. Paul HarperSpokemanTranz Rail LimitedWellingtonNew ZealandPh:  64 (4) 498-3000Fax: 64 (4) 498-3116Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VIETNAM: DISTRIBUTION CHANNELS FOR IMPORTED GOODSfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in HANOI1.   UNLESS LICENSE TO DO SO BY THE MINISTRY OF PLANNING ANDINVESTMENT (MPI) UNDER THE FOREIGN INVESTMENT LEGISLATION (FIL),FOREIGN COMPANIES ARE NOT PERMITTED TO DIRECTLY ENGAGE IN TRADEIN VIETNAM, OTHER THAN THE DIRECT MARKETING OF GOODS THEY HAVEMANUFACTURED IN VIETNAM.  ACCORDINGLY, A FOREIGN COMPANY THATWANTS TO SELL AND MARKET ITS GOODS IN VIETNAM MUST DO SOINDIRECTLY BY APPOINTING A LOCAL AGENT OR DISTRIBUTOR TOFACILITATE BOTH IMPORTATION INTO AND MARKETING WITHIN VIETNAM.2.   CURRENT REGULATIONS ON SALES AGENTS DO NOT ADDRESS THE CASEWHERE GOODS ARE FROM A FOREIGN SUPPLIER.  CONSEQUENTLY, THESTATUS OF SUCH AN AGREEMENT IS SUBJECT TO UNCERTAIN RULES AND THECONTRACT MAY BE DIFFICULT TO ENFORCE IN THE EVENT OF A DISPUTE.THE MINISTRY OF TRADE HAS PROPOSED A DRAFT LAW THAT WOULDREGULATE THOSE VIETNAMESE ENTITIES WHICH CAN ACT AS A SALES AGENTOR DISTRIBUTOR FOR FOREIGN COMPANIES THAT WANT TO SELL THEIRGOODS IN VIETNAM.3.   THE MAIN RISK ARISING FROM THE GAP IN THE CURRENTREGULATIONS IS THE RISK OF NON-PAYMENT. AS A SECURITY MEASURE TOTHE FOREIGN PRINCIPAL, SALES ARRANGEMENTS ARE OFTEN STRUCTURED ASDISTRIBUTORSHIP AGREEMENTS, SINCE THE DISTRIBUTOR BUYS THE GOODSDIRECTLY FROM THE FOREIGN PRINCIPAL.  IN THE CASE OF AN AGENCYAGREEMENT, THE FOREIGN PRINCIPAL BEARS THE RISK SINCE THE AGENTIS ONLY SELLING THE GOODS ON THE FOREIGN COMPANY'S BEHALF.DISTRIBUTORSHIP AGREEMENTS ARE CONSIDERED AS "FOREIGN TRADECONTRACTS" AND SHOULD BE LODGED WITH THE MINISTRY OF TRADE.  INANY CASE, THE EXPORTER SHOULD OBTAIN LEGAL ADVICE WHEN PREPARINGOR ENTERING INTO ANY SALES AGREEMENT WITH A VIETNAMESEAGENT/DISTRIBUTOR.4.   IMPORTING:  IN AN EFFORT TO CONTROL ITS LIMITED FOREIGNEXCHANGE RESERVES, VIETNAM HAS STRINGENT CONTROLS ON THE IMPORTSOF FINISHED GOODS.  ONE FORM OF CONTROL IS THE REQUIREMENT TO USEAN IMPORT-EXPORT COMPANY AUTHORIZED BY THE MINISTRY OF TRADE.  IN1995, ABOUT 1,250 COMPANIES HAVE TEMPORARY OR PERMANENT TRADINGLICENSES TO IMPORT OR EXPORT DIRECTLY, OF WHICH ONLY NINE PERCENTOF THE TOTAL NUMBER ARE PRIVATE FIRMS.   IN MOST CASES, THEVIETNAMESE AGENT/DISTRIBUTOR WILL NEED TO PAY AN AUTHORIZEDTRADING COMPANY TO IMPORT THE GOODS.  THE AUTHORIZED TRADINGCOMPANY WILL ADMINISTER THE PROCESS OF OBTAINING THE IMPORTLICENSE AND CLEARING THE GOODS THROUGH CUSTOMS.   THE LICENSE ISAPPLIED FOR AFTER THE GOODS ARE SHIPPED, SOMETIMES AFTER THEYARRIVE IN VIETNAM.  IN EXCHANGE, THE VIETNAMESE AGENT/DISTRIBUTORWILL PAY A SERVICE COMMISSION, AVERAGING 2% TO 3% OF THE VALUE OFTHE SHIPMENT.   EFFECTIVE FEBRUARY 1, 1996, THE MINISTRY OF TRADEREVOKED THE REQUIREMENT FOR EACH PARTICULAR SHIPMENT TO HAVE ANIMPORT OR EXPORT LICENSE.  HENCE, A LICENSE MAY BE VALID FORSEVERAL SHIPMENTS. THE FIRMS CERTIFIED TO IMPORT AND EXPORT,HOWEVER, ARE LIMITED TO THE RANGE OF COMMODITIES SPECIFIED BY THEMINISTRY OF TRADE FOR EACH FIRM.  THEREFORE, THE VIETNAMESEAGENT/DISTRIBUTOR MUST CONFIRM THAT THE IMPORT-EXPORT FIRM HASTHE PROPER PERMITS TO COVER THE TYPE OF GOODS BEING IMPORTED.5.   DISTRIBUTION:  ONCE THE GOODS HAVE CLEARED CUSTOMS,VIETNAMESE COMPANIES WITH IMPORT-EXPORT PRIVILEGES, PRIMARILYSTATE-OWNED ENTERPRISES,  MAY ALSO ACT SIMULTANEOUSLY ASWHOLESALERS, AND IT MAY BE CONVENIENT FOR A U.S. EXPORTER TO SEEKTHESE TYPES OF FIRMS AS AGENTS/DISTRIBUTORS.   ALTERNATIVELY,WITH THE OPENING OF THE ECONOMY, THE FLEDGING PRIVATE ENTERPRISESHAVE REVITALIZED THE DISTRIBUTION SECTOR.  PRIVATE DISTRIBUTORSGENERALLY DO NOT HAVE IMPORT RIGHTS AND MUST SECURE THE SERVICESOF A LICENSED IMPORTER, ALTHOUGH THIS IS SLOWLY CHANGING.  INGENERAL, VIETNAMESE DISTRIBUTORS, WHETHER STATE-OWNED OR PRIVATE,LACK CAPITAL AND EXPERIENCED PERSONNEL TO PROVIDE A BASIC RANGEOF SERVICES:  PROPER WAREHOUSING, INVENTORY AND QUALITY CONTROL,RELIABLE DELIVERY, MARKETING AND AFTER-SALES SERVICE.  PRIVATEENTERPRISES, HOWEVER, TEND TO BE MORE DEXTEROUS ANDBUSINESS-ORIENTED THAN THEIR STATE-RUN COUNTERPARTS.  GIVEN THEGEOGRAPHIC CONFIGURATION AND POOR INFRASTRUCTURE OF VIETNAMCOUPLED WITH THE LIMITED CAPITALIZATION OF MOST LOCALDISTRIBUTORS,  U.S. EXPORTERS MAY FIND IT NECESSARY TO HIRESEVERAL AGENTS/DISTRIBUTORS TO COVER DIFFERENT AREAS.6.   MARKETING:   CONSIDERED AS PART OF TRADING SERVICES, FOREIGNSUPPLIERS ARE NOT PERMITTED TO PROVIDE MARKETING AND SERVICES FORTHEIR PRODUCTS IN VIETNAM.  GIVEN THAT LOCAL DISTRIBUTORS HAVELIMITED EXPERIENCE IN STANDARD TECHNIQUES, WITHOUT TECHNICALASSISTANCE AND FINANCIAL SUPPORT FROM THE U.S. EXPORTER, THESECOMPANIES CANNOT BE RELIED UPON FOR A SUSTAINED MARKETING ANDSALES EFFORT.   MOREOVER, IT IS NOT UNCOMMON FORAGENTS/DISTRIBUTORS TO CARRY COMPETING BRANDS.  THEREFORE, INORDER TO OBTAIN EFFECTIVE MARKET REPRESENTATION FROM A VIETNAMESEAGENT/DISTRIBUTOR, FOREIGN SUPPLIERS SHOULD BE PREPARED TO INVESTIN TRAINING THEIR AGENT/DISTRIBUTOR EITHER BY SENDING TECHNICALEXPERTS TO VIETNAM OR SENDING THE AGENT/DISTRIBUTOR ABROAD FORTRAINING OR BOTH.  SECURING TRAVEL PASSPORTS AND TRAINING VISASFOR VIETNAMESE NATIONALS TO GO ABROAD MAY TAKE SEVERAL MONTHS TOSECURE; HENCE, ADVANCE PLANNING IS REQUIRED.  CONSTANT CONTACTWITH THE VIETNAMESE AGENT/DISTRIBUTOR IS ALSO NECESSARY.  A CLOSERELATIONSHIP ALLOWS THE FOREIGN SUPPLIER TO KEEP ABREAST OF THECHANGES AND DEVELOPMENTS IN THE LOCAL MARKET.  CONTACT IS ALSONECESSARY TO KEEP THE VIETNAMESE AGENT/DISTRIBUTOR MOTIVATED TOPUSH THE PRODUCT.7.   REPRESENTATIVE OFFICE:  U.S. EXPORTERS MAY CHOOSE TOESTABLISH A PRESENCE IN VIETNAM IN ORDER TO MAINTAIN A HIGH LEVELOF INVOLVEMENT WITH THEIR AGENT/DISTRIBUTOR.  ISSUED BY THEMINISTRY OF TRADE, A REPRESENTATIVE OFFICE LICENSE ALLOWS A U.S.EXPORTER TO CLOSELY MONITOR THE DISTRIBUTION AND MARKETING OF ITSPRODUCT IN VIETNAM.   THIS MAY BE PARTICULARLY IMPORTANT FORTHOSE PRODUCTS THAT REQUIRE EXTENSIVE PROMOTION OR VALUE-ADDEDSERVICES.  THE REPRESENTATIVE OFFICE OF THE U.S. EXPORTER MAYALSO SUPERVISE SERVICE CENTERS AND SHOWROOMS.   TYPICALLY,FOREIGN COMPANIES HIRE AND TRAIN LOCAL STAFF TO ACT AS MARKETINGREPRESENTATIVES, WHO THEN OVERSEE DISTRIBUTION AND MARKETING.  AREPRESENTATIVE OFFICE, HOWEVER, IS STRICTLY PROHIBITED FROMTRADING, RENDERING SERVICES, SUBLEASING ITS OFFICE, OR ANY OTHERREVENUE-GENERATING ACTIVITIES.8.   INTERNATIONAL TRADING COMPANIES:  GIVEN THE POTENTIAL HIGHCOST OF MAINTAINING A REPRESENTATIVE OFFICE, U.S. EXPORTERS MAYCHOOSE TO HAVE A DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENT WITH ONE OF THEINTERNATIONAL TRADING COMPANIES PRESENT IN VIETNAM.  SOMEINTERNATIONAL TRADING FIRMS REPRESENTED IN VIETNAM INCLUDECONNELL BROS., DIETHELM, F.E. ZUELLIG, INCHCAPE AND GANNON.CURRENTLY, INTERNATIONAL TRADING FIRMS ARE LIMITED TOREPRESENTATIVE OFFICE STATUS; HENCE, THE SAME RESTRICTIONS IN THEAREAS OF TRADING AND SERVICES APPLY.  HOWEVER, THESEINTERNATIONAL TRADING COMPANIES HAVE EXPERIENCE IN HANDLING AWIDE RANGE OF CONSUMER PRODUCTS AS WELL AS INDUSTRIAL GOODS.MOREOVER, THEY HAVE EXTENSIVE LOCAL KNOWLEDGE DUE TO THEIRRELATIVELY LONG TERM PRESENCE IN VIETNAM.   BY WORKING CLOSELYWITH KEY WHOLESALERS AND DEALERS, THESE FIRMS LIASE DIRECTLY WITHTHE FOREIGN PRINCIPAL TO COORDINATE MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION.9.   FOREIGN INVESTMENT LICENSE:  IN THE LONG TERM, THE MOSTEFFECTIVE ROUTE FOR MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTING GOODS IN VIETNAMIS TO INVEST UNDER THE FOREIGN INVESTMENT LAW.  THIS OPTIONUSUALLY ENTAILS ESTABLISHING A MANUFACTURING OPERATION.  UNDER ALICENSED FOREIGN INVESTMENT PROJECT, FOREIGN COMPANIES AREPERMITTED TO HANDLE THEIR OWN MARKETING AND DISTRIBUTION OF THEIRPRODUCTS MADE IN VIETNAM.  UNDER THIS FORM, A NUMBER OF FOREIGNFIRMS HAVE RESORTED TO THE CHALLENGING AND COSTLY TASK OFESTABLISHING THEIR OWN NETWORK OF DISTRIBUTORS AND DEALERS TOGAIN GREATER CONTROL ON THE HANDLING OF THEIR PRODUCTS.10.  PRACTICAL CONSIDERATION:  IN ORDER TO MITIGATE THE MYRIAD OFPROBLEMS RESULTING FROM THE CURRENT DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, U.S.EXPORTERS ARE ADVISED TO CONDUCT EXHAUSTIVE DUE DILIGENCE ONPOTENTIAL LOCAL AGENTS/DISTRIBUTORS TO ENSURE THAT THEY HAVE THERELEVANT PERMITS, FACILITIES, MANPOWER, CAPITAL AND OTHERREQUIREMENTS NECESSARY TO MEET THEIR ASSUMED RESPONSIBILITIES.COMMERCIAL AGREEMENTS SHOULD CLEARLY DOCUMENT THE RIGHTS ADOBLIGATIONS OF EACH PARTY AS WELL AS STIPULATIONS FOR DISPUTERESOLUTION.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996JAPAN: SANITATION MEASURES FOR IMPORTED OYSTERSfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in TOKYOThe following memo regarding sanitaion of imported oysters wasdistributed to all qurantine stations in Japan by the JapaneseMinistry of Health and Welfare (MHW).MHW memo of September 30, 1996To:       Managers of Quarantine StationsFrom:     Director of Veterinary Sanitation Division          Environmental Health Bureau          Ministry of Health and WelfareThe importance of food sanitation control has been reconfirmedsince the eruption of nation wide food poisoning since May thisyear.  In order to facilitate the safety of raw consumptionoysters, the following memo was distributed to PrefecturalGovernments prior to the shipping season of Japanese oysters.For imported oysters for raw consumption, your assistance inguiding importers concerning hygienic handling is requested.  Inparticular, importers should be requested that oysters importedfor cooked consumption must not be distributed for rawconsumption as indicated in this memo.Regarding sanitation measures for raw consumption oystersPurpose:  A number of food poisoning cases, including E. coli O-157 contamination, has been reported since May, 1996.  Althoughno raw consumption oysters have been identified as a carrier ofO-157, a guideline has been established to prevent food poisoningfrom raw consumption oysters.  It is requested that Prefecturaland regional authorities of oyster production enhance their foodsanitation control.Summary of sanitation measures:I. Prefectural and regional authorities of raw consumption oysterproduction should take the following sanitation measures.1. Control of microorganisms in the oyster growing waters1)  Periodical water quality testing should be conducted toconfirm the water quality standard:  below 70 MPN of totalcoliform group per 100 ml of sea water.2)  Periodical testing on vero-toxin producing E. coli. (VTEC)with oyster meat should be conducted.  If test results readpositive on VTEC, shipment from the subject growing waters shouldbe prohibited.2. Sanitation control of processing plantsIn order to prevent secondary contamination, processing plantsmust maintain thorough water sanitation control, health check ofemployees, and clean handling of oysters.3) Product inspectionProcessors should maintain periodical product testing for theoyster product standard (Bacteria:  50,000 counts or below perone gram and E. Coli:  230 MPN per 100 grams) and VTEC prior toshipment.4) Hygienic handlingProcessors should confirm the storage standard (storagetemperature of below ten degrees Celsius) and hygienic producthandling to prevent increase of microorganisms.5) Batch control systemProcessors and dealers should confirm the batch control systemwith product labels, production management logs, etc. so theoriginal processors and growing waters can be identified withalready distributed products.6) When VTEC is detected from oysters in distributionIf VTEC is detected from oysters in distribution, the subject lotmust be disposed, and shipment from the growing water must beprohibited until the cause is identified and a prevention measureis adapted.7) Prevention of mixing with raw consumption oysters and cookedconsumption oystersA thorough batch control system must be confirmed in order toprevent distribution of cooked consumption oysters as rawconsumption oysters.II. Sanitation measures for Prefectures which receive rawconsumption oystersPrefectures which receive raw consumption oysters should adaptthe following sanitation measures.1. Confirm sanitation control in distributionConfirm the storage standard (storage temperature of below tendegrees Celsius) and clean product handling to prevent increaseof microorganisms.2. When VTEC is detected from oysters in distribution1) If VTEC is detected from oysters in distribution, thePrefectural authority must report the incident to the producingPrefecture of the oyster and dispose the subject lot.2) If VTEC is detected from imported oysters, the prefecturalauthority must report to the Veterinary Sanitation Division ofthe Ministry of Health and Welfare immediately.Drafted by:         Tomhiro AsakawaApproved by:        Craig B. Allen, Commercial AttacheCleared by:         Dale Tasharski, Commercial AttacheAuthorized by:      Sam Kidder, Commercial CounselorCopyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996ECUADOR: INTRODUCTION TO PETROLEUM CORP BID COMMITTEEfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in QUITOSummary.-  The Special Bid Committee (Comite Especial deLicitaciones- CEL) of Petroecuador, the state petroleum company,is composed of four members, whose major responsibilities are toinvite, study, analyze and award bid process for major projectsundertaken by Petroecuador.1.   Responsibilities: Several of the projects in the petroleumsector that are a responsibility of the Special Bid Committee (orCEL) are the following:-    Conclusion of the Eigth bidding round for the explorationand exploitation of oil blocks. In the eigth round two out of thethree contracts have been granted: Block 23 and Block 31.-    Bidding process for the exploration and exploitatin ofmarginal fiels in the East center Amazon region.-    Bidding process for Project ITTI (Ishpingo-Tambacocha-Tiputini-Imuya). These are four joint fields in the east side ofthe Amazon region that have heavy crude oil reserves of more than700 million barrels.  There will be a need to build a pipeline totransport the oil produced in this area; the project is estimatedat USD 700 million.  The committee is at the moment preparing thefinal documents concerning this project.-    Implementation of the construction of a new independentpipeline parallel to the existing Transecuadorian Pipeline System(SOTE) will be under the Special Bid Committe's responsibility.2.   Members.-  The Special Bid Committee of Petroecuador isformed by the Minister of Energy, the Minister of Defense, theMinister of Finance and the General Comptroller. These fourmembers have voting rights in decisions made by the Committee.The Executive President of Petroecuador is secretary of theCommittee and does not have voting rights within the Committee.Each member may appoint an alternate representative, who will bethe person second in command in each institution. The alternateSecretary of the Committee is the coordinator of the PetroleumContracting Unit. The members of the Special Bid Committee are:Alfredo Jorge Adum Ziade.-    He was born in Guayaquil in 1952.He obtained a Political Science major in the Universidad Catolica(Catholic University).In the private sector he manages nearly 40 companies, includingconstruction, real state and shrimping companies, as well as atelevision and radio station.His political activities include being Prefect of the Province ofGuayas in 1984, congressional member, president of the Water andSewage Company and president of FODUR.At the present time he is Minister of Energy and President of theSpecial Bid Committee.Pablo Concha Ledergerber.-  Pablo Concha graduated in theUniversidad Catolica Santiago de Guayaquil (Catholic Universityof Guayaquil) with an Economics Major.  He has worked in thegovernment and private sectors such as:1979 .-      Secretary of Jaime Roldos A., former president of             Ecuador.1979-1981.-  Founder and General Manager of the Ecuadorian             Development Bank. (Banco Ecuatoriano de Desarrollo)1982.-       Minister of Social Welfare1983-1984.-  General Manager of La Previsora Bank.1984-1988.-  General Manager of Continental Bank.1989.-       General Manager of the National Development Bank.             (Banco Nacional de Fomento)1990.-       General Manager of Azuay Bank.At the present time he is Minister of Finance.Victor Manuel Bayas Garcia.-  Army General Victor Bayas isEcuador's Minister of Defense. He has been President of theEcuadorian Atomic Energy Comission and a member of the board ofdirectors of the National Amazon Region Colonizacion Institute(Instituto Nacional de Colonizacion de la Region Amazonica), theNational Preinvestment Fund (Fondo Nacional de Preinversion -FONAPRE), the Ecuadorian Social Security Institute, the StateTelecommunications Company (EMETEL) and Petroecuador, the statepetroleum company.Jose Fernando Rosero Gonzalez.- Ecuador's General Comptrollerwas born in Guayaquil in 1949 and studied law in UniversidadCatolica de Guayaquil (Catholic University of Guayaquil).He has been legal counselor of several Ecuadorian companies,General Solicitor of AZTRA sugar mill, Provincial Counselor ofGuayas, Director of FODUR, a member of Congress for two differentperiods, and President of the Penal and Civil Commission in the1993 Congress.Patricio Lopez Moreno. Retired Army General Lopez was born in1945.  He has been Army Aviation Commander, Commander of MilitaryAttaches, Commader of the "Guayas" Brigade, Commader of theMilitary Mission in Washington and at the present time, ExecutivePresident of Petroecuador and Secretary of the Special BidCommittee.3.   For more information on the Committe, please contact:     Petroecuador     Alpallana y Av. 6 de Diciembre     Quito, Ecuador     Tel: 593/2/228-811,229-046     Fax: 593/2/569-738     Contact: General Patricio Lopez, Executive President     Ministerio de Energia y Minas     Santa Prisca 223, 4to piso     Quito, Ecuador     Tel: 593/2/502-677, 228-895     Contact: Lcdo. Alfredo Adum, Minister of Energy     4.   U.S. Companies interested in exporting equipment toEcuador are encouraged to explore market opportunities throughthe Gold Key Service and other specialized programs offeredthrough the Commercial Service in Ecuador.  Through the Gold KeyService, the trade specialists of the Commercial Service inEcuador arrange pre-screened appointments with interested foreigncustomers, and/or qualified sales agents or distributors.  Thiscustomized business service allows visiting U.S. companyrepresentatives to get a first hand understanding of theEcuadorian market and to make key contacts so critical tosuccesful exporting.  For further information on the Gold Key andother services available to the U.S. companies interested in theEcuadorian market, contact the Commercial Service at the U.S.Embassy in Quito, Ecuador at Tel: 593/2/561-404; Fax: 593/2/504-550.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996JAPAN: 1ST ASIA-PAC INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT SYSTEM SEMINARfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in TOKYO1.  SUMMARY.  THE FIRST ASIA-PACIFIC INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTSYSTEM SEMINAR WAS HELD IN TOKYO ON SEPTEMBER 24, 1996.THE SEMINAR AIMS AT PROMOTING INTERNATIONAL COOPERATIONAMONG ASIA-PACIFIC COUNTRIES.  PRESENTATIONS WERE MADE BYREPRESENTATIVES FROM AUSTRALIA, CHINA, HONG KONG, INDIA,THAILAND, INDONESIA, KOREA, NEW ZEALAND, THE PHILIPPINES,SINGAPORE, TAIWAN, VIETNAM AND JAPAN.  EXCEPT FOR JAPAN,ALL THE COUNTRIES FOCUSED ON HOW TO INTRODUCE INTELLIGENTTRANSPORT SYSTEM (ITS) RATHER THAN DEVELOPING ADVANCEDTECHNOLOGIES IN TRAFFIC CONTROL.  ONE EXCEPTION IS THEINTRODUCTION OF AN EXPERIMENTAL AUTOMATIC TOLL COLLECTION(ATC) SYSTEM IN MALAYSIA.  SINGAPORE EXPRESSED THE LARGESTEXPECTATIONS FOR ITS TO USE THE ROADS EFFICIENTLY (12PERCENT OF ITS LAND IS OCCUPIED BY ROADS).  END SUMMARY.HISTORY OF JAPANESE ITS RESEARCH2.  JAPAN BEGAN ITS RESEARCH IN 1973 AS THE DEVELOPMENT OFCOMPREHENSIVE AUTOMOBILE TRAFFIC CONTROL SYSTEM (CACS) BYMITI.  ROAD/AUTOMOBILE COMMUNICATION SYSTEM (RACS) BY MOCAND ADVANCED MOBILE TRAFFIC INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONSYSTEMS (AMTICS) BY NPA STARTED IN THE 1980S.  THEPROJECTS WERE INTEGRATED AS VEHICLE INFORMATION ANDCOMMUNICATION SYSTEM (VICS) IN COLLABORATION WITH MPTWHICH HAD BEEN STUDYING RADIO UTILIZATION STANDARDIZATION.3.  AT THE END OF THE 1980S TO 1990S, FIVE AGENCIES ANDMINISTRIES BEGAN ADVANCED ITS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS.  THEMINISTRY OF CONSTRUCTION (MOC) STARTED A STUDY ON ADVANCEDROAD TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS (ARTS) FOR ADVANCED ROADTRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS BY ORGANIC COMBINATION OF VEHICLESAND ROADS.  MITI BEGAN THE STUDY ON SUPER SMART VEHICLESYSTEM (SSVS) AIMING AT AN INTELLIGENT CAR TRAFFICSYSTEM.  THE MINISTRY OF TRANSPORTATION (MOT) STARTED THEDEVELOPMENT OF ADVANCED SAFETY VEHICLE (ASV) AND THENATIONAL POLICE AGENCY (NPA) BEGAN DEVELOPING UNIVERSALTRAFFIC MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS (UTMS), RESPECTIVELY.  THEPRIVATE SECTOR FORMED VEHICLE, ROAD AND TRAFFICINTELLIGENCE SOCIETY (VERTIS) TO PROMOTE ITS INCOOPERATION WITH ITS AMERICA AND ERTICO.4.  IN 1995, THE FIVE MINISTRIES AND AGENCIES COMPILED THE"GUIDELINES FOR INTELLIGENT VEHICLE, ROAD AND TRAFFICDEVELOPMENT."  UNDER THE GUIDELINES, FIVE AGENCIES BEGANCOLLABORATION IN DEVELOPING THE TECHNOLOGIES.CURRENT PROGRESS AND FUTURE R&D TARGETS OF ITS IN JAPAN5.  THE GUIDELINES SET UP NINE FIELDS FOR DEVELOPMENT:A.  ADVANCED NAVIGATION SYSTEMB.  ELECTRONIC TOLL COLLECTION SYSTEMC.  SUPPORT TECHNOLOGIES FOR SAFE DRIVINGD.  OPTIMIZATION OF TRAFFIC CONTROLE.  INCREASING EFFICIENCY IN ROAD MAINTENANCEF.  SUPPORT TECHNOLOGIES FOR PUBLIC TRANSPORTATIONG.  INCREASING EFFICIENCY FOR COMMERCIAL VEHICLESH.  SUPPORT TECHNOLOGIES FOR PEDESTRIANSI.  SUPPORT TECHNOLOGIES FOR OPERATION OF EMERGENCYVEHICLESA.  ADVANCED NAVIGATION SYSTEMVICS HAS BEEN PROVIDING SERVICES IN THE TOKYO METROPOLITANAREA AND ON THE HIGHWAYS WITHIN 100 KM FROM TOKYO.STUDIES HAVE BEEN CARRIED OUT FOR EXPANDING SERVICE AREASAND SAFETY IN INFORMATION TRANSMISSION.B.  ELECTRONIC TOLL COLLECTION SYSTEMTHE EXPERIMENTS FOR THE SYSTEM BEGAN THIS FISCAL YEAR TOSTART PRACTICAL APPLICATION IN FY1998.  BASED ON THERESULTS OF THE TESTS, GOJ IS STUDYING THE TECHNOLOGICALSTANDARDS FOR WIRELESS CARD SYSTEMS.C.  SUPPORT TECHNOLOGIES FOR SAFE DRIVINGSINCE 1991, GOJ CARRIED OUT DEMONSTRATION DRIVING TESTSUSING 16 ADVANCED SAFETY VEHICLES (ASV).  GOJ ISDEVELOPING THE AUTOMATED HIGHWAY SYSTEMS (AHS) INCLUDINGCOLLISION AVOIDANCE SYSTEM AND VEHICLE SENSORS.  AHSDEMONSTRATION TESTS HAVE BEEN CARRIED OUT USING ANUNOPENED PORTION OF A NEW HIGHWAY.D.  OPTIMIZATION OF TRAFFIC CONTROLGOJ IS DEVELOPING THE OPTIMIZED TRAFFIC LIGHT CONTROLALGORITHM, INFORMATION TRANSMISSION SYSTEM AND DYNAMICVEHICLE GUIDANCE SYSTEM.  GOJ ALSO IS CONTINUOUSLYINTRODUCING ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES TO TRAFFIC CONTROLCENTERS.E.  INCREASING EFFICIENCY IN ROAD MAINTENANCECOMPUTERIZATION OF PERMITS FOR SPECIAL VEHICLES AND ANINTEGRATED INFORMATION PROCESSING SYSTEM ARE NOW UNDERDEVELOPMENT.F.  SUPPORT TECHNOLOGIES FOR PUBLIC TRANSPORTATIONAN OPTIMIZED BUS LOCATION SYSTEM IS NOW UNDERDEVELOPMENT.  GOJ IS STUDYING HOW TO CONSTRUCT THEINTELLIGENT TRAFFIC CONTROL SYSTEM WHICH BENEFIT THESAFETY AND EFFICIENCY OF PUBLIC TRANSPORTATIONSG.  INCREASING EFFICIENCY FOR COMMERCIAL VEHICLESAIMING AT CONSTRUCTING A NEW LOGISTIC SYSTEM, GOJ ISTESTING THE DUAL-MODE TRACK WHICH ALLOWS VEHICLES TO DRIVEAUTOMATICALLY ON THE DESIGNATED PART.H.  SUPPORT TECHNOLOGIES FOR PEDESTRIANSA PEDESTRIAN SENSOR SYSTEM IS UNDER DEVELOPMENT FOR AHUMAN-FRIENDLY TRAFFIC SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION.I.  SUPPORT TECHNOLOGIES FOR OPERATION OF EMERGENCYVEHICLESAUTOMATIC ON-VEHICLE ACCIDENT REPORTING SYSTEM FOR QUICKRESPONSE OF EMERGENCY VEHICLES IS NOW BEING STUDIED.MONDALECopyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996FRANCE: EUROPEAN CHILDREN'S WEAR MARKET UPDATEfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in PARISA study has been published by the company  Management HorizonsEurope  on the European children s wear market.  This study tookinto consideration the following factors:  demography, marketsize, spendings, distribution networks, and consumers  taste. Thesurvey reported the following information:Industry analysts predict that between 1995 and 2005, thepercentage of Europe s population represented by children agedunder 14 years will be as follows:                    1995           2000           2005Luxemburg           18.3%          20.9%          20.8%United Kingdom      19.3%          19.9%          19.5%Netherlands         18.4%          19.2%          20.0%France              17.8%          19.2%          18.5%Belgium             18.0%          18.2%          17.9%Switzerland         17.8%          17.9%          17.5%Spain               16.7%          15.3%          15.1%Germany             16.3%          15.5%          14.4%Italy               15.1%          14.1%          13.9%The number of children aged 0 to 14 in Europe is expected toincrease by 1.3% through 2000. However, analysts predict a slightdecrease of 2.3 percent from 2000 to 2005.The population of children aged 0 to 14 years is anticipated togrow from 1995 to 2005 in the following countries:- Netherlands (15.9%)- Luxemburg (11.2%)- United Kingdom (4.2%)- Belgium (1.6%)For the same period, the same population is expected to decreasein the following European countries:- Spain (10%)- Italy (6.6%)- Germany (9.4%)According to market specialists, children aged 2-5 years is theonly share of the population which will certainly increasebetween the years 2000 and 2005.Between 1995 and 2005, the United Kingdom will certainly see anincrease in the number of children aged 6 to 9 years (11.9%), and10 to 14 years (7.1%).1995 sales of children s wear by distribution channel were asfollows:France:- Hyper/supermarkets:    31.0%- Mail-order houses:     11.0%- Specialty stores:      33.0%- Department stores:      3.0%- Popular stores:         3.0%- Independent stores:    13.0%- Others:                 6.0%Germany:- Hyper/supermarkets:     7.0%- Mail-order houses:     11.5%- Specialty stores:      30.5%- Department stores:     12.4%- Popular stores:- Independent stores:    29.4%- Others:                 9.2%United Kingdom:- Hyper/supermarkets:     5.0%- Mail-order houses:      8.0%- Specialty stores:      25.0%- Department stores:      8.0%- Popular stores:        25.0%- Independent stores:    18.0%- Others:                11.0%Italy:- Hyper/supermarkets:     4.8%- Mail-order houses:      0.3%- Specialty stores:      20.9%- Department stores:     11.6%- Popular stores:          -- Independent stores:    53.7%- Others:                 8.7%Spain:- Hyper/supermarkets:    15.8%- Mail order houses:      0.4%- Specialty stores:      20.9%- Department stores:     11.6%- Popular stores:- Independent stores:    53.7%- Others:                 8.7%Considering the above, independent stores lead in terms ofchildren s wear sales only in Italy(53.7%) and Spain (49.8%).  Inthe other European countries, specialty stores andhyper/supermarkets are the two main distribution networks.Specialty stores registered good sales, particularly in theNetherlands (70%) and Belgium (55%), while sales inhyper/supermarkets showed  good results in France (31%), followedby Switzerland (19.1%), and Spain (15.8%).The study reported that the media have a tremendous impact onchildren, particularly in France and The United Kingdom.  Musicand television are influential at an early age, and are thusexcellent means for  promoting products which are specificallydirected towards children.Source: Le Journal du Textile (Textile Newspaper)        No. 1467 dated September 23, 1996.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996FRANCE: PREMIERE VISION TRADE SHOWfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in PARISIMI- Premiere Vision, Apparel Fabrics Trade Show,     Paris October 4 - October 7, 19961. Premiere Vision, the European apparel fabrics trade show tookplace at the exhibition fairgrounds of Paris-Nord Villepinte.  Atotal of 780 European manufacturers representing 14 Europeancountries introduced their collections of fabrics for the Autumn-Winter 1997/1998 season on a surface of 41,000 square meters.Over 43,000 professional visitors attended the show.2. The show remains a strictly European show, and Americancompanies may wish to consider exhibiting through an agent whocarries European fabrics. American companies interested shouldcontact:Premiere VisionLe Britannia "A"20, boulevard Eugene Deruelle69432 Lyon cedex 03Tel: (33 4)72.60.65.00Fax: (33 4)72.60.65.09Dates: March 7-10, 1997 (spring/summer 98)Location: Paris-Nord, VillepinteForeign representation:Klein-Xuereb Associates, Inc.Sophie Xuereb16 East 52nd StreetNew York, NY 10022Tel: (212) 755-7197Fax: (212) 755-77103. Trends:------------------Wool type fabrics:------------------Colors: Red, blue, green, brown.Fibers:  Wool blends with nylon, acetate, polyamide, viscose, orpolyester.  In the top-of-the-range, blends with angora, silk,cupro, raffia or linen.Fabrics:  Crepes and all the weaves based on crepe yarns.Textured micro-weaves:  honeycombs, waffled-looks, cellulars, andoxfords.  Coated wool.  Gabardines and satins.--------------Silky aspects:--------------Colors: Range of browns and beiges: truffle, vanilla, walnut.Fibers: Pure silk or blends with acetate, acetate/viscose,acetate/polyester; wool blends.Fabrics:Velvety: Smooth, iridescent, embroidered velvet.  Importance ofchenille yarns.Jacquards: Jacquards with geometric, floral or vegetationinspiration; fabrics with quilted aspects, reversible, velvety,and tweedy aspects.Semi-transparents with satin stripes, translucent crepes, andorganzas.Patterns:Subtle prints in tone-on-tone with a vegetable or animalinspiration.  Diffused patterns where colors are mixed together.------------------------Color wovens shirtings:------------------------Colors: Greens and browns (camouflage, uniform, truffle,caramel). A range extending to yellows, orange shades, and deepreds (icon, richelieu, honey, rust, imperial).Fibers: 100% cotton. Combed cotton, fine wool blended withcotton; Synthetic and natural fibers in blends: cotton/polyester,cotton/polyamide, viscose, cotton/viscose. Stretch appears in thecomposition of numerous fabrics.Fabrics: True masculine classics: oxfords, poplins, fluidgabardines, and chambrays.Patterns:Dress-shirt: Two-toned mini checks, very neat, narrow tennisstripes, and  club style  stripes, and Prince of Wales checks onfine and fluid grounds; Small windowpane checks, weave effects:Mini herringbones, semi-plains, mini geometric patterns inspiredby the  30s.Outwear: Jacquard checks, blurred blanket checks, wide stripes.-----------Sportswear:-----------Fabrics for waterproof clothing: fine, matt or shiny,transparent, iridescent, pearly coatings.Fabrics for outdoor sports: microfibers, waterproof fabrics,teflon, Scotchgard coatings.Fabrics for fishermen s oilskins: Thick coatings, leatheraspects.Fabrics for high altitude: Gore Tex or other membranes withexterior fabrics, such as Corduroy or ripstop, and polar fleece.Fabrics for skiing: Synthetic waddings and quilted fabrics, polarfleece linings.Fabrics for speed skating: foambacks, ThermaState.----------------------------Lace/embroideries/trimmings:----------------------------Colors: The complete range is present with a predominance ofwarm tones: walnut, vanilla, honey and caramel.Lace:Pure fibers: wool, cotton, rayon, or blends: polyamide/cotton,cotton/acetate, polyamide/viscose, and some blends with stretch.Key points:Matt, shiny, wooly, geometric or floral lace shrunk through theuse of stretch yarns for shirring aspects.Yarns printed tone-on-tone with marbling effectsSubtle touch of gold or colored lurex yarns.Pearl and over embroidered sequin effects.Embroideries: Flowers, feathers.Dots decorate soft grounds: Felt wool, fake fur,velvets, satinsand wadded micro fibers.Trimmings:  Stretch braids in ruffled yarns over embroidered withsequins.  Bouclette or mohair yarns for voluminous fringes.Velvet ribbon braiding blended with shiny yarn or ribbons.Ribbons with sculptured velvet motifs.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996RAPID GROWTH IN VIETNAM'S COMPUTER SERVICES SECTORfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in HANOI1.   THE ESTABLISHMENT OF OVER 2,000 FOREIGN REPRESENTATIVEOFFICES AND 1,400 FOREIGN JOINT-VENTURES/ 100 PERCENTFOREIGN-OWNED BUSINESSES HAS SPURRED A GROWING DEMAND FORCOMPUTER SERVICES IN VIETNAM. CURRENTLY, MANY OF THESE COMPUTERSERVICE FIRMS ARE MOVING FROM SINGLE STATION PERSONAL COMPUTERS(PC'S) TO LOCAL NETWORKING AND/OR WIDE AREA NETWORKS. THE TOTALNUMBER OF PC'S IN VIETNAM HAS GROWN FROM 40,000 IN 1994 TO OVER100,000 THIS YEAR. WITH FEW LOCAL AND FOREIGN PROVIDERS OFCOMPUTER SERVICES, DEMAND IS OUTSTRIPPING SUPPLY.2.   IN 1994, THE VIETNAMESE GOVERNMENT DRAFTED ITS NATIONAL PLANON INFORMATICS TECHNOLOGY (IT 2000 MASTERPLAN). IT 2000 DETAILSTHE COUNTRY'S INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY,DEFINES PRIORITY IT PROJECTS, SETS NATIONAL STANDARDS ANDOUTLINES POLICIES FOR MOBILIZING CAPITAL. OPEN SYSTEMS ARE NOWTHE ADOPTED STANDARD. SINCE THERE IS NO LEGACY SYSTEM OR STANDARDIN VIETNAM, THE MARKET WANTS TO START WITH THE BEST AND MOSTRELIABLE PRODUCTS (MAINLY U.S. MADE).3.   THE MARKET FOR COMPUTER SERVICES IS EXPECTED TO GROW RAPIDLYWITH THE PLANNED COMPUTERIZATION OF STATE-OWNED BANKING, TELECOM,ENERGY AND AVIATION INDUSTRIES. ASSISTING THE GOVERNMENT ARE THEMULTILATERAL DONOR AGENCIES, WHICH ARE EXPECTED TO EXTEND $200MILLION IN CREDITS TO THE GOVERNMENT FOR THE PURCHASE OF COMPUTERSYSTEMS AND SERVICES. AMERICAN PRODUCTS AND SERVICES AREPERCEIVED TO BE ADVANCED TECHNOLOGY WITH SUPERIOR AFTERSALESSERVICE.4.   SERVICES NOW IN GREATEST DEMAND INCLUDE SYSTEMS INTEGRATION,IT TRAINING, NETWORK MANAGEMENT AND IT CONSULTING. DATA CENTERDESIGN, COMPUTER DISASTER RECOVERY CENTERS AND OUT-SOURCING AREPOSSIBILITIES FOR THE FUTURE. IN ADDITION, DOMESTIC SOFTWAREDEVELOPMENT WILL PLAY AN INCREASING ROLE IN VIETNAM'S ITINDUSTRY. CURRENTLY, THERE IS A NEED FOR LEGITIMATE LOCALIZATIONOF MANY INTERNATIONAL SOFTWARE PROGRAMS.ANDERSONCopyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: OIL PRODUCTION AND EXPORTS - PRICE RECORDfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in CARACASTHE AVERAGE VALUE OF VENEZUELA'S OIL EXPORT BASKETHAS BEEN INCREASING STEADILY SINCE THE BEGINNING OF1996.  HOWEVER, FOLLOWING U.S. MILITARY ACTION IN IRAQIN SEPTEMBER 1996 WORLD OIL PRICES SHOT UP DRAMATICALLY,AND VENEZUELA'S OIL BASKET CLOSED AT USDOLS 22.60 PERBARREL ON OCTOBER 15, 1996.  THIS PRICE IS THE HIGHESTSINCE 1990 WHEN IRAQ INVADED KUWAIT.  VENEZUELA HAS BEENEXCEEDING ITS 2.36 MILLION B/D OPEC PRODUCTION QUOTA.MANY ANALYSTS BELIEVE VENEZUELA'S EXPORTS ARE CURRENTLYAVERAGING 3.00 MILION B/D.  VENEZUELA'S OIL EXPORTS AREEXPECTED TO INCREASE EVEN FURTHER DURING THE NEXTSEVERAL YEARS AS MARGINAL FIELDS CONTRACTS, STRATEGICASSOCIATIONS AND EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION AGREEMENTSWITH FOREIGN FIRMS ADD TO PDVSA'S OWN EXPANSION EFFORTS.OIL PRODUCTION AND EXPORTS (THOUSAND B/D)------------------------------------------                                             AVERAGE-                                           EXPORT PRICE-          PRODUCTION(1)       EXPORTS       (USDOLS/BL)1990           2,214            1,881          20.331991           2,493            2,118          15.921992           2,484            2,054          14.911993           2,564            2,170          13.341994           2,723            2,339          13.231995           2,946            2,537          14.711996 (D)JAN            3,053            2,383          15.19FEB            3,065            2,588          15.90MAR            3,093            2,663          17.64APR            3,087            2,724          18.70MAY            3,115            2,758          17.10JUN            3,115            2,758          16.49JUL             N.A.             N.A.          17.55AUG             N.A.             N.A.          18.60SEP             N.A.             N.A.          20.25(D)   PRELIMINARY FIGURES.(1)  CRUDE OIL PRODUCTION FIGURES INCLUDE CONDENSATESAND NATURAL GAS LIQUIDS.SOURCES:  PDVSA, CENTRAL BANK AND VENECONOMY MONTHLY-         (SPECIALIZED MAGAZINE).KEANECopyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: FOREIGN TRADE - NON-OIL EXPORTS UPfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in CARACASNON-OIL EXPORTS INCREASED 32.3 PERCENT DURINGAUGUST 1996 TO USD 430 MILLION IN COMPARISON WITH THEPREVIOUS MONTH.  THIS IS THE SECOND CONSECUTIVE INCREASEWHICH MARKS AN END TO THE DOWNWARD TREND THAT BEGAN INMAY 1996.  HOWEVER, NON-OIL EXPORTS FOR THE PERIODJANUARY-AUGUST OF 1996 ARE STILL LOWER (14.7 PERCENT)THAN THAT REGISTERED DURING THE SAME PERIOD IN 1995.LOWER NON-OIL EXPORTS DURING 1996 CAN BE ATTRIBUTED TOAN OVERVALUED BOLIVAR DURING FIRST QUARTER 1996.FOREIGN TRADE (USDOLS MILLIONS)--------------------------------                                   NON--                                TRADITIONAL                 IMPORTS           EXPORTS1991             10042              26331992             12672              27191993             11271              34221994              8277              44221995             10792              44871996 (I)JAN                625               257FEB                467               337MAR                655               324APR                845               345MAY                898               341JUN                902               302JUL                978               325AUG               N.A.               430(I)  PRELIMINARY FIGURESSOURCES:  GOV CENTRAL STATISTICAL OFFICE (PRESS-         RELEASE), AND VENECONOMY (SPECIALIZED-         MAGAZINE).Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: MARKET EXCHANGE RATE - APPRECIATION OF THEBOLIVARfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in CARACASTHE BOLIVAR BEGAN TO APPRECIATE IN MID-SEPTEMBERBECAUSE OF THE UNEXPECTED ENTRANCE OF FOREIGN CAPITALATTRACTED BY INCREASED CONFIDENCE IN THE VENEZUELANECONOMY.  THE BOLIVAR'S EXCHANGE RATE CLOSED AT BS.473.00 PER DOLLAR AT THE END OF SEPTEMBER, REPRESENTINGAN APRECIATION OF 0.7 PERCENT COMPARED TO THE END OF THEPREVIOUS MONTH.  THIS APPRECIATION CONTINUED INTO EARLYOCTOBER, REACHING A PEAK OF BS. 465.25 PER DOLLAR ONOCTOBER 2.  HOWEVER, THE AVERAGE FOREIGN EXCHANGE RATEFOR SEPTEMBER (BS. 475.84 PER DOLLAR) WAS 0.3 PERCENTHIGHER THAN THAT OF THE PREVIOUS MONTH (BS. 474.60 PERDOLLAR).AVERAGE FREE-MARKET EXCHANGE RATES----------------------------------A.  ANNUAL, QUARTERLY, AND MONTHLY EXCHANGE RATES (SELL    RATE) (BS/USDOLS)-                           AVERAGE                            -------JUN-DEC, 1995               270.27JUL-SEP, 1995               235.12OCT-DEC, 1995               314.57JAN-MAR, 1996               434.98APR-JUN, 1996               470.27JUL-SEP, 1996               473.761996JAN                         369.79FEB                         433.66MAR                         501.48APR                         470.26MAY                         469.32JUN                         471.22JUL                         470.83AUG                         474.60SEP                         475.84SOURCES:  VENECONOMY, AND EMBASSY ESTIMATESB.  DAILY EXCHANGE RATES (BUY/SELL)1996AUGUST-  02            474.75/476.00-  03            475.25/476.50-  04            475.25/476.50-  05            475.25/476.50-  06            475.25/477.00-  09            475.75/477.00-  10            475.75/477.00-  11            475.75/477.00-  12            475.50/476.75-  13            475.35/476.60-  16            475.35/476.60-  17            475.50/476.75-  18            474.75/476.00-  19            474.00/475.25-  20            474.25/475.50-  23            474.35/475.60-  24            474.45/475.70-  25            473.85/475.10-  26            472.00/473.25-  27            471.75/473.00-  30            471.75/473.00SOURCE:  EL UNIVERSAL DAILYCopyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: BRADY BOND TRANSACTIONS - CHANGE IN DOWNWARDTRENDfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in CARACASBRADY BOND TRADING INCREASED 31.3 PERCENT INSEPTEMBER, THE FIRST MONTHLY RISE SINCE THE LIFTING OFEXCHANGE CONTROLS AND DEPRECIATION OF THE BOLIVAR INAPRIL.  VENEZUELAN BRADY BOND PRICES HAVE BEENINCREASING BECAUSE OF THE GOV'S SUCCESSFULIMPLEMENTATION OF THE AGENDA VENEZUELA AND THE RESULTINGIMPROVEMENT IN VENEZUELA'S INTERNATIONAL IMAGE.WINDFALL OIL PROFITS, RISING FOREIGN EXCHANGE RESERVESAND THE GOV'S ANNOUNCED INTENTION TO USE THESE RESERVESTO REDUCE FOREIGN DEBT (PRIMARILY BRADY BONDS) HAVE ALSOINCREASED INVESTOR'S EXPECTATIONS THAT THE BRADY BONDSWILL BE REPAID.  THIS TREND IS EXPECTED TO CONTINUE INCOMING MONTHS CONTRIBUTING TO AN INCREASE IN BOTH THEVOLUME AND PRICE OF BRADY BOND TRADING.BRADY BOND TRANSACTIONS (BS. BILLIONS)---------------------------------------                CARACAS    ELECTRONIC-                STOCK      STOCK-                EXCHANGE   EXCHANGE       TOTAL1996JAN               176.1       17.1         193.2FEB                53.1        9.3          62.4MAR               161.5       10.8         172.3APR                83.0        4.0          87.0MAY                40.4        9.4          49.8JUN                39.1        1.4          40.5JUL                28.3        0.9          29.2AUG                18.4        6.5          24.9SEP                28.2        4.5          32.7TOTAL             628.1       63.9         692.0SOURCES:  CARACAS STOCK EXCHANGE, ELECTRONIC STOCK-         EXCHANGE, AND EL UNIVERSAL DAILY.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: CARACAS STOCK EXCHANGE CAPITALIZATION INDEX -RECORD HIGHfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in CARACASTHE CARACAS STOCK EXCHANGE CAPITALIZATION INDEXCLOSED AT 5,481.90, INCREASING 19.1 PERCENT COMPARED TOTHE END OF THE PREVIOUS MONTH.  THE INDEX INCREASED TORECORD HIGHS IN ELEVEN STRAIGHT DAILY SESSIONS BEGINNINGSEPTEMBER 20.  KEY FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO THE RECORDHIGHS ARE LOW DOMESTIC INTEREST RATES AND POSITIVEEXPECTATIONS OF THE GOV'S PRIVATIZATION PROGRAM WHICHHAVE ENCOURAGED INVESTORS TO BUY STOCKS IN ANTICIPATIONOF RISING INVESTMENT IN THE CARACAS STOCK MARKET.AVERAGE STOCK PRICES HAVE INCREASED MORE THAN THREETIMES SINCE SEPTEMBER 1995.  STOCK PRICES ARE EXPECTEDTO CONTINUE TO RISE, ALBEIT AT A SLOWER PACE, IN FUTUREMONTHS AS THE ECONOMY BEGINS TO RECOVER FROM THE CURRENTRECESSION.CARACAS STOCK EXCHANGE CAPITALIZATION INDEX(DECEMBER 1993 = 1,000)-------------------------------------------                    1994      1995      1996JANUARY           1,009.01  1,264.79  2,047.61FEBRUARY          1,315.74  1,247.34  2,722.16MARCH             1,262.63  1,228.71  3,358.07APRIL             1,043.27  1,223.77  3,787.15MAY               1,314.43  1,215.42  4,451.55JUNE              1,294.12  1,211.80  4,361.43JULY              1,203.61  1,210.08  4,185.72AUGUST            1,428.30  1,230.39  4,601.13SEPTEMBER         1,497.52  1,222.44  5,481.90OCTOBER           1,448.70  1,601.59NOVEMBER          1,199.43  1,804.99DECEMBER          1,348.83  2,019.39SOURCES:  CARACAS STOCK EXCHANGE, AND EL UNIVERSAL DAILYCopyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: MONETARY STABILIZATION INSTRUMENTS - RATESCONTINUE DOWNfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in CARACASDURING ITS WEEKLY AUCTIONS IN SEPTEMBER, THE CENTRALBANK PLACED BS. 188.8 BILLION (USD 249.7 MILLION) IN180, 269, AND 358-DAY MONETARY STABILIZATION INSTRUMENTS(TEMS), AT CLOSING NOMINAL INTEREST RATES OF 30.7, 31.8,AND 33.0, RESPECTIVELY.  THE EFFECTIVE RATES ARE 29.3,33.6, AND 35.5, RESPECTIVELY.  EFFECTIVE INTEREST RATESON TEMS DECREASED FOLLOWING THE END OF EXCHANGE CONTROLSIN APRIL 1996 UNTIL MID-AUGUST 1996 WHEN INTEREST RATESBEGAN TO RISE.  EFFECTIVE INTEREST RATES ON TEMSDECREASED ONCE AGAIN FROM MID-SEPTEMBER UNTILMID-OCTOBER.  ACCORDING TO VENECONOMY (A PRIVATECONSULTING FIRM), THE CENTRAL BANK IS SEEKING A TEMINTEREST RATE LEVEL WHICH IS LOW ENOUGH TO DISCOURAGEHOT MONEY FROM COMING INTO THE COUNTRY AND HIGH ENOUGHTO DISCOURAGE DOMESTIC INVESTORS FROM MOVING FUNDS OUT.MONETARY STABILIZATION INSTRUMENTS (BS MILLIONS)------------------------------------------------                                ANNUAL              AMOUNT   PRICE    INTEREST              PLACED   PERCENT  RATE         MATURITY                                (NOMINAL/                                 EFFECTIVE)19964 SEPTEMBER   30000     99.42    32.8/34.1   03-06-97               1000     97.87    34.1/37.7   06-05-97               1860     97.58    35.4/38.8   09-04-9711 SEPTEMBER  10000    102.71    34.1/27.9   03-13-97               5000    101.89    35.5/32.4   06-12-97               5000    101.58    37.0/34.9   09-11-97               5906     96.18    28.9/35.3   06-19-97              10000     94.26    29.9/37.8   09-18-9725 SEPTEMBER  60000    100.58    30.7/29.3   03-20-97              15000     98.92    31.8/33.6   06-19-97              15000     98.19    33.0/35.5   09-18-97Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: MONEY SUPPLY/M2 - EXPANDS SLOWLYfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in CARACASTHE MONEY SUPPLY HAS INCREASED 21.5 PERCENT SINCEDECEMBER 1995.  THESE INCREASES ARE THE RESULT OFWINDFALL OIL PROFITS THAT HAVE NOT BEEN COMPLETELYSTERILIZED AND THE INFLUX OF DOLLLARS INTO THE CARACASSTOCK EXCHANGE.  IN ADDITION, MOST CONSUMERS STILLPREFER TO HAVE FUNDS AVAILABLE IN CHECKING ACCOUNTS ANDSAVINGS DEPOSITS TO PURCHASE GOODS AND SERVICES FORWHICH PRICES INCREASE RAPIDLY.  INCREASES IN THE MONEYSUPPLY PUT ADDITIONAL DOWNWARD PRESSURE ON INTERESTRATES THAT ARE ALREADY NEGATIVE IN REAL TERMS.  PLANS TOCHANNEL ADDITIONAL OIL REVENUES TO EXTERNAL DEBTPAYMENTS WILL HELP THE GOV MODERATE INCREASES IN THEMONEY SUPPLY AND THE RATE OF INFLATION.MONEY SUPPLY/M2-               M2           PCT CHANGE-                            OVER PREVIOUS-                            PERIODEND OF:1989          463816             38.71990          746477             60.91991         1116103             49.51992         1321261             18.41993         1660677             25.71994         2570250             54.81995         3548277             38.11996 (H)JAN           3565672             0.5FEB           3732050             4.7MAR           3833117             2.7APR           3691552            (3.7)MAY           3871964             4.9JUN           4068959             5.1JUL           4303222             5.8AUG           4296082            (0.2)(H)  PRELIMINARY FIGURESSOURCE:  CENTRAL BANK OF VENEZUELA.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: CURRENT INTEREST RATES - NEGATIVE RATES CONTINUEfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in CARACASINTEREST RATES IN GENERAL INCREASED SLIGHTLY DURINGTHE MONTH, ALTHOUGH THE MARGIN BETWEEN THE AVERAGELENDING RATE (34.68 PERCENT) AND THE AVERAGE CD RATE(20.95 PERCENT) FOR COMMERCIAL BANKS DECREASED.INTEREST RATES HAVE BEEN DECREASING IN GENERAL TERMSSINCE THE END OF APRIL.  EXCESS LIQUIDITY IN THEFINANCIAL SYSTEM HAS BEEN PUSHING INTEREST RATES DOWN,WHICH ARE ALREADY NEGATIVE IN REAL TERMS.CURRENT INTEREST RATES (AS OF SEPTEMBER 20)-------------------------------------------                               AVERAGECOMMERCIAL BANKS-   ASSETS                     34.66-      LOANS                   34.68-      AGRICULTURAL LOANS      26.78-   LIABILITIES                20.95       SAVING ACCOUNTS         15.56-      CD'S                    20.95MORTGAGE BANKS-   ASSETS                     43.09-      MORTGAGE LOANS          43.09-   LIABILITIES                20.98-      SAVINGS ACCOUNTS        12.96-      CD'S                    19.73-      SAVINGS CERTIFICATES    21.12INVESTMENT BANKS-   ASSETS                     34.75-      MORTGAGE LOANS          37.94-      NON-MORTGAGE LOANS      34.75-LIABILITIES                   17.66       CD'S                    18.27-      SAVINGS CERTIFICATES    16.64-BCV MONETARY STABILIZATION- INSTRUMENTS (180-DAY RATE)   27.93SOURCE:  CENTRAL BANK OF VENEZUELA (WEEKLY BULLETIN).Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: CONSUMER PRICE INDEX - STUBBORN, BUT ON THEDECLINEfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in CARACASTHE CONSUMER PRICE INDEX FOR THE CARACAS METROPOLITANAREA INCREASED 3.6 PERCENT IN SEPTEMBER, WHICH IS LOWERTHAN THE INCREASE REGISTERED THE MONTH BEFORE (4.1PERCENT).   THIS IS THE FOURTH CONSECUTIVE MONTHLY DECLINEAND SUPPORTS THE GOV'S CLAIM THAT INFLATION IS ON ADOWNWARD TREND TOWARDS A TARGET MONTHLY INFLATION RATE OF1.5 TO 2 PERCENT.  THE INCREASE FROM SEPTEMBER 1995 TOSEPTEMBER 1996 WAS 115.2 PERCENT, WHICH IS THE HIGHESTANNUAL INFLATION INCREASE EVER RECORDED FOR VENEZUELA.THIS RECORD 12-MONTH ANNUAL INFLATION FIGURE IS EXPECTEDTO DECLINE DURING COMING MONTHS AS MONTHLY INFLATIONCONTINUES TO DECLINE.  INFLATIONARY EXPECTATIONS DECLINEDIN PART DUE TO POSITIVE MACROECONOMIC INDICATORS RELEASEDDURING SEPTEMBER.  AMONG THESE FAVORABLE INDICATORS AREWINDFALL OIL PROFITS, RECORD INTERNATIONAL RESERVES, ARISING CARACAS STOCK EXCHANGE INDEX, A SUCCESSFUL GOV BONDISSUE IN THE GERMAN FINANCIAL MARKET, AND THE APPRECIATIONOF THE BOLIVAR AGAINST THE DOLLAR.CONSUMER PRICE INDEX (1984=100)--------------------------------                   AVERAGE      PCT CHANGE1989                380.2            84.51990                534.8            40.71991                717.7            34.21992                943.3            31.41993              1,302.9            38.11994              2,095.2            60.81995              3,350.8            59.91996 (C)JAN               4,523.8             8.1FEB               4,884.5             8.0MAR               5,186.0             6.2APR               5,629.5             8.6MAY               6,338.3            12.6JUN               6,790.0             7.1JUL               7,128.5             5.0AUG               7,421.9             4.1SEP               7,688.1             3.6-   SEP 96/ DEC 95                   83.7-   SEP 96/ SEP 95                  115.2-   SEP 95/ SEP 94                   51.8(C)  PRELIMINARY FIGURESSOURCES:  CENTRAL BANK OF VENEZUELA, AND EMBASSY-         ESTIMATES.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: INT'L RESERVES - SURPASS 1996 GOALSfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in CARACASINTERNATIONAL RESERVES ROSE FOR THE FIFTH CONSECUTIVEMONTH IN SEPTEMBER.  THIS MONTH THE INCREASE WAS PRIMARILYDUE TO HIGHER OIL EARNINGS, STEMMING FROM IMPROVED PRICESAND EXPORT VOLUME.  THE PLACEMENT OF THE GOV'S DEUTSH MARKBOND ISSUE FOR AROUND USD 420 MILLION ALSO CONTRIBUTED TOTHIS INCREASE.  THE UNEXPECTED INCREASE IN RESERVES LEDTHE GOV TO FOREGO THE SECOND USD 500 MILLION TRANCHE FROMITS IMF STAND-BY PROGRAM AND TO CONSIDER CANCELLING PLANSFOR USD 450 MILLION IN IDB AND WORLD BANK LOANS TO FINANCEFAST-DISBURSING SOCIAL SAFETY-NET PROGRAMS (USD 300MILLION WITH THE IDB AND USD 150 MILLION WITH THE WORLDBANK) DURING THE WEEK OF OCTOBER 7.INTERNATIONAL RESERVES (USDOLS MILLIONS)----------------------------------------1989 DEC             7,5461990 DEC            11,7591991 DEC            14,1051992 DEC            13,0011993 DEC            12,6561994 DEC            11,5071995 DEC             9,7231996 (B)JAN                 10,116FEB                 10,281MAR                  9,983APR                  9,785MAY                 10,122JUN                 10,708JUL                 11,818AUG                 12,093SEP                 12,711(B)  PRELIMINARY FIGURESSOURCES:  CENTRAL BANK OF VENEZUELA, VENECONOMY-         (SPECIALIZED MAGAZINE), AND EMBASSY ESTIMATES.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: FOREIGN EXCHANGE TRANSACTIONS - INFLOWS UPfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in CARACASFOREIGN EXCHANGE INFLOWS EXCEEDED OUTFLOWS BY USD 618MILLION IN SEPTEMBER.  THIS IS DUE TO HIGHER INCOME FROMPETROLEUM EXPORTS AND THE PROCEEDS FROM THE GOV'S DEUTSCHMARK BOND ISSUE (AROUND USD 420 MILLION) PLACED IN GERMANYAT THE END OF SEPTEMBER.FOREIGN EXCHANGE TRANSACTIONS (USDOL MILLIONS)--------------------------------------------------                            1ST    2ND    3RD    SEP                     1995  QT/96  QT/96  QT/96   1996INFLOWS             14793   4105   4221   5317   1931  - OF WHICH- PDVSA (A1)        10556   2954   3366   3538   1288- FIV (A2)             45     15     15     15      5- CENTRAL BANK        268     54     54     74     38- OTHER              3924   1082    786   1690    600OUTFLOWS            16643   3861   3513   3326   1313    OF WHICH- BANKS              9584   1946   2050   2280    950- PUBLIC SECTOR (A3) 2250    510    470    670    340- 0THER              4809   1405    993    376     23NET CHANGE RESERVES (1784)   260    725   2003    618TOTAL RESERVES       9723   9983  10708  12711  12711(A1) PETROLEOS DE VENEZUELA, S.A., NET INFLOWS (THAT IS,INFLOWS MINUS OUTFLOWS); (A2) FONDO DE INVERSIONES DEVENEZUELA; (A3) INCLUDES PUBLIC EXTERNAL DEBT SERVICE.NOTE: '96 FIGURES ARE PRELIMINARY AND PERIODICALLY REVISED.SOURCES:  VENECONOMY MONTHLY (SPECIALIZED MAGAZINE),-         CENTRAL BANK OF VENEZUELA, AND EMBASSY ESTIMATES.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VENEZUELA-MACROECONOMICS: SUMMARYfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in CARACASMACROECONOMIC INDICATORS FOR SEPTEMBER PAINT APOSITIVE PICTURE OF THE ECONOMY.  AMONG THESE FAVORABLEINDICATORS ARE WINDFALL OIL PROFITS, RECORD INTERNATIONALRESERVES, A RISING CARACAS STOCK EXCHANGE INDEX, ASUCCESSFUL GOV BOND ISSUE IN THE GERMAN FINANCIAL MARKET,AND A CONTINUING DECLINE IN THE INFLATION RATE.VENEZUELA'S AVERAGE OIL EXPORT BASKET HAS INCREASEDSTEADILY SINCE JANUARY, CLOSING AT USD 22.60 PER BARREL ONOCTOBER 15, THE HIGHEST PRICE SINCE 1990.  AS A RESULT,INTERNATIONAL RESERVES REACHED A NEW RECORD BY THE END OFSEPTEMBER (USD 12,711 MILLION).  THE GOV HAS REITERATEDITS PLANS TO USE EXCESS OIL PROFITS TO PAY DEBT, ASTRATEGY AIMED AT MANAGING THE ADDITIONAL OIL INCOME ANDAVOIDING THE MONETIZATION OF THE WINDFALL WHICH WOULD FUELINFLATION AND PLACE PRESSURE ON THE CURRENCY (THEBOLIVAR).  RECORD HIGHS ON THE CARACAS STOCK EXCHANGECAPITALIZATION INDEX WERE DUE TO LOW DOMESTIC INTERESTRATES AND POSITIVE EXPECTATIONS OF THE GOV'S PRIVATIZATIONPROGRAM.  FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN LOCAL EQUITIES LED TO ASLIGHT APPRECIATION OF THE BOLIVAR AGAINST THE DOLLAR.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996AUSTRALIA: VETERINARY CONFERENCE AND EXHIBITIONfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN CONSULATE in MELBOURNEThe Australian Veterinary Association Ltd. (AVA) will hold theAnnual Conference and industry exhibit at the Brisbane ConventionCentre May 4-9, 1997.  This Conference will draw on veterinariansthroughout Australia and overseas to provide a comprehensive andinformative meeting of the profession.The scientific program has great appeal for veterinarians in allareas of activity.  Exhibitor booths and sponsorshipopportunities are available to industry.U.S. firms interested in receiving further details on the AVAConference and trade exhibition should contact:Doreen CulliverAustralian Veterinary Association Conference Organising Service(AVACOS)7 Phipps PlaceDeakin, ACT 2600AustraliaPhone: 61-6-285-3600Fax:   61-6-285-3913Email: avacos@ava.com.auCopyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VIETNAM ESTABLISHES 2ND NAT'L TELECOM COMPANYfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in HANOI1.   IN JULY 1996, THE VIETNAMESE GOVERNMENT LAUNCHED THE SECONDNATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMPANY BY FORMING THE SAIGON POSTALCORPORATION (FORMERLY KNOWN AS THE SAIGON POST ANDTELECOMMUNICATIONS JOINT-STOCK CORPORATION). THE SAIGON POSTALCORPORATION (SPC) WILL COMPETE WITH THE PREVIOUS GOVERNMENTMONOPOLY, VIETNAM POST AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS CORPORATION (VNPT).THE COMPANY WAS ORGANIZED AS A JOINT-STOCK COMPANY WITH ELEVENSHAREHOLDERS, INCLUDING VNPT AND THE BEN THANH TOURIST SERVICECOMPANY, EACH OWNING APPROXIMATELY 20 PERCENT. OTHER SHAREHOLDERSINCLUDE THE MINISTRIES OF INTERIOR AND DEFENSE. THE COMPANY FALLSUNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE HO CHI MINH CITY PEOPLES COMMITTEE.SPC IS ESTABLISHED AS A COMPLETELY SEPARATE ENTITY FROM THEEXISTING HO CHI MINH CITY POSTS & TELECOM COMPANY.2.   SPC, WHILE INITIALLY FOCUSING ON PROVIDING POST AND TELECOMSERVICES TO THE SOUTHERN REGION, WILL BE INVOLVED EVENTUALLY INTELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES PROJECTS THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY. INORDER TO PROVIDE WIDER TELEPHONE ACCESS TO SOUTHERN PROVINCES,SPC WILL EXPAND WIRELESS TELEPHONE SERVICES AND MOBILE PHONENETWORKS IN THE ECONOMICALLY KEY MEKONG DELTA PROVINCES, SUCH ASTAY NINH, DONG NAI AND VUNG TAU.3.   THE NEW CORPORATION WILL ALSO BE RESPONSIBLE FOR UPGRADINGTHE TELECOM NETWORKS WHICH CONNECT THE SOUTHERN SONG BE AND TAYNINH PROVINCES TO QUANG NAM - DANANG PROVINCE, IN THE CENTRALREGION AND QUANG NINH PROVINCE IN THE NORTH.  SPC'S COMBINEDEXPANSION PLANS INCLUDE  INSTALLING 150,000 TO 200,00 FIXEDTELEPHONE LINES AND EXPANDING SATELLITE UPLINKS.4.   ADDITIONAL SPC PLANS INCLUDE ESTABLISHING OF A FOREIGNJOINT-VENTURE FACTORY TO PRODUCT TELEPHONY EQUIPMENT AND DEVELOPA 100 - ACRE HIGH-TECH INDUSTRIAL PARK. THIS PARK WILL BE LOCATEDIN THE THU DUC AREA, NEAR HO CHI MINH CITY AND WILL TARGETTELECOM, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND OTHER ELECTRONICS COMPANIES.5.   A THIRD NATIONAL COMPETITOR MAY ENTER THE TELECOM SERVICESSECTOR SOON. THE GOVERNMENT HAS APPROVED THE FORMATION OF THEMILITARY ELECTRONICS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMPANY (VIETEL),OWNED BY THE PEOPLES ARMY OF VIETNAM. GUIDELINES FOR VIETEL HAVEYET TO BE ANNOUNCED, BUT EXPERTS BELIEVE THAT THE COMPANY WILL BEIN FULL OPERATION BY LATE 1997. IT IS EXPECTED THAT VIETEL WILLPROVIDE VALUE-ADDED SERVICES TO THE EXISTING NATIONAL NETWORK,POSSIBLY CONCENTRATING ON WIRELESS SYSTEMS ALONG THE DENSELYPOPULATED COAST.6.    VIETEL FORMERLY KNOWN AS SIGELCO, IS ALREADY OPERATING AS AMANUFACTURER, UNDER A LICENSE ISSUED IN NOVEMBER 1995. IT HASFORMED A FOREIGN  JOINT-VENTURE FACTORY TO PRODUCE TELEPHONEEQUIPMENT AND ELECTRONICS FOR DOMESTIC SALE AND EXPORT. THE $20MILLION PROJECT (VIETEL TECHNOLOGIES, LIMITED) WAS FUNDED BYGOLDMAN SACHS (USA), NIKKO SECURITIES (JAPAN) AND A THAIINVESTMENT GROUP. THE LOCAL PARTNERS CONSIST OF VIETEL AND THEARMY'S M1 COMMUNICATIONS FACTORY. THE JOINT-VENTURE  IS OWNED 70PERCENT BY THE FOREIGN PARTNERS AND  30 PERCENT BY THE VIETNAMESEENTITIES.ANDERSONCopyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VIETNAM ISSUES 1ST LICENSE FOR TRANSPORTATION & DELIVERY SERVICES TOFOREIGN DISTRIBUTION FIRMfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in HANOI1.   ON MARCH 12, 1996, THE MINISTRY OF PLANNING AND INVESTMENTOF VIETNAM (MPI)ISSUED THE FIRST LICENSE ALLOWING A FOREIGNJOINT-VENTURE COMPANY TO TRANSPORT, DELIVER AND WAREHOUSE GOODSIN VIETNAM TO TAIT (ASIA) LTD., A HONG KONG-BASED COMPANY AND ITSLOCAL PARTNER, THIEN CANG COMPANY, LTD., A PRIVATE VIETNAMESEFIRM. THE LICENSE PROVIDES FOR A CAPITAL INVESTMENT OF $2.5MILLION, SPLIT 50/50 BETWEEN THE PARTNERS, AND ALLOWS THE VENTURETO OPERATE FOR TEN YEARS. PRIOR TO THE ISSUANCE OF THIS LICENSE,ONLY FOREIGN COMPANIES WITH MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS IN VIETNAMWERE ALLOWED TO TRANSPORT, DELIVER AND MARKET PRODUCTS THAT THEYMANUFACTURED THEMSELVES. FOREIGN FIRMS ARE STILL PROHIBITED FROMDISTRIBUTING THEIR PRODUCTS IN-COUNTRY.2.   THE INABILITY TO DISTRIBUTE THEIR OWN PRODUCTS IN THEVIETNAMESE MARKET HAS FRUSTRATED FOREIGN BUSINESSES. THEDISTRIBUTION SYSTEM IN VIETNAM CONSISTS OF A FRAGMENTED,DISORGANIZED NETWORK OF STATE-OWNED AND PRIVATE IMPORT-EXPORTCOMPANIES, STATE-OWNED AND PRIVATE WHOLESALERS, INDEPENDENTAGENTS/DISTRIBUTORS, AND RETAIL OUTLETS LIMITED TO SMALLFAMILY-RUN AND STATE-OWNED STORES.  UNTIL MARCH 12, FOREIGN FIRMSWERE NOT PERMITTED TO MANAGE AND CONTROL DISTRIBUTION, THAT IS,TRANSPORTATION, DELIVERY, WAREHOUSING, INVOICING AND MARKETING.3.   UNDER VIETNAMESE LAW, THE IMPORTER ACTS AS THE CONSIGNEE ANDHOLDS TITLE TO THE IMPORTED GOODS.  THE TRADE MINISTRY MUST ISSUEAN IMPORT LICENSE FOR EACH SHIPMENT, WHICH IS SUBJECT TO QUOTARESTRICTIONS FOR CERTAIN CATEGORIES. AS A MATTER OF POLICY,FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN PROJECTS SOLELY FOR TRADING ANDDISTRIBUTION IS NOT ENCOURAGED, AS THESE COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIESARE RESERVED FOR LOCAL COMPANIES.4.   MANY FOREIGN DISTRIBUTORS HOPE THAT THE TAIT LICENSE IS ASTEP IN THE DIRECTION OF CREATING A LESS RESTRICTIVE TRADINGREGIME IN VIETNAM. THE LICENSE PERMITS THE JOINT-VENTURE TO LEASEWAREHOUSE SPACE, PURCHASE AND OPERATE DELIVERY VEHICLES, DELIVERMERCHANDISE AND PROVIDE MARKETING CONSULTANCY SERVICES.UNFORTUNATELY,  THE LICENSE DOES NOT ALLOW THE JOINT-VENTURE TOOWN THE GOODS BEING DELIVERED. ANY GOODS IMPORTED MUST BECONSIGNED TO A LEGALLY AUTHORIZED VIETNAMESE PARTY OUTSIDE OF THEJOINT-VENTURE. IN ADDITION, THE JOINT-VENTURE DOES NOT HAVE THERIGHT TO COLLECT THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE.  MPI IS STILLCONSIDERING WHETHER TO ALLOW THE JOINT-VENTURE TO INVOICEDIRECTLY AND COLLECT REVENUES. IF THIS OCCURS, THEN THE LICENSEWILL MORE CLOSELY REPRESENT A TRUE COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTIONLICENSE.5.   WHILE INDUSTRY EXPERTS ARE CAUTIOUS IN DRAWING ANYCONCLUSION THAT THIS IS A IRREVOCABLE COMMITMENT TO THEINDUSTRY'S IMMINENT FURTHER DEREGULATION, IT IS NONETHELESS ASTEP IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION AND GIVES FOREIGN DISTRIBUTIONCOMPANIES HOPE FOR IMPROVED ACCESS TO THE VIETNAMESE MARKET.ANDERSONCopyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996GUATEMALA PASSES ELECTRICITY LAWfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in GUATEMALA CITY1.  SUMMARY: THE GUATEMALAN CONGRESS ON OCTOBER 16 PASSEDLANDMARK LEGISLATION TO RESTRUCTURE THE ELECTRICITY MARKET.THIS KEY LAW OPENS AND DEMONOPOLIZES THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR TOMAKE IT ATTRACTIVE TO THE PRIVATE INVESTMENT THAT IS CRITICALTO MEETING PRESENT AND FUTURE ELECTRICITY GENERATION NEEDS INTHE COUNTRY.  THE LAW DOES NOT PROVIDE FOR THE AUTONOMOUSRATE-SETTING ENTITY THAT THE GOVERNMENT WANTED, DUE TO ITSINABILITY TO SECURE A TWO-THIRDS MAJORITY IN THE CONGRESS TOCREATE THE INDEPENDENT ENTITY.  NONETHELESS, THE LOCAL IDBREPRESENTATIVE BELIEVES THE LEGISLATION, AS PASSED, WILLSATISFY THE RELEVANT CONDITION IN THE IDB INVESTMENT SECTORLOAN NOW BEING NEGOTIATED.  HOWEVER, FAILURE TO GAIN A LARGERMAJORITY ON THIS BILL DOES NOT BODE WELL FOR THE CREATION OFOTHER NEW GOVERNMENT ENTITIES.  END SUMMARY2.  FOLLOWING SEVERAL MONTHS OF DEBATE AND THE INCORPORATION OFKEY AMENDMENTS, THE GUATEMALAN CONGRESS ON OCTOBER 16 PASSEDITS ELECTRICITY SECTOR MODERNIZATION AND DEMONOPOLIZATION LAWBY A 49-23 MARGIN.  THE LAW IS BASED ON THE DRAFT LEGISLATIONDEVELOPED SEVERAL YEARS AGO THROUGH A USAID-FUNDED GRANT.  THEPAN MAJORITY WAS JOINED BY SEVEN MEMBERS OF MINORITY PARTIES,WHILE THE FRG AND FDNG PARTIES VOTED AS A BLOC IN OPPOSITION TOTHE GOVERNMENT PROPOSAL.3.  THE NEW LAW WILL "DEMONOPOLIZE" THE POWER SECTOR ANDINCORPORATE MOST OF THE FEATURES OF THE GOVERNMENT'S ORIGINALPROPOSAL, I.E., UNBUNDLING OF PRODUCTION, TRANSMISSION, ANDDISTRIBUTION ACTIVITIES; LIBERALIZED ENTRY TO THE POWERINDUSTRY; AND UNRESTRICTED ACCESS TO THE TRANSMISSION SYSTEM BYPRODUCERS, DISTRIBUTORS, AND WHOLESALE CONSUMERS.  THE NOTABLESHORTCOMING OF THE LAW IS THAT THE RATE-SETTING COMMISSION WILLBE SUBORDINATE TO THE MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINES, RATHER THANAUTONOMOUS, AS INITIALLY PROPOSED.  ESTABLISHMENT OF THEAUTONOMOUS ENTITY REQUIRED A 2/3 MAJORITY IN THE CONGRESS,WHICH THE PAN MAJORITY WAS NOT ABLE TO MUSTER, AFTER A NUMBEROF ATTEMPTS.4.  AS ORIGINALLY DRAFTED BY A USAID CONTRACTOR AND APPROVED BYTHE ENERGY COMMITTEE OF THE GUATEMALAN CONGRESS WITH THE STRONGSUPPORT OF THE ENERGY MINISTER, THE RATE-SETTING COMMISSION WASTO BE AN AUTONOMOUS ENTITY WITH THE AUTHORITY TO SET TARIFFSSUFFICIENT TO PERMIT PRODUCERS AND DISTRIBUTORS TO BOTH RECOVERCOSTS AND PROVIDE ECONOMIC INCENTIVES TO EXPAND THE PRODUCTIONAND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS.  UNDER THE APPROVED LEGISLATION THECOMMISSION WILL FUNCTION AS INDICATED ABOVE, BUT UNDER THEAUTHORITY OF THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINES.  IT IS OURUNDERSTANDING THAT THE GOVERNEMENT WILL ALLOW THE COMMISSION TOOPERATE WITHOUT THE INTERFERENCE OF THE MINISTER AND WILL SEEKTO CHANGE THE STATUS OF THE COMMISSION AT A LATER DATE.  THESTATE-OWNED POWER PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES ARE NOWLOSING AS MUCH AS USD 140 MILLION PER YEAR AND ONLY ABOUT 30PERCENT OF GUATEMALAN HOUSEHOLDS HAVE ACCESS TO ELECTRICITYSERVICE.  THOUGH GUATEMALA'S STATE-OWNED ELECTRICITY PRODUCINGAND DISTRIBUTION COMPANIES ON OCTOBER 15 INDEPENDENTLYINTRODUCED RATE INCREASES OF AS MUCH AS 50 PERCENT, AGUATEMALAN COURT, ONCE AGAIN, HAS ISSUED A PROVISIONALINJUNCTION SUSPENDING IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NEW RATES.5.  COMMENT: PASSAGE OF THIS LEGISLATION, WITH OR WITHOUT THEINDEPENDENT RATE SETTING ENTITY, IS A KEY STEP IN ATTRACTINGTHE PRIVATE INVESTMENT CAPITAL THAT IS CRITICAL TO MEETING THEPRESENT AND FUTURE ENERGY NEEDS OF GUATEMALA.  THE FAILURE OFTHE PAN TO MARSHAL THE 54 VOTES NEEDED TO SET UP AN INDEPENDENTREGULATORY ENTITY HAD MUCH LESS TO DO WITH COMPETING VISIONS OFTHE FUTURE OF GUATEMALA'S ELECTRIC POWER INDUSTRY THAN WITH THEEXERCISE OF POLITICAL POWER.  THE FRG, WHICH HAS 20 VOTES INTHE CONGRESS, HAS LONG SUPPORTED REFORM OF THE ELECTRICITYSECTOR AND HAD GIVEN WRITTEN ASSURANCES IT WOULD SUPPORT THEINDEPENDENT COMMISSION.  NEVERTHELESS, THE VIGOROUS DEBATE OFTHIS ISSUE -- LITERALLY REACHING THE POINT OF PHYSICAL BLOWS --IS A REMINDER TO THE PAN MAJORITY THAT THE POWER TO OBSTRUCT ISPOWER NONETHELESS, A POINT THAT WILL NO DOUBT BE RAISED WHENTHE GOVERNMENT SEEKS TO ENACT OTHER ELEMENTS OF ITS PLAN TOMODERNIZE THE STATE.  END COMMENT.PLANTYCopyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996TURKEY PUTS FORWARD A "BALANCED BUDGET" FOR 1997from INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in ANKARA1.  SUMMARY:  THE GOT LAST WEEK SUBMITTED ITSFIRST-EVER BALANCED BUDGET TO PARLIAMENT.  PMERBAKAN CALLED THE 1997 BUDGET "REVOLUTIONARY,"ALTHOUGH NEARLY ALL OTHER OBSERVERS TERMED ITUNREALISTIC.  TO ERASE THE BUDGET DEFICIT -- WHICHIS LIKELY TO REACH 10 PCT OF GNP THIS YEAR -- THEGOT HAS PROJECTED A REAL REDUCTION IN INTERESTEXPENSES IN 1997, A REAL INCREASE IN TAX REVENUES,AND PINNED MOST OF ITS HOPES ON AN EXPLOSION INPRIVATIZATION RECEIPTS.  THE GOT ESTIMATES GROWTHWILL SLOW TO 4 PCT IN 1997, AND IS PROJECTING AMODEST DROP IN INFLATION TO 65 PCT. END SUMMARY.-------------------------------------------------REPUBLIC'S FIRST BALANCED BUDGET RAISES QUESTIONS-------------------------------------------------2.  ON OCTOBER 18 THE GOT SUBMITTED TO PARLIAMENTITS DRAFT BUDGET FOR 1997.  THE 1997 BUDGET, THEFIRST PREPARED BY THE COALITION HEADED BY THEISLAMIST REFAH PARTY, IS THE FIRST BALANCED BUDGETIN THE TURKISH REPUBLIC'S HISTORY.  PM ERBAKANCALLED THE BUDGET "REVOLUTIONARY," WHILE HISJUNIOR COALITION PARTNER, TANSU CILLER, CLAIMEDTHAT THE BUDGET WAS BASED ON FACTS, NOT FICTION.NEARLY ALL OBSERVERS OUTSIDE THE COALITIONGOVERNMENT, HOWEVER, HAVE DISMISSED THE 1997 DRAFTAS UNREALISTIC.  THE BUDGET DEFICIT THIS YEAR --BLOATED BY ELECTION SPENDING AND ERBAKAN'SPOPULIST ECONOMIC MEASURES -- IS LIKELY TO REACH10 PCT OF GNP.  EVEN UNDER CILLER'S 1994 AUSTERITYPROGRAM, THE GOT WAS UNABLE TO BRING THE DEFICITBELOW 3.5 PCT OF GNP.3.  THE MOST CONTROVERSIAL ELEMENT OF THE 1997BUDGET IS A PLANNED SURGE IN NON-TAX REVENUE,PRIMARILY RECEIPTS FROM PRIVATIZATION.  NON-TAXREVENUES ARE EXPECTED TO SOAR BY 765 PCT INNOMINAL TERMS, VERSUS A PLANNED 65 PCT INFLATIONRATE.  NEARLY ALL OF THIS REFLECTS THE GOT'SESTIMATE OF 8.7 BILLION USD FROM SALE OF STATEASSETS NEXT YEAR.  THIS INCLUDES PRIVATIZATION OFSTATE OWNED ENTERPRISES AS WELL AS SALE OF STATELAND, HOUSING AND SOCIAL FACILITIES.  THISESTIMATE IS NEARLY THREE TIMES THE TOTAL AMOUNTTHE GOT HAS RAISED FROM PRIVATIZATION OVER THELAST 10 YEARS; IN THE FIRST 9 MONTHS OF 1996 THESERECEIPTS TOTALLED ONLY 300 MILLION USD.4.  ON THE EXPENSE SIDE, INTEREST WILL CONTINUE TOACCOUNT FOR THE LION'S SHARE, REPRESENTING 30PERCENT OF THE TOTAL BUDGET IN 1997.  HOWEVER,THE NOMINAL INCREASE IN INTEREST EXPENSES IS ONLY24 PCT OVER 1996, VERSUS 65 PCT EXPECTEDINFLATION.  IN OTHER WORDS, THE GOT IS PROJECTINGA SIGNIFICANT REAL DROP IN INTEREST PAYMENTS NEXTYEAR.5.  THE BUDGET ALSO RELIES ON A NOMINAL INCREASEIN TAX REVENUES OF 99 PCT NEXT YEAR.  PM ERBAKANHAS ANNOUNCED THAT REFORMS IN TAX ADMINISTRATION,TO BE UNVEILED LATER THIS YEAR, WILL HAVE ANIMMEDIATE IMPACT BY BROADENING THE TAX BASE ANDINCREASING COMPLIANCE; NO NEW TAXES ARE EXPECTED.OBSERVERS REMAIN HIGHLY SCEPTICAL, HOWEVER, BOTHOF THE GOT'S ABILITY TO BEGIN IMPLEMENTING THELONG-POSTPONED TAX REFORM PROGRAM, AND THE SPEEDWITH WHICH RESULTS WILL BE VISIBLE.  PREVIOUSLYTHE GOT HAS ALWAYS ACKNOWLEDGED THAT CHANGES INTHE TAX ADMINISTRATIONS SYSTEM WILL TAKE 3-5 YEARSTO HAVE AN IMPACT.-----------THE NUMBERS-----------6.  THE BUDGET DRAFT SETS REVENUES ANDEXPENDITURES FOR NEXT YEAR AT 47 BILLION USD(BASED ON THE PROJECTED AVERAGE DOLLAR EXCHANGERATE FOR 1997 OF 135,000).  INTEREST PAYMENTS AREEXPECTED TO TAKE 30 PCT OF TOTAL EXPENDITURES,WITH PERSONNEL PAYMENTS ABSORBING 27 PCT.  PMERBAKAN HAS PLEDGED TO INCREASE CIVIL SERVANTSALARIES IN LINE WITH INFLATION; THE FINANCEMINISTER HAS ALREADY ANNOUNCED A 30 PCT INCREASEFOR THE FIRST HALF OF 1997.  HOWEVER, SOME EARLYCALCULATIONS INDICATE THAT THE 1997 BUDGET'SALLOCATION FOR PERSONNEL WILL NOT BE SUFFICIENT TOINCREASE SALARIES BY AS MUCH AS THE PROJECTEDINFLATION INCREASE.7.  THE DRAFT BUDGET FORESEES A LARGE INCREASE INPUBLIC SECTOR INVESTMENTS, JUMPING 131 PCT INNOMINAL TERMS.  TRANSFERS TO SOCIAL SECURITYORGANIZATIONS, ON THE OTHER HAND, ARE ESTIMATED TORISE BY 54 PCT, OR BELOW THE PROJECTED RATE OFINFLATION.8.  THE FOLLOWING TABLE COMPARES THE 1997 BUDGETWITH THIS YEAR'S:                      (IN TRILLION TL)    97 PCTNOMINAL               1996      1997     SHARE   PCT CHG              ------    ------   ------   -------EXPENSES       3,946     6,255    100.0      58.5-PERSONNEL       975     1,675     26.8      71.8-CURRENT         330       670     10.7     103.0-INVESTMENT      227       525      8.4     131.6-TRANSFERS     2,415     3,385     54.1      40.2 INTEREST      1,507     1,864     29.8      23.7 SEE'S            48        91      1.5      91.6 SOCIAL SEC.     345       530      8.5      53.6 TAX RETURNS     112       178      2.8      58.9 SUBSIDIES        60       100      1.6      66.7 OTHER           343       617      9.9      79.9REVENUES       2,646     6,255    100.0     136.3-TAX           2,200     4,368     69.8      98.5-OTHER REV.      167     1,445     23.1     765.3-SPECIAL REVENUES  AND FUNDS      270       425     6.8       57.6-MISC.            10        17     0.3       70.0---------------------MACROECONOMIC TARGETS---------------------9.  THE GOT LAST WEEK ALSO ANNOUNCED THE FOLLOWINGMACROECONOMIC TARGETS USED IN CALCULATING THE 1997BUDGET:  REAL GNP GROWTH WILL BE 4 PCT ANDINFLATION 65 PCT; THE AVERAGE USD EXCHANGE RATETARGET IS 135,000 TL; EXPORTS AND IMPORTS AREPROJECTED TO REACH TO 29.5 AND 50 BILLION USDRESPECTIVELY, REPRESENTING A TRADE DEFICIT OF 20.5BILLION USD; THE CURRENT ACCOUNT DEFICIT ISESTIMATED AS 5.6 BILLION USD.----------------------COMMENTS ON THE BUDGET----------------------10.  REACTION TO THE 1997 BUDGET PROPOSALS HASBEEN UNIFORMLY NEGATIVE.  OPPOSITION PARTIESSEVERELY CRITICIZED THE BUDGET; AN ANAP DEPUTYCALLED IT "SHEER NONSENSE".  CHP'S VICE CHAIRMANSAID THAT CLAIMING THAT THE 1997 BUDGET WILL BEBALANCED, THE GOVERNMENT WAS FOOLING NOT ONLY THEPEOPLE BUT ALSO ITSELF.  RAHMI KOC, ONE OFTURKEY'S MOST PROMINENT BUSINESSMEN, TOLDREPORTERS THAT HE FOUND THE BUDGET TOTALLYUNREALISTIC.  MOST ACADEMICIANS AND COLUMNISTSALSO EXPRESSED CONCERN OVER THE BUDGET'SCREDIBILITY.  MANY PAPERS ALSO NOTED THAT THERELEASE OF THE BUDGET COINCIDED WITH THE VISIT OFAN IMF DELEGATION TO ANKARA, AND CITED UNSOURCEDCLAIMS THAT THE IMF TEAM FOUND THE BUDGET "OVERLYOPTIMISTIC."11.  SEPTELS WILL PROVIDE FURTHER ANALYSIS OF THE1997 BUDGET, INCLUDING DISCUSSIONS WHICH TOOKPLACE LAST WEEK DURING THE MEETING OF THE JOINTECONOMIC COMMISSION.GROSSMANCopyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996HUNGARY: BUDAPEST STOCK EXCHANGE SURPASSES 3700from INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in BUDAPESTTHE BUDAPEST STOCK EXCHANGE (BSE) INDEX OPENEDMONDAY, OCTOBER 14 AT 3682.18 AND AFTER REACHING A NEWHIGH OF 3728.58, CLOSED THE WEEK AT 3707.50.  COMPENSATIONCOUPONS OPENED THE WEEK AT 636 AND CLOSED AT 630.BLINKENCopyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996HUNGARY: PERSONAL FOREX SAVINGS FALL IN NINE MONTHSfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in BUDAPESTTHE REAL VALUE OF PERSONAL SAVINGS HELD IN FOREIGNCURRENCY ACCOUNTS FELL BY HUF 18 BILLION IN THE FIRST NINEMONTHS OF THIS YEAR.  NATIONAL BANK OF HUNGARY FIGURESSHOW THAT THE FORINT VALUE OF PERSONAL FOREX SAVINGSINCREASED BY HUF 32 BILLION IN THE NINE-MONTH PERIOD.HOWEVER, DEVALUATION ALONE WOULD HAVE INCREASED THE FORINTVALUE OF THE AMOUNT HELD IN FOREX ACCOUNTS AT THE START OFTHE YEAR BY HUF 50 BILLION.  FOREX SAVINGS INCREASED BYHUF 1.5 BILLION IN FORINT TERMS IN SEPTEMBER BUT THE 1.2PERCENT RATE OF THE CRAWLING PEG DEVALUATION ALONE WOULDHAVE CAUSED A HUF 5.5 BILLION INCREASE LAST MONTH.PERSONAL SAVINGS HELD IN FOREX ACCOUNTS TOTALLED HUF 471BILLION AT THE END OF SEPTEMBER.  MORE THAN 30 BANKS OFFERPERSONAL FOREX ACCOUNTS BUT MORE THAN HALF OF ALL FOREXSAVINGS ARE HELD AT OTP.  HALF OF ALL FOREX SAVINGS ARE INDEUTCH MARKS, 20 PERCENT IN U.S.DOLLARS AND 12 PERCENT INAUSTRIAN SHILLINGS.  FINANCIAL ANALYSTS BELIEVE THAT FOREXSAVINGS HAVE LOST THEIR APPEAL BECAUSE OF HIGHER YIELDS ONFORINT SAVINGS AND THE PREDICTABLE RATE OF DEVALUATION BYTHE CRAWLING PEG MECHANISM.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996HUNGARY: DEVALUATION EXHAUSTS ITS EXPORT-PROMOTING EFFECTfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in BUDAPESTACCORDING TO THE LATEST ANALYSIS OF THE ECONOMICRESEARCH INSTITUTE (GKI), THE FORINT DEVALUATION LOST ITSEXPORT-STIMULATING EFFECT AROUND THE MIDDLE OF THIS YEAR.FOREIGN TRADE FIGURES SHOW ADVERSE TRENDS FROM THE SECONDTHIRD OF 1996, COMPARED TO EARLIER EXPECTATIONS.  EXPORTSGREW BY 5.2 PERCENT, CALCULATED IN DOLLARS AND BY 8.9PERCENT IN VOLUME DURING THE FIRST SIX MONTHS, COMPARED TOTHE SAME PERIOD LAST YEAR.  THESE FIGURES ARE DOWN FROMTHE FIRST QUARTER.THE FORMERLY STRONG ACTIVITY IN EXPORTS MOTIVATED BYEXTERNAL PRICES IN FORINT TERMS WEAKENED IN 1996.  THISWAS A DIRECT CONSEQUENCE OF THE FACT THAT COMPANIES COULDREALIZE A HIGHER INCREASE IN DOMESTIC SALES PRICES THAN INEXPORT PRICES DUE TO THE REDUCTION IN THE RATE OF THECRAWLING-PEG DEVALUATION.  THE RISING IMPORT PRICES DUE TOTHE IMPORT DUTY SURCHARGE ALSO ASSISTED DOMESTICMANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES TO RAISE DOMESTIC PRICES ABOVEEXPORT PRICES.  BY THE MIDDLE OF 1996, IN MOST INDUSTRIALSECTORS, THE PRICE ADVANTAGE OF EXPORTING CEASED TO EXIST.GKI FORECASTS THAT THE VOLUME OF EXPORTS WILL GROW BY6-7 PERCENT, WHILE IMPORTS WILL BE UP 3-4 PERCENT IN 1996.THE MONTHLY ONE PERCENT REDUCTION IN THE DUTY SURCHARGE,WHICH IS SCHEDULED TO BE ABOLISHED BY JULY 1997, COULDCAUSE A 10 PERCENT DECREASE IN THE COST OF IMPORTED GOODS,THUS BOOSTING IMPORTS STRONGLY.  GKI EXPERTS DO NOT THINKTHAT THE IMPORT INCREASE COULD BE OFFSET BY A RISE IN THECOMPETITIVENESS OF EXPORTS NEXT YEAR.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996HUNGARY: GOVERNMENT PUBLISHES THREE-YEAR FORECASTfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in BUDAPESTUNDER THE LAW ON PUBLIC FINANCES, THE GOVERNMENT ISCOMMITTED TO PRESENT A THREE-YEAR OUTLOOK OF MAJORECONOMIC INDICATORS ACCOMPANYING THE ANNUAL BUDGET BILL.ACCORDING TO THIS THREE-YEAR FORECAST, THE GOVERNMENTEXPECTS A HUF 40 BILLION COMBINED DEFICIT IN THE TWOSOCIAL SECURITY FUNDS IN 1998 AND A HUF 28 BILLION DEFICITIN 1999 FOLLOWING A BALANCED BUDGET IN BOTH FUNDS IN 1997.THE GFS GENERAL GOVERNMENT DEFICIT INCLUDING PRIVATIZATIONREVENUES IS FORECAST AT HUF 315.2 BILLION NEXT YEAR, 376.3BILLION IN 1998 AND HUF 330.9 BILLION IN 1999.  THE GFSDEFICIT IN PUBLIC FINANCES EXCLUDING INCOME FROMPRIVATIZATION IS FORECAST AT 4.9 PERCENT OF GDP IN 1997,4.3 PERCENT IN 1998, AND 3.3 PERCENT IN 1999.  THEFORECAST PROJECTS 2 PERCENT GDP GROWTH NEXT YEAR, 3-4PERCENT GROWTH IN 1998 AND 4-5 PERCENT GROWTH IN 1999.THE GOVERNMENT EXPECTS INFLATION OF 17-19 PERCENT NEXTYEAR, 12-14 PERCENT IN 1998 AND 10 PERCENT IN 1999 WHILEINDUSTRIAL PRODUCER PRICES ARE EXPECTED TO RISE 1-3PERCENT POINTS SLOWER THAN CONSUMER PRICES.  THE FORECASTPROJECTS AN 8-10 PERCENT INCREASE IN EXPORTS NEXT YEARFOLLOWED BY A 5-7 PERCENT INCREASE IN 1998 AND A 7-9PERCENT INCREASE IN 1999.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996HUNGARY: CONSTRUCTION OUTPUT 3% DOWN IN 12 MONTHS TO AUGUSTfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in BUDAPESTTHE OUTPUT OF THE CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY IN AUGUST WASUNCHANGED FROM JULY AND WAS THREE PERCENT DOWN, IN VOLUMETERMS, ON AUGUST 1995.  THE VOLUME OF NEW CONSTRUCTIONORDERS IN AUGUST WAS 18.5 PERCENT LOWER THAN IN THE SAMEMONTH OF LAST YEAR.  ORDERS ON CONSTRUCTION COMPANIES'BOOKS WERE THE EQUIVALENT OF 4-5 MONTHS OUTPUT AT THE ENDOF AUGUST.  WORK STARTED ON 185 CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS WITHA TOTAL BUDGET OF HUF 17 BILLION (CURRENT HUF/DOLLAREXCHANGE IS APPROXIMATELY 155 HUF/1 USD) IN AUGUST AND 141PROJECTS WORTH HUF 7 BILLION WERE FINISHED.  THE VALUE OFPROJECTS STARTED WAS 35 PERCENT HIGHER THAN IN AUGUST 1995WHILE THE VALUE OF COMPLETED PROJECTS WAS 25 PERCENTLOWER.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996HUNGARY: PRIVATE RESEARCH INSTITUTE FORECASTS 2.5% GDP GROWTH IN 1997from INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in BUDAPEST(GKI) THE PRIVATE ECONOMIC RESEARCH INSTITUTEFORECASTS A 2.5 PERCENT INCREASE IN GDP, A 5-6 PERCENTRISE IN INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION AND A 10 PERCENT INCREASE ININVESTMENTS FOR 1997.  GKI PROJECTS ANNUAL AVERAGECONSUMER PRICE INFLATION OF 20 PERCENT FOR NEXT YEAR, ANAVERAGE OF TWO DIFFERENT ESTIMATIONS.  ASSUMING AN ANNUAL25 PERCENT INCREASE IN ENERGY PRICES, THE INFLATION RATECOULD BE 19 PERCENT OR ASSUMING AN ANNUAL AVERAGE OF 40PERCENT INCREASE IN ENERGY PRICES, THE INFLATION RATECOULD BE 21 PERCENT.  SIGNIFICANT FACTORS, SUCH AS THEABOLITION OF THE 6 PERCENT IMPORT SURCHARGE IN THE FIRSTHALF OF 1997 AND TARIFF REDUCTIONS WILL REDUCE IMPORTCOSTS NEXT YEAR.  THE REDUCTION IN IMPORT COSTS COULDRESULT IN AN IMPORT GROWTH RATE EXCEEDING THAT OF EXPORTS.GKI FORECASTS AN EIGHT PERCENT IMPORT INCREASE AND A 6PERCENT EXPORT INCREASE FOR 1997, RESULTING IN A USD 200-300M RISE IN TRADE DEFICIT OVER THE YEAR.  GKI FORECASTS AUSD 2.5 BILLION TRADE DEFICIT OF USD 1.8-2 BILLION, WHICHIS STILL SLIGHTLY BELOW THE VALUE OF EXPECTED DIRECTFOREIGN CASH INVESTMENTS.THE 10 PERCENT INCREASE IN INVESTMENT SHOULD BEFUELLED BY IMPROVING THE BUSINESS OUTLOOK FOR PRODUCERSSUPPLYING THE DOMESTIC MARKET.  LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND THECENTRAL BUDGET ARE ALSO PLANNING TO INCREASE INVESTMENTSPENDING.  ESTIMATIONS BASED ON TAX AMENDMENT PROPOSALSFOR NEXT YEAR SHOW A 20 PERCENT INCREASE IN BOTH GROSS ANDNET WAGES, RESULTING IN NO FURTHER FALL IN REAL WAGES.PERSONAL CONSUMPTION, HOWEVER, IS EXPECTED TO RISE BY 1PERCENT, DUE TO DELAYED PURCHASES FROM PRECEDING YEARS.HENCE THE GROWTH RATE OF PERSONAL SAVINGS IS EXPECTED TOFALL SLIGHTLY.  DOMESTIC DEMAND IN VOLUME TERMS, ISPROJECTED TO RISE TO 3 PERCENT AS A RESULT OF INVESTMENTSAND CONSUMPTION.  GKI FORECASTS A CONSOLIDATED GENERALGOVERNMENT DEFICIT IN THE RANGE OF 4.5-5 PERCENT OF NEXTYEAR'S GDP, SIMILAR TO THAT OF 1996.  (NOTE: REFTELEXPLAINS THE NEW ACCOUNTING MEASURE TO BE USED BY THE GOHBEGINNING IN 1997.  WITHOUT THIS CHANGE IN ACCOUNTINGMETHODS, THE 1997 CONSOLIDATED BUDGET WOULD BE THREEPERCENT OF GDP.  END NOTE.)  PROVIDED FINANCINGREQUIREMENTS OF THE GENERAL GOVERNMENT WILL NOT EXCEEDTHIS LIMIT, NOMINAL INTEREST COULD FALL FROM 22 PERCENT ATTHE BEGINNING OF NEXT YEAR TO 19 PERCENT AT THE END.  GKIWARNS THAT POSITIVE DEVELOPMENTS EXPECTED FOR NEXT YEARARE CONSIDERABLY THREATENED.  A POSSIBLE RISE IN DOMESTICDEMAND COULD GENERATE A HIGHER THAN EXPECTED IMPORTINCREASE RATHER THAN BOOSTING DOMESTIC PRODUCTION.  INADDITION, THE PLANNED RESTRUCTURING OF TAXES AND SOCIALSECURITY CONTRIBUTIONS MAY NOT PRODUCE THE TARGETEDREVENUES.  FINALLY, GENERAL ELECTIONS IN 1998 COULD LEADTO A SOFTENED ECONOMIC POLICY IN THE SECOND HALF OF 1997.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996HUNGARY: GOV'T FORECASTS 1 PERCENT GDP GROWTH IN 1996from INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in BUDAPESTACCORDING TO THE FINANCE MINISTRY, HUNGARY'S GDP ISEXPECTED TO GROW BY ONLY ONE PERCENT THIS YEAR AS A RESULTOF DECLINING DOMESTIC DEMAND.  THE MINISTRY FORECASTS AN8-10 PERCENT ANNUAL GROWTH IN EXPORTS AND A 3-5 PERCENTINCREASE IN IMPORTS RESULTING IN A USD 1.8 BILLION TRADEDEFICIT, USD 800 MILLION LESS THAN LAST YEAR.  THE DEFICITIN THE CURRENT ACCOUNT IS NOW PROJECTED AT USD 1.7BILLION, USD 300 MILLION LESS THAN THE ORIGINAL TARGET.THE CURRENT ACCOUNT DEFICIT AS A PERCENTAGE OF THE ANNUALGDP WILL BE LESS THAN 4 PERCENT THIS YEAR AS COMPARED TO5.5 PERCENT LAST YEAR AND OVER 9 PERCENT IN 1994.  NETDEBT IN PROPORTION TO EXPORT REVENUE IS PROJECTED TO BEBELOW 110 PERCENT THIS YEAR, DOWN FROM 130 PERCENT IN 1995AND 180 PERCENT IN 1994.THE FINANCE MINISTRY PROJECTS ANNUAL AVERAGE CONSUMERPRICE INFLATION OF 23-24 PERCENT AND 20 PERCENT TWELVE-MONTH INFLATION IN DECEMBER, WHICH ARE BOTH HIGHER THANTHE ORIGINAL GOVERNMENT TARGETS OF 20 PERCENT AND 16PERCENT RESPECTIVELY.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996AUSTRALIA: HOSPITAL & HEALTHCARE 97 EXHIBITIONfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN CONSULATE in MELBOURNEThe Hospital & Healthcare 97 Exhibition will be held at the WorldCongress Centre, Melbourne from 18-20 November 1997.The exhibition provides exhibitors with an outstandingopportunity to market their products to a targeted audience.Attendees will include over 2500 Australian healthcare decisionmakers from hospitals, aged care and retirement facilities, andover 1000 international healthcare delegates from the 30thInternational Hospital Federation Congress which is taking placeconcurrently.A biennial event held since 1993, the exhibition has attractedexhibitors and visitors from Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong,Thailand, Sweden, United Kingdom and the United Arab Emirates.U.S. firms interested in further information should contact:Denise Cooney, Exhibition DirectorAustralian Trade Exhibitions Pty. Ltd.PO Box 192Camberwell, Victoria 3124AustraliaPhone: 61-3-9819-0211Fax:   61-3-9818-8553Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996GEORGIA: EXCHANGE RATE OF THE LARI HELD AT 1.27 LARI TO ONE USDfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in TBILISITHE EXCHANGE RATE OF THE LARI HELD FIRM AT1.267 LARI TO ONE USD IN THE LAST TRADING HELD ONTHE INTERBANK CURRENCY EXCHANGE.CURRENT OFFICIAL EXCHANGE RATES FIXED BY THEGNB ARE THE FOLLOWING:USD 1 - 1.27 LARIRUSSIAN RUBLES 1000 - 0.225 LARIDM 1 - 0.8257 LARIECU 1 - 1.5832 LARIFRENCH FRANC 1 - 0.2440 LARITHE REVIEW IS PREPARED BY ECON FSN RATI JAPARIDZE,TEL: 7-8832-989967, 989968, 982830, 933803; E-MAILJAPARIDZER@TBILIWPOA.US-STATE.GOV;  FAX 933759.COURTNEYCopyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996GEORGIA: FOREIGN INVESTMENT REACHES USD 53 MILLION SINCE INDEPENDENCEfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in TBILISITHE MINISTRY OF TRADE AND FOREIGN ECONOMICRELATIONS REPORTS THAT AS OF MID-OCTOBER, 115LICENSES HAVE BEEN ISSUED TO FOREIGN COMPANIES FROM31 COUNTRIES.  THE COMPARABLE FIGURES IN AUGUST OFTHIS YEAR WERE 64 LICENSES FOR COMPANIES FROM 26COUNTRIES.  GERMAN COMPANIES, WITH 19 JOINT VENTURESOPERATING IN GEORGIA, FORM THE LARGEST FOREIGNPRESENCE, FOLLOWED BY RUSSIA (13 COMPANIES), GREATBRITAIN (12 COMPANIES), AND THE U.S. (11 COMPANIES).THE LARGEST SINGLE INVESTOR IS THE SOUTH KOREANFIRM DAEWOO.  IT HAS COMMITTED USD 9.1 MILLION ININVESTMENTS IN THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SECTOR, 17.2PERCENT OF THE TOTAL AMOUNT OF FOREIGN INVESTMENT.ACCORDING TO THE MINISTRY, FOREIGN FIRMSINVESTED USD 34 MILLION AND ARE COMMITTED TO INVESTANOTHER USD 19 MILLION IN THE GEORGIAN POST-INDEPENDENCE ECONONY.THE LARGEST NUMBER OF JOINT VENTURES, 35, AREREGISTERED IN THE FOOD SECTOR, WHICH IS FOLLOWED BYCOMMERCE, WITH 20 JOINT VENTURES.  THETELECOMMUNICATIONS SECTOR LEADS IN THE TOTAL AMOUNTOF FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT.  EIGHT FOREIGNCOMPANIES HAVE EITHER INVESTED OR COMMITTED USD 14.6MILLION IN THIS SECTOR.THE FOLLOWING TABLE SUMMARIZES FOREIGN DIRECTINVESTMENT IN THE GEORGIAN ECONOMY:  INVESTING COUNTRY    NUMBER OF  TOTAL INVESTMENTS     -- PERCENTAGE         OF         COMMITTED OR   OF INVESTMENTS      COMPANIES   DISBURSED (IN USD)=====================================================  USA -- 13.1             11           6,945,434  AUSTRALIA -- 5.1         1           2,700,000  AUSTRIA -- 0.8           2             434,164  BELGIUM -- 0.2           1             102,000  BAHAMA ISLANDS -- 0.8    1             400,000  BERMUDA ISLANDS -- 7.8   1           4,120,190  BULGARIA -- 0.9          2             487,650  GERMANY-- 13.4          19           7,103,428  GREAT BRITAIN -- 7.0    12           3,676,424  TURKEY -- 4.4            7           2,345,722  IRELAND -- 0.2           1             103,980  ISRAEL -- 5.3            3           2,801,750  ITALY -- 1.4             5             743,136  CANADA -- 0.3            1             150,000  CYPRUS -- 3.0            2           1,541,429  KOREA -- 17.2            2           9,120,500  LATVIA -- 0.2            1             108,500  LEBANON -- 0.2           1             117,300  LITHUANIA -- 0.2         1             113,084  LIECHTENSTEIN -- 0.9     1             462,159  LUXEMBOURG -- 0.2        1             103,000  MONACO -- 0.5            1             270,000  NETHERLANDS -- 2.7       7           1,406,248  PANAMA -- 0.2            1             110,000  POLAND -- 0.2            1             100,000  RUSSIA -- 8.1           13           4,284,041  GREECE -- 1.7            3             899,257  FRANCE -- 0.2            1             104,612  SEYCHELLES -- 0.2        1             114,500  SINGAPORE -- 0.2         1             100,000  SWITZERLAND -- 4.0       9           2,127,745MOST OF THE JOINT VENTURES WERE REGISTERED INSEPTEMBER -- 26.  THE FOLLOWING TABLE SUMMARIZESFOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT IN THE GEORGIAN ECONOMYACCORDING TO MONTHS AS OF OCTOBER 20:MONTH  THE NUMBER OF     INVESTMENT      PERCENTAGE         REGISTERED     COMMITTED OR    TO THE TOTAL      JOINT VENTURES      DISBURSED        AMOUNT----------------------------------------------------MAY         16        USD  9,000,000        16.9JUNE        18        USD  9,400,000        17.7JULY        20        USD  7,300,000        13.7AUGUST      23        USD 15,200,000        28.6SEPTEMBER   26        USD  7,300,000        13.7OCTOBER     12        USD  5,000,000         9.4==================================-=================  TOTAL    115       USD 53,200,000        100.0  (SOURCE: THE MINISTRY OF TRADE AND FOREIGN  ECONOMIC RELATIONS)Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996GEORGIA: DUTCH FIRM PLANS US$ 10 MLN INVESTMENT IN MINERAL WATER INDUSTRYfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in TBILISIGEORGIAN GLASS AND MINERAL WATER, A DUTCHCOMPANY PLANS TO INVEST USD 10 MILLION OVER THECOURSE OF FIVE YEARS IN REFURBISHING TWO FACTORIESWHICH BOTTLE "BORJOMI" MINERAL WATER.  IT PLANS TODOUBLE PRODUCTION TO TEN MILLION BOTTLES PER YEAR.IN ADDITION TO ITS INTEREST IN THE MINERALWATER SECTOR, GEORGIAN GLASS AND MINERAL WATER ALSOMANAGES THE KHASHURI GLASS FACTORY, LOCATED IN THECENTRAL GEORGIA, NEAR THE BORJOMI MINERAL SPRINGS.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996FRENCH FOREIGN MINISTER VISITS GEORGIAfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in TBILISIFRENCH FOREIGN MINISTER HERVE DE CHARETTEVISITED GEORGIA ON OCTOBER 12.  DE CHARETTE HELDMEETINGS WITH KEY GEORGIAN OFFICIALS, INCLUDINGPRESIDENT SHEVARDNADZE.  DE CHARETTE WAS ACCOMPANIEDBY REPRESENTATIVES OF THE FRENCH PARLIAMENT, AND AGROUP OF FRENCH BUSINESSMEN.  THE OBJECTIVE OF THETRIP WAS TO FURTHER THE DEVELOPMENT OF BUSINESSRELATIONS BETWEEN GEORGIA AND FRANCE.DE CHARETTE CONFIRMED FRANCE'S COMMITMENT TOPARTICIPATE IN ENERGY, TRANSPORT AND AGRICULTURALSECTOR PROJECTS FUNDED BY THE WORLD BANK AND OTHERINTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996TURKEY AND GEORGIA CONTINUE CONSULTATIONS ON RAILWAY LINE CONSTRUCTIONfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in TBILISIGEORGIA AND TURKEY CONTINUE THEIR DISCUSSIONSON CONSTRUCTING A NEW RAILWAY LINE BETWEEN THE TWOCOUNTRIES.  PRESIDENT SHEVARDNADZE AND TURKISHPRESIDENT DEMIREL SIGNED A PROTOCOL ON APRIL 4 WHICHCALLS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF A RAILWAY LINE BETWEENAKHALTSIKHE, GEORGIA AND KARS, TURKEY.  THEESTIMATED COST OF THE PROJECT IS USD 500 MILLION.CONSTRUCTION IS EXPECTED TO LAST FIVE YEARS.  WHENCOMPLETED THE LINE SHOULD BE ABLE TO CARRY 10MILLION METRIC TONS OF CARGO ANNUALLY.THE GEORGIAN MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT HASCONCLUDED A CONTRACT WITH ABSOLUTE/HOWARD ENERGY TOMANAGE THE PROJECT FROM THE GEORGIAN SIDE.ABSOLUTE/HOWARD ENERGY ENCOMPASSES HOWARD ENERGYINTERNATIONAL (USA), ABSOLUTE-BANK (USA-GEORGIA),SEA LAND SERVICE INTERNATIONAL (USA), CSX (USA), ANDMITSUI (JAPAN).THE GEORGIAN GOVERNMENT BELIEVES THAT THE NEWRAILWAY WILL HAVE STRATEGIC IMPORTANCE, NOT ONLY FORGEORGIA BUT FOR THE WHOLE OF THE CAUCASUS AND FORCENTRAL ASIA.  THE NEW RAILWAY LINE WOULD BE PART OFA EURASIAN TRANSPORT CORRIDOR.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996GEORGIA: PROJECTED BUDGET DEFICIT FOR 1997: 163.7 MILLION LARI (USD 129.2MILLION)from INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in TBILISIPRESIDENT SHEVARDNADZE DECLARED ON OCTOBER 14THAT ADOPTION OF THE 1997 DRAFT BUDGET IS ONE OFGOVERNMENT'S KEY GOALS.  THE DRAFT BUDGET PROJECTSREVENUES OF 855.1 MILLION LARI, AND EXPENDITURES OF1.02 BILLION LARI.  THE PROJECTED BUDGET DEFICIT IS2.9 PERCENT OF GDP (THE 1996 BUDGET PROJECTED ADEFICIT OF 4.4 PERCENT OF GDP).  THE DEFICIT IS TOBE FINANCED THROUGH DOMESTIC BORROWING (104.6MILLION LARI), AND FROM EXTERNAL SOURCES (59.1THOUSAND LARI), INCLUDING SUPPORT FROM INTERNATIONALFINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.THE DRAFT BUDGET CALLS FOR REVENUES TO INCREASEBY 60 PERCENT AND EXPENDITURES BY 25 PERCENT.  26PERCENT OF TOTAL EXPENDITURES WILL BE USED FORSOCIAL WELFARE MEASURES.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996LATVIAN TRADE FAIRS IN 1997from INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in RIGA1.  EMBASSY HEREBY TRANSMITS THE FOLLOWING LIST OF TRADEFAIRS PLANNED IN LATVIA IN 1997 FOR USDOC PUBLICATIONAND DISTRIBUTION TO INTERESTED U.S. COMPANIES.2.  U.S. COMPANIES INTERESTED IN PARTICIPATINC IN THESHOWS SHOULD CONTACT TRADE SHOWS ORGANIZERS (CONTACTINFORMATION FOLLOWS BELOW) OR ARTURS DOMBROVSKIS,DIRECTOR OF EXHIBITION DEPARTMENT, LATVIANCHAMBER OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY, 21 BRIVIBAS BLVD.,RIGA, LV 1849, LATVIA, TEL: (371) 722-5595; 733-3228,TEL/FAX: (371) 782-0092; FAX: (371) 733-2276;E-MAIL: CHAMBER AT SUN.LCC.ORG.LV.WWW:HTTP:/SUN.LCC.ORG.LV/TRADE97.HTML1)  SERVICE'97 (SERVICES, EQUIPMENT, MATERIALS)    DATE: JANUARY 22-25    LOCATION: RIGA FILM STUDIO    ORGANIZER: R.A.S.A.2)  BALTIC SHOP, RESTAURANT, HOTEL DESIGN'97   (ARCHITECTURE, DESIGN, SHOP FITTINGS, EXHIBITION SYSTEMS)    DATE: FEBRUARY 6-8    LOCATION: EXHIBITION HALL "LATVIA"    ORGANIZER: CREATIO3)  BALTTOUR 97 (TOURISM)    DATE: FEBRUARY 7-9    LOCATION: RIGA FILM STUDIO    ORGANIZER: ALTA4)  ARCHITECTURE, INTERIOR, DESIGN'97    DATE: FEBRUARY 18-23    LOCATION: EXHIBITION HALL "LATVIA"    ORGANIZER: R.A.S.A.5)  BALTIC BOOK FAIR'97 (PUBLISHING HOUSES,    BOOKS WHOLESALERS, DISTRIBUTION OF MEDIA)    DATE: FEBRUARY 20-22    LOCATION: RADISSON SAS DAUGAVA HOTEL    ORGANIZER: CREATIO6)  TRANSBALT'97 (TRANSPORT AND TRANSPORTATION SERVICES)    DATE: MARCH 11-14    LOCATION: RIGA CONGRESS HALL    ORGANIZER: EKSPOLATS7)  ENGINEERING INDUSTRY'97 (MACHINE BUILDINC EQUIPMENT,    TOOLS, METAL PROCESSING)    DATE: MARCH 12-16    LOCATION: RIGA FILM STUDIO    ORGAZIZER: R.A.S.A.8)  STYLE AND VOGUE'97/COSMETICS AND PERFUMERY    (FASHION DESIGN, COSMETICS, HAIR AND BEAUTY    PRODUCTS/EQUIPMENT)    DATE: MARCH 19-22    LOCATION: EXHIBITION HALL "LATVIA"    ORGANIZER: CREATIO9)  BUILDING IN THE BALTICS    (BUILDING MATERIALS AND TECHNIQUES)    DATE: MARCH 21-25    LOCATION: RIGA FILM STUDIO10) BAR, HOTEL, SHOP    (FURNITURE, ACCESSORIES, EQUIPMENT, BEVERAGES)    DATE: APRIL 2-5    LOCATION: RIGA SPORT "MANEGE"11) AUT0'97    CARS, LORRIES, SPARE RARTS AND ACCESSORIES    DATE: APRIL 3-8    LOCATION: OLYMPIC HALL "SKONTO"    ORGANIZER: BT 112) COMMUNICATIONS'97    DATE: APRIL 9-12    LOCATION: EXHIBITION HALL "LATVIA"    ORGANIZER: R.A.S.A.13) SPRING'97    AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT    DATE: APRIL 9-15    LOCATION: EXHIBITION COMPLEX "RAMAVA"    ORGANIZER: A.M.L.14) MY HOUSE, FLAT AND GARDEN    CONSTRUCTION, RENOVATION AND HOUSEHOLD GOODS    DATE: APRIL 16-20    LOCATION: OLYMPIC HALL "SKONTO"    ORGANIZER: BT 115) PACKEXPO'97    PACKAGING TECHNOLOGY, PRODUCTS AND SERVICES    DATE: APRIL: 17-19    LOCATION: EXHIBITION HALL "LATVIA"    ORGANIZER: CRKATIO16) BALTIC DRINKS FAIR'97    ALL BEVERAGE EXHIBITION    DATE: APRIL: 24-26    LOCATION: EXHIBITION HALL "LATVIA"    ORGANIZER: CREATIO17) SCHOOL'97-98    EQUIPMENT AND MATERLALS FOR EDUCATION    DATE: APRIL 24-27    LOCATION: RIGA FILM STUDLO    ORGANIZER: BT 118) BALTREST'97    SPORTS AND TOURIST GOODS, LEISURE EQUIPMENT    DATE: MAY 1-4    LOCATION: RIGA FILM STUDIO    ORGANIZER: BT 119) ITALEXP0'97    GOODS FROM ITALY    DATE: MAY 8-12    LOCATION: OLYMPIC HALL "SKONTO"    ORGANIZER: R.A.S.A.20) ENERGY'97    DATE: MAY 21-24    LOCATION: OLYMPIC HALL "SKONTO"    ORGANIZER: R.A.S.A.21) BALSPO    SPORT EQUIPMENT AND ACCESSORIES    DATE: JUNE 6-9    LOCATION: RIGA CONGRESS HALL    ORGANIZER: EKSPOLATS22) MEDIZINBALT & DENTBALT'97    MEDICAL AND DENTAL EQUIPMENT, PHARMACEUTICALS    DATE: JUNE 25-28    LOCATION: OLYMPIC HALL "SKONTO"    ORCANIZER: PRIMUS-BALTLCUM21) TRANSPORT FOR THE COUNTRY    MEANS FOR TRANSPORT AND MACHINERY FOR FARMERS    DATE: AUGUST 6-10    LOCATION: EXHIBITION COMPLEX "RAMAVA"    ORGANIZER: A.M.L.22) BUILDING IN THE BALTICS    BUILDING MATERIALS AND TECHNIQUES    DATE: SEPTEMBER 3-7    LOCATION: RIGA FILM STUDIO    ORGANIZER: EKSPOLATS23) RIGA FOOD'97    FOOD PRODUCTS, FOOD PROCESSING EQUIPMENT, CATERING    DATE: SEPTEMBER 3-6    LOCATION: OLYMPIC HALL "SKONTO"    ORCANIZER: BT 124) "INTERTEXTIL BALTICUM"    TEXTILES, GARMENTS, FOOTWEAR, TECHNOLOGIES AND EQUIPMENT    DATE: SEPTEMBER 18-21    LOCATION: OLYMPIC HALL "SKONTO"    ORGANIZER: BT 125) ADVERTISING & MARKETING'97    MASS MEDIA, EDUCATION, ADVERTISING, PUBLISHING,    PHOTO, VIDEO, RESEARCH AND ANALYSIS    DATE: SEPTEMBER 18-20    LOCATION: EXHIBITION HALL "LATVIA"    ORGANIZER: CREATIO26) WOOD PROCESSING    DATE: SEPTEMBER 24-27    LOCATION: LATVIAN ACADEMY SPORT "MANEGE"    ORGANIZER: EKSPOLATS27) STYLE & VOGUE'97/FASHION INDUSTRY    FASHION, TEXTILES, TECHNOLOGY, FASHION SHOW    DATE: SEPTEMBER 26-27    LOCATION: EXHIBITION HALL "LATVIA"    ORGANIZER: CREATIO28) INFOTECH'97    TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS    BANKING SYSTEMS/COMPUTER HARDWARE/SOFTWARE    DATE: OCTOBER 1-4    LOCATION: RIGA SPORT "MANEGE"    ORGANIZER: CREATIO29) MAJA II (MY HOUSE, FLAT)    WOOD PROCESSING, CONSTRUCTION, FURNITURE,    HOUSEHOLD GOODS    DATE: OCTOBER 1-5    LOCATION: OLYMPIC HALL "SKONTO"    ORGANIZER: BT 130) ENTERTAINMENT INDUSTRY'97    GAMBLING EQUIPMENT, COMPUTER GAMES    DATE: OCTOBER 3-7    LOCATION: EXHIBITION HALL "LATVIA"    ORGANIZER: R.A.S.A.31) PAPER, PRINT, PACK    MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING OF PAPER    PRINTING/PACKAGING MACHINERY    DATE: OCTOBER 7-10    LOCATION: RIGA SPORT "MANEGE"    ORGANIZER: EKSPOLATS32) ZIEMA (WINTER)    WINTER SPORTS AND TOURIST GOODS, LEISURE EQUIPMENT    DATE: OCTOBER 9-11    LOCATION: RIGA FILM STUDIO    ORGANIZER: BT 133) CHARM    BEAUTY -- SCIENTIFIC AND NATURAL APPROACH    DATE: OCTOBER: 9-11    LOCATION: RIGA FILM STUDIO    ORGANIZER: BT 134) OFFICE'97    OFFICE EQUIPMENT, COMMUNICATIONS, STATIONERY    DATE: OCTOBER 15-18    LOCATION: OLYMPIC HALL "SKONTO"    ORGANIZER: R.A.S.A.35) ELECTRON'97    ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING AND ELECTRONICS    DATE: OCTOBER 15-18    LOCATION: RIGA FILM STUDIO    ORGANIZER: BT 136) AGRICULTURAL EQUIPMENT'97    EQUIPMENT FOR AGRICULTURE, FORESTRY AND WOOD PROCESSING    DATE: OCTOBER 22-28    LOCATION: EXHIBITION COMPLEX "RAMAVA"    ORGANIZER: A.M.L37) GASTRO'97 FOOD & DRINKS FAIR    FOOD AND DRINKS PRODUCTION, PROCESSING, EQUIPMENT    FOR STORES, TABLEWARE    DATE: OCTOBER 23-25    LOCATION: EXHIBITION HALL "LATVIA"    ORGANIZER: CREATIO38) MUSIC FAIR'97    MUSICAL EQUIPMENT AND INSTRUMENTS, ELECTRONICS,    CASSETTES, COMPACT DISCS    DATE: OCTOBER 30-NOVEMBER 1    LOCATION: EXHIBITION HAIJ. "LATVIA"    ORGANIZER: CREATIO39) INDUSTRYBALT'97    CHEMICAL INDUSTRY, RAW MATERIALS, MACHINERY    DATE: NOVEMBER 4-7    LOCATION: RIGA FILM STUDIO    ORGANIZER: EKSPOLATS40) FURNITURE'97    DATE: NOVEMBER 5-9    LOCATION: OLYMPIC HALL "SKONTO"    ORGANIZER: R.A.S.A.41) CHEMISTRY'97    CHEMICAL PRODUCTS    DATE: DECEMBER 10-14    LOCATION: RIGA FILM STUDIO    ORGANIZER: R.A.S.A.TRADE SHOWS ORGANIZERS:A.M.L. LTD.EXHIBITION COMPLEX "RAMAVA", RIGA, LV 1076, LATVIATEL: (371) 7901-209; FAX: (371) 7901-208ASSOCIATION OF LATVIAN TRAVEL ACENTS (ALTA)P.O. BOX 59, RIGA, LV 1012, LATVIATEL: (371) 7210-065; FAX: (371) 7221-205BT 1 LTD.SMERLA IELA 3-339, RIGA, LV 1006, LATVIATEL: (371-2) 529-918; FAX: (371) 782-1493CREATIO LTD.KUGU 26-314, RIGA, LV 1047, LATVIATEL: (371) 786-0047; FAX: (371) 786-0006EKSPOLATSKUNGU 8, RIGA, LV 1050, LATVIATEL: (371) 7228-415; FAX: (371) 7213-267R.A.S.A. LTD.M. MONETU IELA 3, RIGA, LV 1901, LATVIATEL: (371) 7213-637; FAX: (371) 7212-598PRIMUS-BALTICUM GMBHWALDSTRASSE 56-58, ROTTENBURG/LD-84056, GERMANYTEL: 49 8781 94020; FAX: 49 8781 940 240NAPPERCopyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List WT03-B05-11IA087-000634-B039-73http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it136.html 205.156.212.5 19970122025248 text/html 6250HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:50:57 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:23 GMTContent-length: 6064Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it136.html Sample Issue Copyright INT'L MARKET INSIGHT TRADE INQUIRIES via NewsNet October 23, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES VIETNAM PLANS TO DEVELOP DEEP-SEA FISHING FLEET: OPP'TIES (494 words) POLAND: TENDER FOR PIPE HEAT EXCHANGERS: PROCUREMENT OPP'TIES (291 words) CopyrightINT'L MARKET INSIGHT TRADE INQUIRIES via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996VIETNAM PLANS TO DEVELOP DEEP-SEA FISHING FLEET: OPP'TIESfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in HANOI1.  VIETNAM'S INTEREST IN DEVELOPING A DEEP SEA FLEET CAPABILITYBETWEEN NOW AND THE YEAR 200 IS TRONG.  INDEED, THE GOVERNMENTHAS MADE DEEP SEA FISHING AND AQUACULTURE AN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTPRIORITY.  CURRENT ESTIMATES INDICATE THAT THE VIETNAMESE FISHINGINDUSTRY WILL NEED TO INVEST $600 MILLION USD OVER TH NEXT FIVEYEARS IN ORDER TO RAISE OVERALL PRODUCTION FOR CONSUMPTIONINTERNALLY AND FOR EXPORT (OF HIGH QUALITY PRODUCTS) FROM 800,000TONS PER YEAR TO 1,200,000/1,500,000-THE TARGET OBJECTIVE.2.  VIETNAM PRESENTLY HAS NO DEEP SEA FLEET CAPABILITY.  ITSFLEET IS LIMITED TO SMALL COASTAL VESSELS OF 400-600 HP WORKINGAT A DEPTH OF 30 TO 50 METERS.  HOWEVER, TO INCREASESIGNIFICANTLY ANNUAL PRODCUTION OF SHRIMP AND YELLOW FIN TUNA,VIETNMA MUST DEVELOP THE CAPABILITY TO FISH FOR LARGER SIZESHRIMP FOUND AT A DEPTH OF 120 TO 150 METERS AND A RANGE OF150-200 KM FROM SHORE.  THE PRODUCTION BY VIETNAM OF FRESH SHRIMPAND TUNA ARE BELIEVED TO BE MOST LUCRATIVE FOR SERVICING WORLDMARKETS.  CURRENTLY, FOREIGN COMPANIES PRIMARILY FROM TAIWAN ANDJAPAN ARE CONTROLLING THIS CATCH.3.  ACCORDING TO CURRENT ESTIMATES, VIETNAMESE INDUSTRY MUSTDEVELOP A FLEET OF 50 TUNA VESSELS, WITH A "MOTHER" PRCOESSINGSHIP TO PRESERVE THE CATCH AND ENSURE THE HIGHEST QUALITY. FORSHRIMPING, THE FLEET IS FOR 250 VESSELS.  A DETAILED GOVERNMENTSURVEY OF VESSEL NEEDS BY PROVINCE, NOW UNDERWAY, SHOULD BECOMPLETED BY THE 4TH QUARTER OF 1996.  THE BOATS REQUIRED AREEXPECTED TO RANGE IN SIZE FROM 75 TO 110 FEET, WITH 600 HP TO1,000 HP ENGINES.  EQUIPMENT FOR SHRIPING WILL INCLUDE CAGES FORMATURE CRAWFISH, PLUS CONVENTIONAL NETTING GEAR.4.  THE NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR DEVELOPMENT OF VIETNAM FOR A PHASEDAPPROACH ROUGHLY AS FOLLOWS:  1) THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANKAPPROVED A $57 MILLION SOFT LOAN PROGRAM TO ESTABLISH THELAND-BASED INFRASTRUCTURE TO SUPPORT DEEP SEA FISHING ANDPURCAHSE ONE 30-50 FEET ALUMINUM HULL FISHING VESSELS, WITH 250HP (IMPORTED) ENGINES; 2) PURCAHSE OUTRIGHTA NUMBER OF LARGERSIZE VESSELS FROM ABROAD; 3) ENTER JOINT VENTURES IMPLEMENTEDWITH FOREIGN FIRMS TO CONSTRUCT FISHING VESSELS, USING VIETNAMSESTAFF IN FOREIGN SHIP YARDS, FOLLOWED BY ASSEMBLY OF VESSELS INVIETNAM AND THEN ESTABLISHMENT OF AN INDEPENDENT, NATIONALSHIPBUILDING CAPABILITY.5.  COMPETITIVE FINANCING WILL BE KEY IN ORDER TO WIN ORDERS TOSUPPLY THESE FISHING VESSELS TOVIETNAM, AUTHORITIES EMPHASIZE.AND, VIETNAM'S EXPORTERS WILL NEED TO HAVE ASSURED COMMERCIALACCESS TO FOREIGN MARKETS FOR ITS TUNA AND SHRIMP TO BE ABLE TOSERVICE PAYMENT OF LOAN OBLIGATIONS INCURRED.6.  FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT:  DR. HO VAN HOANH,DIRECTOR, INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION DEPARTMENT, MINISTRY OFFISHERIES, 57 NGOC KHANH, BA DINH, HANOI, TEL: 84-4-8326396; FAX:84-4-8326702.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List CopyrightINT'L MARKET INSIGHT TRADE INQUIRIES via NewsNetOctober 23, 1996POLAND: TENDER FOR PIPE HEAT EXCHANGERS: PROCUREMENT OPP'TIESfrom INTERNATIONAL MARKET INSIGHT REPORTS, October 23, 1996     U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service (US&FCS)Telegraphic Report from the AMERICAN EMBASSY in WARSAWThe District Heating Enterpise (SPEC) in Warsaw has received aloan from the World Bank for the Heat Supply RestructuringProject, and intends to use part of the loan toward financing theprocurement of the following:Pipe Heat Exchangers  - BID No. 31Package 1 -1,800 piecesSPEC requests interested foreign suppliers to file offers/bidsfor this equipment.A. Bid must be complete.  Incomplete bids will be rejected.B. Contract will be awarded to the lowest Bidder.C. Interested Bidders may obtain further information from andinspect the bidding documents at the following address:Stoleczne Przedsiebiorstwo Energetyki Cieplnej (SPEC)Joint Procurement Unit Bureau, Room 906tel/fax 48/22/25-98-05ul. Batorego 2, Warszawa, PolandD.  A complete set of bidding documents may be purchased startingSeptember 26, 1996 by an interested Bidder upon filing a writtenrequest at the Joint Procurement Unit Bureau and upon payment ofa non-refundable fee of USD 250.00 to the following account:Powszechny Bank Kredytowy S.A., IX O/Warszawa No 370031-97-2700-1-18 (SWIFT: PANKOL PWA PBK).  Cheques are accepted.  All bidsmust be accompanied by a Bid Security of a minimum 2% of the BidPrice and must be delivered to the above address.E. Bids will be opened by the Joint Procurement Unit Warsaw (atSPEC s Conference Room - 2nd floor) in the presence of Biddersrepresentatives, who choose to attend, at 10:00 a.m. on November12, 1996.Copyright 1996 by Financial Times Information.  No claim tooriginal works prepared by U.S. government employees as part of theirofficial duties.  All rights reserved.Back to Headline List WT03-B05-12IA087-000634-B039-112http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it08.html 205.156.212.5 19970122025350 text/html 128363HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:51:07 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:26 GMTContent-length: 128175Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it08.html Sample Issue Copyright INTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNet July 19, 1991 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES OPINION & EDITORIAL FROM THE DESK OF GEOFFREY BELL (646 words) Coming Down from the Summit (639 words) Chemical/Manny Hanny: Let the Mergers Begin (765 words) Myth and Reality at BCCI (1335 words) A Not-so-precious Metal? (555 words) MAJOR CURRENCY ECONOMIES UNITED STATES (632 words) TIGHTENING UP ON THE BANKS (397 words) CANADA (549 words) JAPAN (1050 words) GERMANY (777 words) THE MERTENS AFFAIR (202 words) UNITED KINGDOM (650 words) MIDLAND IN MOSCOW (166 words) GOVERNMENT FOR SALE (158 words) CRIME PAYS (120 words) SWITZERLAND (721 words) WESTERN EUROPE FRANCE (380 words) SABENA'S FATE (168 words) A BREAK IN THE FARM IMPASSE? (111 words) ADVICE TO APPLICANTS (70 words) EASTERN EUROPE SOVIET UNION (290 words) CZECHOSLOVAKIA (246 words) POLAND (229 words) LATIN AMERICA BRAZIL (1020 words) BANK CONSOLIDATION, BRAZIL-STYLE (294 words) AIRCRAFTS FOR SALE (237 words) ARGENTINA (542 words) ASIA & THE PACIFIC NEW ZEALAND (366 words) PHILIPPINES (741 words) INDIA (744 words) THE MARKET REPORT -- FOREIGN EXCHANGE OUTLOOK US DOLLAR (811 words) GERMAN MARK (195 words) JAPANESE YEN (275 words) STERLING (193 words) SWISS FRANC (186 words) FRENCH FRANC (188 words) CANADIAN DOLLAR (172 words) AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR (239 words) THE MARKET REPORT -- CREDIT MARKET OUTLOOK OVERVIEW (302 words) UNITED STATES (457 words) JAPAN (306 words) GERMANY (355 words) UNITED KINGDOM (360 words) OTHER MARKETS (248 words) CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991FROM THE DESK OF GEOFFREY BELL"The main excitement at the London summit naturally centered onPresident Gorbachev's visit and his economic plans.  Beneath the cordialpublic reception, a vigorous debate raged behind the scenes over how farthe West should go in offering financial assistance, with the US andJapan taking the hardline position.  The end result will be some increasein technical assistance and a modest relaxation of restrictions on EBRDlending to the USSR."At the same time, and with considerable fanfare, the USSR has beengranted `special association' with the IMF and World Bank.  The originalidea, floated at the G7 finance ministers' meeting in London, was tomake the Soviet Union an `associate member' of the Bretton Woodsinstitutions -- but since the multilaterals' statutes currently have no suchmembership classification, `special association' has been substituted for`associate member' status.  The end result is the same: Moscow willsupply the multilaterals with economic statistics, the IMF can examineUSSR economic performance in Article IV-type consultations, and theUSSR is eligible for technical assistance in reforming its economy."But the new Soviet linkage with the multilaterals does not entail newfinancial commitments from Washington.  Moscow will have no quotaat the IMF, nor is the World Bank expected to finance major projects inthe Soviet Union.  Put another way, there is less to `associate status' thanmeets the eye, and surely no substitute for the broader benefits of fullmembership -- which is still some distance off."The dollar behaved impeccably for the G7 summit, with the massivecoordinated central bank intervention on July 12 successful in keepingthe currency slightly below the DM1.80  level throughout the meetings.While the dollar is still vulnerable to a near-term correction, however,our surveys indicate a heavy majority of market participants feel that thegeneral trend for the dollar remains upward.  That conviction has beenreinforced by Fed Chairman Greenspan's decidedly upbeat economicreview in congressional testimony this week, where he predicted growthranging from 2 1/4-3% in 1992 and steady progress in bringing downinflation."While few economists now challenge the administration's contentionthat the recession has ended, serious questions linger over the strengthof the economy.  Greenspan may well be correct about growth next year,but the current air of caution in the consumer and business sectorssuggests his optimistic forecast could prove a bit on the high side.  Thechairman's view did gain support this week from report of a Junehousing starts rise of 5.2%, surpassing the 1 million annualized rate forthe first time since November 1990.  In response, bond yields havebacked up slightly, with the long bond yielding just under 8.5%."We have been emphasizing the inevitability of US bank consolidationfor some time, so the only surprise in the Chemical/ManufacturersHanover marriage announced on July 15 is that it happened sooner thanmany analysts expected.  This first money center merger, along with theproposed NCNB-C&S/Sovran coupling, is likely to trigger a series ofsimilar consolidations.  Bankers have shown a consistent pattern ofrushing in the same direction -- whether the fad be LDC loans, highlyleveraged transactions or globalization and securitization -- and themerger movement is likely to be no different.  Bank stocks haveimmediately moved up, and investment houses are eager for the actiongiven the paucity of new business elsewhere."One area of banking where activity is growing fast is the funding ofThird World debt.  Prices have been rising very sharply, and bankersanxious to sell their loans are finding willing new buyers in tradingrooms and among portfolio managers looking for high-yield paper.  It isno exaggeration to argue that the Latin American debt crisis is nearingan end: Indeed, the value of bank loans in the secondary market alreadyequals or exceeds the written-down value in the books of many banks."Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991Coming Down from the SummitTHE LONDON SUMMIT was historic by virtue of Soviet PresidentGorbachev's presence and the synchronized announcement of theconclusion of the START negotiations.  But the focus on Gorbachevpushed a diverse range of other important economic and diplomaticissues to the background, and that raises serious questions about summitreform.The bare bones of the deal with Gorbachev were widely anticipated:"special association" with the IMF and the World Bank and commitmentsto provide technical advice in specific sectors, notably energy and fooddistribution.  The promises of additional assistance from the OECD andthe EBRD do not amount to much.  More significant was the proposedhelp with retooling military factories for civilian use, which doubtless didnot go unnoticed by the hardliners in Moscow.  In the end, Gorbachevemerged with only modest Western commitments to expand financialassistance, sweetened with lavish praise and an invitation to the 1992summit.  The latter has been widely interpreted as a first step toward aG8 -- but in fact, it is little more than a symbolic gesture aimed atshoring up the Soviet president's political position at home.Aside from the Soviet question, G7 leaders offered a semblance ofmovement on several issues, including a reaffirmed commitment tocontrol arms sales and arrest the proliferation of weapons of massdestruction.  Participants also gave an endorsement to renewed efforts toachieve a negotiated peace settlement in the Middle East, and establisheda yearend deadline for conclusion of the Uruguay Round of GATTnegotiations.  It remains doubtful, however, whether G7 goals on armscontrol and Mideast policy can be realized -- and the consensus on thegeneral need for a GATT accord does nothing to resolve the sticky issuesthat frustrated attempts to meet the original deadline for conclusion of theUruguay Round at end-1990.Perhaps more notable is what the summit participants scarcely discussedat all.  Environmental issues got a scant 15 minutes of public discussion,and the tour d'horizon in the final communique reappeared virtuallyverbatim the Houston summit positions on secondary issues ranging fromdrug trafficking to aid to Africa.  In effect, the agenda was hijacked bythe Soviet question -- and the gradual erosion in substance, continuityand focus at annual G7 summits over the past decade has continued.What should be done?  A Group of Thirty report released last week putforward three practical recommendations:* Set a new core agenda for future summits alongside a topical agendaof items like aid for the Soviet Union.  The core should comprise fivebroad topics -- aid, trade and investment, economics (macro andstructural adjustment), defense and the environment.* Define, manage and monitor sharing of responsibility on core agendaissues in a systematic and comprehensive manner.  That would requireG7 leaders to agree on performance measures for their own countries,which would then be used to frame the discussion of burden-sharing andtradeoffs in different areas of the G30 process.* Improve arrangements for follow-through on summit decisions.  Onepossibility would be to emulate the European Council of Ministers, withheads of state meeting twice a year and periodic ministerial consultationsbeyond finance to other areas such as agriculture and trade.  Broaderministerial representation at the leadership summits could also assuremore comprehensive discussion of policy coordination in specific areas.On balance, the London summit avoided the appearance of failure, butit failed to deal effectively with the pressing international issues thatthreaten to destabilize the world order.  If progress on GATT is achievedand if the Soviet Union can somehow be extricated from its presentpolitical and economic morass, the summit may have served sufficientpurpose.  But the prospect of new frustrations looms large on both fronts-- and something more than pageantry may be required when G7 leadersmeet again.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991Chemical/Manny Hanny: Let the Mergers BeginTHE MONEY CENTER MERGER long rumored finally took its firststep toward consummation this week -- and more such consolidationmoves in the US banking industry are imminent.  Once the merger ofChemical and Manufacturers Hanover is carried out -- there seems scantchance regulators will object, though it represents a major setback forNew York City employment and municipal revenues -- the new ChemicalBanking Corp. will have assets of US$135.5 billion, second only toCiticorp with US$216.9 billion.  That puts more pressure on fourth-placeChase Manhattan, fast sliding down the US asset league table withUS$98.1 billion, to shop around.  Others will have to consider mergersjust to remain cost-competitive, particularly those with large branchnetworks in crowded banking markets.Some analysts see Chase linking up with the Bank of New York, aUS$39.44 billion institution, though BNY is still working through theaftereffects of its 1988 merger/takeover of Irving Trust.  There aremultiple consolidation possibilities on the West Coast, even ifdeterioration of California and other Pacific real estate markets and bankcredit quality may delay action until the worst loans are shaken out.Executives from Wells Fargo and Security Pacific held exploratory talkslast year; they may be taking a second look.  Another widely toutedmatch would merge First Interstate of Los Angeles into the well-capitalized and aggressively expanding BankAmerica of San Francisco.In the South, NCNB and C&S/Sovran were already talking merger as acombined US$116.6 billion regional power when this week's newsbroke, and high-performance Wachovia and South Carolina NationalBank recently tied a definitive knot.  In the Midwest, some see thepossibility of a merger between First Chicago and Continental Bank --the latter just shaking off the lingering effects of its 1984 liquidity crisisand rescue by the FDIC.The Chemical/Manny Hanny merger is encouraging because it indicatesthat, in the upper reaches of the US industry, realism is prevailing overissues of institutional prestige and executive ego.  Put another way, post-consolidation yearly cost savings of US$650 million were simply toogreat to be overlooked at a time of diminished earnings prospects.  IRhas long argued that the US industry is weakened by its fragmentationinto an excessive number of institutions, with much of the excesscapacity to be found in the New York money center.  Together,Chemical and Manufacturers have 562 branches in New York and thesurrounding region -- 133 in Manhattan alone.  Seventy branches will beeliminated, contributing in significant part to the overall savings as atleast 6,200 jobs from a combined total of 45,000 are eliminated.  That'sa tough blow to New York, whose job pool and revenues had alreadytaken a major hit as the financial industry dramatically contracted.  Butas bankers prepare to cope with pending legislation in Congress thatwould lock undercapitalized institutions out of expanded business areas,they are likely to give local political considerations considerably lessweight.Another important implication of the Chemical/Manny Hanny deal is thenew lease on life it has given bank stocks, whose first-half rebound wasin danger of petering out.  Shares of both banking concerns posted largegains on the news, pulling up other banking issues.  Investors see a waveof consolidations boosting profits, though it won't be easy to find manypairs of institutions that dovetail so nicely (and with such compatiblechairmen) as Chemical and Manufacturers Hanover.  But most banksstand to realize some savings through consolidation, and as their rivalsmerge, they may have little choice but to follow suit.  In New England,Fleet/Norstar's spring acquisition of the failed Bank of New England'sthree main units already has raised pressure on the reorganizing Bank ofBoston to join forces with Shawmut National in neighboring Connecticut.The misfortune for the longer-term development of the industry,especially in an international context, is that there is little immediateincentive for mergers of banks in different US markets.  The FDIC'srejection earlier this year of BankAmerica's strong bid for the BNE unitswas shortsighted in this regard because it prevented the creation of thefirst major bicoastal institution.  BankAmerica may yet acquire asubsidiary outside its region, but there are few others inclined to do soat present.  For now, the main impulse will be consolidation withinregions and in contiguous regions, in anticipation of a US bankingreform bill likely to liberalize branching across state lines.  At some laterdate, with the current bank crisis and real estate recession waning, wemay see truly national banks created by a second wave of East-West andNorth-South mergers.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991Myth and Reality at BCCITHE MAIN MYTH about BCCI -- which no one has challenged -- isthat it was founded by a Pakistani banker, Agha Hassan Abedi, with GulfArab money.  The truth is that it was founded by Bank of America,which at the time was trying to build up its presence in the Middle Eastand had just failed in an attempt to put together a consortium bank withSaudi Arabia's NCB and Iran's Bank Saderat.  BoA brought in Abedi,who had been in Beirut, to head a management team that he ran beforeUBP's East Pakistan empire died with the birth of Bangladesh.  That'sno big deal: Lots of Western banks were promoting Middle East banks,and Abedi very quickly seems to have taken over the show.  But it doesserve to emphasize the layers of obfuscation that now cloud the BCCIaffair.We put little credence in the rumors that BCCI ran a hit squad in the USthat "eliminated" hostile witnesses, and that BCCI had made directpayments to several former world leaders.  And the story that a recentwarehouse fire in London destroyed all or a good part of the BCCIpapers taken away from the bank by the SFO and the liquidators at thetime of its closure sounds more like James Bond fiction -- at least, wehope it is.  More plausible is the story that BCCI paid its non-executivedirectors US$200,000 a year -- wildly out of line with standardcompensation for such posts.  And what about the link between London'shighbrow but troubled Cromwell Hospital (favorite of Arab clients foryears) and BCCI?  It seems the original ownership came from BCCIsenior management, and the funding came from the bank as well.  Therelationship is well worth a look, particularly in light of some of theshenanigans uncovered at the hospital in recent years.A particularly intriguing published report buried in the BCCI news wasa report from Abu Dhabi suggesting that the second set of books, whichdocumented the years of fraud, had been located in the UAE.  That justhappens to be where Abedi's No. 2, the mysterious Mr. Naqvi, isreputed to be now (in fact, we suspect Naqvi is more likely in Pakistanwith his erstwhile boss).Whatever the case, the report serves to focus attention on just what thefraud in question was.  Given the secrecy attached to the various PriceWaterhouse reports -- as many as 10, of which those of last October andthis June were most important -- the answer to this critical question is notclear, though presumably Leigh-Pemberton has finally told the sheikh.But we see three separate problems:* a shuffling of assets from low- to high-regulation jurisdictionswhenever a bit of window dressing was necessary to pull the wool overthe bureaucrats of the bank's "college" of regulators -- something that weare assured has been known in its entirety to the BoE and PW for at leasttwo years;* the non-recording of deposits, probably to assist clients in avoidingVAT and corporate taxes, primarily in the UK -- which inevitably led toa dual booking system (and which was also, we are told, well known tothe BoE; and* a very dodgy loan book, including unsecured or inadequately securedloans to insiders, influential Gulf families, Pakistani shipping interestsand apparently fictitious names.The official BoE position seems to be that, while BCCI was thoughtmerely to have a solvency problem, doing a deal with Sheikh Zayed topour more money in was acceptable.  But as soon as there wasirrefutable evidence of fraud, that deal had to be dumped and the bankclosed -- no matter that Sheikh Zayed feels he was duped or that 1.5million depositors worldwide may have lost their money.The problem is that there are so many holes in this argument that onescarcely knows where to begin.  First, contrary to the BoE's officialinterpretation, the 1987 Banking Act does not need proof of fraud beforea bank is closed -- just strong evidence that it is in trouble.  There wasnothing to stop the BoE from acting earlier if it had wanted. (And underthe act, neither it nor its agents can be sued except in the most direcircumstances.)  Second, we know for a fact that the BoE had plenty ofevidence on at least the first of the three frauds as early as mid-1988, soit could have acted then.  And don't forget that it has had its ownmanagement, seconded from Lloyds Bank, in place since early this year.Third, given that the Urdu mafia around Abedi had been cleaned out lastyear, there is no reason to believe that the fraud situation at BCCI wasactually getting worse in 1991 -- indeed, everything we hear suggests itwas getting better.So why did the BoE act?  One suggestion is that Leigh-Pemberton didnot appreciate the consequences, but that is too insulting to accept.  Lessincredible is the possibility that Luxembourg didn't know what mighthappen, and that it pushed the button first.  Or maybe the US regulators(or FBI) prompted action.  Our own suspicion is that the initiative camefrom Price Waterhouse, whose position in the whole affair is both crucialand equivocal.PW audited half of BCCI even before 1987, when it was awarded aworldwide contract at the behest of the BoE (and apparently at a fee ofaround STG1 million a year).  In the last two years, it has done around10 supplemental reports for the BoE, the last two of which (and perhapsothers) have contained evidence of fraud sufficient for the authorities toshut the bank down.  Prior to the 1990 accounts (which are stillunpublished), however, PW did not choose to qualify its approval, exceptin ways that few professionals would have spotted.  In the last 18months, poor Sheikh Zayed -- who is utterly blameless in this -- pouredabout US$2 billion into BCCI as the Pakistanis got out with their loot.Now, the auditor (in the US and the UK) works for the shareholder --not the regulators and not the depositors.  So, PW might well have askeditself, should it tell Sheikh Zayed what it is finding in its investigationsfor the BoE, since those findings mean that it will be unable to approvethe accounts and since they will almost certainly force the authorities toclose BCCI?  In particular, shouldn't PW have told Sheikh Zayed enoughto stop him pouring money into the bank that he is most unlikely to getback?  Clearly, PW was in a difficult situation -- but it is significant that,two days before the bank was closed and after the June 27 date on whichPW handed over its final report to the BoE, Sheikh Zayed pumpedanother US$660 million into BCCI.  One can well imagine near-panic atPW: After all, they, the auditors, were at that point unequivocally inpossession of information that would render that capital injectionworthless in the very near future.  Might PW not have said to the Bank,"Act, or we will go public"?Certainly, PW does not emerge covered in glory.  It appears to havegotten itself in a dreadful pickle between its twin responsibilities: to theshareholders in the normal course of (very lucrative) audit business, andto the BoE in the course of special studies that directly impinged on theaudit side.  Maybe it was wrong of the Bank to entrust the same firmwith both tasks.  But the Bank has more to answer for than that.Whatever soothing words Leigh-Pemberton and Brian Quinn gave to theGulf rulers, the fact is that the BoE effectively allowed Sheikh Zayed topour huge amounts of good money after bad, knowing all the while thata closure was almost inevitable whatever pledge might have been made.That's shoddy treatment, at best.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991A Not-so-precious Metal?THE FACT that gold funds in the US turned in an impressive 8.04%gain in the second quarter has bolstered optimism that the market hasturned the corner.  But what we find more intriguing is the shift inemphasis -- notably in Kathryn Welling's thoughtful analysis in thisweek's Barron's, which predicts improved prices in the second half --to define gold increasingly as little more than a commodity subject toforces no different than those that apply to copper and wheat.Traditionalists would doubtless argue that recent political change in SouthAfrica and the lifting of US sanctions have also had a positive impact,and there is surely some truth in that.  But Welling's analysis still pointsup a fundamental change from the gold bug arguments common duringthe last runup of prices from 1976-79.  Traditional reasons to buy goldwere to hedge against rising inflation and consequent loss of value inpaper currency, reinforced by the more extreme scenario of a sharpdepreciation of other assets as a result of major political disturbances.But Welling puts the case for a new price rise in more basic terms:Demand for gold, especially for jewelry, continues to rise, and supplycannot keep pace given the high marginal costs of expanded production.An IR editor who addressed a congregation of gold bugs in the 1970srecalls the hoots of derision that greeted a lonely heretic who venturedto note that surging prices might depress jewelry demand.  At the time,this area of the market was considered trivial compared with theapparently inexhaustible demand for gold for financial purposes.  Nowthe outlook is different: In 1989, jewelry demand for gold overtookWestern mine production, and the gap widened last year.  Evidently theindustry has taken notice: The World Gold Council is a primary sponsorfor a current exhibit of rare African gold jewelry at the Chicago ArtInstitute.So why has gold become a commodity?  The reason is that it's nowwidely realized that paper money can have value when issued by acentral bank that keeps the money supply under tight control.  Thisperception differs fundamentally from the traditional view that papermoney (including bank deposits) can never have ultimate value unless itis redeemable in gold.  In fact, investors have shown no reluctance tohold dollars, DM or other hard currencies because it is universallyrecognized that central banks in the key industrialized countries will actresponsibly to control money supply.  Hard lessons from inflationaryexperience have definitively refuted any "greenback" theories thatgovernments can simply print unlimited amounts of money withoutaffecting its value.With these lessons learned, gold -- earning no interest and requiringstorage costs -- looks less attractive as an investment, save purely as acommodity.  Even the threat of war or rising inflation is no longerenough to set off a rush into gold -- the dollar is generally the preferredsafe haven.  Hence the Gulf crisis produced surprisingly modestmovement in the price of gold.Today, many traders in silver look to tableware instead of coinage forguidance on demand.  Perhaps gold bugs will be more reluctant toundergo complete conversion -- but it's not too early to pay closerattention to how gold rings and necklaces are moving at the retail jewelryshops.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991UNITED STATESGREENSPAN'S testimony before Congress confirms that Fed bankpresident hawks in the FOMC have taken a back seat on monetarypolicy.  Although Greenspan's forecast of economic growth next year ina range of 2.25-3.0% is below the administration forecast at 3.6%, hepointedly chose to keep present money supply targets at 2.5-6.5%.  Theanti-inflation zealots would have preferred to lower the band a notch, butthe 0.3% fall in the June PPI hardly supports their case -- and the 0.2%CPI rise last month scarcely appears grounds for panic.Greenspan conceded, as most corporate borrowers could confirm, thatthe credit crunch persists -- and there's no guarantee that the situationwill get better in the near term.  In this context, the Chemical/MannyHanny marriage unveiled this week -- and the certain prospect of moremergers to follow (see the lead editorial in this issue) -- could prolongand conceivably even exacerbate the crunch in the short term, for tworeasons:* parties to coming mergers will want to wash their hands of lending bythe other party that looks unwise or possibly vulnerable to regulatorydifficulties; and* in many cases, loan officers fearful for their jobs will be inclined to siton their assets until they get a clearer picture of the new chain ofcommand and its revamped lending priorities.The 5.2% rise in June housing starts is obviously good news, reinforcingthe anecdotal evidence that lower interest rates have given a boost toresidential construction.  But the recovery in the sector remains fragile-- one more reason why the Fed will be cautious about raising interestrates in the near term.  The 0.7% rise in industrial production for Junewas skewed by a surge in auto and truck output, behind the 3.7% jumpin the consumer goods category.  Business equipment, excluding autosand trucks, showed no change (remember too that some "fleet sales" ofvehicles quickly feed through to the consumer market).  Thus far, therecovery seems to be stronger in consumer-based categories like housingthan in the business investment sector.  One gloomy projection based onthat dichotomy is that employment will show little improvement in thenear term -- and could even decline further -- though rising spendingpower for workers will be sufficient to offset declining demand from theunemployed.  The implicit risk in this scenario is that, unlessproductivity picks up, lower profit margins and lower investment will bethe end result, undercutting the nascent recovery.  We do not view suchan outcome as inevitable -- but it's worth noting that a recovery drivenlargely by the consumer economy threatens to exacerbate the existingdistortions caused by the relatively low savings rate of the US.  Andhigher real long-term interest rates as global demand for capitalintensifies could further undercut business investment.President Bush offered vague commitments in London to press forwardwith the Uruguay Round -- but behind the reassuring rhetoric is a driftin Washington toward the same sort of protectionism that the US ispressing Brussels to abandon.  That suggests that the administration mayseek to use the North American FTA as a vehicle to introduce tougherrestrictions on imports from outside the proposed trading bloc.  A criticalissue is whether the new FTA will contain tougher foreign contentrestrictions to prevent Japanese and European exporters and investorsfrom stealing under the umbrella of the trade pact.  Already USautomakers are complaining about liberal interpretations as to "nationalcontent" in Canadian-built cars -- and we can expect such issues to bepressed with greater urgency regarding Japanese- and European-ownedcompanies in Mexico.  That could lead to establishment of more uniformtariff treatment for imports into North America -- another step down theroad toward major regional trading blocs.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991TIGHTENING UP ON THE BANKSIn contrast to pending House legislation that less charitable observersderide as a "widows, orphans and bankers relief bill," the SenateBanking Committee draft released this week grants less new turf to thebanks and asks more in return.  Still, the "committee print" fashioned bycommittee chairman Donald Riegle (D-Mich.) is consistent in keyrespects with the Brady reform plan.  It includes two essential elementsof the White house proposal -- repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act separatingcommercial and investment banking and authorization of interstatebranching -- albeit with provisos on both.  But the Riegle draft would notallow ownership of banks by commercial enterprises and would continueto bar entry by federally chartered banks into the insurance business.Maintenance of the existing barrier to business ownership of banks couldamount to de facto continuance of Glass-Steagall, as so many securitieshouses are subsidiaries of major corporations.  And the Senate bill ismuch more restrictive than the House version on deposit insurance.  Itdoes not propose to cut back coverage of individuals from present levels,but it would eliminate protection of brokered deposits.  The industry issure to mount heavy resistance as well to the provision for a specialassessment to cover the first US$10 billion pumped into the BankInsurance Fund.  Big banks will object in particular to the inclusion offoreign as well as domestic deposits in the assessment base.Some of the Riegle bill's sterner provisions may fall away in eventualHouse-Senate conference talks on the final bill.  But commercial controlof banks, also vigorously opposed by Rep. John Dingell (D-Mich.),chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, may well bedoomed.  It is also vulnerable to the populist argument (exaggerated, butnot entirely unfounded) that letting big companies buy banks wouldconcentrate economic power and dramatically raise taxpayer exposure inthe event of failures.Provisions in the draft Senate bill that would impinge on Fed andTreasury discretion in stabilizing big banks in trouble also are likely tobe watered down.  The Riegle draft would bar the rescue of large banksas "too big to fail," and limit discount window assistance.  In the end,however, monetary officials are likely to be left with wide discretionhere.  Democrats in both the House and Senate may well oblige themaintenance of provisions obliging banks to provide services to low-income consumers.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991CANADATHE MULRONEY government is going Gramm-Rudman in a big way--  if more for political expediency than budgetary rigor.  FM DonMazankowski used a visit to his home province of Alberta to announceplans for a 3% cap on annual federal spending, with Parliament barredfrom hiking taxes or authorizing new borrowings to push spending abovethat limit.  The Spending Control Act would cover all federalexpenditures except debt service, and would be applied on a government-wide basis -- which means above-target increases in entitlements such associal welfare or unemployment benefits would have to be offset bycompensating cutbacks elsewhere in other federal departments.It is no accident that the FM broke the news in Alberta, the hotbed of thesurging Reform Party, whose otherwise vague and unfocused rightistplatform has one clear plank -- strict controls on governmentexpenditures.  The Reformists are ahead of the ruling Tories in the pollsnationally and far ahead in Alberta.  Cabinet ministers like Mazankowskiand high-profile Constitutional Affairs Minister Joe Clark may be safe,but private polls show that other Alberta-based Tories would be wipedout if elections were held now.It appears doubtful whether Mazankowski's gambit can reverse the Toryslide in the West, but odds for approval in Ottawa appear favorable --likely before yearend.  Under the law, a five-year spending ceiling wouldbe set at Can$615.3 billion.  If spending projections in a given budgetexceed the yearly levels implicit in the five-year limit, the FM would becompelled to establish how the government plans to compensate for theoverrun in future years.  Budgets that do not comply with mandatedspending limits could be approved only if Parliament rescinds the actitself.Gadfly Quebec businessman Glen Kealey -- well known nationwide as aconstant fixture who conducts his one-man protests almost daily outsideParliament -- has become far more than just a nuisance to the Torygovernment.  The doggedly persistent Kealey, whose rage stems fromalleged attempts by several Quebec Tories to extract bribes in exchangefor commitment of federal offices to his planned office complex acrossthe river from Ottawa, surprised the political cynics by persuading thecourts to bring charges of fraud and corruption against Sports MinisterPierre Cadieux, three former ministers, the RCMP commissioner, severalsenators and other Tory party officials.  Several targets of Kealey's wrathalready have been convicted on other charges; several more left thecabinet with their political careers ruined.  The new charges will beinvestigated by the local police, and some big Tory names could facetrial; Kealey first complained to the RCMP, but the federal agency foundevidence supporting the charges to be insufficient.Economists are convinced the recession is over, but some leadingbusiness executives fear that the economy could slip into a double-bottomrecession if the present upward momentum proves unsustainable.  Fornow, the recovery scenario looks secure: Manufacturing shipmentsincreased by 0.9% in May to Can$23.3 billion, the third straight monthlygain after a string of declines.  Granted, the gain was well below the 2%rise in April, and most of the expansion was concentrated in the auto andwood industries.  But combined with other economic indicators, it pointsto an improving trend that should persuade the BoC to keep short-termrates steady.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991JAPANTHE EFFECTS of the brokerage scandal may persist long after theembarrassing disclosures end, and could knock the wind out of aneconomy that is already looking tired.  No one is talking about anoutright recession: On the contrary, with just two months to go, thecurrent expansion is certain to surpass the record 57-month Izanagi boomof the 1960s.  But most economists now doubt that real GNP will meetthe official target of 3.8% growth in the fiscal 1991 year through nextMarch.  The latest forecast revisions show inflation-adjusted growth of3.0-3.5% in FY 1991.  Moreover, the likelihood that activity in Europe--  a major customer of Japanese exports in recent quarters -- will continueto slow suggests that the external sector may no longer offset weaknessin the domestic economy.The immediate cause for concern is the newly foundering stock market,which plunged to a 1991 low earlier this month and remains unsteadyover the 23,000 level.  Since Japanese banks may book unrealized profitson equities holdings as capital, fluctuations of the Nikkei directly affecttheir ability to meet the 8% capital adequacy requirement that the BIShas set for the end of March 1993.  Last August, as the recoveringTokyo Stock Exchange stalled and headed south again, only three of the12 city banks had met the new standard.  However, the next phase of therally hatched in January pushed all but one over the threshold at the endof FY 1990 on March 31.  At current levels, stock prices are 15% belowthe 1991 peak of 27,147 on March 18.The Ministry of Finance's largely symbolic response to the securitiesscandal has done little to reassure investors or restore its flaggingcredibility.  Last week, the Big Four securities houses began a"voluntary" punishment -- a four-day suspension of soliciting businessfrom corporate clients.  FM Hashimoto, who previously deniedresponsibility for the incident, subsequently reversed his position andacknowledged that faulty oversight may have been a contributing factor.The penalty: a three-month pay cut of 10% for himself (which translatesto a sum of US$30,000) and two other MoF officials.  Ironically,Hashimoto's embarrassment may yield political dividends for PM Kaifu,whose chances of retaining the LDP presidency and the top job inOctober have thus improved.The BIS rule and slumping TSE are squeezing banks anew and reducingtheir ability to lend.  Now that equity financing is not a viablealternative, major banks are rushing to obtain massive amounts ofsubordinated loans from life insurance companies.  Sumitomo Bank, forexample, is seeking to borrow Y40-50 billion through this avenue.  Atworst, this could become a new source of pressure on stocks and crimpcorporations, which face rationing of credit needed to fund investment.Significantly, the Bank of Japan's half-point cut in the discount rate onJuly 1 was designed to refuel the economy and provide relief to theteetering Nikkei.  Thus, the fallout from the brokerage scandal hasprobably nullified the stimulative effect of lower interest rates.  Indeed,all but two of 18 economic research institutes, which published revisedeconomic forecasts this week, believe that further easing of monetarypolicy is required to sustain the expansion.Warning signs are emanating from a variety of sources:* Corporate bankruptcies: The number of first half business failures rosefor the first time in seven years by 60.2% to 4,723 in January-June 1991from a year ago.   Combined liabilities surged 394.4% to a recordY3,426.2 billion, surpassing the previous high reached in the firstsemester of 1986.  This figure represents 82% of the full-year recordachieved in 1986, and assures that a historic high will be set for all of1991.  Most of the increase in liabilities resulted from the collapse of"bubble" companies that speculated heavily in equities and real estate.* Foreign trade: The merchandise trade surplus widened in June for thesixth consecutive month.  Measured year-on-year, the surplus grew 8.9%to US$7.26 billion, as 6.9% growth in exports outpaced the 6.1% risein imports.  However, the bilateral balance with the US fell 17.9% -- areflection both of the relative strength of the yen and the weak USeconomy.  Consequently, Japanese companies are likely to renew theirbid for American pocketbooks, which could draw new protectionistreprisals from Washington.The improving trade balance elsewhere carries the same political risk.In the 12 months through June, the surplus soared 48.5% to US$2.64billion with the EC and 20.3% to US$3.44 billion with Southeast Asiancountries.  In Europe, French PM Edith Cresson is leading the rhetoricalattack on Tokyo, while complaints are emerging from both Seoul andTaiwan.  Thus, researchers at LTCB expect the current account surplusto expand sharply from US$33.8 billion in FY 1990 to US$58.6 billionthis year, but to contract by 9% in FY 1992 in line with the shrinkingtrade surplus.* Monetary growth: The key M2+CDs measure rose a modest 3.5% inMay from a year ago, down nearly 10 percentage points from the peakrate of 13% in the first quarter of 1990.  The BoJ insists that this paceis sufficient to sustain economic activity, and expects the money supplyto show a 4% increase in April-June -- we have our doubts.* Business investment: A new Small Business Credit Insurance Corp.survey reveals that planned plant and equipment spending by small andmedium-size companies will drop 6.8% in the current fiscal year amidincreasing caution about the economic outlook.  Asahi Mutual expectsoverall capital spending to grow just 1.1% in January-June 1991 fromthe previous half year, and by a relatively modest 2.2% in July-December.The BoJ's 25-month regimen of tight credit will continue to reduceinflation pressures.  Overall wholesale prices fell 0.1% in June fromMay and rose an enviable 0.6% from a year earlier; since 1985, the WPIhas fallen 9%.  LTCB economists foresee no more than 1% wholesaleinflation and 2% retail inflation in the latter half of FY 1991 on the basisof stable crude oil prices and moderate wage growth.  Taken together,anemic activity, restrained growth in prices and the money supply anda foundering stock market increase the prospects for another cut in theofficial discount rate, currently 5.5%, by the end of September.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991GERMANYTHE DECISION of the Bundesbank to lower the target for monetaryaggregate growth has blown the cover on the attempt in Frankfurt andBonn to play down the deepening rift over monetary policy.  Thedecision to lower the top end of the money supply band to 5% is a directresponse to the failure of FM Theo Waigel and Economy MinisterJuergen Moellemann to make headway on subsidy and other spendingcuts.  IR sources say the only reason the Bundesbank chose not to hikerates last week is that it didn't want to embarrass Waigel on the eve ofthe London summit, where a German rate hike would have beenenormously unpopular -- though it seems eminently plausible that themassive coordinated CB intervention in support of the DM one day afterthe Bundesbank meeting was the quid pro quo for standing pat.Market sources in Frankfurt anticipate an upward bias in interest ratesto the end of the summer.  The central concern at the Bundesbankremains the budget: BB analysts dismiss Finance Ministry claims that thefederal share of PSBR will fall by 50% to DM25 billion in 1995 asirrelevant, and forecast total new public debt will reach at least DM160billion by that year.  That's not counting "shadow budgets" and otherhidden outlays taken off budget, notably the Treuhand and Hermes-backed credit lines to the USSR.Schlesinger's immediate concerns are twofold:* FX reserves at the BB have fallen by DM10 billion thus far in 1991,narrowing the margin of comfort for future intervention.  Thecoordinated July 12 operation proved a huge success -- but Schlesingeris well aware that such broad support, particularly from the Fed, cannotbe counted on if the DM comes under renewed pressure.* The June inflation numbers were bad enough, and Schlesinger fears theJuly results could be worse -- albeit largely due to the one-off impact ofthe tax increases that took effect July 1.Heightened pressure on the FX and inflation fronts would significantlynarrow the odds for a Bundesbank rate hike, regardless of Bonn's desireto hold off.  And rising interest rates would also intensify pressure onWaigel to consider new fiscal actions.  Wilhelm Noelling of theHamburg LZB already is publicly touting hefty taxes on real estateholdings and capital assets as the only effective means to transfer wealthfrom west Germany to the ex-GDR.  Noelling's view is still tainted byassociation with the Hamburg SPD's weakness for giveaways to the East-- but the endorsement of several economic institutes has broadened thepolitical base of support for new fiscal actions.  Any movement in thatdirection, however, clashes head-on with the palpable unpopularity in theWest of the tax rises already in place -- and it's impossible to conceiveof Bonn implementing fiscal adjustments that could prevent the PSBRfrom moving steadily higher.Further repercussions of the Karlsruhe decision. Tax lawyers who haveseen the 60-page Supreme Court verdict call the decision a landmarkvictory for fiscal authorities -- and a stinging defeat for rights to privacyin banking transactions.  In the political arena, the ruling CDU isinclined to opt for spot tax audits as the most efficient -- and leastfinancially damaging -- response to the court ruling.  It also appears tofavor a deductible limit of DM2,000 for interest income.  But neither theparty nor the government thus far has provided sufficient clarification ofits position on the Karlsruhe ruling, and that alone could unsettleinvestors.  The opposition SPD has taken advantage of the confusion byspelling out a more clear-cut policy that rules out reintroduction ofwithholding tax on interest income, establishes higher deduction limitsfor small investors, and calls for aggressive efforts to assure greaterconformity in tax laws throughout the EC.  The SPD also would favorspot audits over more sweeping tax controls.Banks will be forced to relax secrecy requirements, but will seek Bonn'scommitment to broaden exemptions for interest income on the (somewhatself-serving) grounds that lower taxes would make voluntary controlsmore workable.  Specifically, the industry will lobby for much bigger taxexemptions up to DM6,000 for single and DM12,000 for joint returns.The trouble is that the standard tax deduction for wages currently is setat just DM2,000 -- and it will be difficult to make a case for givingpreferential treatment to interest income.  Also expect the small banks --without links to Luxembourg or offshore subsidiaries -- to press foruniformity in rules for interest taxation throughout the EC, whichDeutsche, Commerzbank and Dresdner are more likely to oppose toprotect their interests abroad.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991THE MERTENS AFFAIRTwo weeks after allegations of insider trading abuses in the newsletterEffecten-Spiegel triggered action at Deutsche Bank against a key figurein the case, the affair is burgeoning.  Prosecutors are now investigatingThomas Fluegel, a crony of Manfred Mertens, the DB securities officialsacked for violating "internal regulations" of the bank.  Prosecutors haveraided Fluegel's office and are now sifting through documents forevidence to support allegations that Mertens was embezzling from hisemployer -- purportedly by skimming payments for securities deals thatturned a profit, while chalking up losses to DB.  IR sources also reportthat Deutsche is restructuring its securities trading operations to preventits employees from conducting one-man operations at its expense.The latest twist is part of an increasingly tangled web of allegations.Fluegel was a former employee of the Frankfurt securities traderOhms/Schmidt, until Schmidt and Fluegel quit and joined forces.  Ohms,not touched in the most recent affair, was the former employer ofJoachim Schmidt, the securities trader who gained notoriety in the VWsecurities scandal.  A report in the business magazine Wirtschaftswocheclaims that Poehl's former secretary, who was fired after allegedlyproviding Schmidt with information about dollar interventions, was laterhired by Ohms.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991UNITED KINGDOMThe half-point cut in interest rates, courtesy of the Bundesbank, came onschedule.  And the enthusiasm of the markets may convince ChancellorLamont to go for another half-point cut before the new Schlesinger-eraBundesbank Council reconvenes at the beginning of September.  TheFTSE has surged, the gilts market has suspended disbelief, andeconomists like Gavyn Davies (whose ideological bent is to the left) aresaying that there is finally light at the end of the tunnel.But hold on.  For once, we side with the CBI, whose latestpronouncement is that "brutal" anti-inflation policies (strongly supportedat the time by the CBI) have set back growth prospects for years.  Wedon't see any sign of the recession ending: Indeed, in some key sectors,the other shoe is still to fall.  The most vulnerable is property: theStanhope/Rosehaugh merger is a sign of weakness, not recovery.  Incentral London, 15% of office space supply is now unoccupied, andempty office space in the capital has increased by 6.2 million square feetin the last six months alone.  Plus, there is still a huge amount of newbuilding about to come on the market -- with no realistic chance offinding tenants.  Whether base rates are 11% or 11.5% is irrelevant tothe plight of these developers: Another half-point cut won't stop somevery nasty collapses.And the banks stand to suffer from the property fallout.  Theconventional wisdom is that the clearers are in for a bonanza -- after fiveyears of retrenchment, it is felt, they are leaner and more bottom-lineoriented.  As the economy recovers, it is argued, bank profits will soar.Well, maybe -- but only because bank accounting is exceptionallycreative and they are going to have to raise capital for Basel.  The truthis that all the clearers are sitting on real estate loans that arenonperforming, underperforming or outright worthless -- and they willhave to take the hit sometime.  Lamont's anticipated report exoneratingthe clearers from operating a cartel to the detriment of small businesscould well reinforce the feel-good tendency among the banks -- but inour view, the optimism is premature.As for gilts, the message seems to be that, despite the expectation ofhigher growth, inflationary expectations are falling even faster -- andgilts are, therefore, a solid bet.  But note that the markets are lookingvery selectively at the price data: The fact is that retail prices are stuckat 5.8% and that core output inflation is running at 6%.  And forecastsof 3.5% by Christmas, despite a pickup in growth, are wildly optimistic.Plus, the improvement in the June PSBR to "only" STG1.41 billion,from STG3.52 billion in May, is a one-off improvement: Had it not beenfor receipts from the Scottish power selloff, the amount would have beenalmost STG2.6 billion.  Given the doubts about the government's abilityto sell off the residue of BT as it had expected in the autumn, the PSBRfor FY 1991-92, which is slated at STG8 billion, could well come in atcloser to STG12-13 billion -- and that will offset even a substantialimprovement in inflation.Finally two pointers:* Barclays's new ECU issue of subordinated notes (a private placementto Asian investors) will be the first of several such calls as clearers lookfor capital to meet Basel ratios.  The ECU market is underdeveloped forUK institutions, and there is real potential there.* The front-runner to succeed Robin Leigh-Pemberton, whose stock hastaken a tumble as a result of BCCI, is SIB's David Walker.  As anoutsider, he has remained untainted by the BCCI affair -- unlike EddieGeorge, who might normally get the nod.  As a former insider, he wouldbe better able to clean house under a Labour government than someonelike David Scholey.  Plus, he is a genuinely impressive intellect.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991MIDLAND IN MOSCOWThe Financial Times investigation into the activities of a Midland Banktrade subsidiary in the arms business, and the revelation of its links tothe world of British spookery -- not to mention losses close to STG100million over 10 years -- is yet another bizarre banking story that couldrun and run.  Moreover, the emerging evidence indicates close traditionallinks between boardrooms at a number of clearing banks (and one or twomerchant banks) and the intelligence community, though Midland maybe the only one to have had its senior staff commit "suicide" in Moscow.What must have present managements worried is just how easy it seemsto have been to lose MITS within the Midland organizational structure:Kit McMahon is no fool, but it took him at least a couple of years toidentify a division that was apparently losing money like Bank of NewEngland.  A couple of questions to the auditor might not be amiss: Whatare they paid for, after all?Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991GOVERNMENT FOR SALETransatlantic observers begin by accepting the British picture ofthemselves as squeaky-clean, which only heightens their incredulity whenthe venality of British politics and business is exposed to view.  A goodcase in point is the decision by British Airways' boss, Lord King, towithhold his company's regular STG40,000 contribution to the Toryparty because the DTI and Department of Transport have decided to openup BA's cozy near-monopoly of long-haul routes out of Heathrow tocompetition -- particularly from Virgin's Richard Branson.  In the US,this kind of corporate donation  goes through a PAC and is decently (ifingenuously) clothed in some sort of ideological garb -- free markets, fairtrade, Japan-bashing, whatever.  In the UK, it is right up front -- henceKing's decision.  What is more outrageous is that, by and large, theBritish press has applauded King for his frankness -- but then the presshas a pretty relaxed view of its perks, too.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991CRIME PAYSLatest evidence that the UK courts are hopelessly naive comes from thedecision just handed down against the four principals in the GartonAmhurst case, who got between 2 1/2 and 4 1/2 years in jail for fleecingclients quite shamelessly of at least STG4.7 million over 10 years.  Thefour, who were barely in their 20s when the scam started, will do 12-24months with good behavior -- and will then have to forego the pleasuresof being a company director for another couple of years.  Mostoutrageous, the judge accepted that they had salted nothing away for thiskind of rainy day, and hence made no restitution order against them.That seems more like Colombian than English justice.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991SWITZERLANDEXPECTATIONS that inflation will remain stubbornly high through thesummer -- with the year-on-year index climbing in June to its highestlevel in nearly a decade, at 6.6% -- have dampened investor interest inthe SF bond market.  The falloff in new issues as the summer breakbegins also has hurt the market.  Current prices already discount ananticipated fall in inflation to 4.5% by yearend, and leading analysts atSwiss banks expect SF bond yields to hold near present levels toyearend.The consensus among Zurich bankers is that investors would do betterto move now to lengthen maturity profiles in SF fixed-income portfolios-- those who wait could find supply short when the market takes a moredramatic upturn.  From a technical perspective, another good play inZuerich at present is Japanese equity warrants, currently recommendedby CS director Pierre Andre Chappallaz.  In recent weeks, warrantvalues have declined from a 20% to 14% premium, which has made thissector competitive with other currency warrants.  Chappallaz warns,however, that persistent political uncertainty in Japan could lead tofurther depreciation in value.Bank Vontobel also is advising investors to reduce liquidity in allcurrencies.  Jean-Pierre Rothenbuehler, head of the bank's advisorydepartment for private clients, views DM investments as likely to remainthe most solid in Europe, but prefers Euro-DM to the domestic Bundmarket.  Vontobel analysts are concerned at the pall cast over thedomestic market by the recent constitutional court decision regardingtaxation of interest income.  The result could be a split in the DM bondmarket, with prices falling for Bunds but rising for Euro-DM issues.As for the Swiss stock market, currently near its 1991 high, Vontobelanticipates little movement over the next several weeks, with theeconomic slowdown and slower-than-anticipated improvement on theinflation front already factored into pricing.  The market will regain itsupward momentum only with a significant drop in interest rates andimproved Swiss corporate earnings, bolstered by recent favorablemovements in SF exchange rates against the dollar and the yen.A new study of prospective Swiss economic integration with Europe byPeter Meier, chief economic analyst at Zurcher Kantonalbank, seessignificant advantage in the potentially enhanced stability that EMSalignment could bring to the Swiss franc.  In Meier's view, full Swissintegration in the EMS would appear a logical extension of present ECmovement toward monetary union.  But SNB Governor Markus Lusserremains skeptical over the perceived benefits in closer SF alignment withthe EMS.  In our view, however, the SNB's dream of monetary policyindependence from Germany appears impossible to realize in the presentenvironment.On interest rates, Meier foresees no fall in domestic mortgage rates atleast until Euro-SF rates begin to slide more sharply.  Three-monthEuro-SF rates, currently around 7 13/16-7 15/16%, should ease byaround half a point by yearend, but ZKB analysts view that fall asinsufficient to influence mortgage rates.Don't expect any further substantial improvement in the Swiss tradedeficit to yearend, as softening in export sales abroad should offset ananticipated falloff in import demand.  In the first half, the trade deficitdeclined by 8% against the year-ago period to SF5 billion, while termsof trade improved due to modest decline in import prices and modestimprovement in average export values.  Widening interest spreadscurrently favor the DM -- some Swiss forecasters now anticipate a riseto SF0.88/DM on the cross by yearend -- but the currency movement isunlikely to have a major impact on the bilateral balance withSwitzerland's largest key trading partner.  IR expects softened Germandemand as a result of the economic slowdown to weaken Swiss exportsto that country in the second half.The Swiss economic slowdown has taken its toll on federal finances.The Federal Financial Department in Berne, in revised projections basedon first-half tax income, predicts that the budget will finish the year indeficit for the first time in five years.  The new forecast contrasts withan original budget projection of a SF73 million surplus in 1991.Estimated tax revenues of SF16.2 billion were significantly belowexpectations: Direct federal tax income appears likely to come in nearanticipated levels at yearend, but turnover taxes -- the main source offederal tax revenues -- show a substantial decline.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991FRANCENOW THAT year-on-year inflation is lower in France than in Germanyfor the first time in 18 years, FM Beregovoy sees a widening margin ofcomfort to ease credit -- but he will resist political pressure for moreaggressive action.  Provisional data show the June CPI at just 0.2%, withthe year-on-year rate up by 10 bp from May to 3.3%.  But a 0.5%monthly surge pushed the German CPI up to 3.5% year-on-year in June.The widely anticipated reversal in the Franco-German inflationdifferential is a personal victory for Beregovoy, whose tight-money,strong-franc policies over the past three years have steadily slowed pricegrowth.France should retain the inflation edge over Germany at least until theend of the year, given expectations of stable French inflation around 3%and persistent reconstruction pressures on German prices.  ButBeregovoy and the Bank of France are taking a cautious line on interestrates, despite mounting political pressure to ease monetary policy toprime the economy.  French growth was flat in the first quarter and isexpected to remain sluggish at 1.5% for all of 1991, down from 2.8%in 1990.The BoF's benchmark rates, the money market intervention rate and therepurchase rate for five- to 10-day securities, have held steady at 9% and10%, respectively, since March 18.  The rates are applied by the centralbank on its advances of liquidity to the banking system and are generallyregarded as the lower and upper limits for daily movement by short-termmarket-determined rates.  The BoF's quarter-point cut of key rates lastOctober was quickly followed by German monetary tightening that sentthe franc into dangerous territory, briefly over FF3.4200; the BoF nowappears firmly committed to holding the line at FF3.40.Advocates of immediate easing gained additional ammunition with thecontinued fall in housing starts to the end of the first quarter.  Thedownward trend is expected to continue through the summer, despite arecent pickup in construction permits.  The volume of houses completedin 1990 rose by just 1.6% after a rise of 5.4% in 1989, while spendingon house purchases and building improvements rose by a feeble 0.2%.Developers reported a sharp rise in housing inventory to FF7.1 billionin 1990, from FF2.4 billion the year before.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991SABENA'S FATEThe EC Commission will decide next week whether to approve aproposed Belgian government aid package of BF35 billion to helprestructure struggling national air carrier Sabena.  The issue is seen asimportant since the EC is taking an increasingly dim view of subsidies,and last year heavily criticized Air France and UK-based Rover forhidden subsidy arrangements.  The Commission previously has indicatedthat it would approve a Sabena bailout only if:* it is a one-time operation, ruling out any future aid for the airline; and* Sabena's monopoly on routes to Brussels's Zaventem internationalairport is dismantled and access is granted to other airlines.The Commission is understood to believe that the Belgian governmenthas gone a long way toward meeting conditions for the aid.  The packagewould include a BF16.2 billion writeoff of long-term debt and would beextended in two phases.  An initial installment of BF10 billion would bepaid immediately upon Commission approval, mainly to finance up to3,000 layoffs.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991A BREAK IN THE FARM IMPASSE?EC Agriculture Commissioner Ray MacSharry has come up with a newplan designed to take large amounts of land out of production.  Thecomprehensive reform program is designed to encourage farmers to retireearly, tempted by lump-sum payments and pension plans.  Those stayingon would face a 35% cut in the Community's guaranteed prices, a 15%cut in support prices for beef, and a 4% cut in the EC milk quota overthe next three years.  The scheme would cost the EC budget almostSTG3 billion in compensation to farmers over three years -- butMacSharry argues that would be modest relative to the cost ofperpetuating the present subsidy system.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991ADVICE TO APPLICANTSEuropean Commissioner Henning Christophersen is advising Sweden andother EFTA countries positioning for EC membership to move early toharmonize economic policy with EC norms.  Sweden applied to join theEC on July 1 after voluntarily linking its currency to the ECU on May17.  Christophersen has indicated the EC Commission will give itsopinion at the end of July on the membership bid filed two years ago byAustria.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991SOVIET UNIONCAN THE WEST avoid paying for perestroika?  The G7 managed topolitely fend off Gorbachev's financial pleas at the London summit: Thesix-point program for the future is skillfully and carefully crafted to putthe emphasis on technical assistance and macroeconomic monitoring bythe multilaterals.  But it should already be obvious that -- even if foreigncapital makes inroads in select areas such as energy, mining andaerospace,   and  even  if  the  Soviet  Parliament  and  the  republicsadopt the necessary legal framework for development of the privateeconomy -- the need for more substantial financial aid will remain acute.The key to the future of the Soviet economy -- assuming it is not rippedapart by nationalist movements -- remains privatization.  But thetransition to a market economy will be long and difficult: Production willcontinue to plummet in the interim, existing distribution patterns will bedisrupted, and living standards will slide further.The conundrum is that Western leaders tacitly recognize Gorbachev'sgreat experiment -- and his government -- could come crashing down ifhe cannot raise the capital abroad to finance a more ambitious andaccelerated market transformation, yet they are reluctant to make massivefinancial commitments.  The G7's insistence on a more specific andviable blueprint for reform is understandable -- but the risk is that thetransformation will be stopped dead in its tracks while the West quibblesover the details of the program.  Sweeping Soviet capitulations on globalpolicy from Eastern Europe to arms control of the magnitude agreed byGorbachev would have been inconceivable a decade ago -- andGorbachev's defenders would argue that the G7 would ultimately bedoing itself a favor by more generously assisting the transition to acapitalist economy.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991CZECHOSLOVAKIAEXPECT a reasonably good economic performance for 1991, despitepredictable setbacks in the transition to a market economy.  Like its EastEuropean neighbors, Czechoslovakia has suffered economic damage fromlost oil imports and Mideast contracts as a result of the Gulf crisis, aswell as from disruption of trade with the Soviet Union.  But Prague hasfared better in weathering the storm -- and while FM Vacalv Klaus warnsagainst premature optimism, government officials express satisfactionwith the progress made toward economic stabilization thus far.Jaromir Zahradnik, vice president of the National Bank, notes that thekoruna exchange rate has stabilized and that inflation has been broughtunder control after an initial surge following price decontrol at the startof the year.  The CPI, which surged to 26% monthly in January,dropped below 2% in May.  Unemployment has remained moderate ataround 3% of the workforce, in contrast to much higher levels inneighboring countries.  Prague is proceeding with careful butfundamental reform of the banking and financial systems.  State subsidiesfor unprofitable enterprises are gradually being phased out, andbankruptcies are certain to follow.On balance, Prague's go-slowly approach to reform appears to haveproduced less economic disruption and political turmoil than Warsaw'smore sweeping strategy.  Whether that is a matter of superior economicmanagement is another  question -- clearly Czechoslovakia has alsobenefited from the fact that its foreign debt position is the mostadvantageous among all East European countries save Romania.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991POLANDWARSAW will press the IMF for new concessions in its new pact withthe multilateral to ease the country's worsening financial straits.  Thegovernment is watching helplessly as revenues from state-ownedenterprises dwindle, and the fledgling private sector can scarcely beexpected to fill the gaping hole in the budget.  The fiscal deficit isprojected to reach US$777 million this year, with inflation expected tohit 55%.  Goals agreed with the IMF when the US$2.5 billion three-yearassistance package was originally negotiated in April already appearhopelessly beyond reach.  One sign of Warsaw's growing desperation isthe postponement of a US$100 million payment on interest arrears owedto commercial bank creditors.Poland's financial reputation will be further tarnished by the brewingscandal at the Agency for Foreign Debt Servicing.  The agency wasestablished before Solidarity took power, but several of its officials,including Vice Finance Minister Janusz Sawicki, hold important positionsin the Bielecki government.  The agency is accused of mishandling thefunds, unauthorized repurchase transactions of national debt and outrightfraud.The IMF will not agree readily to take the pressure off Warsaw -- butsome compromise appears inevitable if credit lines to Poland are to bepreserved.  Local political observers are loath to predict when thepopulation's tolerance for further austerity measures will run out, but thepessimists say the breaking point is dangerously close.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991BRAZILMONTHLY INFLATION moved as anticipated into double digits inJune, but the rise was not so drastic as to fatally undercut confidence inEconomy Minister Marcilio Marques Moreira's economic program.Estimates by the FIPE institute at the University of Sao Paulo showinflation for the 30-day period to July 8 accelerated to 10.7%, and FIPEeconomists expect inflation to peak around 11% before easing to 10% byend-July.The IMF technical mission that arrived in Brazil this week will have toweigh the recent economic progress made under Moreira againstlingering concerns, specifically over the inflation outlook and adeterioration in the fiscal situation after steady improvement in 1990.The latter problem reflects a sharp reduction in government revenues,caused by restoration of diverse fiscal incentives by Congress and anunexpected plunge in income tax receipts laid to bureaucratic confusionunder the previous economic team.  Restored tax breaks alone have costthe federal treasury an estimated US$1.77 billion, boosting totalgiveaways through fiscal incentives to a crushing US$7.82 billion -- or1.51% of GDP.  Bureaucratic foulups in income tax collection over thepast year have cost the treasury another US$1 billion.Despite these fiscal problems, Moreira stands a good chance ofpersuading the Fund to sign off on a new credit facility so long as he canoffer convincing evidence that the economic situation has been stabilizedand inflation has been brought under control.  In this context, the Julyinflation figures assume added weight as an indicator of the credibilityand effectiveness of Moreira's economic policy management.  His cloutwith US and IMF officials in Washington should also help -- but noamount of influence could overcome a renewed deterioration in theinflation trend.  To bolster anti-inflation policy, Moreira has concentratedhis formidable diplomatic skills on persuading Congress of the need toresist pressure for a return to full-fledged wage indexation.  His successin maintaining wage restraint thus far should improve Brazil's case withthe IMF.  Moreira also can be expected to emphasize the fiscal windfallanticipated from the dramatic shortening of the term for industrial taxcollections under EM 297.Assuming July inflation holds below 11%, Moreira is well positioned togain IMF approval of a new letter of intent, clearing the way for signoffon a credit facility.  Moreira's immediate objective is to gain IMFcommitment to an 18-month standby loan, which currently is expectedto total between US$1.5-2 billion.  If Brazil remains on course inmeeting its IMF targets, the economy minister is expected to seeksubsequent Fund approval of an extended fund facility for a three-yearterm, with a credit commitment totaling US$3 billion or more.  If theIMF hurdle can be cleared, Moreira remains optimistic that a deal withcommercial bank creditors can be reached by yearend.  The bank talkscan be expected to proceed in parallel with renegotiation of Paris Clubdebt, currently estimated at around US$4 billion.Terms for securitization of exports were regulated by the Central Bankthis week in Carta Circular 2185, which will allow Brazilian exportersto negotiate loans in foreign currency with an international financialinstitution using export revenues as collateral.  Sources in Brasilia reportthat Brazilian exporters already have filed requests at the Central Banktotaling a massive US$1.5 billion for approval of securitizationoperations.  The new mechanism for export financing already appears tobe supplanting traditional reliance on short-term credit lines from foreignbanks.  According to exporters, securitization is advantageous since itallows for longer terms, lower interest rates and larger volumes of cashin foreign currency rather than cruzeiros.  The CB regulation allowsBrazilian exporters to open foreign bank accounts where they can depositpart of their revenues.The National Monetary Council this week also approved the rules forconversion of foreign debt for financing environmental projects.  Aconversion fund will be constituted by conversion of debt into Treasurypapers denominated in cruzeiros with FX correction and fixed interest of6% yearly.  Brazilian debt would be acquired abroad at prevailingsecondary market discounts and exchanged for Treasury papers.  CBPresident Francisco Gros said that the G7 commitment at the Londonsummit to initial investment in Amazon conservation will be discussedwithin the rules approved this week.  In a first stage, the government hasset a ceiling of US$100 million on this type of conversion, but Grosalready concedes that this limit may well be increased.A consortium of eight foreign private bank creditors headed by Austria'sBBA Creditanstalt-Bankverein plans to participate in the Brazilianprivatization process through debt-equity conversions.  This marks thefirst time that a group of creditor banks has joined for this purpose. Theother banks in the consortium are Amro of Holland, Banco Portugues doAtlantico of Portugal, Generale Bank of Belgium, Dresdner and BFG ofGermany, and UBS and SBC of Switzerland.  A leading figure in puttingtogether the consortium is former CB President Fernao Bracher,president of BBA Creditanstalt in Brazil.After moving up at the beginning of the week, interest rates began toslide on July 17.  The traditional pattern of government expendituresabove receipts in the second half of the month is one factor; another isthe conclusion of reschedulings for most state banks with outstandingdebt obligations to the Central Bank.  Interbank CD rates dropped atmidweek from 17.5% monthly to 15.3%; private bank CDs were offeredfor yearly rates of 325/340%, trending lower.  The official CB referencerate, or TRD, for July has been set slightly higher at 10.05%, broadlyconsistent with inflation estimates for the month.The black dollar moved at midweek to Cr$364/366, at a 10.9% premiumover the commercial rate at Cr$329/330.  Gold prices edged up toCr$4,307, for a 10.8% advance over the past month.  After rallyingearly in the week, the BOVESPA dropped 0.4% on July 17 to 14,164points with a trading volume of Cr$9.48 billion; the BVRJ rose 0.9% to57,683 points with trading volume at Cr$2.58 billion.  Telebras, thetelecoms parastatal, accounted for close to half of July 17 trading onBOVESPA on expectations of spectacular first half profits exceedingUS$500 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991BANK CONSOLIDATION, BRAZIL-STYLEBrazilian bank earnings reports for the first five months of the year showan industry that has grown in numbers -- and deteriorated in profitability.The number of banks in Brazil has reached 239, and 116 -- nearly half--  reported losses for the January-May period.In good part, this negative performance reflects the fallout from anexcessive expansion of the industry in 1990, spurred by a flurry ofincorporations of small and medium-size institutions.  Liberalization ofrules for bank incorporation under the 1988 constitution and subsequentregulations issued by the Sarney administration set the stage for lastyear's expansion.  The result was a surge in institutions from 153 in1989 to the present 239.The irony is that the expansion occurred even as the draconian freeze ofinvestment funds implemented under the original Collor Plan in March1990 drained liquidity from the system.  Total liquidity in the bankingsystem shrunk by nearly 50%, from US$116.5 billion in 1989 to US$59billion in 1990.  Many of the new banks were not well prepared to facethe adversities of 1990.  Most were founded by industrial and retailgroups, restructured brokerages and distributors seeking to profit fromlucrative margins of as much as 50% that prevailed in the last months ofthe Sarney administration.  Then came the liquidity crunch, followed bya wave of bankruptcies in the second half of 1990 and a continuedmonetary squeeze that put additional pressure on industry profit margins.Few of the new banks thus far have failed as a result of these financialpressures.  But industry executives believe that many will eventuallyhave to seek mergers to avoid going under, which could reduce the totalnumber of banks by as much as 40% over the next year.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991AIRCRAFTS FOR SALEWith the debut selloff of the state-owned steelmaker Usiminas set forSeptember, the Collor government is preparing to launch its secondprivatization with sale of the jet-turbine maintenance firm CompanhiaEletromecanica.  Celma, with assets officially valued at US$84 million,will be privatized in several stages.  An initial tender of up to 10% oftotal Celma shares will be offered to employees; United Technology,which currently owns a 13% shareholding in Celma, will be offered theoption to increase its stake up to the 40% maximum established forforeign shareholders in the privatization process.  Remaining Celmastock will go on the block for public offer on October 22.One problem that has held back privatization of Celma is the fact that itis the only domestic company qualified to service Brazilian Air Forcejets.  This issue was resolved through inclusion of a special clause inprivatization terms that guarantees such maintenance will be continued.Though the Celma selloff is on a much smaller scale than the Usiminasdeal, its sale breaks a number of nationalistic taboos and paves the wayfor a much more significant privatization: Brazil's biggest aircraft maker,Embraer.  The recent surprise appointment of former InfrastructureMinister Ozires Silva as president of Embraer -- the company he headedfrom its founding until he assumed the Petrobras presidency in 1986 --has been widely interpreted as a mission to get the parastatal ready forprivatization.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991ARGENTINAGOOD NEWS on the inflation front: The cost-of-living index shouldease this month to a range of 2.2-2.5%, from 3.1% in June.  EconomyMinister Cavallo has taken the initiative with a new decree issued thisweek to end blanket wage indexation, a key element in the government'santi-inflation strategy.But don't expect organized labor to accept wage restraint meekly.Steelworkers boss Lorenzo Miguel already has called a new 24-hourgeneral strike for July 24, in protest of plans by the state-owned steelgiant Somisa to lay off roughly one-third of its 13,000-strong workforce.CGT Saul Ubaldini is challenging the government on another front -- heis widely expected to enter the Buenos Aires gubernatorial contest as anindependent in September, and his anticipated vote share of up to 5%would likely come at the expense of Peronist nominee Eduardo Duharde.And the emerging alliance of Luis Barrionuevo, Ubaldini and Miguel --the so-called "BUM" factor -- poses a major threat to government wagepolicy.  Current expectations are that Cavallo will seek to hold wageadjustments within a range of 5-8% and limit adjustments to no morethan a semi-annual basis, but the unions promise rough sailing ahead.The Menem government is moving to wrap up final terms for agreementwith the Fund, bolstered by continued price stability.  The target date forsigning of the IMF standby accord now appears to be July 29, with afirst tranche of US$260 million expected to be disbursed in Septemberfrom a one-year facility totaling US$1.04 billion.The political situation is growing increasingly complicated as thePeronists move toward what could prove a devastating defeat inSeptember congressional and gubernatorial elections.  Radical leader andformer president Raul Alfonsin already is predicting a Peronist debacleand demanding a "national unity" government at the federal level.  Oneof the more extraordinary endorsements for a unity pact among the majorparties came from former US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, whosuggested to Foreign Ministere Guido di Tella that such a move wouldbolster foreign investor confidence in Argentina.President Menem appears unlikely to give ground until the electionresults are in, though speculation is rife that he will implement areshuffle at Interior if the ruling party suffers serious setbacks.  Presentforecasts anticipate that the Peronists will lose a substantial number ofcongressional seats and governorships, with the Radicals making modestgains but provincial parties staging the largest advances.  The 120-seatPeronist plurality on the 254-seat lower house looks certain to undergoserious erosion, though the party could cling to its majority in theSenate.The federal government's confrontation with the provinces deepened withthe brash move by Radical Governor Massaccesi in Rio Negro to seize(with local police assistance) funds held at a CB-related federal financialinstitution in the region.  Massaccesi claimed that the seizure wasjustified by his need to meet state payrolls and the federal government'sfailure to provide the provinces adequate resources to meet basicfinancial requirements.  The conspicuous lack of criticism from otherprovincial leaders has left Economy Minister Cavallo isolated in hisefforts to force return of the seized funds, though the federal governmenthas tightened the squeeze by canceling clearing for the province for newwithdrawals.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991NEW ZEALANDCONSUMER PRICES rose just 0.1% in the second quarter, the leastsince 1967, while annual inflation slowed sharply to 2.8%.  This placesNew Zealand ahead of all major OECD countries, including Australia,Germany, Japan, the US and UK -- its biggest trading partners.  Theobvious implication is that local goods will become increasinglycompetitive in foreign markets, and confirms our belief that the longer-term outlook for the economy is decidedly bullish.  The continueddepreciation of the kiwi dollar to under the key 57-cent level against thegreenback and toward 57 on the TWI carries little inflation risk, andinstead will support a durable expansion led by exports later this year.Inflation fell in most categories, particularly in transportation, householdand food costs.  Significantly, existing house prices fell 0.6% in thequarter, the first drop since 1977.  Adjustment for volatile energy prices,tax-related changes and other one-off factors yields an underlying annualinflation rate of 2.2%, down from 2.7% in the first quarter and 4% ayear ago.  Weak domestic demand, falling real wages and fallinginflation expectations are all favorable portents.  NZNB economistsforecast underlying price growth of 2.3% for all of 1991.The reaction of the Reserve Bank to the CPI result, which was in linewith expectations, speaks volumes about the official commitment to pricestability.  Market participants had hoped for a signal that the RB wouldnow tolerate a positively sloped yield curve; on July 15, the gap between90 days and five years was virtually flat, compared with minus 151 bpone year ago.  Instead, the CB declared that the encouraging headlineinflation rate overstates the actual improvement, and supported this withits housing adjusted price index, which rose 0.3% in June and 3.4%year-on-year.  Clearly, the monetary authority is not contemplating asignificant shift in policy as a result of the second quarter CPI.  On thecontrary, the RB noted that wholesale interest rates and the exchange ratehave already largely discounted the improvement in inflation.  Finally,it warned that modest credit easing awaits further evidence that pricepressures remain under control and confirmation in this month's budgetthat the government's fiscal house will be put in order.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991PHILIPPINESECONOMICS AND POLITICS have taken a turn for the worse.Government statisticians report that the economy is at a virtual standstill,after an imperceptible 0.2% expansion in the first quarter.  Inflation roseto a five-year high of 19.0% annually in June, and unemployment hit asix-year peak of 15.1% in April, which is certain to increase further asthe 600,000 layoffs linked to the Mount Pinatubo eruption flow throughto the official data.The recent political developments are equally bearish.  The resignationof Oscar Orbos, President Aquino's eminently capable and trustedexecutive secretary, was apparently the result of a cabinet power play.Orbos was principally responsible for implementing a local version ofglasnost and perestroika, which have made the administration moreaccessible to the electorate and streamlined the bloated governmentbureaucracy; his absence will be sorely felt.  At the same time, DefenseSecretary Fidel Ramos vacated his portfolio to pursue the ruling party'smandate in the May 1992 elections.  These departures will leave thepresident without two of her most popular advisers, just as a social crisisis emerging on the horizon.Indeed, opposition members Sen. Juan Ponce Enrile and VP SalvadorLaurel recently warned of impending chaos -- food riots staged by thethousands left jobless, hungry and homeless by the fury of Pinatubo.Although this strikes IR as deliberately alarmist and laden with ulteriorpolitical motives, the deteriorating economy does have explosivepotential.  Both the rightist Iglesia Ni Kristo Church of Christ group andthe leftist Kilusang Mayo Uno May 1st movement are planning massiverallies.  Their demands: rollback of petroleum prices to the level ofDecember 4, 1990, when Aquino pushed through sharp increases tocomply with IMF guidelines; and elimination of the 9% import surtaximplemented in January.The INK's agenda could well extend beyond these two issues.  Loyal tothe late President Marcos, closely knit and thus politically influential, thisextremist sect is capable of putting all of its 4 million supporters on thestreets.  The apparent gambit: If the Catholic church was able toorganize one million for the historic people-power movement in February1986 that led to Marcos's demise, the INK can do the same to Aquino.To guard against infiltration by troublemakers, the sect has recruitedthousands of marshals backed by six helicopters.In contrast, the KMU has a proven track record for provoking violence.And IR does not dismiss the possibility that renegade Col. "Gringo"Honasan and his Reform Armed Forces Movement might seek to takeadvantage of the situation by mounting another coup attempt.  Twohopeful notes: The conservative Federation of Free Farmers and theTrade Union Congress of the Philippines will not join the INK and KMUin the street demonstrations; and the unofficial ceasefire continues to holdin the volcano-affected regions and insurgency-related incidentselsewhere remain subdued.Perhaps the worst news came from Washington, which disclosed thatClark AFB will be abandoned after all because of the devastationwrought by the volcano.  A Pentagon survey team estimated that it wouldcost US$500-800 million to dig out the 9,000-acre base and repairrunways and more than 70 buildings that were damaged by ash.  Thus,the Air Force will vacate Clark at the expiration of the existing lease onSeptember 16, 1992.  But the US considered Subic Naval Base with itsstrategically important deep-water port worth the cost of rehabilitation.In fact, the Pinatubo disaster put new urgency into the talks that havedragged on for 14 months.  Chief negotiator Richard Armitage'sbargaining position was substantially enhanced by the dire economiccircumstances in the Philippines, and by the growing congressionalopposition to any continued military presence on the islands when the USis shuttering dozens of installations at home.  The two sides reachedagreement this week on a new lease for Subic, which carries a 10-yearterm and provides for US$400-500 million in cash and in-kindcompensation divided about equally.  This will provide the economy withurgently needed relief, although the treaty will face stiff opposition in thePhilippine Senate, where approval by a two-thirds vote is required.The poor political and economic fundamentals explain the collapse of theManila Composite to 990 points on July 12 from 1,554 two weeks ago.Curiously, the peso regrouped from a brief slide to appreciate by 16centavos to P27.59/US$ in official dealing and by 42 centavos toUS$27.55 in parallel activity -- unsustainable strength in both cases.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991INDIAECONOMIC reforms have been coming from the new Congressgovernment of PM Narasimha Rao at such a furious pace that no one isquite able to figure out their impact on the economy or on specificindustries.  Over the past three weeks, the government has:* devalued the rupee by around 18% against a basket of currencies andpromised to make the rupee a convertible currency in three to five years'time;* overhauled the export policy regime;* raised bank lending rates; and* presented a railways budget that makes a determined effort to putindustry finances on a firm footing.And the most dramatic moves are yet to come.  The government isdrafting a new industrial policy that promises to push deregulation wellbeyond previous expectations, and its new budget is expected to narrowthe federal deficit, slash a range of subsidies and launch privatizations forselect public sector enterprises.In IR's view, the significance of the rupee devaluation has beenexaggerated, and its benefits in the medium term remain unclear.  Butthe government had no choice -- not so much because of IMF insistenceas a condition for new credit, but rather to shore up eroded confidenceamong international bankers (which led to an almost completeevaporation of short-term loans) and expatriate Indians (who made heavywithdrawals from foreign currency deposits held in Indian banks).  Atthe pace of deterioration on the eve of devaluation, the country's FXreserves of R25 billion, equivalent to just two weeks' import cover,would have run out in three days.  The initial steep devaluation of therupee was a dramatic gesture intended to send a message that the newgovernment was determined to restore economic and fiscal order andserious about carrying out IMF-approved reforms.  The strategy appearsto have worked -- at least for now.  The run on overseas Indian depositshas ceased, both because of renewed confidence in the government andbecause a devalued rupee implies higher returns for expatriates in rupeeterms.The long-term implications of rupee devaluation for the balance ofpayments, however, are unclear.  The 1966 devaluation of the rupeefailed in the short run because of production constraints caused bydrought, though it did tend to narrow the trade gap over the longer term.In the 1970s and 1980s, however, the steady decline of the rupee, whileleading to an acceleration of exports, failed to narrow the trade gap asimports also grew rapidly.  Given that India's export mix remainsheavily weighted toward relatively price-inelastic commodities,devaluation by itself will not have a major impact on the trade balancein the near term -- but combined with the entire reform packageproposed, it could make a difference.  The real breakthrough so far hasbeen the new trade policy, which scraps the vexatious system ofgovernment-issued import licenses with a streamlined system for licenseissuance based on export performance (exporters will receive Exim scripsvalued at up to 30% of exports, which will be freely traded).  Thereform eliminates procedural delays and diminishes opportunities forbureaucratic corruption; more important, it links imports to exportperformance -- a definite incentive to manufacturers to step up exportcapability.  Import-dependent industries (such as computers andconsumer electronics) will obviously be hit hard, while exporters ofgoods with minimal import content (such as various agribusinesses) willreap windfall profits by selling off Exim scrips they earn but do notrequire.  The new trade policy also eliminates cash subsidies forexporters (the devaluation of 18% should be adequate incentive forcompetitive exporters, while uncompetitive exports will cease), savingthe government R40 billion per fiscal year -- a move that will go a longway toward bridging this year's budget deficit.Bank lending interest rates have been raised to a minimum of 18% fromthe existing 17%, with banks free as before to fix rates over theminimum.  A move to increase long-term interest rates was announcedearlier.  The moves are intended partly to rein in excess demand in theeconomy, but also to answer persistent demands for pricing scarce capitalmore realistically.Rationalization is also the central theme behind railway rate reform, withboth freight and passenger fares hiked to yield a projected budgetsurplus.  Market borrowings by the railways will be increased inaccordance with the principle that reliance on budgetary allocations mustdiminish, which partly explains the move to reduce subsidies forpassenger travel.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991US DOLLARThe G7 went into the London economic summit with lofty expectations.Depending on who was talking, these included a pledge to revitalize thestalled Uruguay round of GATT, improve the coordination of economicpolicy, provide debt relief for Third World countries, step up the war ondrugs and money-laundering, draft a plan for environmental protection,and in general promote sustained economic recovery and price stabilityfor all.  The formal emphasis on economic issues notwithstanding, themost important item on the agenda was clearly Mikhail Gorbachev.  Inshort, the seven heads of state aimed to do nothing less than manufactureperestroika on a global scale.The flurry of communiques issued at the conclusion of the summitdeclared substantial progress on all counts.  In fact though, the talks didlittle more than confirm that the Seven are not prepared to abandon theirparochial interests for the collective good.  The US expansion is ontrack, the economic slowdown in continental Europe and Japan willcontinue, the collapsing economies of Eastern Europe and the SovietUnion will collapse further -- despite the best efforts of the august group.As expected, Bonn eloquently represented Moscow's case for buckets ofWestern cash, which was vigorously resisted by Washington and Tokyo.In the event, the opposing sides compromised and agreed to provideplenty of moral support for the beleaguered Kremlin leader but nobailout -- again, as expected.None of this should have come as a surprise.  On the contrary, theoutcome was virtually preordained and reflects the nettlesome economic,political and social problems that each of the Seven faces at home.Japan's Toshiki Kaifu arrived in London somewhat humbled by thebrokerage scandal in Tokyo and revelations that Japanese firms illegallysupplied military hardware to Iraq.  But the others also came withforgettable baggage, and almost no one could escape responsibility forthe embarrassing BCCI affair.For the foreign exchanges, the significance is that the solid consensusthat led to the Plaza and Louvre accords no longer exists.  Thus, thedollar will dance to the tune played in the markets, with little regard tothe preferences of the authorities.  From IR's perspective, the road forthe dollar is clearly up.  Readers are well acquainted with the reasons,which in brief review focus on the favorable economic and politicalfundamentals for the US, particularly when compared with Germany.The recent statistics indicate further improvement at American factoriesand reveal signs of life in the moribund housing market.  Even thedismal auto industry appears to have rebounded modestly.  At the sametime, both wholesale and retail inflation remain under control (anunsustainable jump in renter and homeowner costs was responsible forthe 0.4% rise in the core CPI for June).  Granted the rosy outlookshould not be exaggerated -- the unexpected 0.2% decline in retail saleslast month confirms that consumers are not prepared to embark on aspending binge, and the decline in the personal savings rate to 3.6% inMay suggests that they may not be able to.  But there is no doubt thatthe business cycle in the US is ahead of much of the industrializedworld.Thus, IR is confident of the dollar's longer-term direction, even thoughdaily and weekly volatility will remain high.  This past week was noexception.  After trading more quietly in early July, a riot broke out onJuly 12, as a pair of weak US statistics combined with a sharp responsefrom the authorities to send the dollar plummeting from DM1.8410 to alow of DM1.7850 in a matter of hours.  The repeated bouts of concertedintervention -- by 15 central banks, including the Fed and Bundesbank--  reflected truly masterful timing that forced the FX markets into adefensive mode ahead of the London meeting.  Although no one willadmit as much, the Fed's participation was obviously part of a G7 pact:The Bundesbank's Poehl agreed to delay tightening at the July 11 councilmeeting in exchange for Alan Greenspan's support for a coordinatedattack.IR's advice all along has been to take advantage of dips to buy cheaply--  and the markets seem to have the same idea.  Indeed, the dollar wasconsistently supported at key levels above DM1.78.  Even the latestselloff on July 18 linked to the May merchandise trade report (bothexports and imports declined, a sign of weak demand at home andabroad) failed to inflict the fatal blow.  The greenback was easily beatenthrough the critical DM1.7770 area to a low above DM1.7650, but boththe corporates and the dealers stepped in to bid it up to safer levels.  Inour view, the dollar will continue to run on a treadmill until participantssee compelling reasons for a break into a new range.  Thus, we preferto believe that current prices are close to an effective bottom.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991GERMAN MARKA BOXING MATCH is in progress.  In one corner, the technicals arepummeling the dollar lower.  On July 18, the unit broke through supportat DM1.7840 and the more important DM1.7770 level and tumbled anadditional 120 points before regaining its footing.  In the other corner,the fundamentals have thrown the favorable US economic statistics intothe ring to defend their case for a higher dollar.  The technical analysisis as follows: We have witnessed a correction after the (halting) rallyfrom DM1.6900 to DM1.8425.  On this current dollar downtrend, thesupport levels are DM1.7850 (already vanquished) and DM1.7650(dangerously close).  Beyond that lie DM1.7550 and DM1.7480.  As thetheory goes, a break of DM1.7650 heralds a collapse to DM1.6900.This may look convincing on the charts, but we see little fundamentaljustification for a significant dollar correction.  Indeed, the recentappearance of corporate demand for dollars indicates skepticism amonglonger-term participants with the bearish astrology.  In addition, whilethe central banks have succeeded admirably in setting up the markets, wedoubt that their strategy is to sell the dollar down to DM1.70.  Thus, wewill operate in a DM1.7550-1.8150 range over the forecast horizon.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991JAPANESE YENTHE CONCERTED central bank defense of the DM on July 12 cost theyen heavily on the cross, which climbed from Y75.50/DM ahead of theintervention to test key resistance at Y76.90.  Since then, it has rangedmostly between Y76.00-76.60 in trendless trading.  The yen broke outof its narrow range against the dollar and soared 300 points to a high ofY136.05 during that furious Friday morning.  But in the meantime it hasretreated to Y137.50, and thus we look for it to remain inside ofY136-139 over the next two weeks.  IR's expectation that thedollar/mark is near bottom implies that the DM/Y is approaching its top-- a reversal of the scenario from last week.  Our success with the crossextends the record to four straight weeks (which will more than pay forstopping out of the short DM/SF position).  Most recently, readersbought DM for half at Y75.85 and soon took profit at Y76.85.  Nextweek, we suggest selling the cross for 50% at current levels aroundY77.20 with the expectation of again taking 100 points of profit.We should point out however that there is considerable disagreementabout the outlook.  For example, we hear that Japanese commercialbanks plan to raise substantial amounts of subordinated loans from lifeinsurance companies.  To increase lending domestically, life insurersmay reduce overseas investment and perhaps even repatriate foreignfunds.  The effect will be to reduce the demand for dollars and othercurrencies.  The markets also know that if the yen strengthens -- againstthe dollar or EMS bloc -- the insurance companies may need to purchaseyen to hedge their foreign investments.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991STERLINGTHE MARKETS ignored the 50-bp cut in base rates engineered by theBank of England on July 12.  In fact, the pound actually firmedmarginally on the cross to a high of DM2.9631/STG, and currentlyappears firm about one pfennig below.  Technicians now see goodsupport at DM2.95, compared with previous support atDM2.9350-2.9400.  The markets are also bullish the pound against thedollar.  One source close to the action saw a US brokerage purchaseSTG200 million of US$1.7500 sterling calls on the IMM at midweek.Nonetheless, IR remains skeptical of this currency and advises steeringclear of a continued rally.  The recent indicators on industrial output,unemployment and unit labor costs depict continued recession andresilient inflation pressures.  Readers are still fully short the cross atDM2.9450 and should take profits at DM2.9180.  Look for aUS$1.6250-1.6850 range against the dollar, and be prepared for sterlingto be punished if major support 30 points under the bottom is broken.On the yen cross, IR is still short the pound for 50% at Y226.00/STG,and will sell for the balance at Y228.00.  We have raised therecommended level to take profits to Y222.50.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991SWISS FRANCTHIS CROSS came under additional pressure in the past week.  Thefranc tested SF0.8700/DM after the Bundesbank announced thatmonetary policy would not change, and has recovered only 30 pointssince then.  A contributing factor was a July 17 report that the SNB willlink its currency to the ECU.  The markets interpreted this to mean thatthe Swiss are abandoning their traditional ties to the restrictive policiesin Bonn -- a ridiculous assertion since this never was an expressed policyof the SNB.  In any case, the prevailing dislike for the SF has forced usto reconsider the near-term outlook.  IR now advises stopping out ofshort DM acquired at SF0.8535 at a loss.  Immediately reverse topurchase the cross for a half lot at current levels around SF0.8660 andput on a quick stop-loss at SF0.8625.  Against the dollar, IR nailed theactual range for the July 17 week -- SF1.5443-1.5942, 40 points aboveprediction (although the dollar broke through the bottom during the July18 selloff).  A test of SF1.52 is possible over the fortnight, while thedollar should face resistance at SF1.57.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991FRENCH FRANCTHE FUNDAMENTAL strength of this franc was confirmed by the JuneCPI -- up 0.2% from the previous month and 3.3% from a year ago.This brought the growth rate of French prices under the German rate(3.5% at present) for the first time since 1973, and assures membershipin the elite group of low-inflation countries.  It also reflects thecommitment in Paris to building a strong currency through tough wagebargaining and a refusal to follow a beggar-thy-neighbor policy ofdevaluation.  Thus, IR's longer-term confidence in the FF is intact.  Butin the immediate future we cannot rule out a rise in the cross overFF3.40/DM, in view of the softer tone in franc deposit rates linked torecent remarks from FM Beregovoy that hint at a 25-bp cut in the CB'sintervention rate.  Consequently, we are more comfortable to square upshort DM at current levels around FF3.3930 for a modest profit of 10points.  Over the forecast horizon, readers should sell the cross for 50%at FF3.3975, and short for the balance at FF3.4050.  Against the dollar,buy francs at FF6.16 and sell at FF5.95.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991CANADIAN DOLLARTHE RECESSION may be over, but IR remains skeptical and has areceptive audience among Canadian business executives.  Indeed, manyare now raising the possibility of a double-dip recession that is alsomentioned south of the border.  At the very least, the economic recoverywill proceed from a deep hole, with little assistance from fiscal ormonetary policy.  Readers are familiar with our aversion to the high-yielding currencies.  The Canadian dollar is a particular favorite as aparking place for speculative Japanese capital, which has little allegiance.Indeed, further revelations about what is billed as "Canada's Watergate"triggered overnight selling on July 18 by three major Tokyo banks andsent the Can$ tumbling by nearly 100 points to Can$1.1565.  Those whohave patiently held greenbacks purchased at Can$1.1470 took 70 pointsof profit on the move.  IR recommends employing a similar strategy atslightly higher levels in the weeks ahead: Buy US for half of positionson a dip to Can$1.15 with a view to taking a full cent of profit.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991AUSTRALIAN DOLLARTHE JUNE employment report revealed a modest but unexpected dropin the jobless rate to 9.3%, and a more moderate rate of decline in full-time payrolls.  Canberra says -- we agree -- that Australia is slowlyemerging from an unusually deep recession, and surveys of businessexpectations point to the same conclusion.  However, we are lessoptimistic about the pace and strength of the recovery.  The labor marketin particular will remain weak for the foreseeable future, and a furtherrise in the unemployment rate toward 10% is not out of the question.  Infact, the Treasury forecasts a peak rate of 10.75%.  That seems undulypessimistic, but may help to explain the prevailing expectation for anadditional 50-bp reduction in official cash rates to 10% next month.  Themarket is tipping at a credit easing to accompany the second quarterreports on consumer prices on August 7 or the national accounts onAugust 15.  This could cut short the Aussie dollar's stubborn rally to ahigh of US$0.7767 this week.  In fact, the unit slid 40 points on July 17amid rumors (quickly denied) that the RBA had sold the A$ aroundUS$0.7750.  True or not, the reaction indicates that dealers have littleconfidence in holding long Aussie positions.  IR expects to take 100points of profit on short A$ acquired at US$0.7600, but now adviseslaying a stop at US$0.7810 to protect against an unlikely bounce.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991OVERVIEWCONVERGENCE WAS THE KEY to profits in European bond marketsas this year began, and until recently inflation and interest rates appearedto be trending toward Germany's more desirable levels.  FX risk aside,this partly explains why, in the first half of 1991, Spanish bondsoutperformed all other major government instruments with a local-currency total return of 13.9%.  But now that the drop in inflation hasstalled in Spain and Italy -- the other high-yielder -- high nominal returnsno longer suffice.  Meanwhile, inflation in Germany has crept up to3.5% and looks headed over 4%, pulling up the anchor of Europeanconvergence.  With German bond yields on the rise and the Bundesbankexpected to hike its central rates when its leadership returns fromholiday, some observers see pressure on yields in other majorgovernment securities markets.A case in point is France, where inflation, now at an annual 3.3% rate,is below Germany's for the first time since 1973.  Finance MinisterPierre Beregovoy makes no bones about wanting to cut interest rates,much to the dismay of analysts who point to a vulnerable exchange rateand inevitable German tightening.  Yet the French market, bolstered byan influx of capital fleeing Bunds, has shown some willingness to bringdown yields.  The lesson from this is that convergence, which took itscompass bearings from Germany, is off for the moment, although itmight be going too far to say divergence is now the rule.  Still, inmonths to come, markets with sound fundamentals will pave their ownroad while Germany struggles down the reunification path.  German ratesare pushing to attractive levels, but unfurling risk in Frankfurt makes the50-bp premium offered by French OATs even more attractive and givesBeregovoy leeway to push down rates regardless of the BB's intentions.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991UNITED STATESTREASURIES saw both extremes over the past week.  Investors werealternately encouraged by retreating producer prices and weak retailsales, and discouraged by unexpectedly high June consumer inflation andhousing starts.  The latter figures carried more weight.  The 5.2% gainin housing starts built the case for a durable -- if not necessarily dynamic-- recovery, while the rise in consumer prices disappointed bulls whopointed to the textbook tendency of inflation to slow in the wake of arecession.  However, economists are learning that the 1990-91 recessionis following an unpublished textbook, much to the chagrin of participantswho loaded up on long maturities.  Other factors contributed to theuncertain bond outlook.  Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan launched histwice-yearly testimony to Congress on the economy.  His message wasmixed in its implications for the Treasuries market: Despite compellingsigns of recovery, the central bank looks for meaningful progress oninflation.  But that was before the July 17 release of consumer prices --up just 0.2% overall, but with core (excluding energy and food) pricesup 0.4%.  Bond investors took that as an indication that inflationarypressures have not been purged by the recession and continue to threatenreal returns.  That, taken with the housing starts data, sparked sellingand markdowns to push the key 30-year bond yield to 8.49% on July 17,from 8.43% on July 12 after the PPI release.A rise in applications for jobless benefits on July 18 did not appear tobreak the recent trend of improvement in the labor market, and thus wasof little help.  During the July 18 session the long bond yield improvedslightly to 8.47%, but the upward bias remains.  With the June inflationfigures behind it, the market has begun to focus on issues of supply.  Inthe week ahead participants face the sale of US$12.5 billion in two-yearnotes and US$9.25 billion in five-year notes.  But of greater concern isthe August quarterly refunding operation, which has been estimated atUS$37.5 billion, another record.  Specific figures on the refunding areto be released July 31 -- which could accelerate sales and markdowns topush the key yield toward the 8.60% level.  Over the shorter term,however, the market could well manage to hold within the range pivotingaround 8.50% on grounds that the jury is still out about the strength ofthe recovery.  It may also reconsider the CPI data, which suffered fromsome one-off influences.  There has been some idle talk of another Fedeasing, but this seems improbable in view of the encouraging indicatorsand the bond market's resilient inflation jitters.  "Watchful waiting," inGreenspan's artful phrasing, speaks volumes, which makes intermediatematurities -- twos to fives -- the place to be.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991JAPANTOKYO BOND ACTIVITY was not reinvigorated by the return of theBig Four securities houses to full trading after their slap-on-the-wrist,four-day suspension for unethical dealings.  Indeed, IR wonders if thereis anything capable of shaking the Japanese government bond market outof its torpor.  The recent half-point cut in the official discount rate hasbeen absorbed without significant benefit to bonds.  It would not surpriseus if the Bank of Japan were to give the markets another 50-bp cut in thediscount rate by the end of this quarter (sooner if the Nikkei plungesbelow 22,000).  But that cannot be counted upon and the market may beobliged to bide its time and await further indications of a deceleratingeconomy, better price data and restoration of a positive yield curve.  Inthe meantime, bonds may do worse before they do better.We have seen reports that Japanese banks, under pressure to defend theircapital ratios eroded by the Nikkei's recent declines, intend to sell off asmuch as 30% of their bond holdings this year and next.  But a fall inmoney market rates could bolster the Nikkei and convince Japanese lifeinsurers to shift from cash and short-term instruments into bonds, inexpectation of a rally later this year assisted by a relatively strong yen.But until the CB moves to cut the ODR from its present 5.5% level,there will be little interest for participants to increase exposure inJapanese bonds.  The money market reveals no expectation of animminent cut, with the key unsecured overnight call rate trading around7.50% and the three-month CD changing hands at 7.60-7.65%.  Thoserates still figure very favorably with the benchmark 10-year governmentbond yield, which on July 18 stood at 6.74% after 6.78% a week earlier.IR expects little progress in the week ahead.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991GERMANYALTHOUGH the London economic summit lightened the burden onBunds of a Soviet economic debacle, the investment climate in Germanyitself continued to deteriorate.  While Chancellor Helmut Kohl andFinance Minister Theo Waigel were urging the rescue of Soviet PresidentMikhail Gorbachev's perestroika program, their opposition at home wason the offensive.  An SPD leader scoffed at Waigel's estimate of aDM140 billion public sector deficit this year, claiming it would amountto some DM202.1 billion; Rudi Walther, head of the Bundestag's budgetcommittee, said rising deficits were having devastating financial effects.Later the FM acknowledged a rise to DM156 billion, after whichDeutsche Bank chief economist Norbert Walter forecast what the marketsalready know: The Bundesbank will have to raise interest rates later thisyear.  Despite this, the bond market held its own during the issuance ofDM2.39 billion one- and two-year zero-coupon notes.  They went downat average yields of 9.20% (with a tail to 9.28%) and 9.18%,respectively.  The benchmark 10-year federal bond closed on July 17 ata yield of 8.59%, continuing a steady advance in the week.Market sentiment took a turn for the worse the next day, ironically justas the DM continued its rally against the dollar, on the basis of the Julymonthly report of the Bundesbank and the US trade report.  The CB saidthe price climate was worsening considerably even before the tax hikewas implemented this month.  Private economists see the cost of livingsurging to 4.2-4.3% in July compared with 3.5% in June, and the centralbank's policy-making council is not expected to respond by raising ratesbefore August 15.  While this inflationary surge was expected, therevised PSBR projection has conjured up images of a tidal wave of newsupply, further depressing prices and driving up yields.  On July 18 thekey 8 3/8% 10-year government bond yielded 8.66% as the futurescontract crashed through support levels; market operators are looking forbuying interest only at 8.75%.  In the current climate, IR expects Bundsto quickly reach that target -- at which investors may wish to begincautiously acquiring government paper.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991UNITED KINGDOMAS IR EXPECTED, the Bank of England cut the base lending rate by 50bp to 11% on July 12, even though the RPI figures released by the CSOwere above forecast.  Retail inflation remained at a 12-month rate of5.8% in June, the same as in May, due mainly to seasonal rises in foodprices.  Excluding mortgage payments, the rate rose to 6.9% from 6.6%.Gilt investors decided things were as good as they would be for a whileand began to lighten up, with many shifting funds to the Frenchgovernment bond market.  But there was more erosion at the front endthan in long maturities, given the strong fundamentals at the far end.Supply concerns are an additional factor.  On July 12 the BoE said it willissue STG500 million in paper in tranches of 12% and 9.5% stock due1998 and 2005, respectively.  Though well received, that contributed tothe market's more tenuous tone.However, it's premature to say that the gilts rally is over.  ExchequerNorman Lamont said at the summit that while he looks for a second halfrecovery, it has not yet begun.  On July 18 the market received a batteryof economic data that was relatively bullish for bonds.  Unemploymentrose to 8.1% in June from 7.9% in May and industrial production fellby a seasonally adjusted 0.5% in May after a 2.7% fall in April.  Whilethe figures cast doubt on predictions of a double-dip recession, they doindicate that the first dip is not over.  Thus, gilts will probably progressfurther.  On July 18 the benchmark 10% gilt maturing in February 2001yielded 10.27%, compared with 10.20% after the rate cut on July 12 and10.26% a week earlier.  The longer-dated 11 3/4% of 2003 yielded10.22% against 10.27% a week before,   and the 12% coupon of 2017yielded 9.97% after  10.02%.  IR sees continued declines in yields in theweeks ahead, although progress on the short end will depend onexpectations for additional credit easing.  But with elections apparentlydelayed until 1992 and inflation now stalled, the next cut is unlikely tocome until late in the summer.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNATIONAL REPORTS via NewsNetJuly 19, 1991OTHER MARKETSFrench bonds were well bid this week on June's 3.3% inflation rate.There was some disappointment on July 16, when the Bank of Franceleft its intervention rate at 9% in a tender operation, which may belinked to official concern that the franc might suffer.  But a 25-bp cut --the same as the last, in March -- is being discounted with inflation seenat 2.8% by yearend.  Still, foreign investors remain wary of the policiesof Socialist PM Edith Cresson.  Securities prices rose in the week asBeregovoy said low inflation would boost the franc and allow rate cuts.Yields fell 12-14 bp at an auction of two- and five-year notes on July 17,but the next day players balked at a large FF11 billion note tender.However, support levels held and prices looked firm.  The benchmark9.5% 10-year bond finished at 9.14%, up three bp from one weekbefore.  Progress is likely to be tied closely to the franc's position in theEMS grid.  Elsewhere, Spanish yields pushed up on July 18 aftergovernment-union talks on a proposed wage and productivity pact brokedown.  The yield at a tender of one-year bills rose to 12.04% from11.73% at the last such tender.  Economy Minister Carlos Solchagawarned of tighter fiscal policy and higher interest rates in answer toinflation, which is stubbornly holding around 6%.  Failure of the wageand productivity negotiations squelch talk that the Bank of Spain mightease its 12.75% intervention rate.Back to Headline List WT03-B05-13IA087-000634-B039-156http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it137.html 205.156.212.5 19970122025444 text/html 125276HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:52:25 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:38 GMTContent-length: 125088Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it137.html Sample Issue Copyright THE JAKARTA POST via NewsNet September 24, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES BNI president upbeat about share offering (636 words) Sukarno's daughters make peace with army officer (562 words) ABRI reshuffles another hundred senior officers (468 words) Minister confirms art theft (558 words) IKIP Surabaya selects new rector (190 words) 238 arrested for timber theft (202 words) Reporters demand proper probe (222 words) 'Clear conscience inspired Frans Seda' (305 words) Legislator deplores PDI candidate list (412 words) Vote-getters not needed, political scholars say (418 words) Internal dispute among labor exporters drags on (418 words) 'Hairy pollution crisis in Lampung' (259 words) NGOs demand controls on land ownership (499 words) 7-day cruise to Banda Islands (146 words) Medication too pricey for 50% of TB sufferers (298 words) Public participation in crime prevention sought (417 words) Man arrested for forging money (142 words) German musicians to perform here (131 words) 'Belantara Jakarta' on display (72 words) Worker crushed by steamroller (148 words) Sarwono hails idea to build homes on stilts (491 words) Lawyers demand acquittal of client (450 words) Clarity requested for 'public info campaign' (327 words) Defendant tells court of previous 'sin' (387 words) Idea on Jabotabek needs clear planning: Ginandjar (534 words) Our art for sale? (736 words) Visa card surcharges (252 words) Dewi A. Rais Abin (155 words) Polio vaccine safe (261 words) Museums need help to protect cultural legacy (378 words) Mystery of missing RI paintings puzzles art world (1475 words) Concessionaires told to set aside wood for locals (640 words) PT Gobel diversifies to build three-star hotel (439 words) ACeS gets US$60 million loan (311 words) Rukindo admits leakage (243 words) Inflation rate expected to hit 8.5% this year (464 words) Stock Exchange (1413 words) Gajah Surya to buy a 51.8% share of BDNI (442 words) Indonesian horse riders lack basic skills: Expert (427 words) Games medal winners cash in on victories (551 words) Chess meet lures top players (123 words) CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996BNI president upbeat about share offeringfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 1   JAKARTA (JP): The president of state-owned Bank Negara Indonesia(BNI) 1946, Widigdo Sukarman, said yesterday he was confident the bank'sinitial public offering (IPO) in November would be well received byinvestors despite the large number of shares it had to sell.   Widigdo said the bank, which started a "roadshow" promotion campaignhere yesterday, would take the IPO roadshow to six other cities inIndonesia and to major financial centers in Japan, Europe and the UnitedStates to attract investors.   "We are confident that foreign and domestic investors will respondpositively. The potential demand for BNI shares is quite good," he toldreporters after launching the bank's roadshow program, which is to endon Oct. 24.   He said the bank, the country's largest commercial bank, would sell1.08 billion new shares, or around 25 percent of its enlarged capital.   The share prices, each with a face value of Rp 500 (20 U.S. cents),are to be determined at the end of the roadshow. The shares are to besold to the public during the primary offering period between Nov. 6 andNov. 29.   Widigdo hinted that the price of the bank's shares would be set at areasonable level even though the potential demand for the shares waspromising.   "The bank's IPO is merely based on business factors so that we willmake a success not only on the primary market but also on the secondarymarket," he said in an indirect reference to the decline of a number oflisted companies' share prices to below their IPO prices.   He said the proceeds from the IPO would be used to boost its capitaland strengthen its short-term and long-term finance.Assets   BNI's total assets were valued at Rp 32.35 trillion ($13.7 billion)on June 30 this year, with deposits amounting to Rp 17.90 trillion andloans to Rp 20.44 trillion.   Its pretax profit totaled Rp 198.6 billion in the first semester ofthis year, or more than half of last year's pretax profit of Rp 378.7billion.   David Chang, the research division director of securities company PTVickers Ballas Tamara, said the bank, which had the widest nationalnetwork, with over 489 branches throughout the country and six overseasbranches, was projected to sell its shares at a price which offered aprice earning ratio between eight and 10 times of its 1997 profit. Onthe Jakarta Stock Exchange, the banking sector's price earning ratio isgenerally eight times its 1997 profits.   "If the bank offered (the shares) at a discount, the issue is likelyto be successful because it deserves a premium over the banking sector,given its sovereignty," he told The Jakarta Post.   The bank is expected to raise around Rp 1 trillion from the IPO,allowing it to strengthen its capital and improve its capital adequacyratio from its current level of 9.1 percent to about 12 percent, hesaid.   Chang said the bank, which is expected to maintain its loan todeposit ratio at around 85 percent to 90 percent, would generatesufficient funds from the IPO to support its growth over the next threeto four years.   He projected that BNI would maintain its credit expansion rate atabout 17 percent a year for the next few years in conformity with thecentral bank's low loan expansion target.   BNI's net interest margin is likely to remain at 3.5 percent in 1997as it compensates for the rise in its reserve requirement from 3 percentto 5 percent next April, he said.   On funding, Chang said the bank had an advantage over its competitorsin strengthening its retail market, given its large branch network andits low sovereign risk. (hen)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Sukarno's daughters make peace with army officerfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 1   JAKARTA (JP): A lawsuit for libel which was filed by two of formerpresident Sukarno's daughters against Armed Forces' Chief ofSociopolitical Affairs Lt. Gen. Syarwan Hamid was settled by mediationin court yesterday.   The conflicting parties agreed to end the row after Syarwan"corrected" a contentious statement that he reportedly made on MegawatiSoekarnoputri, the deposed chairperson of the Indonesian DemocraticParty (PDI), and Sukmawati Soekarnoputri last August.   The agreement was mediated by Judge Thoyib at the East JakartaDistrict Court.   Megawati and Sukmawati filed the lawsuit, saying they were offendedby Syarwan's statement, published by Surya daily newspaper, whichaccused Megawati of planning to start a rebellion along the lines ofCory Aquino's "people's power" in the Philippines.   In the Surya article, Syarwan was reported as saying that Sukmawatiwas mobilizing her Marhaen group, a pronationalist organization offollowers of Sukarno's teachings, to help the rebellion.   Syarwan's remarks were reportedly made during a meeting with membersof the Indonesian Ulema Council in Jakarta on Aug. 12. Surya's frontpage article the following day carried the suggestive heading "Megawatiwants to become Cory Aquino: ABRI Chief of Sociopolitical Affairs".   Megawati and Sukmawati said the remarks were slanderous and damagingto the reputation of their father and people in general. They demanded apublic apology and Rp 50 billion in damages.   Only Sukmawati was present in court yesterday. Syarwan and Megawatiwere represented by their lawyers.   Syarwan's lawyers Col. Imron Anwari and Major Payaman Pangaribuantold the court that the statements regarding the two plaintiffs, printedin Surya, "were untrue".   This correction was deemed sufficient by the plaintiffs whoconsidered the case to be over, Antara reported.   R.O. Tambunan, who represented Megawati at the hearing, told TheJakarta Post last night that his client was not insisting on a publicapology.   "The hearing today was open to the public and it was widely coveredby local and international press," Tambunan said, adding that thedecision "reflected Megawati's big heart".   The case for Rp 50 billion in damages was automatically dropped.   "We weren't after the money when we filed the lawsuit. We only wantedto see the names of Megawati and Sukmawati restored," he said.   He said the peace agreement resulted from a meeting of the parties'lawyers on Sept. 17.   "We did not drop the lawsuit. We came to an agreement," he stressed.   Tambunan said that another lawsuit, filed by Megawati against theArmed Forces Chief, the National Police Chief, the Minister of HomeAffairs and her foes in the PDI, would proceed.   In this lawsuit, Megawati is demanding that the results of thecongress of her PDI foes in Medan in June be annulled. The congress,which had the backing of the government and the military, deposed her asthe party's leader.   This lawsuit is scheduled for this Thursday at the Central JakartaDistrict Court. Efforts for an out of court settlement have failed.   Syarwan's remarks in August came in the wake of massive riots inJakarta in which at least four people died.   The July 27 riots, blamed on the leftist Democratic People's Party,began after the violent takeover of the PDI headquarters by supportersof Soerjadi, who ousted Megawati as the party's leader. (emb/imn)   Photo on Page 2Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996ABRI reshuffles another hundred senior officersfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 1   JAKARTA (JP): The Armed Forces (ABRI) announced yesterday a reshuffleaffecting more than 100 senior officers in all four services, includingthe reassignment of onetime rising star Maj. Gen. A.M. Hendropriyono.   ABRI Chief Spokesman Brig. Gen. Amir Syarifudin told Antara thatHendro would be recalled to ABRI headquarters, pending a new assignmentin a civilian position.   Amir did not elaborate, but Suara Pembaruan daily reported yesterdaythat Hendro, currently chief of the Army Training School in Bandung,will be given the post of secretary for development operations, astrategic position under the supervision of the State Secretariat.   Some military analysts said the new civilian post would end hismilitary career. Hendro is currently 51 years old; the mandatoryretirement age for military officers is 55 years.   A 1967 graduate of the Military Academy, Hendro was once regarded asone of the Army's most promising rising stars when he became theyoungest ever chief of a regional military command. He became chief ofthe Jakarta Regional Military Command at the age of 48 in 1993.Latest reshuffle   Amir said the latest reshuffle in the military affects 108 seniorofficers. As stipulated in a Sept. 16 decree by ABRI Chief Gen. FeisalTanjung, 52 Army officers, 24 Navy officers, 13 Air Force officers, and19 officers of the National Police are being moved.   Another major important change, announced Saturday, was thereplacement of the current assistant to the chief of sociopoliticalaffairs, Maj. Gen. Suwarno Adiwijoyo, who is nearing the mandatoryretirement age of 55.   He will be replaced by his deputy, Brig. Gen. Budi Harsono, who willbecome the new assistant to Lt. Gen. Syarwan Hamid. Suwarno will berecalled to the armed forces headquarters before he retires.   The commandant of the Bandung-based Infantry Weapons Center, Maj.Gen. Rachmad Mokoginta, is also being moved as he too is preparing forhis retirement. He will be replaced by his deputy Brig. Gen. LuhutPanjaitan.   Changes in the Navy include the reassignment of  Maj. Gen. (Marine)Gafur Chalik, currently aide to the ABRI chief, to the Navy headquartersto prepare for his retirement.   Commodore Freddy Numberi, currently aide to the navy Chief of Staff,will be assigned as Chief of the Fifth Sea Born Command based in IrianJaya, and Brig. Gen. (Marine) Benyamin Balukh, will be assigned asdeputy chief of the Armed Forces School of Command.   In the Air Force, Rear Marshall Sadeli Kalman, chief of the AirForce's Maintenance Division will be replaced by Commodore SyaifulKartimunaf.   In the National Police, Brig. Gen. Soerpadi will be assigned as thenew director for operational education at the National ResilienceInstitute, replacing Brig. Gen. I Wayan Karya. (imn)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Minister confirms art theftfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 1   JAKARTA (JP): The government confirmed yesterday the theft of anumber of valuable Indonesian paintings from the National Museum,including two masterpieces withdrawn Friday by international auctionhouse Christie's from its October sale in Singapore.   The theft took place a month ago and was believed to involve membersof staff at the museum, according to Minister of Education and CultureWardiman Djojonegoro.   He said: "The stolen paintings have been withdrawn by Christie's fromits auction house."   It was the first official statement issued by the government sincethe news of the theft, categorized as part of the national collection,was broken by some local media late last week.   Wardiman gave no details about the other titles or the precise numberof paintings stolen from the museum, which is under the supervision ofthe minister's office.   According to reliable sources, at least six paintings by world-renowned Indonesian masters, such as Raden Sarief Bustaman Saleh,better-known as Raden Saleh, Affandi and Raden Basoeki Abdullah havebeen taken.   Police records show that the theft was only reported by museumstaffer Kolam Sardjono on Sept. 12.   However, the theft was hidden from the public by the museum until artcurators were amazed to see Christie's catalog for the Oct. 6 auctionfeature two paintings by Indonesian masters previously thought to be inthe National Museum here.   Local media first reported the theft Friday, despite no officialcomment from the authorities.   Shortly after a long meeting the same day, Christie's InternationalSingapore Pte. Ltd. announced that the two paintings, A Nude, completedin 1992, by Basoeki Abdullah and Portrait of a Dutch Governor Wearingthe Willems Order, completed in 1867, by Raden Saleh, were withdrawnfrom its upcoming auction.   However, there is no further explanation about the hasty withdrawalor the current whereabouts of the paintings.   Minister Wardiman criticized the media for disturbing theinvestigation to arrest the thieves.   "The reports have made the investigation more difficult. That's why Iasked the press not to magnify the case," he said.   The minister said that any dishonest museum employees might have hada double motivation; the poor security system and their low pay.   "The museum employees are state employees. Therefore, they have thesame level of salary earned by other state employees," said Wardiman.   Consequently the temptation to steal the precious items could havebecome stronger, he said.   The salary of middle-rank state employees ranges from Rp 250,000 toRp 500,000 (US$106 to $212) per month. The price of the each painting ishundreds of millions of rupiah.   The National Museum, located on Jl. Medan Merdeka Barat in CentralJakarta, has recorded a number of thefts of a wide range of nationaltreasure from its collection.   National Police Chief Lt. Gen. Dibyo Widodo said Sunday in BatamIsland, Riau, that the police have questioned a number of peopleregarding the recent theft of the paintings.   The three-star general also said that the Indonesian police haveasked the local police in Singapore, through Interpol, to helpinvestigate the stolen paintings.   In another related development yesterday, Minister of Tourism, Postand Telecommunication Joop Ave called on Christie's to cooperate withIndonesia to arrest the suspects. (bsr/icn)   Editorial -- Page 4   Mystery -- Page 7Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996IKIP Surabaya selects new rectorfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 2   SURABAYA: The state Teachers Training Institute (IKIP) in Surabaya,is having trouble selecting a new rector to replace SoeronoMartorahardjo.   The three best of ten nominees for the position are said to haveflaws. Although two of them have doctorate degrees, one is said to havebeen involved in corruption involving a campus development project threeyears ago and one has been the target of student protests over theexpulsion of a lecturer.   The other candidate has good leadership and academic ability but onlyhas an undergraduate degree (S1), said lecturers at the instituteyesterday.   Academics at the institute doubt that he would be respectedprofessionally, because of his lack of experience and scientificbackground.   Suripan Sadi Hutomo, one of the three best candidates, said that thenominees were selected on Sept. 17.   "But the results have not been announced yet. Not even internally,"he said.   The institute is preparing to become a university in about threeyears, when is expected to have the biggest campus in Southeast Asia.(27/14)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996238 arrested for timber theftfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 2   SURABAYA: A forest raid, code-named "Brush Operation", has resultedin the arrest of 238 people in Jombang and Nganjuk who are suspected ofstealing 600 cubic meters of teakwood from surrounding forests.   "We expect that court hearings will be held soon to try all thesuspects, some of which are members of the Armed Forces (ABRI),"Marsanto, a provincial government official in charge of security,agrarian and public affairs, said yesterday.   According to Antara, the market price of illegal timber rangesbetween Rp 200,000 (US$85) and Rp 300,000 a meter cubic.   He said 850 mobile brigade officers took part in the raid in areasprone to illegal teak wood logging, including Nganjuk, Jombang andMadiun.   Marsanto said the operation would be extended to cover other areas inEast Java such as Bojonegoro and Padangan.   "More preventive measures will be taken to deter teakwood theft," hesaid.   Nganjuk regent Soetrisno said that while he supported the efforts toeliminate teakwood theft, he criticized a recent police move toconfiscate a local official's chair which they suspected of being madefrom stolen wood. (14)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Reporters demand proper probefrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 2   SURAKARTA, Central Java: The Yogyakarta chapter of the IndonesianJournalists Association is considering whether to ask the NationalCommission on Human Rights to investigate the death of a local reporterhere last month.   The chairman of the association's Yogyakarta chapter, OkaKusumayudha, said yesterday that he would refer the case to the rightscommission if the police investigation into the murder wasunsatisfactory.   Senior journalists have formed a fact-finding team to assist thepolice. The team has submitted five bundles of reports to thejournalists association in Jakarta, Oka said.   Fuad Muhammad Safrudin was fatally beaten in his home on Aug. 13. Hedid not regain consciousness before he died in intensive care three dayslater. The Bernas journalist is survived by his wife and two children.   "If the police neglect to follow up our team's findings, we will seekhelp from the National Commission on Human Rights," Oka said.   According to Oka, the association had encouraged the police to speedup their investigation.   "The team works relentlessly, meticulously and professionally, afterall, they are used to searching for facts," Oka said.   Oka added that the Chief of the Yogyakarta Police Precinct Col.Darsono had promised a thorough and proper investigation. (har/14)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996'Clear conscience inspired Frans Seda'from THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 2   JAKARTA (JP): A clear conscience consistently underlined the thoughtsand actions of senior economist Frans Seda, one of the architects of theNew Order, says book editor Frans M. Parera.   "In answering social, political and economic challenges, Frans Sedahas consistently acted with a clear conscience," Frans Parera toldreporters yesterday.   Frans Parera headed the team which edited a soon-to-be-released bookin honor of Frans Seda's 70th birthday. The book Kekuasaan dan Moral(Power and Morality) is to be launched on Oct. 6.   In connection with his birthday, a seminar will be held on Sept. 26to review the political economy of Indonesia during the 1966 to 1970period, Frans Parera was reported by Antara as saying. The seminar is tobe held at the Catholic Atmajaya University in Jakarta.   Frans Parera described Frans Seda as a "three-generation statesman"and a "professional politician" because of his lengthy experience andhis rational way of examining the state administration.   He kept his distance from religious and ethnic organizations for thesake of establishing a united, harmonious nation, Frans Parera said.   "In his thoughts and writing, Frans Seda constantly tries to definepower amid changes with time," he said.   Frans Seda has always been critical of inconsistencies in the stateadministration, he added.   Frans Seda was born in Maumere, Flores, on Oct. 4, 1926.   He was a member of a team of economic advisors to President Soehartoin the early years of the New Order administration. He served as theminister of plantations from 1964 to 1966 and as the minister ofagriculture in 1966 under President Sukarno. He was finance ministerfrom 1966 to 1968 and minister of transportation from 1968 to 1973 underPresident Soeharto. (emb)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Legislator deplores PDI candidate listfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 2   JAKARTA (JP): A legislator criticized the government yesterday foraccepting the election candidate list from the rift-ridden IndonesianDemocratic Party (PDI), saying that the list breached the electoral law.   A.A. Oka Mahendra, a member of House Commission II for home affairs,said in a hearing with Minister of Home Affairs Yogie S.M. that the PDIhad listed 903 legislative candidates although the law allowed 850 to belisted.   Oka said the electoral law stated that the number of legislativecandidates that a contesting group could propose was twice the number ofcontested seats in the House.   Next year, Golkar, the Indonesian Democratic Party (PDI) and theUnited Development Party (PPP) will contest 425 seats in the 500-seatHouse of Representatives. The remaining 75 seats are reserved for theArmed Forces.   Golkar and PPP have each submitted 850 names of legislativecandidates to the National Elections Institute.   "Accepting a list with more than 850 candidates is against the law,"said Oka, a House member from the ruling Golkar organization.   Yogie, who is also chairman of the National Elections Institute, didnot answer Oka's objection. Yogie responded by saying that the electorallaw should be properly abided by.   Separately, the secretary-general of the national electionsinstitute, Suryatna Subrata, said the institute would return theproposed list to the PDI central board.   "The PDI central board has to revise the list and nominate a maximumof 850 names," Suryatna told reporters after the hearing.   Oka questioned why the government had assigned the National Councilfor Defense and Security, instead of the Minister of Home Affairs, todevelop guidelines on campaigning for next year's election.   President Soeharto has asked the National Council for Defense andSecurity to draw up new guidelines for the 1997 election campaign.   "Why should the task go to the council? Is the Home Affairs Ministrytoo busy supervising the existing three political organizations to doit?" Oka asked.   Yogie said that next year street rallies involving huge numbers ofpeople would no longer be permitted because they had the potential todisturb security and public order.   "We should develop an electioneering system which emphasizes eachparty's programs on offer to potential voters. It would be moreeducational politically," he said.   On the heating political climate in the lead-up to the 1997 generalelection, Yogie said it was still within tolerable limits. (imn)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Vote-getters not needed, political scholars sayfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 2   SEMARANG (JP): Political scholars said yesterday that the recruitmentof celebrities as vote-getters in next year's general election is anoutdated trick to attract voters.   They said that vote-getters are effective only in uneducatedcommunities because on campuses and in the cities people know they needpoliticians who can really defend their interests.   Riswandha Imawan, a political scholar from Gadjah Mada University,said that the use of vote-getters is a trick that tends to deceive thepublic.   The idea of recruiting vote-getters, he said, is to have celebritiesuse their popularity rather than their political skill to attract asmany people as possible to vote for the party they represent.   "Political studies should stop using vote-getters because it assumesthat people do not have enough of a grasp of the political games inIndonesia," Riswandha said.   "As Indonesians are increasingly educated, the vote-getting systemshould be stopped," he said.   The three political organizations: Golkar, the United DevelopmentParty (PPP) and the Indonesian Democratic Party (PDI), will compete for425 seats in the House of Representatives in next year's generalelection.   While the PDI and PPP do not have well-known figures in their frontlines, Golkar made headlines for recruiting king of dangdut music RhomaIrama, soap opera star Rano Karno and shadow puppet master Ki AnomSuroto -- to name a few -- to attract voters.   Golkar hopes to increase its domination in the House from its current282 seats to at least 299. It wants to recapture the 16 seats it lost tothe PDI and one to the PPP in the 1992 election.   Golkar has promised the much coveted seats to the popularpersonalities.   "Educated people will certainly ask why political organizations putcelebrities higher on their list of prospective House members thanprofessional politicians," said political observer Susilo Utomo fromDiponegoro University.   "If it later turns out that the celebrities fail to defend thepublic's interests as they promise during election campaigns, peoplewill feel cheated," he added.   MT Arifin, rector of Surakarta Muhammadiyah University, has proposedthat political organizations stop recruiting vote-getters because theirpolitical ability is questionable.   He argued that those representing the people in the House should bepeople who are well-versed in politics and have the courage to defendaverage people, not just their peers.   "The vote-getting system should be stopped if Indonesia wants to seedemocracy flourish," he said. (har/pan)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Internal dispute among labor exporters drags onfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 2   JAKARTA (JP): The row in the Association of Labor Export Companies(Apjati) heightened yesterday with the government-backed leaderthreatening to take his opponents to court unless they surrendered thefunds belonging to the association.   Abdullah Puteh, the chairman of the government-backed executiveboard, demanded the old board to surrender the association's bankaccounts and their books peacefully, or face a court order.   He said he has asked banks to freeze the association's accounts,which are still controlled by members of the old board.   He did not give an estimate of the amount involved.   "You figure it out yourself. Each member paid a membership fee of Rp5 million (US$2,127) and workers have to pay Rp 20,000 each," Puteh toldreporters after he met with Minister of Manpower Abdullah Latief, who isalso the association's patron.   Puteh, a politician of the ruling political group Golkar, was electedas Apjati chairman in a congress attended by 111 of the association's128 members last week. The congress was boycotted by members of the oldexecutive board, headed by Mahfudz Djaelani, who called the event"unconstitutional".   The industry has continually been beset by politicking by companiesamidst pressure from the government to restrict the number of companiesin what is regarded as a lucrative business.   Apjati was established in May last year at the urging of thegovernment to instill some order in the industry. Lack ofprofessionalism among workers' exporting companies has been blamed forsome of the problems facing many Indonesian workers overseas.   One of the tasks of the association was to run basic training coursesfor Indonesians before they were sent abroad.   Puteh said that during the meeting, Latief asked the association tobe run more professionally, and that its finances should be madetransparent.   He promised that under his leadership, he would submit a financialreport every three months to members and the minister. "I have noproblem about transparency," he said.   Anton Sihombing, secretary-general of the new board, disclosed thatthe board plans to "borrow" between Rp 2 million and Rp 3 million fromeach member to finance the association's activities.   But the fees charged on workers sent abroad would be scrapped, hesaid.   The new board will be working out of an office at the PersadaExecutive Club in Halim Perdanakusuma, East Jakarta, and not from theGKBI building, the secretariat of the old board. (ste)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996'Hairy pollution crisis in Lampung'from THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 2   JAKARTA (JP): Air pollution in the Lampung capital of Bandar Lampungis so heavy that residents' hair is contaminated with industrial waste,notably cadmium, an academic said yesterday.   In her speech commemorating Lampung University's 31st anniversary,Ida Farida Rivai said that her recent study on pollution in the cityproved that there was a direct relationship between intensiveindustrialization and population concentration causing increased levelsof environmental contamination in cities.   Ida, a chemistry expert, said that toxic industrial waste includedgas emissions from motorized vehicles and smoke and gases fromfactories.   Perpetual accumulation of heavy metal compounds such as cadmium, leadand mercury is hazardous to humans, Ida, who graduated from the GunmaUniversity of Japan, said.   Prolonged exposure to mercury destroys the nervous system, cadmiumdiminishes the kidney's function and lead can cause lung cancer, shesaid.   Ida, the founder of the science department at the university, saidthat chemical contamination and poisoning from industrial waste cannotbe minimized by rejecting industrialization.   "Perhaps preventative measures and control can be socialized andmanaged in a wiser manner," she said.   Ida also encouraged chemists and biologists to undertake moreresearch on toxic waste by-products which are inadvertently consumed bythe public.   "A thorough understanding of environmental toxicology is one way ofimproving the quality human resources. It is futile to tell people ofthe danger without providing a solution or telling them how to preventthe danger," Ida said. (14)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996NGOs demand controls on land ownershipfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 2   JAKARTA (JP): A group of non-governmental organizations (NGOs)yesterday renewed their long-held demand for a government regulation tolimit the size of land ownership across the country.   On the eve of the 26th anniversary of the Land Reforms Law, theConsortium of Agrarian Reforms said the 1960 legislation has not beenfully upheld, particularly on the question of limiting land ownership.   The 1960 law recognizes the need to limit land acquisition to ensurejustice and recognizes the rights of indigenous people over land, saidconsortium chairman Noer Fauzi Rachman.   But the implementation has not lived up to the spirit of the law,Noer said. "The 'social function' of the land as recognized by the lawhas, in practice, become the 'business function.'"   The 1960 Land Reforms Law was seen as a piece of landmark legislationin the quest for justice in predominantly rural Indonesia. Theanniversary is marked each year either with a seminar or otheractivities.   Noer, whose consortium was founded two years ago by 65 NGOs toeducate people about their land rights, said the massive buying of landis taking Indonesia back to the Dutch colonial era when plantationowners were allowed to possess massive land tracts.   Now more than 64 million hectares of land in the country are owned by20 business groups, he said. Most of the land bought had been recognizedby customary laws as being owned by the indigenous people.   Noer criticized State Minister of Agrarian Affairs/Chairman of theNational Land Agency Soni Harsono for saying over the weekend thatpreserving customary laws would be a "step backward".   Speaking in Yogyakarta, Soni, as reported by Antara, said customarylaws regarding land ownership would disappear as Indonesia developsfurther.   With the trend toward individual land ownership, these customary lawswould eventually die a natural death, he was quoted as saying. He saidthe government will continue to respect customary laws, but will nothelp preserve them.   The government marks the anniversary of the 1960 law more quietlybecause the legislation was often associated with the IndonesianCommunist Party (PKI). The party, banned since 1966, politicized the1960 law, turning it into a tool to force land redistribution.   Noer shared the view that the 1960 law has been mistakenly consideredas communist-sponsored legislation.   "The content of the law was actually prepared by land experts fromGadjah Mada University of Yogyakarta," he said.   He said the unfortunate association with the PKI is one of thereasons why reforms have been slow and why massive land buying continuesunchecked.   Many timber estates, oil palm plantations and the pulp industry havebeen built on vast forest tracts that were originally part of the localpeople's customary land, he said.   "The government has often labeled the indigenous people as 'forestwanderers', but really they are people who inhabit the forest and liveby cultivating it," Noer said. (16)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 19967-day cruise to Banda Islandsfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 2   JAKARTA (JP): A new seven-day cruise to the Banda islands, known asthe Pearl of the Indian Ocean, will operate for the first time tocoincide with the island's annual Kora Kora boat race from Nov. 12 toNov. 19.   Sailing on the Modern Group's Awani Dream, the tour will cast offfrom Bali's Benoa harbor on Nov. 12 and will call first at Komodoisland. On Nov. 15, the ship will arrive in Bandaneira and be greeted bydozens of Kora Kora boats, which will escort the ship to the quay.   "The Kora Kora boats symbolize the heroism of Banda's natives as theboats were used in the defense of Banda against the colonists," StateMinister of Sports and Youth Affairs Hayono Isman says. (ste)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Medication too pricey for 50% of TB sufferersfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 2   JAKARTA (JP): About 50 percent of the 500,000 Indonesians takingmedication for their tuberculosis (TB) stop half-way through the courseof treatment because they are too poor to continue it, a health activistsaid yesterday.   Chairwoman of the Indonesian Foundation for Tuberculosis EradicationMrs. Soepardjo Rustam said that the price of the second round ofmedication is more expensive than the first.   TB can be cured within six months, she said, but many sufferers whoundergo medical treatment fail to complete the entire process; somebecause they are too poor, others because they think they have alreadyrecovered the moment they stop coughing.   "Consequently, they have to repeat the medication," she said aftermeeting with President Soeharto.   Community health centers can ask for free TB medicine from theassociation for poor patients," Mrs. Soepardjo, wife of the latecoordinating minister for people's welfare, said.   According to her, TB bacteria can be found everywhere and people whoare physically or mentally tired are particularly prone to contractingthe disease.   She said her foundation offers Rp 80,000 (US$34) in transport coststo all TB patient who are too poor to go to the nearest health centerfor further medication.   She said that there are currently about 500,000 Indonesians sufferingfrom contagious TB and guessed that there are about 500,000 others whohave not reported their illness.   In 1993 the World Health Organization estimated that 1.9 billionpeople, or one in every three worldwide, are infected with the disease.In the next decade, 300 million more people will become infected, 90million people will develop the disease, and 30 million people will dieof it, according to the organization's research. (ste)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Public participation in crime prevention soughtfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 3   JAKARTA (JP): Jakarta Police Chief Maj. Gen. Hamami Nata called onthe public yesterday to join the battle against crime in the city.   "Caring about others' fate should be developed to build togethernessto fight crime," the two-star general said in a weekly ceremony at theheadquarters prior to handing over rewards to a number of policepersonnel and civilians.   "Discard the ego which has become the trademark of metropolitanpeople," said Hamami.   "Should we let a person become a victim of a crime, we could be thenext victim," he said.   That's why, he said, active public participation in fighting crime isabsolutely necessary.   "The limited number of Jakarta police personnel and a shortage ofequipment required for their operations could be compensated by publiccooperation in making the city secure," said Hamami.   Shortly after the ceremony, the police chief handed rewards, in theform of certificates and cash, to three security guards for theiroutstanding efforts in fighting crime.   Among the three were M. Dasri, 66, a security guard at the residenceof Egyptian Ambassador Mahmoed Mohamed Osman in Menteng, CentralJakarta.   Dasri lost two fingers and suffered a serious head wound last weekfight when he struggled with at least five criminals in theneighborhood.   On behalf of the police force, Hamami handed Dasri Rp 500,000(US$212.80) in recognition of his performance.   "I really appreciate the present, which I can use for my medicaltreatment which so far has cost me Rp 400,000," said Dasri.   "The police gift means a lot to me and my family because I havereceived nothing from my employer," continued Dasri, who works for Rp140,000 per month.   A reader of The Jakarta Post also presented Dasri with Rp 250,000 tohelp with his medical expenses.   Besides Dasri, Hamami also presented Rp 100,000 to two other securityguards, Mat Sani, 26, and Pulung Mahmudin, 30, for their roles instopping a group of burglars in front of the BCA bank in Penjaringan,North Jakarta, in June.   Hamami also presented cloth to 41 police officers, who wereconsidered meritorious but unable to buy new uniforms while they awaiteduniform distribution from the National Police headquarters.   The police chief then gave rewards to nine police officers whoparticipated in the recent national sports games and collected medals.   Each of the nine officers received a certificate and Rp 750,000 incash. (bsr)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Man arrested for forging moneyfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 3   JAKARTA (JP): The Bogor police have arrested one of four peoplesuspected of forging money, Suara Pembaruan reported yesterday.   The suspect, identified as Bud, 24, was apprehended over the weekendwhen he was about to use a fake Rp 50,000 note at the PD Pangestu storein front of the Bogor railway station on Jl. Nyi Raja Permas.   The police seized three Rp 50,000 notes from the suspect, an ID cardand some bank receipts.   The Bogor police detectives are still tracking the other threesuspects, the daily reported.   According to the police, the gang members spent their fake money inBogor. Then they deposited the change they received from the counterfeitmoney in a bank account they had opened earlier. (26)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996German musicians to perform herefrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 3   JAKARTA (JP): Two German musicians are to hold a concert andmasterclass here as part of their tour to four cities.   Pianist Stephan Kiefer from the Musikhochschule Hannover and JensPeter Maintz, a cellist from Hamburg, will perform at the Erasmus HuisDutch cultural center on Sept. 29.   The performance is part of four duet groups due to perform here inthe "Festival Duo Eropa", which runs from September to December. Thegroups are scheduled to perform in Bandung, Yogyakarta and Surabaya inaddition to from Jakarta.   Kiefer and Maintz, whose visits are arranged by the German culturalcenter, the Goethe Institut, will play works by Bach, Beethoven andShostakovich. (anr)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996'Belantara Jakarta' on displayfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 3   JAKARTA (JP): An exhibition of the works of French photographer HerveDangla is to be opened today at the French Cultural Center in CentralJakarta.   A book on his works, titled "Belantara Jakarta", is also to belaunched at the center on Jl. Salemba Raya.   The exhibition runs to Oct. 12. (anr)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Worker crushed by steamrollerfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 3   JAKARTA (JP): A road construction worker has been crushed to death bya steamroller driven by a friend in the East Parking Lot, Senayan,Central Jakarta.   Lasman, the victim, was asleep on the road he and his friends wererepairing early yesterday morning when his colleague Azis decided tomove the steamroller to another place.   Azis told police that after traveling a few meters he noticed thatthe steamroller was running unsmoothly. He said he thought the machinewas running over a heap of garbage or soil. He was horrified to see thatthe body of Lasman, who hailed from the same town of Banyumas, CentralJava, had been broken under the steamroller's steel wheel.   Azis screamed hysterically before other workers came, the Terbitevening daily reported yesterday.Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Sarwono hails idea to build homes on stiltsfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 3   JAKARTA (JP): State Minister of Environment Sarwono Kusumaatmadja isin favor of a proposal that homes in water catchment areas be built onstilts.   The proposal, from South Jakarta Mayor Pardjoko, was among othersuggestions to help preserve water catchment areas.   "But the municipality should serve as an example and build itsoffices on stilts" in such areas, Sarwono said.   Locations in the mayoralty have been designated as the city's mainwater catchment areas. However, given the relatively cooler climate,they are also favorite sites for residential areas.   Sarwono had earlier addressed a seminar, which was held by themayoralty, on preserving South Jakarta as a water catchment area.   Sarwono also urged that more information be given to residents on theneed to build more water catchment wells.   Given the decreasing amount of water catchment areas, the mayor saidhouses planned for construction on plots of less than 500 square metersshould be built on stilts.   The districts of Jagakarsa, part of Cilandak and a part of PasarMinggu, all in South Jakarta, are particularly designated for watercatchment areas. The current rule states that building is allowed on amaximum of 20 percent of the plots in the districts. In order for abuilding permit to be issued, a plot must be a minimum of 500 squaremeters.   A further decrease in water catchment areas in South Jakarta is alsoindicated by only two remaining natural ponds, the Mangga Bolong andBabakan ponds.   Pardjoko, Sarwono added, could easily secure support from high-ranking residents on policies to preserve water catchments, as "mostministers live in South Jakarta".   Pardjoko had also proposed that the city change rules on buildinglimitations in water catchment areas.   But Pardjoko said given the increasing price of land, violations werelikely to become rampant because many residents had smaller-sized plots.More buildings will be found without building permits, he said.   A way out of this problem, he said, would be to make mandatory theprovision of collective areas for groundwater preservation.   He said this was suggested six months ago to the municipality, whichis working on the idea.   The central government or the municipality, Pardjoko said, could buythe necessary plots from residents, but he acknowledged the source offunds might be a problem.   Deputy Governor for Developmental Affairs, Tb.M. Rais, said in hisaddress that a maximum of 35 percent, or 800 million cubic meters ofannual rainfall, enters into the ground. From this figure, he said thecity's annual groundwater potential is around 77 million cubic metersper year.   As the safe limit for groundwater use is up to 70 percent, or 48million cubic meters per year, Rais reiterated warnings that the intakehas become critical. The city-owned water company, PDAM Jaya, has onlycatered to 48 percent of homes in Jakarta. (anr)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Lawyers demand acquittal of clientfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 3   JAKARTA (JP): The defense lawyers of a man charged with murdering theowner of a recording studio asked the North Jakarta District Courtyesterday to acquit him of all charges.   "Our client is accused of complicity with two other men in the murderof the late Beng Seng," said Tommy Sihotang, the leading counsel for thedefense, "so, to prove the allegations beyond reasonable doubt whetherTP, alias Opiu, was involved in the murder, the prosecutor should havepresented the two key witnesses to testify."   Nyo Beng Seng was killed in his mansion in Pluit, North Jakarta. Alsoknown as Darmansyah Sujadi, Beng Seng was the owner of a leadingrecording company, PT. Irama Tara, and several massage parlors and nightclubs in Jakarta.   The businessman was stabbed to death with a samurai sword. His deathdrew much public attention because it was widely believed to have beenlinked to fierce competition in the entertainment industry.   Police believe the murder was masterminded by renowned gambler HongLie, who is still at large. He denied being involved in the murder at apress interview in Singapore last year.   The two key witnesses, Agiono bin Syafran and Sudartono, alias Atok,were sentenced to 20 years and 15 years imprisonment respectively inAugust last year.   Prosecutor Muhammad Yusuf told the court in earlier sessions that hedid not call the two witnesses to the trial because they were imprisonedin Nusa Kambangan, a prison island off the coast of Central Java.   Defense lawyer Tommy Sihotang said the prosecutor had recited thetestimonies given by the two witnesses to the police instead of hearingthe witnesses' testimonies in court.   "Article 185(1) of the Criminal Code Procedures dictate thatwitnesses' testimonies are those given in court, not those given to thepolice," Tommy said.   He then presented a letter from one of the witnesses in NusaKambangan claiming that Opiu had nothing to do with the murder.   Prosecutor Yusuf had told the court that Opiu drove Agiono to BengSeng's mansion on April 7, 1994, and gave him Rp 5 million (US$2,200).He said that Agiono used the money to purchase a motorcycle on which heescaped after the murder a week later.   Yusuf accused Opiu, of violating Article 56 of the Criminal Codewhich states that anyone who helps another party to commit a capitalcrime is liable to a maximum of 15 years imprisonment.   When asked to rebut the defense lawyers' statement, Yusuf said hemaintained his earlier sentencing demand.   Judge Suwardi adjourned the trial for two weeks to prepare theverdict. (26)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Clarity requested for 'public info campaign'from THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 3   JAKARTA (JP): The City Council would like the municipality to explainthe effectiveness of its Rp 4 billion campaign to familiarize the publicwith city regulations, deputy council speaker Ismunandar said yesterday.   The city's public relations office reportedly questioned the deputyspeaker's request, who responded by saying that he was not singling outany one particular office of the municipality for its fund-handlingmethods.   Councilor Romulus Sihombing of Commission D for development affairssaid last week that both the city's legal department and the publicrelations office are the offices most involved in the campaign.   City Council Speaker M.H. Ritonga earlier conveyed his impressionthat many Jakartans are still in the dark about city regulations andquestioned the allocation of the Rp 4 billion (US$1.7 million).   The city information budget for this fiscal year climbed to Rp 4.131billion, an increase over last year's Rp 3.61. The budget includes Rp825 million for a "public information project."   Meanwhile, the legal department has been allocated Rp 1.07 billion todisseminate information about recently passed legislation and currentbills.   City public relations officer Soesilo Darmoadji recently sent aletter to several newspapers in response to the recent queries. He saidthat the funds being used in the campaign are also at the disposal ofother offices, including the Ministry of Information's branch inJakarta.   "We ask for an explanation from the municipality, which could sendrepresentatives from the public relations office to explain the use ofcampaign funds to the council," Ismunandar said.   "We would then suggest that the public relations office coordinatethe other offices which it says are also privy to the funds."   Helmy AR Syihab, the head of Commission C for city revenues, saidthat his commission will formally raise the issue when it meets withmunicipality executives to discuss the city budget in October. (anr)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Defendant tells court of previous 'sin'from THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 3   TANGERANG, West Java (JP): A 41-year-old woman standing trial forallegedly attempting to smuggle 9,000 Ecstasy pills into Indonesia toldthe Tangerang District Court yesterday that she had twice succeeded insmuggling the drug into the country in 1993 and 1994.   "In 1993 I managed to smuggle 200 Ecstasy pills from the Netherlandsinto Indonesia through the Soekarno-Hatta International Airport. Thefollowing year I smuggled in 300 pills," ELW told the court presidedover by Judge M. Nawir.   Motivated by her desire to make a large sum of money, the defendantconfessed that she stashed 9,000 pills in her suitcase and sports shoesand attempted to enter the country on March 27 through Soekarno-HattaAirport, where she was apprehended by customs and excise officials.   "In The Hague I bought for 10 guilder (Rp 14,000) each. I intended tosell the pills in Jakarta for Rp 30,000 each," she said.   She claimed that she bought the pills from someone named Sonny LuisLai in The Hague. She then boarded a Lufthansa flight.   If found guilty, the defendant could be imprisoned for up to 15 yearsand fined up to Rp 300 million.   The defendant's lawyers, Nuryanto and Rusdi Sovian, earlier asked thecourt to drop the charges against their client.   According to the lawyers, Health Regulation No.23/1992 cannot be usedto convict their client.   The lawyers argued that only institutions, professional and businessgroups having expertise in public health are subject to the regulation,not individuals.   The defendant has no expertise in public health and had the Ecstasypills just because she thought the pills could make her a lot of money,the lawyers said.   The trial was adjourned until Monday when prosecutor Sarwono willread his sentence appeal.   Last Thursday the West Jakarta District Court sentenced Ng Wi Hon,alias Awi, 56, to 10 months imprisonment after finding him guilty oftrafficking Ecstasy pills.   The case, the first of its kind in Jakarta, followed an intensivegovernment campaign against the abuse of Ecstasy.   The government has been forced to use the 1992 Health Law toprosecute people because Ecstasy is not yet classified as a narcotic,and therefore is not covered under the 1976 Narcotics Law. (28/bas)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Idea on Jabotabek needs clear planning: Ginandjarfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 3   JAKARTA (JP): State Minister of National Development PlanningGinandjar Kartasasmita says the idea to unite Jakarta, Bogor, Tangerangand Bekasi (Jabotabek) into one province under one governor ofministerial level reflects the complicated development problems in thearea.   Ginandjar said if the idea was accepted, the supporting systems andall legal aspects should be thoroughly prepared.   "The idea aired by Pak Emil (Prof. Emil Salim) mirrors his concernabout the complex problems in Jabotabek," Ginandjar was quoted by Antaraas saying.   Emil Salim, former state minister for both population andenvironment, said two weeks ago that the Jakarta, Bogor, Tangerang andBekasi area needs one governor of a ministerial level to anticipatefuture challenges.   He said such a move would enable better management to enhanceservices in the capital city as well as support decentralization, whichis needed for future economic autonomy.   "That is a positive idea. However, clear systems must be prepared forthat," Ginandjar said.   Presently, governors are elected or proposed by the provinciallegislative councils, while ministers are appointed by the President.   He said that comprehensive discussions on development in Jabotabekare needed, citing poverty eradication programs as the main focus todevelop an area like Jabotabek.   Minister of Home Affairs Moch. Yogie S.M. said earlier that such anidea requires comprehensive feasibility studies.   West Java Governor R. Nuriana has said on separate occasions that theidea could create many problems. One of the problems that should betackled is the formulation of the size and status of the new province.   Ginandjar, who is also chairman of the National Development PlanningBoard (Bappenas), said that his office does not specifically handle thedevelopment of Jabotabek. "Bappenas deals with the development ofdensely-populated areas in connection with master spatial planning," hesaid.   Ginandjar said he has not looked into the possible economic benefitJabotabek would gain from becoming a single province.   Efforts to deal and synchronize the development of Jakarta, Bogor,Tangerang and Bekasi have been made by the government by setting up acoordination body in early 1980s.   However, according to urban experts, the body has failed in itsfunction as Jakarta, Bogor, Tangerang and Bekasi have their own targetsand concerns with their respective development programs.Military   Meanwhile, Bekasi regent Moch. Djamhari said yesterday that Jabotabekwould need a greater military command under one commander, a lieutenantgeneral, should they be merged into one province.   Djamhari, an army lieutenant colonel, said this at a meeting withJakarta military commander Maj. Gen. Sutiyoso and hundreds of localpublic figures.   The regent said that a greater military command would need to beheaded by an officer of at least lieutenant general in rank if theprovince was to be headed by a governor with ministerial level authorityas suggested by Emil Salim.   Djamhari said that a greater military command would enhance order andsecurity in Jakarta and its surrounding areas.   Bekasi is a regency under the West Java provincial administration,but in military and security matters it is controlled by the Jakartamilitary command and the Jakarta police headquarters. (sur/kod)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Our art for sale?from THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 4   The current furor over the aborted auction in Singapore of twopaintings that were allegedly stolen from the National Museum'scollection in Jakarta once again puts the spotlight on the lamentableconditions of our museums and monuments. The two paintings -- Portraitof a Dutch Governor Wearing the Willems Order by the 19th centuryIndonesian master Raden Saleh and Metamorphosis, a nude painting byBasoeki Abdullah -- are believed to be among at least six paintingsmissing in recent years from the National Museum in Jakarta. More sadly,the thefts might never have become known to the public were it not forthe fact that public attention was focused on Christie's auction andthat some people questioned the origin of two of the paintings listed intheir catalog.   Indonesians and Jakartans especially are right to be proud of theirNational Museum. Its collection of ancient Hindu-Javanese art objects isunrivaled. Its collection of antique Chinese and Southeast Asianceramics is reputed to be among the best and largest in this part of theworld. Its numismatic collection and its collection of gold artifactsstand up to comparison with those of any other museum in this region.   Yet, this showpiece of Indonesian museums has been said by someobservers, in several respects, to resemble no more than a warehouse forthe storage of art objects. This appears to be particularly true in thecase of paintings. It wasn't such a long time ago that newspapersreported that a number of paintings by contemporary French masters,donated during the 1950s, had disappeared. Others were damaged becauseof neglect.   Paintings, however, are not the only art objects that are vulnerableto theft. About a decade ago, about 20 pieces were reported stolen fromthe museum's collection of antique Chinese and Southeast Asian ceramics.A big furor arose over the incident and measures were reportedly takento step up the museum's security. Yet, as far as is known to the public,none of the pieces appear to have been recovered or traced.   If such incidents can occur at Jakarta's National Museum, which isthe showpiece of Indonesian museums, one would hate to think of whatcould happen in museums of lesser standing in our big cities or inmuseums in the more remote areas of this archipelago. The Kutai Museumin Tenggarong, East Kalimantan, for example, was reputed to house amagnificent collection of antique ceramics. There, too, many pieces aresaid to have since disappeared.   The picture becomes even more dismal, of course, when one takes intoconsideration the fact that many art treasures have also been reportedstolen from our ancient temples and other archaeological sites. Yearsago, the heads of stone figures at the Bima temple in the Dieng complexin Central Java -- one of the most ancient of Hindu temples in Indonesia-- were reportedly chopped off by thieves. Similar cases of vandalismfor the sake of monetary gain have occurred in numerous other sites.   It is a sad fact that it appears that thieves are among the first ofus to recognize the value of our art objects. It is well enough knownthat art nowadays is in many cases no longer something to be appreciatedfor its esthetic value only. People with more businesslike dispositionshave long appreciated the fact that many art objects, paintings inparticular, make good investments. Hence, the flourishing of not onlyprivate galleries, but also of art theft around the world.   Protecting our art objects by stepping up security, proper catalogingand improving treatment in storage and during displays are obviouslyamong the first steps that must be taken. It is to simplify matters,however, to say that these tasks belong to museum curators only. Thepublic and private institutions, with the support of private business,can and should help by raising the necessary funds and especially agreater public awareness of the value of our art objects.   As for the present, the best we can do is to try to recover what hasbeen unduly taken from our national art collections. This,unfortunately, is not an easy task to accomplish. In time, with betterfunding and with growing public appreciation, we hope that our arttreasures can be housed in the proper, modern edifices which theydeserve.Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Visa card surchargesfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 4   Thanks to Ms. Pauline Sahetapy for reaffirming my view thatsurcharges on payments with Visa card or in fact with any credit cardare illegal.   What she omits, however, is to mention what Visa and the card issuingbanks are going to do in order to stop this widespread practice.   I am using my Swiss Visa card frequently, that's what it is here for.If a shop assistant or cashier, who after all are only following orders,mention a surcharge, usually between 3 and 5 percent, I ask her or himto write this clearly on the credit slip, so that I could claim it backfrom Visa Switzerland.   In over 90 percent of the cases, sometimes after consulting the boss,no such charge is added. If my ploy fails, I will sign the credit slipand then send it together with the cash register slip or receipt toVisa, who, without any fuss will credit my next statement. I suggestthat all cardholders do the same. As this process will mean a lot ofwork for the banks they may kneel on their contract partners -- theshops.   The card issuing banks on the other hand should inform theircustomers of their right to refuse surcharges, not just encourage themto report errant shop-owners, and that without telling us what theconsequences, if any, are.   ALFRED HAFNER   Bandung, West JavaCopyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Dewi A. Rais Abinfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 4   Thank you for printing on Sept. 21 a photograph of my husband and Ion the occasion of the launching of my book Notes from Sinai: ANostalgia on Sept. 20.   I would like to clarify that my husband, retired Lt.Gen. Rais Abin,is a former commander of the United Nations Emergency Force-Middle East.The force comprised seven contingents from seven countries: Canada,Finland, Sweden, Ghana, Indonesia, Australia and Poland. He was not thecommander of the Indonesian contingent which you referred to as theIndonesian Peacekeeping Force. The Indonesian Peacekeeping Force was theIndonesian contingent usually called Batt. Garuda.   The Indonesian contingent was one among seven contingents of othercountries which were assigned to the United Nations Emergency Force-Middle East. My husband happened to be force's commander.   DEWI A. RAIS ABIN   JakartaCopyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Polio vaccine safefrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 4   It is most unfortunate that a child died on the day of NationalImmunization Day and gave the impression to some that this death wasassociated with polio vaccine (Sept. 12, 1996). Careful investigation bythe health authorities found that this child had been ill for severaldays and happened to receive a dose of polio vaccine orally hours priorto his death. There is no logical association of the death of this childwith the oral polio vaccine.   We wish to point out that with more than 200 million doses of oralpolio vaccine given annually worldwide, there is not a single knownadverse effect within hours after vaccination. The short term safetyrecord of oral polio is incontrovertibly established. It is through suchefforts as the National Immunization days that Indonesia has anexcellent chance of eliminating polio within the next few years. We hopethis incident, which is not related to polio vaccine, will not detractfrom the current effort of eliminating one of the most deadly disease ofchildhood.   What is more unfortunate than the case reported on Sept. 12 howeveris the unreported fact that 1000 under-five children still die everydayin Indonesia, mainly as a result of relatively easily preventableillness, and that the Ministry of Health and ourselves are committed todramatically reduce this toll. This effort deserves financial and othersupport from all sectors of society.   STEPHEN J. WOODHOUSE   UNICEF Representative   JakartaCopyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Museums need help to protect cultural legacyfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 7   JAKARTA (JP): Fine art is becoming more popular in Indonesia, butthis new found appreciation is not all positive.   When at least six paintings were allegedly stolen from the NationalMuseum recently, the thieves took advantage of the dilapidated conditionof Indonesian museums.   There are now more painters and art collectors in Indonesia, and theworks of a few painters have improved tremendously. There are alsosignificant increases in the quantity and quality of art exhibitionsheld by galleries. The galleries are being run with increasingprofessionalism. And art writers are working with them closely topromote their shows.   While the artists, galleries and art writers have been quick to meetthe challenge of an Indonesian art boom, museums have failed to developas quickly, due to their limited budgets and authority. "I feel sorryabout what happened at the National Museum, but honestly it could easilyhave happened in any museum in Indonesia. We need to give more attentionto the registration and storage systems of our museums," said SudarmadjiDamais, the head of Jakarta History Museum at Taman Fatahillah, CentralJakarta.   The government is beginning to pay more attention to its museums, butits efforts need public and private sector support.   The public must pay more attention to its museums. "We need to bemore respectful toward our cultural heritage," said Guruh Soekarnoputra,an artist and art collector, in response to the recent theft. Hopefullythis incident will make the community pay more attention toward culturalpatrimony in Indonesia, especially toward art in museums.   The municipal government of Jakarta is working hard to improve itsmuseums. Its own fine art museum is being renovated in response togreater public interest in art, particularly in paintings.   Perhaps the time has come for both the public and the private sectorto establish museums which are not merely warehouses for works of artand culture, but also institutions of learning through the display ofeducational exhibits and places where people can enjoy and pursue theirinterests. It seems that it is time for the concept of a National ArtGallery to be planned and realized.   -- Amir SidhartaCopyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Mystery of missing RI paintings puzzles art worldfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 7By Amir Sidharta   JAKARTA (JP): The Indonesian art world was shocked by the news of thealleged theft of six paintings from Jakarta's National Museum. Even moreshocking was the fact that at least two of the allegedly stolenpaintings, A Nude (Metamorphosis)  by Basoeki Abdullah and Portrait of aDutch Governor Wearing the Willems Order by Raden Saleh, may have beenincluded in the catalog of the upcoming Christie's auction in earlyOctober 1996.   A cartoon by GM Sudarta published in last Friday's Kompas showed aChristie's employee auctioning the Bronze elephant which symbolizes theNational Museum, also popularly known as Gedung Gajah or "ElephantBuilding".  It clearly implied that the 230-year-old auction house wasin the business of auctioning off Indonesia's national treasures.   In fact, the alleged theft would have probably not been revealed ifit were not for the publication of the auction catalog. Members of theBasoeki Abdullah estate recognized lot 319 in the catalog, A Nude,  asMetamorphosis, one of the paintings that was in the custody of theNational Museum. Meanwhile, lot 363 bore great resemblance to a paintingreproduced in a catalog published by the Directorate of Culture of theMinistry of Education and Culture, in preparation for the National ArtGallery in 1988. The pictures in the catalog were almost identical.There was a green stain on the figure's trousers, and damage was seen inthe same location on both reproductions. The only difference was that inthe later publication (the Christie's catalog), to the right of  thefigure's face, the painting had been torn and poorly restored.   Although auction houses mainly facilitate the sale of artworks at thehighest possible prices according to the market condition in a certainregion, they also become centers of documentation. "That is why we needChristie's. It records much of the changing of hands in the world ofart," said Sudarmadji Damais, head of the Jakarta History Museum atTaman Fatahilah after hearing about the alleged theft last week.   "Christie's often helps locate stolen art," someone in the field ofart auctions explained. Perhaps it has in other parts of the world. Butin this case, we can only hope that the paintings will be returned.   The reappearance of allegedly stolen Indonesian paintings inChristie's auction of Southeast Asian paintings has happened previously.One of Ida Bagus Made's 14 paintings, which was stolen a while ago, anda Basoeki Abdullah's from the collection of former president Sukarnowere offered at the Christie's auction in March 1995. However, becauseof insufficient evidence, no investigation was pursued. Neither IdaBagus Made nor Guruh Soekarnoputra, the youngest son of the latepresident Sukarno, filed police reports when the paintings were stolenor found missing. The inclusion of the painting in the album entitledPaintings in the Collection of President Sukarno, compiled by Dullah,apparently was not sufficient proof of theft. "It is Christie's policynot to reveal the identity of either the seller or the buyer of theartworks in their auctions," explained art writer Agus Dermawan, who isan avid observer of Indonesian auction trends. Therefore, the allegedtheft could not be traced.   Whether or not Christie's can be required by law to reveal theidentity of the seller in the case of the two paintings allegedly stolenfrom Indonesia's National Museum will depend on the laws in Singapore.Laws concerning stolen goods differ from country to country. Accordingto a prominent Japanese art dealer, in Japan, when a stolen painting hasbeen sold, it becomes the legal right of the buyer, and the originalowners have to buy the painting back from the new owner. In othercountries, legal ownership depends on whether the purchase was madebefore or after the official report of theft was reported to the police.Time   At this point, we can only predict the time of the alleged theft andthe characteristics of the alleged thief. It might be helpful to try toanalyze the mystery. Considering that it takes at least three monthsbefore artworks can be included of artworks in a Christie's auction, Artobserver Agus Dermawan T. estimates that the paintings were allegedlystolen before June.   Taking into account the fact that the estimated prices of thepaintings were still quite reasonable, it seems that the paintings wereprobably stolen before the sale of Raden Saleh's Deer Hunt  in lateMarch of this year. If the alleged theft took place after the news ofthis landmark sale, the alleged thieves would certainly expect ratherhigh prices, at least for the Raden Saleh, and therefore would haveincreased the expected reserve price in the auction.   Unfortunately, the reserves for the pieces remain confidential.However, it seems that the price of portrait still within reasonablelimits and is therefore considered suitable for auction.   It seems that the theft also may have occurred after the publicationof the Christie's catalog of the March auction. The catalog revealed thehigh estimate of the piece to parties interested in Indonesian art. Highprices for Indonesian art may have seduced the alleged culprits to stealthe Raden Saleh which they knew was in the neglected possession of theNational Museum. It is also possible that the pieces were stolen evenearlier, perhaps after the announcement of the auction of the Deer Huntlate last year or earlier this year. Profile   In terms of the profile of the alleged thief/thieves, we can almostbe sure that the seller of the paintings was not involved in the allegedtheft, unless he/she were completely naive. As this case has proven, theinclusion of stolen items in auctions tends to reveal cases of allegedtheft.   It seems safe to say that the paintings have changed hands at leasttwice before the paintings reach the seller. We can assume that thealleged theft was masterminded by someone who had reasonable knowledgeof art, and even knew that there was a Raden Saleh in the NationalMuseum's collection placed in its storage area.   If there had been any indication of forced entry into the museum'sstorage space, the theft would have been revealed immediately. It isalmost certain that no sign of forced entry to the storage facility wastraced, because the theft which, based on reliable sources, happened atleast three months ago, was only revealed two weeks ago. This suggeststhe involvement of insiders.Worth   Basoeki Abudllah's A Nude has been estimated as being worth betweenS$8,000 to S$12,000. Was it worth stealing? If the piece was expected tosell at around Rp 20 million, then, minus commissions and otherexpenses, the seller would have bought it for Rp 12 million at most.Therefore, we can assume that the persons behind the alleged theft paidless than Rp 2.5 million for the job.   Then we can almost be sure that the six paintings were stolen as alot, and later sold to the seller as a lot as well. The Raden Saleh isestimated between S$100,000 to S$150,000. If the painting were to besold (which I doubt, because of its poor condition), I think it wouldonly reach the low end of the estimate. At Rp 165 million, minuscommissions and expenses, the seller would have bought it for around Rp100 million. For this painting, the alleged culprits behind the theftmay have paid Rp 20 million for the job. Coupled with the otherpaintings in the lot, the value of the job may have reached Rp 30million. This amount would presumably be divided among two to threepersons. Although the sum, averaging Rp 10 million, might not seemlarge, it is actually still quite substantial, considering the wages ofgovernment employees in this country.   If the involvement of insiders is revealed, then punishment is ofcourse necessary. However, we should not treat the involved insiders ashaving sold national treasures, even though they are in the NationalMuseum's collection. It should be taken into account that the paintingsmost likely had been neglected in the museum's storage space and treatedas insignificant pieces.   Of more crucial importance is to reveal the masterminds of thisalleged theft. It should be stressed that the masterminds havesignificant knowledge about art, including Indonesian art, and theexistence of important paintings in certain collections in thegovernment. They also seem to know that some key paintings are kept instorage spaces of certain museums, although cooperation with insidersmay lead them to this kind of information. Certainly, there ispossibility that it is the work of a syndicate, which may also beinvolved in other art crimes, including art forgery, which is alsorapidly developing in the country.Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Concessionaires told to set aside wood for localsfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 8   JAKARTA (JP): Minister of Forestry Djamaludin Suryohadikusumo saidyesterday only 45 forest concessionaires, or about 10 percent of thetotal number, have allocated a portion of their log harvests for localcommunities.   He said that 405 out of about 450 forest concessionaires operating inIndonesia have yet to set aside at least 5 percent of their log harvestsfor local people, as stipulated by the government earlier this year.   The stipulation not only calls for the concessionaires to providelocals with quality wood, but also to ensure an adequate supply atmarketplaces at reasonable prices.   Speaking at a hearing with members of the House of RepresentativesCommission IV on forestry and agricultural affairs, Djamaludin said thetotal log volume obtained from the 45 concessionaires has reached only84,165 cubic meters.   He said he would send warnings to the negligent concessionaires andwould revoke their concessions if they failed to respond after a thirdwarning.   Djamaludin calculated that if log production from natural forestscurrently reached 22.7 million cubic meters and if wood-processing cutback this amount to 11 million cubic meters, then a 5 percent allocationof the processed wood by each of the country's 450 concessionaires wouldprovide local communities with at least 550,000 cubic meters of wood.   He considered the 84,165 cubic meters collected from concessionairesso far as being far from satisfactory.   Djamaludin said that the low supply of wood at local markets had ledto illegal trade of timber.   Commenting on this issue, Director General of Forest UtilizationTitus Sarijanto was convinced that the government's campaign againstillegal trade of timber would not increase timber prices on the domesticmarket.   "The prices which are currently created with the existence of illegaltimber are abnormal. Once we can get rid of illegal timber, the marketwill have its own way of creating the prices... And people will get usedto the new prices," he said.   He was also confident that the situation would not cause a slump inexports.   "What the wood-processing industry must learn to do is give addedvalue to its products. This way, companies can get more revenues for thesame amount of wood harvested," he said.Shortage   According to recent reports, a number of large wood-processingcompanies are currently suffering raw material shortages.   Titus said the total production capacity of Indonesia's wood-processing industries is presently 48.2 million cubic meters a year,consisting of 31.95 million cubic meters for the sawmill industry and16.25 million cubic meters for the plywood industry.   The wood-processing industries, however, have an operational capacityof only 45 million to 46 million cubic meters a year.   Meanwhile, supplies for these industries, which include a certainamount of trees cut from the opening up of the one million hectares ofpeat land in Central Kalimantan, reach only about 36 million cubicmeters a year.   As a way out, the government has encouraged the industries to applytechnologies with minimum waste and restructure their machinery.   Titus said yesterday there are currently technologies that can helpcompanies carry out such short-term plans.   These include installing machinery that is capable of peeling offlayers of wood barks until the core diameter of a log reaches sevencentimeters -- smaller than the 20 to 25 centimeter diameter coreproduced by most machinery currently used -- and cutting back onindustrial waste from 30 percent to 20 percent.   "This waste can further be burned to generate the boilers used in theplywood industry," he said.   Titus said Indonesia's plywood industry production reached ninemillion cubic meters a year, while state revenues obtained from thissector in the past five years reached an average of US$4.5 million eachyear, with an increasing trend. (pwn)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996PT Gobel diversifies to build three-star hotelfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 8   JAKARTA (JP): PT Gobel Development Corporation, a major electronicsmanufacturer, is entering the hotel business by constructing a threestar-hotel on Jl. Saharjo in South Jakarta.   The planned hotel, to be called Hotel Clarion Jakarta, is owned by PTDharmagraha Nusantara, a Gobel subsidiary, and will be managed by PTChoice Hotels Indonesia, the master license holder of Choice HotelsInternational of the United States.   The ground breaking ceremony of the US$125 million hotel took placeyesterday and was led by a Gobel commissioner, Abdullah Gobel, Choice'sexecutive chairman, David Schaefer, and the chief of the Jakarta officeof the Ministry of Tourism, Post and Telecommunications, Pudjo Basuki.   Gobel said that the planned eight-story hotel will include 172 rooms,a business center, meeting rooms, a conference hall, a swimming pool,restaurants and a health center.   The hotel is expected to open in early 1998 and to employ some 250Indonesians, he said.   Pudjo admitted that the 1.5-year construction period is relativelyshort for such a project.   "I am quite happy that this hotel will be up and running soon. Thereare currently 11 star-rated hotel projects in Jakarta delayed by theowners, mostly owing to financial problems."   A number of star-rated hotels in Jakarta are currently carrying outrenovation or expansion projects, including the Borobudur Inter-Continental and Le Meridien, while dozens of new star-rated hotels, suchas the Conrad, the Marriott, the Kempinski, the Marco Polo, the Tradersand the Park Lane, are being prepared to open in the city in the nextfew years.   However, Pudjo said, Jakarta might lack star-rated hotel-rooms if thegrowth rate is slow and more hotel projects are delayed. He refused toname the delayed hotel projects.   "Jakarta now has some 18,000 star-rated hotel rooms. This figure isexpected to increase to 30,000 by the year 2000."   Choice currently operates six hotels, in Yogyakarta, Bandung andAnyer in West Java, Parapat in North Sumatra and Pacung and Taman Mumbulin Bali.   Choice expects to see four hotels open in 1997, located in theCentral Java city of Surakarta, Batam in Riau, Carita beach in West Javaand Surabaya in East Java.   In addition to the Clarion Jakarta, Choice will also manage twofurther hotels, in Palembang in South Sumatra and Bogor in West Java in1998.   Today Choice, which uses Quality, Clarion, Comfort and Sleep as itbrands, is scheduled to sign an agreement with the Lippo Group to managethe Carita Clarion Suites at the Carita beach in West Java. (icn)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996ACeS gets US$60 million loanfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 8   JAKARTA (JP): Jakarta-based satellite operator PT Asia CellularSatellite (ACeS) signed a US$60 million loan facility yesterday from adomestic financial consortium led by the state-owned PT DanareksaFinance.   The nonrevolving bridge finance facility was prepared by Danareksa($15.5 million), Bank PDFCI ($15.5 million), Bank Niaga ($15.5 million),Bank Dagang dan Industri ($3.5 million) and Panin Bank ($10 million).   Reksadana's president, Edgar Ekaputra, said that the loan syndicationwas the first ever for a satellite project in the country.   "This is the first time that financial institutions have joinedtogether in supporting the infrastructure development of the satelliteindustry," he said.   He acknowledged that the satellite-based telecommunications businessis complicated, causing the consortium to pledge only $60 million inloans.   "ACeS plans to look for bigger loans, but we will learn togetherfirst about the satellite business," Ekaputra said.   ACeS's president, Adi R. Adiwoso, said that the loans will be used tofinance company projects, including the construction of Garudasatellites and telecommunication networks.   ACeS, set up in June 1995, is equally owned by PT Pasifik SatelitNusantara, the Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company and JasmineInternational Overseas Company of Thailand.   By operating a satellite-based mobile communications system, ACeSwill facilitate the making and receiving of calls to and from placeswithin the spacecraft's coverage. Garuda satellites, manufactured byLockheed Martin Corporation of the United States, will allow subscribersto call fixed telephone users anywhere in the world through its gatewayslocated in Thailand, the Philippines and Indonesia.   The cost for using the satellite service is estimated at $1 for oneminute of air traffic.   Today, ACeS is scheduled to sign an agreement with Proton of Russiaon the launching of the first Garuda satellite in the middle of 1998.(icn)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Rukindo admits leakagefrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 9   JAKARTA (JP): The president of state-owned dredging company PTRukindo, Baharudin Wahab, said yesterday that his company hasexperienced some "financial leakage."   "Deviation and financial leakage did occur in our companies, but weshouldn't necessarily relate them to corruption," he said at a hearingwith House Commission V for finance, trade, cooperatives and logistics.   He did not give any overall figures, saying only that in the secondquarter of this year the company incurred Rp 7.8 billion (US$3.4million) in "financial leakage" (unexpected expenses).   Baharudin admitted that his company has been having efficiencyproblems and has experienced setbacks due to delays in dredging projectsin west and east Ancol, North Jakarta, and in the Krakatau port ofCilegon, West Java.   The inefficiencies were partly caused by his employees, many of whom,he said, lack professionalism.   Baharudin also reported other problems that plagued his company'sperformance during the second quarter, including equipment failures andproblems with its dredging ships.   He said that his company expects to receive a loan of Rp 60 billionfor equipment and ship repair. "We're currently negotiating with anumber of financial institutions to get the loan," he said.   He projected that his company would gain a profit of about Rp 3.5billion this year. "At the least we hope to avoid incurring more lossesthis year," he said. (13)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Inflation rate expected to hit 8.5% this yearfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 9   JAKARTA (JP): The Central Bureau of Statistics (BPS) expectsIndonesia's inflation rate to reach 8.5 percent this calender year and8.9 percent next year.   The agency attributed the high estimates to continued increases indemand for consumer products.   A BPS economic forecast for 1996 and 1997, made available yesterday,said the projected rates are not expected to affect confidence in therupiah. Higher inflation is to come from increases in demand rather thanslower growth on the supply side, the report said.   The government had planned to keep the inflation rate at 5 percentper annum in the current five year development period, ending in 1999.The target has yet to be achieved.   The inflation rate, for example, was recorded at 8.65 percent in1995, down slightly from 9.24 percent in the previous year. In theJanuary to July period of this year, the inflation rate was checked at4.98 percent, down from 6.41 percent during the same period of lastyear.   According to BPS, government policies to fight inflation throughfiscal and monetary measures have not been effective due to growth inshort-term foreign funds through domestic equity and money markets.   "The increase in the inflow of foreign funds through the capital andmoney markets makes it difficult for the monetary authority to controlthe money supply," the bureau said.Investment decline   It also reported an expected drop in the growth rate of foreigninvestment approvals to 15 percent both in 1996 and 1997, from 25percent last year.   The projected declines in the value of foreign investment approvalswere attributed to inconsistencies in the government's microeconomicpolicies. BPS did not elaborate.   Foreign investment approvals, according to the InvestmentCoordinating Board (BKPM), declined in value by 2.7 percent to $21billion between January and July 15 this year from $27.2 billion in thesame period of last year. Meanwhile, the value of domestic investmentapprovals rose 127 percent to Rp 70.6 trillion from Rp 31 trillion.   In 1995, foreign investment approvals rose 68 percent to $39.9billion from $23.7 billion in 1994, while domestic investment approvalsincreased 30 percent to Rp 69.9 trillion from Rp 53.3 trillion.   BPS said that slower foreign investment growth would result in adecline in the aggregate growth of gross domestic capital to 7.67percent in 1996 and 7.91 percent in 1997, compared to 8.4 percent in1995.   It said that slower growth in foreign investment approvals would alsoslow domestic demand and the importation of consumer goods and services.   The actual growth rate of imported goods and services is expected todecline to 12 percent next year from 24 percent last year, BPS said.(hen)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Stock Exchangefrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 9Stock prices on the Jakarta Stock Exchange (in rupiah) on Sept. 23,1996: Shares                          Close   Change   Trading                                           volume -------------------------------------------------------- Ades Alfindo                    1,100      0           0 AHAP Insurance                  2,700      0           0 Alumindo Perkasa                  650      0           0 Andayani Megah                  1,100      0     487,000 Aneka Kimia Raya                2,450      0      75,000 Anwar Sierad                    2,400      0     687,500 Aqua Golden Mississippi         2,300      0           0 Argha Karya Prima Industry      2,800   -125     210,500 Argo Pantes                     1,900      0           0 Asahimas Flat                   1,475    175   3,389,500 Asiana IMI Industries           1,425      0           0 Aster Dharma Industry           1,400      0           0 Astra Graphia                   2,200    300      24,000 Astra International             3,600    300   10,624,00 Asuransi Bintang                1,900      0           0 Asuransi Dayin Mitra            1,300      0           0 Asuransi Ramayana               4,675      0           0 Bakrie Finance Corporation      2,000      0           0 Bakrie Sumatra Plantation       2,700   -100     132,500 Bakrie & Brothers               3,300     75     608,000 Bank Bali                       3,150    -50       6,000 Bank Bira                       2,275    -25      63,500 Bank Danamon                    1,775     50   1,348,500 Bank Duta                       1,575      0      47,500 Bank International Indonesi     3,550   -125     304,500 Bank Mashill Utama              2,025    -25     334,000 Bank Niaga                      6,200     75      23,500 Bank NISP                       2,100      0           0 Bank Papan Sejahtera            1,250     25      25,000 Bank PDFCI                      1,975     25      20,000 Bank Rama                       1,600      0           0 Bank Surya                      1,150      0           0 Bank Tiara Asia                 2,325    -50     125,000 Bank Umum Nasional              1,300     50       5,500 Barito Pacific Timber           1,450      0      74,000 BAT Indonesia                  14,000      0           0 Bayer Indonesia                 1,925      0           0 Bayer Indonesia SB              2,350      0           0 Bayu Buana                        675      0      63,500 BBL Dharmala Finance            3,300      0           0 BDNI                            1,675    -50      85,500 BDNI Reksadana                    400      0      77,000 Berlian Laju Tanker             2,975    125   1,655,000 Berlina                         1,450    -50       1,000 Bhuwanatala                     1,225    -25     263,500 Bimantara Citra                 2,575      0   1,076,000 Bintang Kharisma                2,600      0           0 Branta Mulia                    1,600      0           0 Budi Acid Jaya                  3,100   -100     300,000 Bukaka Teknik Utama             1,650      0      13,500 Bumi Modern Hyatt               1,000      0           0 Bunas Finance Indonesia         2,500      0           0 Cahaya Kalbar                   1,350    125   1,070,000 Centex                          1,200      0           0 Centris Multi Persada           1,100      0           0 Charoen Pokphand Indonesia      3,100      0           0 Cipendawa Farm Enterprices      1,500      0           0 Ciputra Development             1,975    -75     973,000 Citatah                         1,675      0     422,500 Citra Marga NP                  1,575      0     580,500 Citra Tubindo                   3,800      0           0 Clipan Finance Indonesia          925      0           0 Concord Benefit Enterprises       800   -100      75,500 CP. Prima                       1,400    -25     228,000 Dankos Laboratories             2,275      0           0 Darya-Varia Laboratoria         3,875     50       1,000 Davomas Abadi                   2,250      0     608,000 Delta Djakarta                  5,100      0       2,500 Dharmala Agrifood               1,450    -50      34,000 Dharmala Insurance              2,600      0           0 Dharmala Intiland               2,800      0     521,500 Dharmala Sakti Sejahtera        2,050      0     528,000 Dharmindo Adhiduta              2,000      0           0 Duta Anggada Realty             2,000    -50     176,500 Duta Pertiwi                    1,675      0     377,000 Duta Pertiwi Nusantara            800      0       5,000 Dynaplast                       2,425     50     390,500 Ekadharma Tape Ind                900      0           0 Elang Realty                      625      0           0 Enseval Putra Megatrading       1,175      0     139,000 Eratex Djaja                      700    -25      15,000 Ever Shine Textile Industry     1,700     25   4,665,000 Fajar Surya Wisesa                925    -25      25,000 Fast Food Indonesia             3,300      0           0 Ficorinvest Bank                1,750      0     735,500 Fiskaragung                     1,775    -25     383,000 Gajah Surya Multi Finance       1,400    -25     683,500 Gajah Tunggal                   1,075    -25     639,500 Ganda Wangsa Utama                800      0     199,500 Goodyear Indonesia              2,300      0           0 Great Golden Star               9,900      0           0 Great River International       1,175      0      79,500 Gudang Garam                    9,550      0     251,000 H M Sampoerna                  21,900   -150     142,500 Hadtex Indosyntec                 575    -25     153,500 Hero Supermarket                1,525    -25      76,500 Hexindo Adiperkasa              2,900      0           0 Hotel Prapatan                  1,050      0           0 Hotel Sahid Jaya                  825     25       3,000 Igarjaya                        2,750    -25     204,000 IKI Kabel                         900      0           0 INCO                            2,750    -50      10,000 Indah Kiat Pulp & Paper         1,850     25     890,000 Indal Aluminium Industry          825    -50       5,000 Indo Citra Finance                675      0           0 Indocement Tunggal Perkasa      3,625      0     217,500 Indofood Sukses Makmur          4,400     25     440,500 Indomulti Inti                  1,700      0           0 Indorama Syntetics              6,600    -25      41,500 Indosat                         8,150     25      96,000 Indospring                      1,200      0           0 Indovest Bank                   1,350      0           0 Intan Wijaya Chemical             900    -75     488,000 Inter Delta                     1,675    -50     238,000 Inter-Pacific Bank              1,500      0           0 Inti Indorayon Utama            2,050      0     228,500 Intinusa Selareksa              1,900      0           0 Intraco Penta                   1,550     25     140,500 Itamaraya Gold Industry         1,775      0           0 Jakarta Int'l Hotel & Dev.      1,700      0           0 JAPFA                           1,800     50   4,479,000 Jaya Pari Steel                 1,150      0           0 Jaya Real Property              3,225      0           0 Jeewon Jaya Indonesia           1,750      0           0 Jembo Cable Company               775      0      80,000 Kabel Metal Indonesia             975    -25      60,000 Kabelindo Murni                   850    -25      12,000 Kable Farma                     5,300     25     325,000 Karwell Indonesia               1,250     25     191,500 Kawasan Industri Jababeka       3,350    -50     462,500 Kedaung Indah Can               1,475      0           0 Kedawung Setia                  1,250      0   1,529,000 Keramika Indonesia              2,000      0           0 Komatsu                         1,550      0           0 Kurnia Kapuas UGI               1,175      0      35,000 Langgeng Makmur Plastic         2,725      0           0 Lion Metal Works                  900      0       5,000 Lionmesh Prima                  1,000    -50       2,500 Lippo Bank                      3,600    -50   1,157,000 Lippo Industries               11,700      0           0 Lippo Karawaci                  2,700      0           0 Lippo Land Development          4,500    -50     306,000 Lippo Life Insurance            2,000    -25     137,500 Lippo Pacific Finance           1,200      0           0 Lippo Securities                1,400    -50   1,711,000 London Sumatra                  5,375    175     339,500 Mas Murni Indonesia               750    -25     219,000 Maskapai Reasuransi I           1,675    175       5,000 Matahari Putra Prima            3,575      0     233,500 Mayatexdian                       925      0     247,500 Mayertex Indonesia              3,100      0           0 Mayora Indah                    1,025    -25     766,000 Medco Energi Corporation        2,625     50     235,500 Merck Indonesia                11,000      0           0 Metro Supermarket Realty        1,275      0      10,000 Metrodata Electronics           2,700      0       4,500 Miwon Indonesia                   975      0           0 Modern Bank                     1,425     25     102,500 Modern Photo                    7,500      0           0 Modernland Realty Ltd.          1,625      0       7,000 Mulia Industrindo               2,300      0   1,692,000 Mulialand                       2,525    -25      39,500 Multi Bintang Indonesia         9,500      0           0 Multibreeder Adirama              950    -25      27,500 Multipolar                      1,050    -25      50,000 Mustika Ratu                    4,000      0           0 Nipress                           825      0      25,000 Ometraco Corporation            2,800      0           0 Ometraco Realty                 1,000      0           0 Pakuwon Jati                      825    -25     202,500 Pan Brothers Tex                2,125    -25      20,000 Panca Wiratama Sakti              925      0           0 Panin Bank                      1,650     50      52,500 Panin Insurance                   950    -25      18,000 Panin Life                      1,850      0           0 Panin Overseas                    800      0           0 Pelang Indah                      725     75   5,188,000 Perdana Bangun                    675      0       2,500 Perdana Cipta Multi Finance     1,850     25      49,500 Petrosea                        1,650      0           0 Plaza Indonesia Realty          1,575      0       2,000 Polysindo Eka Perkasa           1,175      0     129,000 Pool Asuransi Indonesia         3,700      0           0 Prasidha Aneka Niaga            3,300      0           0 Prima Alloy Steel                 875      0           0 Procter & Gambler Indonesia     9,000      0           0 Pudjiadi Prestige Limited         975      0           0 Pudjiadi & Sons                 3,900      0           0 Putra Sejahtera P. (CFC)        1,225    -25   3,594,000 Putra Surya Perkasa             2,300      0     526,500 Ramayana                        3,875    125   1,222,500 Rig Tenders                     1,175     50     448,500 Rimba Niaga Idiola              1,250    -50      24,500 Roda Vivatex                    1,475      0      53,500 Sarasa Nugraha                  1,200    -25      13,500 Sari Husada                    13,000      0           0 Schering Plough Indonesia       5,900      0           0 Sekar Bumi                      1,400      0     620,000 Sekar Laut                      1,175    -25      34,000 Selamat Sempurna                1,850      0     411,000 Semen Cibinong                  4,500     50      83,000 Semen Gresik                    6,800    225     265,500 Sepatu Bata                     2,100      0           0 Sinar Mas                       2,300      0     104,500 SMART Corporation               1,650    -25     468,500 Soedarpo Corporation              950     50       3,000 Sona Topas Tourism Industry     1,025    -25     355,000 Sorini Corporation              1,600      0           0 Squibb Indonesia                4,150      0       1,000 Steady Safe                     2,025      0   1,297,000 Suba Indah                      1,800      0           0 Sucaco                          2,350      0           0 Sumalindo Lestari Jaya          2,300      0           0 Summarecon Agung                1,425    -25      66,000 Suparma                           600      0      64,500 Super Indah Makmur              3,500     75      23,500 Super Mitory Utama              1,700      0      73,500 Surabaya Agung Industry Pul       725      0     157,500 Surya Dumai                     2,125    -25     587,500 Surya Hidup                     1,100     25         500 Surya Toto Indonesia            4,750      0           0 Suryamas                          525      0      54,500 Tamara Bank                     2,300      0           0 Tambang Timah                   3,900     50     243,000 Tancho Indonesia                2,600    100      44,000 Telagamas Pertiwi               1,150      0           0 Telkom                          3,475      0   1,009,000 Tembaga Mulia Semanan           1,350      0       2,500 Tempo Scan Pacific              4,200      0     100,000 Texmaco Jaya                    1,200      0       1,000 Texmaco Perkasa Enginering      1,500      0         500 Tifico                          2,075      0           0 Tigaraksa Satria                4,600      0           0 Tira Austenite                  1,700      0           0 Tjiwi Kimia                     2,150     25      70,000 Toko Gunung Agung               1,725      0           0 Trafindo Perkasa                1,100      0           0 Tri Polyta                      1,825      0      15,000 Trias Sentosa                   3,600    100      75,000 Tunas Ridean                    4,725      0           0 Ugahari                           775      0           0 Ultra Jaya Milk                 1,300      0           0 Unggul Indah Corp               2,600      0           0 Unilever Indonesia             29,500      0         500 United Tractors                 3,750      0      23,500 Unitex                          3,500      0           0 Voksel Electric                   800      0     110,000 Wicaksana Overseas Int'l        2,650      0           0 Zebra Nusantara                 1,800      0           0 Regular trading        : 71,742,000  Composite Index     : 570.16 Bloc trading           :  5,350,000  Previous            : 568.99 Cross trading          : 15,967,951  Total trading volume: 95,839,451 Foreign portion trading:  2,226,500  Total trading value : Rp 238.12b Odd lot trading        :          0 Cash trading           :    553,000Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Gajah Surya to buy a 51.8% share of BDNIfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 9   JAKARTA (JP): The independent shareholders of PT Gajah Surya MultiFinance, of the Gajah Tunggal Group, approved yesterday the company'splan to acquire a 51.8 percent share of PT Bank Dagang NasionalIndonesia (BDNI), together with four other proposals.   The company said in a statement that all proposals, including thosefor a rights issue and a change in its line of business, won unanimousapproval from approximately 80 percent of its independent shareholderswho attended yesterday's extraordinary meeting.   The statement said that the planned acquisition will cost Rp 734billion (US$313 million), representing a price of Rp 1,725 per share,which will be financed by funds raised from the proposed rights issue.   "The shareholders have also endorsed our plan to issue seven newshares at Rp 1,300 each for every two old shares to raise total funds ofRp 728 billion," it said.   Gajah Surya shares yesterday closed at Rp 1,400 on the Jakarta StockExchange and BDNI shares at Rp 1,675.   The company said that after the acquisition it will become the GajahTunggal Group's investment holding company under the name PT BDNICapital Corporation Tbk.   "In line with the restructuring of our business line, we will handover all of our multifinance activities to PT Gajah Surya Finance andwe, therefore, increase our ownership from 86 percent at present to 98.8percent."   It was reported that Gajah Surya will increase its authorized capitalfrom Rp 800 billion to Rp 2.8 trillion, including a paid-up capital ofRp 720 billion, after the planned right issue.   The meeting also appointed Karmady Arief as a new commissionerreplacing Sutrisno, and  F.T. Chong and Arie Yandi Taswar as newdirectors replacing Eddy Sanusi and Hendra Alimin.   Gajah Surya, established in 1982 as a leasing company, also operatesin general and life insurance, insurance brokerage, stock brokerage andventure capital, with total assets of Rp 779 billion.   "The management has planned to make use of BDNI's nationwideextensive branches to sell a broad range of financial services tocorporate and consumer clients," the company said.   BDNI, with total assets of Rp 14 trillion, operates 12 subsidiariesand affiliates, including Bank Dewa Rutji, PT DBS Securities andpublicly-listed PT BDNI Reksa Dana.   Gajah Surya is controlled by Gajah Tunggal Mulia with 65.49ownership. The remaining 34.51 percent shares are owned by the investingpublic.   BDNI's shareholders are PT Daya Patria Corporation (with 51.84percent stake), PT Nusantara Duta Development (5.1 percent), PTNusantour Duta Djaya Invest Corporation (3.2 percent) and the investingpublic (39.86 percent). (alo)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Indonesian horse riders lack basic skills: Expertfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 10   JAKARTA (JP): Indonesian horse riders are among the best in SoutheastAsia, but surprisingly they lack basic skills, an internationalequestrian expert said yesterday.   Wolfgang Niggli, former chairman of the international equestrianfederation (FEI), the world equestrian body, told The Jakarta Post aftera three-day coaching clinic here that many Indonesian riders are notfamiliar with basic training techniques.   "I can see that a lot of basic training skills are still lacking.Maybe the basics are not known well enough," he said.   Of 12 riders invited to the clinic only five turned up; the othersreturned home after the just-concluded 14th National Games last week.   Niggli said, however, the riders have good prospects for success ininternational events. "Look at Chiang Mai. If only the Indonesian ridershad had good horses, they would have won," he said.   In the 1995 Southeast Asian Games in Chiang Mai, host Thailandadopted a ruling saying that all participants had to use local horses.Indonesia blamed the regulation for its failure to win gold medals inboth the individual and team dressage events. Indonesia had to becontent with a silver and a bronze.   Niggli, who prefers to come here by himself instead of sendingsomebody, said that the FEI issues passports for horses to enable themtravel around the world for competitions.   "It is still difficult to do more because each country has its ownrules. We can't do much about it," he said.   Thailand and Malaysia have just opened their borders to foreignhorses.   Commenting on Indonesia's decision to exclude equestrian events fromthe 25 proposed medal sports when it hosts the SEA Games next year,Niggli said that the country will lose its biggest chance to win goldmedals.   "It's a shame that the National Sports Council wants to dropequestrian events based on medal-tally judging. It will also prevent thesport's development here," he said.   Wijaya, treasurer of the Jakarta Equestrian Association, told thePost that despite the absence of equestrian events in the SEA Games, twoseries of the Volvo World Cup will be staged here in September nextyear.   The first leg of the tournament will be held on Sept. 7 at theArthayasa Stable in Cinere, South Jakarta, which is owned by RadinalMoochtar's son Rafiq Radinal. The second leg will be staged a week laterat the Ciater Stables in Sukabumi, West Java.   The championships will feature dressage, jumping and three-day-eventcompetitions. (yan)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Games medal winners cash in on victoriesfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 10   JAKARTA (JP): Cash bonuses for National Games winners made theheadlines in the country's sports pages over the weekend after 12 daysof hectic competition finished Friday.   The size of the awards, a preferable substitute for traditionalfloral garlands, varied from province to province, but there is nodenying that the vast majority of medal winners across the archipelagoare richer than they were before the Games.   Central Java is the only province not rewarding its sporting heroes.Governor Suwardi told his athletes arriving in Semarang Sunday that hisadministration would not provide anything for the medalists.   "As long as I am at the helm of this province, there will be no cashbonuses for Central Java's athletes. For those who don't agree with mypolicy I'll let you race to other provinces for cash," Suwardi wasquoted by Antara as saying,   Leftovers from the province's Games budget are to be used to buildsports facilities, said the governor.   Suwardi promised that rewards will be given in other forms, such asjobs in provincial offices and direct admittance to state-rununiversities.   In Kendari, Governor La Ode Kaimoeddin handed out Rp 5 million(US$2,146) to each of Southeast Sulawesi's 11 gold medalists, Rp 3million to the four silver medalists and Rp 2 million to the nineathletes who won bronzes during a ceremony yesterday attended byMinister of Public Works Radinal Moochtar, who was there on an officialvisit.   The province finished 14th in the medal standings, three places lowerthan three years ago. Nine of the golds in this year's Games came fromwater sports.   "Don't look at the amount, which may be less than that received byathletes from other provinces. We have to thank this province's 1.4million people who contributed to the bonuses," Kaimoeddin said.   Jakarta's medal winners are enjoying the biggest bonuses, with eachgold medalist receiving three times the amount given to their SoutheastSulawesi counterparts. A Jakartan silver medalist is Rp 7.5 millionricher, while the bronze medalists bagged Rp 4 million.   Each member of a gold, silver and bronze medal-winning team receivedRp 7.5 million, Rp 5 million and Rp 2.5 million respectively. Andathletes who left the Games empty-handed were awarded consolationbonuses of Rp 1 million.   Record-breaking performances were also worth whopping bonuses, with aSoutheast Asian Games mark priced at Rp 5 million, a national recordworth Rp 3 million and a meet record going for Rp 2.5 million.   "The amount of the bonuses is small compared to your efforts and Idon't think that you fought for glory because of the bonuses," GovernorSurjadi Soedirdja told his athletes during a get-together celebration onSunday.   Jakarta was crowned the overall champion for a record eighthsuccessive time, scooping 141 golds, 83 silvers and 79 bronzes.   West Javanese medal winners lived up to their status as runners-up toJakarta, emerging the second richest with Rp 12.5 million given to agold medalists, Rp 6.2 million to silver medalists and Rp 3.1 million tobronze medalists.   Central Kalimantan awarded Rp 6 million to its gold-medal winners, Rp3 million to the silver medalists and Rp 1.5 million to the bronzemedalists. (amd)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE JAKARTA POST                              via NewsNetSeptember 24, 1996Chess meet lures top playersfrom THE JAKARTA POST -- TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1996 -- PAGE 10   JAKARTA (JP): Indonesia's three grandmasters -- Utut Adianto, EdhiHandoko and Ardiansyah -- and defending champion international masterRuben Gunawan are to take part in the Rp 25 million (US$10,638) IntisariCup chess tournament from Oct. 6 to Oct. 9 here.   Utut is the only player who will receive a bye into the last-32 roundof the tournament, to be held at the F. Sumanti chess hall in TanahAbang, Central Jakarta, and the nearby Auditorium building.   The tournament, organized by the Intisari monthly magazine and PTAsia Sejahtera Perdana Pharmaceutical, has not been sanctioned by theworld chess governing body FIDE. (arf)Copyright 1996 The Jakarta PostBack to Headline List WT03-B05-14IA087-000634-B039-176http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it46.html 205.156.212.5 19970122025518 text/html 39603HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:53:22 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:18 GMTContent-length: 39416Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it46.html Sample Issue Copyright JAPAN DIGEST via NewsNet January 4, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES BANKING & FINANCE Sending a Perfectly Terrible Year Into History, Yen & Stocks Soar (196 words) MoF Vice Minister Shinozawa Resigns After Just Seven Months on Job (362 words) Despite MoF Assurances on Bank Crisis, S&P, Moody's Lower Debt Ratings (197 words) Farm Co-op Banks Hold Yen 2 Trillion in Bad Loans To Other Institutions (191 words) ECONOMY Leading Indicators Climbed To 80, But Other Statistics Are Mixed Bag (337 words) POLITICS Ozawa Wins Shinshinto Presidency in a Walk, But Unity is a Question (295 words) Dietman Yamaguchi Indicted for Illegal Loans from Failed Credit Associations (169 words) Report That Murayama Agreed to Hand Power to Hashimoto Is Denied (155 words) FOREIGN RELATIONS Clinton Reschedules Japan Visit for April 17 (100 words) FOREIGN INVESTMENT Lockheed Martin, Timken, Other U.S. Firms Plan Joint Japan Business Base (186 words) AUTOMOTIVE Nissan Will Move All Sentra Assembly To Mexico, Export Altima from U.S. (328 words) Pressured By Fearful Koreans, Ssangyong Scrubs Plan To Start Sales in Japan (215 words) Japanese Makers Bought $10.3 Billion of U.S. Parts in FY '95 First Half (146 words) Honda Starts Using South Korean Steel for Sheet Metal on Minis (47 words) Hurt By Exports, November Domestic Vehicle Output Plunged 9.1% (201 words) ENERGY Monju Coverup Officials Demoted; Fast Breeder Program To Be `Rethought' (261 words) Tomen, B&W to Build Nuclear Waste Disposal Plant for Old Russian Submarines (171 words) ELECTRONICS Hitachi Plans Yen 230 Billion in Chip Ventures in Singapore, Kuala Lumpur (184 words) Takara Drops Plan To Write Software for Nintendo `Virtual Boy' (52 words) NEC Develops Flash Voice Card Able To Store 30 Minutes of Talk (83 words) Time Warner Cable Buys Toshiba Online System for San Diego Experiment (40 words) DEFENSE U.S. Proposes Joint Electronics Weapons Component R&D With Japan (153 words) LABOR Jobless Rate Hit 3.4% in November; Miyazaki Claims It May Signal `Recovery' (247 words) Matsushita to Begin Hiring in Fall as Well as Spring (157 words) Mitsubishi Corp. To Abolish Clerical Track for Women (189 words) SOCIETY Population Growth in 1995 Fell To Lowest Level of Post-war Era (201 words) CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Sending a Perfectly Terrible Year Into History, Yen & Stocks Soar     Sending what was a perfectly terrible year firmly intohistory, the Tokyo markets opened 1996 with a tremendous surge,in a half day session today. The dollar climbed above Yen 105 forthe first time since June of 1994, and the stock market soared750 points, or 3.77% to close at 20,618.00 on the Nikkei, itshighest finish since September 2, 1994. Helped along by heavyforeign buying, about 400 million shares changed hands on theTokyo Exchange--close to double the volume in many full daysessions of recent months. Stock prices had climbed sharply inthe week before shogatsu, the year-end holiday, finishing above20,000 at midweek before dropping back a bit before the yearended. Tokyo brokers told news agency reporters they believeforeign buying will continue because the higher dollar will helpcorporate profits, and Japanese stocks are currently underpricedin comparison to New York and other foreign markets. It was all asharp contrast to last year's opening, when prices fell for fivedays running and volume dropped to levels that hadn't been seensince the early 1960s, setting a tone that persisted through muchof Japan's most troublesome year since 1945.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996MoF Vice Minister Shinozawa Resigns After Just Seven Months onJob     In a move that jolted Kasumigaseki just as the governmentwas shutting down for the year-end holiday, Vice Finance MinisterKyosuke Shinozawa resigned 12/29 after just seven months asJapan's most powerful bureaucrat, the shortest incumbency ever.His successor is National Tax Administration Agency directorgeneral Tadashi Ogawa, a former administrative secretary toNoboru Takeshita. Shinozawa said he quit to help "renovate thehearts and minds... and lift up morale" at MoF. Both he andFinance Minister Takemura vehemently denied he was takingresponsibility for anything specific. But reports said there wasno doubt his departure stemmed from MoF's inept handling of aseveral financial crises culminating in the controversy over useof government funds to bail the banks out from under trillions ofyen in bad debt owed by seven jusen or mortgage lenders (Digest,12/20-22). Asahi said Shinozawa acted to prevent a politicallydisruptive interrogation by the opposition Shinshinto when theDiet reconvenes late this month. Shinshinto's new presidentIchiro Ozawa is already attacking on the issue. Persistent callsare also heard for Takemura's head, but the Finance Ministerhuffed that "My responsibility, which I have to carry out, is toresolve the housing loan problem."     Punishment: Shinozawa is the second vice minister in a rowto leave before his time. Predecessor Jiro Saito was forced outin May, a month before his term was up, in what was widelyinterpreted as punishment both for MoF's ineptitude and for hisconnections to the political opposition. Taken together, theirdepartures are read as a signal that the ministry's formerlyuncontested clout is in deep decline--and more broadly, so is thegeneral power of Japan's almighty central bureaucracy. "I neverthought the post of Finance vice minister could be so fragile,"one bureaucrat told Asahi. But several commentaries also observedthat one resignation or even several won't cure incompetence andmisbehavior. "The problem is that once well-functioning decisionmaking system made up of bureaucrats and politicians no longerworks in today's dynamically changing economy. Unless thegovernment and the ruling parties tackle this problem straightforwardly, there will be no essential difference regardless ofhow many vice ministers' heads fall," Yomiuri lamented.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Despite MoF Assurances on Bank Crisis, S&P, Moody's Lower DebtRatings     The Finance Ministry's self-assured contention that thejusen [mortgage lender] settlement and other actions to shore upthe financial system have finally brought the banking crisisunder control (Digest, 12/20-22), didn't cut much ice withAmerican rating agencies. Standard and Poor's lowered the debtratings of seven major Japanese banks over the year-end, andMoody's did so on two large regionals. Affected were Mitsubishi,Sumitomo, Dai-Ichi Kangyo, Sanwa, Fuji, its Chicago subsidiaryHeller Financial, Sakura, Industrial Bank of Japan, Hokkaido Bankand Ashikaga Bank. S&P said bluntly that Japanese banks "remainunder considerable stress resulting from a high level of under-reserved problem loans, exacerbated by a continuous slide in realestate prices." The big banks, said S&P are also plagued by lowprofitability, serious difficulties in foreclosing on property,and quite possibly by exposure to the problem loans of manysmaller financial institutions. Moody's added that with propertyvalues still falling, actual bad loan losses could well be largerthan anyone now imagines. About the only thing that will get thebanks healthy again, S&P said, is either a general economicpickup that generates an ability among borrowers to pay, or aturnaround in property prices.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Farm Co-op Banks Hold Yen 2 Trillion in Bad Loans To OtherInstitutions     The farm co-op banks, whose political allies limited theirlosses in the collapse of the seven jusen to Yen 530 billion($5.1 billion), are owed an additional Yen 5.1 trillion ($49.5billion) by 68 other nonbank lenders--and more than Yen 2trillion ($20 billion) is a dead loss, Yomiuri reported 1/1. Thepaper said 27 of the lenders are paying no interest or makingreduced payments on Yen 2.23 trillion owed to the co-op banks.Largest of the debtors is Nippon Lease, an affiliate of Long TermCredit Bank of Japan, which owes them Yen 456.2 billion. LTCBJhasn't asked the co-ops to forgive any of the debt yet, Yomiurisaid, but Nichiboshin wants them to abandon some of the Yen 41.8billion it owes, and Yen 21.3 billion owed by Hyogin Factor, asubsidiary of bankrupt Hyogo Bank, is gone. Largest single lenderamong the co-ops is their central bank, Norinchukin, with Yen551.9 billion outstanding, but the National Federation ofAgricultural Co-op Mutual Aid Associations and its 47 prefecturalchapters hold Yen 720.3 billion in loans among them, whileseparate prefectural co-op associations hold the remaining Yen609.7 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Leading Indicators Climbed To 80, But Other Statistics Are MixedBag     The index of leading indicators climbed to 80 on a scale of100 in October, the Economic Planning Agency reported 12/26. Thatwas its first trip in six months over 50, the point at which ittheoretically begins to predict expansion 6-9 months hence. Butother statistics reported over the year end, many of themNovember numbers, were mixed at best, with a majority of themstill pointing down. Details:     -- Retail sales by major department stores and supermarketsfell 0.5% from a year ago in November, to Yen 1.84 trillion, MITIsaid. Department stores gained 0.1% to Yen 904 billion butsupermarkets fell 1.1% to Yen 932 billion. October sales hadfallen 3.2%.     -- The Prime Minister's office said consumer prices throughNovember averaged 0.7% below a year ago, and added that if thetrend continued through December Japan would have seen its firstfull year of deflation since 1958. Prices in Tokyo were actuallyoff 0.5% from a year ago in December.     -- November industrial production gained 0.5% from a yearago, MITI reported 12/27, adding that manufacturers it surveyedreported plans to raise output in December and January. Chiefstatistician Harumi Takahashi told reporters she expects 4thquarter output to gain 0.9% from a year ago. "Industrialproduction is better than we had expected," she said.     -- New construction orders to 50 major companies in Novemberfell 10.4% from a year ago to Yen 1.4 trillion yen, theConstruction Ministry reported 12/27.     -- MOC also said November housing starts gained 0.1% from ayear ago to 137,180, the first rise after eight months ofdecline. Private homes fell 8% to 45,953 and company housingdropped 2.8% to 2,314, but rental units gained 2.6% to 56,040--and housing for sale (mainly condos) climbed 9.4% to 32,862.     -- MITI said 12/25 it forecasts crude steel production willfall 9.2% from a year ago to 23.2 million tons in the firstquarter of 1996.     -- November unemployment climbed to 3.4% after six months at3.2% (see Labor).Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Ozawa Wins Shinshinto Presidency in a Walk, But Unity is aQuestion     Longtime behind-the-throne power broker Ichiro Ozawa moved along step toward putting himself in the seat of authority bydefeating erstwhile ally Tsutomu Hata 2-to-1 for the presidencyof Shinshinto, 12/28. Ozawa got into the race only after Hata'speople started to talk about removing him as secretary general, aspot he'd held since he organized the party. But with a littlehelp from his friends in organized labor and other local groups,he managed in two weeks to put together a 1,120,012 to 566,998rout of the former prime minister. That tally included anybodywilling to pony up Yen 1,000 ($10) for the right to cast aballot. Among the 223,578 regular party members, Ozawa garneredonly a slim margin. Most commentary approved his enunciation ofclear policy proposals, over Hata's emphasis on consensus-building, and suggested that once LDP President Hashimoto takesover from Prime Minister Murayama, Japan will finally return toreal politics.     No Shutting Up: Always provided Ozawa can hold his forcestogether. Neither Hata nor his allies seem in a mood to shut upand follow the leader. About 15 Hata supporters, including formerPrime Minister Hosokawa, said they'll organize yet another "studygroup" (read incipient faction). Ozawa put Hata, former primeministers Hosokawa and Kaifu, and other senior politicians on aboard of senior advisors, but several said they will continue tocriticize him. He named as his secretary general Takashi Yonezawawho once held the same job in the old Democratic Socialist party,and who had delivered the union vote for Ozawa. He kept followerKozo Watanabe as Political Affairs chairman, but coopted longtimecritic Kazuo Aichi, a Hata man, as policy chairman, and namedanother Hata backer, former postal minister Hajime Funada as hispolitical affairs deputy.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Dietman Yamaguchi Indicted for Illegal Loans from Failed CreditAssociations     Tokyo prosecutors indicted former Labor Minister ToshioYamaguchi 12/27 on embezzlement, fraud and other charges,culminating a year's investigation into financial irregularitiesof two defunct Tokyo credit co-ops, Tokyo Kyowa and Anzen.Yamaguchi is accused of conspiring with former Tokyo Kyowadirector Harunori Takahashi to get Yen 2.7 billion in unsecuredloans that are in default. The fraud charge stems from aconspiracy to extract Yen 180 million from Kumamoto EngineeringUniversity, ostensibly to help build the `WashingtonInternational University' project in Reston, VA., though therewas no prospect of construction. Those funds also went to pay offdebts of his family firm. He is also accused of using assets ofnon-profit foundations he created as collateral for other loansfrom the two credit co=ops--and of perjuring himself before theDiet by testifying that he knew nothing of the conspiracies.Prosecutors said their year-long investigation of the twoinstitutions uncovered Yen 38.2 billion in illegal loans to avariety of people, a record in a Japanese bank fraud case.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Report That Murayama Agreed to Hand Power to Hashimoto Is Denied     Yomiuri reported 12/31 that Prime Minister Murayama hassecretly agreed to hand his office over to LDP president RyutaroHashimoto in April, but Murayama himself denied it, and perhapsmore important, so far you've read it in Yomiuri, and nowhereelse. Murayama told reporters at a year-end press conference heplans to go to Lyon, France for the next G7 summit in June. Headded that there's no plan to dissolve the Diet. Yomiuri had saidMurayama, Hashimoto and Finance Minister Takemura, hashed up adeal to make the switch after the FY '96 budget passes the Dietthis spring, and to have Hashimoto call an election about threemonths later, giving the Murayama's Socialists and Takemura'sSakigake party time to prepare. The paper said the switch mightnot happen until late April because President Clinton is due tovisit April 17-18, and Murayama is going to an atomic energysummit in Moscow April 19.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Clinton Reschedules Japan Visit for April 17     The White House said 12/26 that President Clintonrescheduled his state visit to Japan April 17-18, on his way toMoscow to see Boris Yeltsin and attend the atomic energy summit.Clinton canceled a trip in November for the ASEAN summit and afollow on visit to Tokyo because of the U.S. government shutdown.Main purpose of the visit is to issue a joint declaration thatthe U.S.-Japan security relationship is intact and should remainso despite the end of the Cold War and a measure of publicunhappiness with the presence of U.S. troops, exacerbated by theOkinawa rape.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Lockheed Martin, Timken, Other U.S. Firms Plan Joint JapanBusiness Base     Lockheed Martin, Timken and other U.S. firms are layingplans to establish a joint business base in Japan that they hopewill allow them to serve the Japanese market better while keepingcosts to a minimum, Nihon Keizai reported. So far, seven firmsincluding Caterpillar, Cooper Automotive, and electrical partsmaker AMP have agreed to join, and the group wants to attract atleast 20 companies before making a firm go-ahead decision. But italready has the unreserved support of MITI and is likely to getboth tax breaks and a low-interest loan from the JapanDevelopment Bank to execute the project, Nikkei said. Theplanners are looking for a 30-year lease on 20,000-30,000 sq.m.(215-325,000 sq.ft.) of floor space that could be subdivided intoindividual company offices, small R&D facilities, design shops,conference rooms and an exhibit hall for joint use. Evencompanies that already have offices in Japan would benefit fromusing the joint facilities, the paper said. The group is workingwith MITI and local governments to pick a location early thisyear, and is looking hard at Yokohama and Kobe, Nikkei said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Nissan Will Move All Sentra Assembly To Mexico, Export Altimafrom U.S.     Struggling to stanch its cash hemorrhage in Mexico, Nissanwill move all assembly of Sentra sedans for the U.S. market fromSmyrna, Tenn. to its plant in Aguascalientes, while raisingoutput of the Altima in Tennessee so it can export 30-40,000 ayear to Japan. A separate report said it will also restartproduction of the AD Van at Aguascalientes, mainly for export toJapan. Nihon Keizai said 12/23 the Sentra shift will be completedby 1998, when the car is due for its next major model changeover.Smyrna currently makes about 170,000 Sentras a year, so theswitch would just about bring the Mexican plant up to capacity.It made 100,000 last year, vs. a capacity of 270,000. It alreadymakes an earlier version of the Sentra, which Nissan sells inLatin America under the same Sunny nameplate it uses in Japan.The company itself announced 12/27 it plans to resume productionof the AD in Mexico for export to its home market.     NAFTA: Nihon Keizai said the main motive for the shift is totake advantage of both NAFTA rules and lower costs in Mexicogenerated by the declining value of the peso. Decision to exportthe Altima from Tennessee, the paper added, is meant to shortcircuit organized labor and other opponents of NAFTA. The switchwill help Nissan make use of a plant that became a white elephantwhen the peso collapsed. Nissan borrowed heavily in dollars toenlarge Aguascalientes--and banking on continued prosperity inMexico, it even quit exporting the Mexican-made AD home to Japan.But the Mexican auto market disintegrated: sales are now 30-40%of year ago levels, and that helped generate Yen 60 billion ($600million) losses in Mexico last year and this. What isn't clear,Nikkei said, is whether it will help the company's bottom line.Given competition from the Toyota Avalon and Honda Accord,Nissan's U.S.-made Altimas could well wind up eating into salesof its own domestic plants.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Pressured By Fearful Koreans, Ssangyong Scrubs Plan To StartSales in Japan     Under stiff pressure from Korean makers and officialsfearful that its action could force Seoul to open its domesticmarket to Japanese autos, Ssangyong Motor scrapped plans to sellits Mercedes-designed Musso sport utility in Japan this month,Nihon Keizai reported 12/30. The company had said it planned tobecome the first Korean automaker into the Japanese market with alocation in Nagoya and plans to expand its dealer networknationwide within 2-3 years (Digest, 12/11). The paper didn'tgive details of exactly what happened in Seoul, but said thatSsangyong, currently the midget of the Korean auto industry (itmade 50,000 Mussos in 1995, and exported 15,000), ran head-oninto worries that its action would give Tokyo an excuse to demandthat the Korean market be opened. The Koreans lifted some importbarriers effective Jan. 1, but the impact will be felt mainly inthe luxury and semi-luxury categories, while the bread-and-buttermarket for sedans with engines under 3 liters will be left mainlyuntouched. There was also some worry, Nikkei said, that if theKorean market is fully opened, Japanese makers like Nissan andMazda who've been selling technology to the Koreans as a way toget into the market, might be tempted to cancel the arrangementsand start sales on their own.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Japanese Makers Bought $10.3 Billion of U.S. Parts in FY '95First Half      Japanese makers bought a record $10.3 billion worth of U.S.automotive parts in the first half of FY '95, ended Sept. 30, up8.3% from the year ago period, the Japan Auto ManufacturersAssociation reported. The figure was about $800 million above theprevious record, set in FY '94. About $8.7 billion of the partswere for use on transplant assembly lines in the U.S., up 8% fromFY '94, and imports for domestic operations totaled $1.65billion, up 9.8%. Although Japanese makers, with MITI's backing,refused to set a new industry-wide parts purchasing target duringthe autos and parts negotiations that ended in June, the figurewould seem to indicate a substantial increase for all of FY '95,from the $19.9 billion they bought in FY '94. A JAMA brieferwarned, however, that declining vehicle exports, which areknocking down production, could limit parts imports.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Honda Starts Using South Korean Steel for Sheet Metal on Minis     Honda said 12/27 it has begun regular use of cold-rolledsheet from South Korea's Pohang Iron & Steel for door panels onthe Today 660-cc minicar and the Acty van. The company said itexpects to buy 500-1,000 tons a month for now, or 1-2% ofconsumption.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Hurt By Exports, November Domestic Vehicle Output Plunged 9.1%     Stung by a rapid fall in exports stemming from the high yenand rising output abroad, Japanese vehicle makers reported a 9.1%plunge in November domestic output, to 863,460. It was a sixthstraight monthly drop, and among the big five, Nissan was theonly gainer, the Japan Auto Manufacturers' Association said. Thefigure included 655,067 cars, down 5.7%, 204,047 trucks, off18.9%, and 4,346 buses, up 8.1%. The decline was all in exports,which plummeted 21%. Domestic sales gained 4.6% to 593,073, andpassenger cars were up 7% to 380,405. For all but Nissan, whichgained 7.6% to 143,448 on the strength of a domestic surge, theresults were bleak. Toyota hurt by falling exports to North andSouth America and the Middle East, dropped 11.2% to 277,194.Mazda, as usual, got hurt worst in percentage terms, off 24.9% to65,789. Mitsubishi fell 15.4% to 106,581, and Honda, whosedomestic sales actually climbed 18.6%, saw production fall 9.5%to 81,425 because of lower exports. Overall, production for thefirst 11 months totaled 9,423,306, off 2.8% from a year earlier,and JAMA said it projects the fully year total at around 10.2million, which would represent a 2.4% drop from 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Monju Coverup Officials Demoted; Fast Breeder Program To Be`Rethought'     The Power Reactor and Nuclear Fuel Development Corp. orDonen said 12/23 it removed from duty four officials involved inan effort to cover up the extent of the Monju reactor'sdisastrous leak of three tons of sodium coolant (Digest, 12/22).Donen had acknowledged that Monju operations director YasutamiOmori and deputy Isao Sato conspired to cut 14 minutes from agruesome, 15-minute videotape of the accident scene. They gavethe 1-minute tape to TV stations the day after the accident, andreleased an additional four minutes two days later, saying it wasnewly shot. The Donen director in charge of Monju, TadaoTakahashi, and a lower level official were also demoted. Reportscalled the action highly unusual, especially since the reactor isshut down and the investigation isn't finished. Some accountstreated it as a ploy by Donen to get people who know too much outof the way. "Why do they have to make personnel changes now?...Tofind out what happened, it's better to leave those who were incharge in place," Fukui governor Yukio Kurita told reporters.     Rethinking: Asahi reported 1/1 that Atomic Energy Commissionhas decided to "rethink" the entire fast breeder program, whichhappens to be the centerpiece of Japan's long-term nuclear energypolicy. The Monju experiment was supposed to lead to constructionof another and bigger fast breeder a decade hence, and commercialoperation of plutonium-fueled reactors by 2030. AEC, which isheaded by Science and Technology Agency Director Yasuoki Urano,thinks Monju and its aftermath necessitate formation of "a newnational consensus," Asahi said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Tomen, B&W to Build Nuclear Waste Disposal Plant for Old RussianSubmarines     With funding from the Japanese government, Tomen and Babcock& Wilcox will build a facility to process nuclear waste extractedfrom old Russian submarines, Nihon Keizai reported 12/31. TheRussian Navy was found dumping used submarine reactor coolant inthe Sea of Japan in 1993 to Japan's great dismay (Digest 10/19-22/93). The incident led Tokyo to agree to spend about $100million in foreign aid funds to help Russia find a better way todispose of the waste. The fund, now managed by a joint Japanese-Russian commission, will pay Tomen and B&W to build a Yen 2.5billion ($25 million) floating disposal plant, to be moored nextto a submarine dismantling facility in Vladivostok. It will havean annual processing capacity of 7,000 cubic meters of waste--enough to process all waste coming from the submarines--5,000-6,000 cubic meters a year--plus what's stored on land in the FarEast. Prime Minister Murayama will formally announce the projectduring an atomic energy safety conference in Moscow April 19-20,Nikkei said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Hitachi Plans Yen 230 Billion in Chip Ventures in Singapore,Kuala Lumpur     Hitachi is planning Yen 230 billion ($2.2 billion) worth ofnew chip ventures in Singapore and Kuala Lumpur that would highdensity memories and CMOS chips, Nihon Keizai reported. The Yen100 billion Singapore venture, with Nippon Steel and the EconomicDevelopment Board of Singapore, will be capable of processing 20-30,000 eight inch wafers a month to make 16-and 64-meg DRAMsstarting in mid-1998, the paper said. It would be Nippon Steel'sfirst venture into overseas electronics production. The company,like much of the rest of the steel industry, has been trying todiversify into electronics for several years, but without a wholelot of success so far. The Kuala Lumpur project, a joint venturewith South Korea's LG Semicon, will build a Yen 130 billion chipplant capable of processing 30,000 8-inch CMOS wafers a monthwith 0.3 micron technology. The Malaysian news agency Bernamasaid it will be located at Kulim, Kedah. The venture is due to beorganized in the spring, but when production would actually beginwasn't given. In Tokyo Hitachi said Singapore venture willeventually create 1,000 jobs.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Takara Drops Plan To Write Software for Nintendo `Virtual Boy'     The Takara gameware house said it dropped plans to writesoftware for Nintendo's `Virtual Boy' 3D game machine. Thecompany wouldn't discuss the reason, but rival gameware houseTaito has also dropped the project because sales of the machinehave been poor. The headset machine produces a red and black lineimage.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996NEC Develops Flash Voice Card Able To Store 30 Minutes of Talk     NEC announced development of a 32-meg flash memory soundstorage card called the "Chip Whisper" that can hold up to 30minutes of digitized conversation. NEC said the card, whichweighs 100 grams (3-1/2 oz) is capable of giving random access toits contents. With additional chips it can store up to 4 hours oftalk, the company said. NEC said 12/26 it will offer the systemto museums and exhibitions, and believes the technology couldalso be used in personal digital assistants.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Time Warner Cable Buys Toshiba Online System for San DiegoExperiment     Time Warner Cable, in which Toshiba is a major investor,said it's buying from the Japanese maker 50,000 cable modems andother equipment with which it will experiment with providingcomputer online communications in San Diego and two other cities.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996U.S. Proposes Joint Electronics Weapons Component R&D With Japan     The Pentagon has proposed a joint R&D program with Japan onparts that go into weapons used by both countries, Yomiurireported 1/1. The proposal was made during bilateral talks inOctober and November, and what the Pentagon has in mind is mainlythe electronics that go into such systems as the F-15 fighter,the P3C anti-submarine patrol plane, and Aegis series destroyersand cruisers, the paper said. While the U.S. objective is mainlyto share R&D costs, the Defense Agency also sees benefit in suchprojects: They would increase interchangeability of weapons andhelp deflect criticism about the one-way flow of weaponstechnology from the U.S. to Japan, Yomiuri said. But the agencyalso wants to limit the proposal for now to "research" ratherthan "development" because it's worried that Socialist andSakigake politicians in the ruling coalition may object to it asa violation of Japan's long-standing ban on weapons exports.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Jobless Rate Hit 3.4% in November; Miyazaki Claims It May Signal`Recovery'     The unemployment rate jumped to a new post-war high of 3.4%in November, up 0.2% from where it had rested since June, theManagement and Coordination Agency announced 12/26. Particularlyhard hit were first-time job seekers aged 15-24, for whom therate was 6%, up from 4.8% a year ago. That's consistent withother surveys indicating the difficulty next spring's high schooland college graduates face in finding jobs. But the LaborMinistry also issued a contradictory statistic, showing afractional rise to 0.63 in the ratio of job openings to jobseekers, from 0.61 in October. That led a Labor Ministry brieferto theorize that with the economy now out of the darkest part ofthe tunnel, some people are deliberately quitting to look forbetter jobs. As evidence he noted an MCA survey that showed850,000 of the 2.18 million unemployed in November, up 100,000from a year ago, said they'd quit of their own volition. Thenumber forced out of work was 560,000, up just 60,000. EconomicPlanning Agency Minister Isamu Miyazaki ventured that "A rise inthe jobless rate can sometimes be seen in the initial stage of aneconomic recovery." Still, Miyazaki predicted the jobless ratewill hover at 3-4% "for some time." Because most big companiesseem determined to continue "restructuring" workers out the door,the Labor Ministry is planning "consultations" with the managersof up and coming venture businesses to encourage them to raiseemployment, Asahi and Nihon Keizai reported.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Matsushita to Begin Hiring in Fall as Well as Spring     Matsushita will recruit in the fall as well as the springstarting next year, to make it easier to hire experienced workersand graduates returning from study abroad, Nihon Keizai reported12/31. Though the Itoyokado supermarket chain started hiring inthe fall last September, and competitor Seiyu said recently itwill begin taking on people year round, Matsushita is one of thefirst industrial companies to do so, Nikkei said. The example, itadded, may encourage other manufacturers to break up a rigid,decades-old hiring pattern, in which almost all new workers starttheir jobs April 1. Matsushita plans to take on 600-700 employeesin 1997, up from 500 each last year and this. About half theincrease, or up to 100 people, will be taken on in the fall. Sonyhas been hiring a handful of returning graduates from abroad inthe fall, and Kao began offering research and sales jobs in theautumn, last year.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Mitsubishi Corp. To Abolish Clerical Track for Women     In a step toward gender equality in the workplace generatedas much by office automation as by sentiment, Mitsubishi Corp.will abolish the long-standing jimu-shoku, or "clerical track"under which thousands of women worked at low pay, with no hope ofadvancement, Nihon Keizai reported. The trading giant will setaside up to one third of its new-hire slots for women, the papersaid. But more important, Mitsubishi will encourage some of the2,800 clerical-track women already on its payroll either to jointheir 6,500 male colleagues on the sogo-shoku "comprehensive[career] track," or to get on a new intermediate career track itwill create.  The reason, said Nikkei, is that personal computersnow perform many functions previously handled by clerks, makingthe women redundant. If and when additional clerical help isneeded in future, the company will use temps, Nikkei said. Theplan, the paper added, is likely to be copied by other bigcompanies considering women for serious work. There is adownside, however, in that it will reduce the total number offemale hires, making it even tougher for young women to findemployment, Nikkei said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 4, 1996Population Growth in 1995 Fell To Lowest Level of Post-war Era     With fewer births and more deaths, Japan's population grewat the slowest rate in 50 years during 1995, the Health andWelfare Ministry said 12/31. Based on Jan.-October figures, theministry estimated there were 1.123 million live births duringthe year, down 45,000 from 1994, and the second lowest post-warfigure, after 1993. That translates into 9.6 births per 1,000Japanese, about the same level as in 1993. Meantime deaths rose40,000 from 1994 to 916,000, the highest figure since 1950. Thefigures were particularly high in the first quarter because ofthe Kobe earthquake Jan. 17, and a flu epidemic that struck lastwinter. As a result, the population grew only 277,000, or 10.6%less than the 310,000 recorded in 1993. There is a slight hopefor more births this year, based on the fact that there were784,000 marriages in 1995, up 1,000 from 1994. The increase mayhave been generated by a confluence of dates: This was theseventh year of Heisei, Emperor Akihito's reign, and July 7th, orTanabata, is a romantic date in Japanese astrology. Yomiuri saidabout 30,000 couples arranged to marry on that day so the date ontheir marriage certificates would be "7/7/7."Back to Headline List WT03-B05-15IA087-000634-B039-204http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it62.html 205.156.212.5 19970122025541 text/html 62357HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:53:38 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:16 GMTContent-length: 62170Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it62.html Sample Issue Copyright JAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNet January 08, 1993 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * A REPORT * AN INTERVIEW WITH JAPANESE AMBASSADOR TAKAKAZU KURIYAMA (2259 words) FY 1993 BUDGET REVEALS FISCAL STRAINS by Jon Choy (2024 words) INCREASE IN FY 1993 DEFENSE BUDGET SMALLEST IN 33 YEARS by Barbara Wanner (1339 words) * NOTES * JAPANESE AID TO SOMALIA (274 words) NTT PROCUREMENT (384 words) * A REPORT * GOVERNMENT ANTICIPATES SLOWER GROWTH IN FY 1993 by Douglas Ostrom (895 words) GROWING GLOBAL ROLE IN JAPAN'S FY 1993 FOREIGN AID BUDGET by Margo Grimm (787 words) CopyrightJAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 08, 1993AN INTERVIEW WITH JAPANESE AMBASSADOR TAKAKAZU KURIYAMASUMMARY       Any change of administration in Washington puts Japanese governmentleaders and business executives on the alert.  A Democrat in the White Houseafter 12 years of Republican rule transforms caution into wariness.  As Japan'sambassador to the United States, Takakazu Kuriyama is uniquely positioned toassess the impact on bilateral relations of the transition from George Bush toBill Clinton.  In a recent discussion with JEI Senior Political Analyst BarbaraWanner the ambassador offered some observations certain to calm the jitters inTokyo.Q.     What will Bill Clinton's election to president mean for U.S.-Japanrelations?  Do you anticipate any changes?A.     No, I do not anticipate any basic change in our bilateral relations.Prior to the election, however, some Japanese commentators expressed theirunease with Mr.  Clinton because he is not well known in Japan, even though hevisited a few times as governor of Arkansas.  Whenever there is a new presidentthere will be an understandable feeling of uneasiness among some Japanese,which can be attributed to a fear of the unknown.  There also was apprehensionabout Mr. Clinton because of the Japanese tendency to identify the DemocraticParty with more protectionist elements in the United States.  All in all,however, it is my impression that the president-elect has a broad and balancedinternational outlook, so we can expect basically a continuation of theeconomic, trade and political-security policies pursued by the Bushadministration.  Too, there is a solid recognition on the part of responsibleAmerican political leaders that the U.S.-Japan relationship is critical forboth countries as well as the world.  That is why I believe we will see policycontinuity.Q.     What trade issues do you think the Bush administration and the Japanesegovernment successfully have tackled during the past four years and what issuesawait the Clinton economic team? A.     In the latter part of the 1980s the Japanese government and the Bushadministration made substantial progress on the trade front until the recessionhit the Japanese economy.  If you examine the trade statistics you will see aremarkable increase in Japan-bound U.S. exports as well as an increase inJapanese direct investment in the United States [see Appendix].   This was asound start in building a more balanced and beneficial relationship between thetwo countries.  Work still needs to be done in several areas, however, if thiseconomic realignment is to continue.       One of the most important factors contributing to the favorabledevelopments in the second half of the 1980s was the exchange raterealignment.  The increase in U.S. exports, of course, was prompted by theappreciation of the yen, which made U.S. products more competitive in theJapanese market.  As the yen strengthened, the Japanese government also made aconscious effort to try to shift the economy's gears to take advantage ofdevelopments in the currency markets by implementing a number of measures tostimulate domestic demand; these had the effect of substantially increasingimports.  In addition, Tokyo pursued a number of initiatives designed toimprove foreign access to the Japanese market.  These factors have led to asubstantial reduction in the trade imbalance.  With this solid foundation Ithink the bilateral trade picture will continue to improve once the Japaneseeconomy picks up again.Q.     Do you foresee any specific sectoral issues that may challenge theClinton administration in its first year?A.     Automobiles, automotive parts and semiconductors, of course, still willbe on the trade agenda.  But these industries have engaged in collaborativeactivities, and the Japanese government has sought to promote the purchase ofU.S.-made automobiles, automotive parts and semiconductors, which over timeshould yield tangible results.  While I cannot forecast specific results forthe coming year I do hope that these issues no longer will create as muchfriction in bilateral relations.  It is very important that Tokyo resolve thesesectoral disputes as soon as possible so that imports can increase and Japan'scurrent account surplus, which now is rising, can be contained.Q.     Turning to the political-security side of U.S.-Japan relations, Iunderstand there is growing support in the Japanese government for theformation of a new Asian Pacific security forum that would involve the keyplayers in this region.  How would that arrangement complement or possibly evenchange the U.S.-Japan security relationship?A.     We must recognize the change that now is taking place in the AsianPacific political-security structure with the end of the Cold War and thecollapse of the so-called bipolar power configuration.  But a great deal ofuncertainty still exists because of the economic and political problems in therepublics comprising the former Soviet Union, tensions on the Korean peninsulaand developments in China.  Tokyo continues to believe -- and I imagine the newadministration also will recognize -- that the U.S.-Japan security relationshipis essential to ensuring regional stability.  For this reason I do not see anyneed for or any possibility of changing our bilateral security ties in theforeseeable future.       On the other hand, we have reached a stage where we need a multilateralforum to enable Asian Pacific countries, including, of course, the UnitedStates, the countries of ASEAN [Association of Southeast Asian Nations],Australia, New Zealand and South Korea, to exchange views on a regionalsecurity situation in which all of these countries have an interest.Admittedly, their perceptions of what constitute security threats may not bequite the same.  Still, these countries have a common interest in maintainingpolitical stability and peace in this part of the world.       The Japanese government feels that it would be useful to have adialogue among these countries so that we can develop a common understandingof the security situation in the Asian Pacific and have a better appreciationfor our respective policies.  Last year Tokyo proposed this kind ofmultilateral dialogue using the forum of the so-called post-ministerialconference of ASEAN [an annual meeting with ASEAN's foreign ministers andtheir dialogue partners, which include the United States and Japan].  Thereaction of the ASEAN countries at that time was somewhat cautious.Evidently, they did not understand what we were trying to do.  This year,however, the ASEAN countries appeared more agreeable to this approach. Wethink it would be in Japan's interest as well as the interests of the regionas a whole if we pursued this two-track approach of maintaining Japan-U.S.security ties and promoting regional dialogue to ensure stability in theAsian Pacific.Q.     In some of the articles that you have written on challenges facingU.S.-Japan relations you discuss the difference between burdensharing andresponsibility sharing.  Please elaborate on why this is important in thepost-Cold War era.A.     The notion of burdensharing, rightly or wrongly, often is perceived bymany in Japan as meaning that the United States first establishes its policyand then expects its friends to foot the bill.  We do not think that is theright way to manage the bilateral relationship.  If Japan is to become an equalpartner, then we should share with the United States the responsibilities forpolitical peace and economic growth.  If Tokyo were to participate in thepolicymaking process, it would be all the more natural for us to share thecosts accordingly.  We have been telling our American friends that on majorpolitical and economic issues we should maintain very close consultations so wecan coordinate our policies.  If that is done, it would be legitimate for theUnited States to ask Japan and other allies to share more of the burden.       Tokyo's request to participate in the CSCE [Council for SecurityCooperation in Europe] process also reflects the Japanese government's desireto share more responsibility for ensuring world peace, as does our push for apermanent seat on the United Nations Security Council.  We think that in duecourse we will be awarded an appropriate place on the Security Council since weare expected to play a more active role in the United Nations.Q.     Speaking of responsiblity sharing and Japan's participation in theUnited Nations, not long ago the Japanese government for the first time sinceWorld War II dispatched members of the Self-Defense Forces to support theU.N.-sponsored peacekeeping mission in Cambodia.  If there was another PersianGulf-type crisis, do you think Tokyo could respond more quickly in terms ofsending nonmilitary assistance now that this law is on the books?A.     The new law authorizes Japanese participation in peacekeeping operationsunder the aegis of the U.N.  In the case of the Persian Gulf war, of course,there was a Security Council resolution condemning Iraq's invasion of Kuwait.Strictly speaking, however, Operations Desert Shield/Desert Storm were not U.N.operations; they involved coalition forces led by the United States.  Legallythe cases of Cambodia and the Persian Gulf are different.   But insofar asU.N.-sponsored peacekeeping initiatives are concerned, the Japanese governmentdoes not intend to limit our participation to Cambodia.  We are quite willingto participate in similar operations outside of Asia.Q.     In light of the conclusion of the North American Free Trade Agreement aswell as developments in the European Community, is the Japanese governmentworried that the global trading system may break down into trading blocs thatwould shut out Japanese goods -- particularly if the Uruguay Round ofmultilateral trade talks remains deadlocked?A.     The Japanese government certainly is concerned about that possibility.Obviously, we do not want to see the world breaking up into three or even moretrading blocs.  Japan has a huge stake in maintaining and strengthening an openglobal trading system.  And with the world becoming increasingly interdependentthere is a much greater need for a common set of rules governing trade.  Theprospect of escalating frictions and bilateral and multilateral disagreementsin the absence of these rules, in fact, creates a strong incentive for bringingthe Uruguay Round to a successful conclusion.  On that point Japan, the UnitedStates and the European Community all agree.                                  * * * * * *                          U.S. Trade, 1980 and 1985-92           (in millions of dollars; exports f.a.s., imports Customs)                                    Percent                 Percent     Trade                       Exports      Change      Imports     Change      Balance                                   Total Trade1980                   $225,722       21.0%    $245,262       16.6%    $-19,5401985                    218,828       -2.3      345,276        6.0     -126,4481986                    227,159        3.8      369,961        7.1     -142,8031987                    254,122       11.9      406,241        9.8     -152,1191988                    322,426       26.9      440,952        8.5     -118,5261989                    363,812       12.8      473,211        7.3     -109,3991990                    393,592        8.2      495,311        4.7     -101,7181991                    421,730        7.1      487,129       -1.7      -65,3991992 (Ten Months)       371,994        6.4      439,606        8.7      -67,612                                Trade with Japan1980                     20,790       18.3       30,867       17.6      -10,0771985                     22,631       -4.0       68,783       20.4      -46,1521986                     26,882       18.8       81,911       19.1      -55,0301987                     28,249        5.1       84,575        3.3      -56,3261988                     37,725       33.5       89,519        5.8      -51,7941989                     44,494       17.9       93,553        4.5      -49,0591990                     48,580        9.2       89,684       -4.1      -41,1051991                     48,125       -0.9       91,511        2.0      -43,3851992 (Ten Months)        39,986       -0.7       78,905        4.2      -38,918                          Trade with European Community1980                     58,855        n.a.      38,211        n.a.      20,6441985                     48,994       -3.0       67,822       12.6      -18,8281986                     53,154        8.5       75,736       11.7      -22,5821987                     60,575       14.0       81,188        7.2      -20,6131988                     75,755       25.1       84,939        4.6       -9,1831989                     86,331       14.0       85,153        0.3        1,1781990                     98,129       13.7       91,877        7.9        6,2521991                    103,122        5.1       86,157       -6.2       16,9651992 (Ten Months)        86,432        0.8       77,152        7.7        9,280                                Trade with Canada1980                     40,331        n.a.      41,025        8.2         -6941985                     53,287        2.9       69,006        3.8      -15,7191986                     55,512        4.2       68,253       -1.1      -12,7411987                     59,814        7.7       71,085        4.1      -11,2711988                     71,622       19.7       81,398       14.5       -9,7761989                     78,809       10.0       87,953        8.1       -9,1441990                     83,674        6.2       91,380        3.9       -7,7071991                     85,150        1.8       91,064       -0.3       -5,9141992 (Ten Months)        75,779        5.7       81,897        7.7       -6,118              Trade with Hong Kong, South Korea, Singapore and Taiwan1980                     14,741       24.1       17,779       11.5       -3,0381985                     16,918       -4.5       39,066        7.4      -22,1481986                     18,290        8.1       46,136       18.1      -27,8461987                     23,547       28.7       57,664       25.0      -34,1171988                     34,816       47.9       63,030        9.3      -28,2141989                     38,429       10.4       62,774       -0.5      -24,3451990                     40,734        6.0       60,573       -3.5      -19,8391991                     45,628       12.0       59,277       -2.1      -13,6481992 (Ten Months)        39,709        5.3       51,892        6.0      -12,183                      Trade with People's Republic of China1980                      3,755      117.8        1,062       79.0        2,6931985                      3,856       28.3        3,862       26.0           -61986                      3,106      -19.4        4,771       23.5       -1,6651987                      3,497       12.6        6,293       31.9       -2,7961988                      5,021       43.6        8,511       35.3       -3,4901989                      5,755       14.6       11,990       40.9       -6,2351990                      4,806      -16.5       15,237       27.1      -10,4311991                      6,278       30.6       18,969       24.5      -12,6911992 (Ten Months)         5,896       15.5       21,375       38.6      -15,479Source:  Department of Commerce Japan's Foreign Direct Investment Position in the United States, Yearend1985-91                (in millions of dollars, historical cost basis)                           1985    1986    1987    1988    1989    1990    1991Total                   $19,313 $26,824 $34,421 $51,126 $67,268 $81,775 $86,658Petroleum                    31      34     -56     -64    -122      11     113Manufacturing             2,738   3,578   4,970  11,065  15,601  17,153  18,657  Food Products             159     158     281     393     678     793     769  Chemicals                 268     279     932   1,677   2,350   3,101   3,446  Metals                    562     471     602   1,293   2,527   2,326   2,504  Machinery                 715   1,052   1,686   2,930   3,943   5,203   5,396  Other                   1,033   1,618   1,469   4,772   6,101   5,730   6,542Wholesale Trade          11,796  13,687  15,927  18,462  21,111  25,750  26,935Retail Trade                251     290     373     411     571     639   1,102Banking                   2,160   2,704   3,655   4,367   4,963   5,931   6,797Finance                      51   2,087   2,994   5,666   9,291   8,605   9,120Insurance                   119     *       188     266     368     388     572Real Estate               1,536   2,941   4,386   8,190  10,665  15,084  14,948Services                                  1,603   2,314   4,043   7,393   7,574Other                       629   1,306     381     449     779     820     839*Suppressed to avoid disclosure of data on individual companies.Source:  Department of Commerce                                  * * * * * * .DEPARTMENT************* B REPORT *************Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 08, 1993FY 1993 BUDGET REVEALS FISCAL STRAINS by Jon Choy       Moving quickly to counter Japan's sluggish economic conditions, the newcabinet of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa signed off on a spending plan for FY1993 that diverts greater resources to public works and other stimulativecategories at the expense of other spending options.  The public had mixedreactions to this reallocation.  Some observers said that the plan, which woncabinet approval December 26, represented the most the government could dogiven the tight revenue picture, while others criticized it as having littlereal effect on the economy.       The government was able to hold to its pledge not to issue new bonds tofund general operations in fiscal 1993 only by deferring some payments andtransferring some new borrowing to local governments.  This sleight of handunderscores the need for major tax reform, according to Japanese analysts.Given the current turbulent domestic political situation, however, prospectsfor smooth passage of the spending package and action on more weighty taxreforms in the upcoming Diet session, set to open January 22, are uncertain.       The overall 0.2 percent increase to Y72.4 trillion ($57.8 billion) inthe initial general account budget for the 12 months beginning April 1 pointsto the preoccupation that the Ministry of Finance has with holding the line onspending.  The bare rise in outlays is the smallest since FY 1987's zero growthbut masks a solid 3.2 percent increase in discretionary spending (see Table 1),although that is the smallest gain for the discretionary side of the budgetsince FY 1990.  The growth was made possible, in part, by a 1 percent cut intransfers to local governments and a stunning 6.1 percent drop in the cost ofservicing the national debt.  Nevertheless, MOF estimates that the total amountof outstanding national debt will reach Y176 trillion ($1.4 trillion) by theend of the current fiscal year and then climb another Y6 trillion ($48 billion)over the next 12 months.       From a more disaggregated standpoint the cabinet's spending plan for theyear beginning April 1 reflects steadily growing demands on Japan from theinternational community as well as new imperatives to boost the saggingdomestic economy.  The difference between the Ministry of Finance's draftbudget and the budget approved by the cabinet is stark and surprising in somecases (see Table 2).  While MOF granted some leeway to defense spending and theforeign aid program, budget planners had the greatest change of heart foreducation and science as well as social security funding.         Table 1:  Summary of General Account Outlays, FY 1992-FY 1993                              (in billions of yen)                                                  Initial     Initial                                                  FY 1992     FY 1993    ChangeDiscretionary ItemsSocial Security                                 Y12,737.4   Y13,145.7      3.2%Education and Science                             5,683.4     5,820.5      2.4Pensions                                          1,783.9     1,776.6     -0.4Defense                                           4,551.8     4,640.6      2.0Economic Cooperation                                905.1       957.1      5.7Public Works                                      7,956.1     8,458.9      6.3Disaster Reconstruction                              68.2        68.2      0.0Small Business Measures                             195.6       195.1     -0.2Food Control Programs                               342.1       311.3     -9.0Energy Measures                                     631.3       655.1      3.8Administration and Operations                     4,577.3     4,729.4      3.3Transfer of NTT Proceeds to Public Works            216.6       186.6    -13.9Infrastructure Investment                             0.0         0.0      0.0Reserves                                            350.0       350.0      0.0  Subtotal                                       39,998.8    41,295.1      3.2Nondiscretionary ItemsTransfers to Local Governments                   15,771.9    15,617.4     -1.0Debt Service                                     16,447.3    15,442.3     -6.1  Subtotal                                       32,219.2    31,059.7     -3.6Total                                            72,218.0    72,354.8      0.2       These latter categories each showed respectable increases compared withthe current fiscal year's initial budget, but their gains in the generalaccount budget placed well behind the 6.3 percent increase for public works andthe 5.7 percent rise for economic cooperation.  When all government spending isconsidered, public works outlays will be 4.8 percent higher in FY 1993 thanwhat was planned initially for the current fiscal year (see Table 3).  Generalaccount outlays for official development assistance will top Y1 trillion ($8billion) for the first time.  Although defense spending will go up just under 2percent -- far below the Japan Defense Agency's 3.6 percent target, that gainis better than the 1.7 percent figure penciled into MOF's draft budget.       Food control programs suffered the biggest percentage cut amongprograms, leaving this line item at less than one-third its FY 1991 level.(The extraordinary category referring to proceeds from the sale of NipponTelegraph and Telephone Corp. stock is not a program category.)       As for individual programs, MOF listed the following highlights:       --  About 7.1 percent more money will be spent in FY 1993 on socialinfrastructure, bringing the total to over Y2.5 trillion ($20 billion).       --  A five-year road improvement program will be launched in FY 1993,with a total spending target of Y76 trillion ($608 billion).        --  Government aid to retrain employees or to pay temporarily laid-offworkers will skyrocket to Y50.9 billion ($407.2 million) from Y0.9 billion($7.2 million).       --  The Global Environmental Fund will be initiated with Y1.5 billion($12 million) in funding.       --  The Japan Patent Office budget will be increased by 4.7 percent tospeed processing of applications, a commitment made to the United States in theStructural Impediments Initiative talks.       --  The immigration staff at the Ministry of Justice will be expanded by84 percent or 168 employees to assist with the influx of foreign visitors andundocumented workers.  Another Y1.1 billion ($8.8 million) is penciled in tobolster efforts to control and manage the problem of illegal workers.       --  Funding for AIDS education and care programs has received newimpetus and will total Y10.1 billion ($80.8 million) in the upcoming fiscalyear.       --  Income support for rice farmers will be slashed by 25 percent toY101.3 billion ($810.4 million).       --  A program to encourage small businesses to reduce employees' totalannual working hours will operate under funding earmarked at Y7.8 billion($62.4 million).     Table 2:  Proposed and Approved Initial FY 1993 Discretionary Outlays                              (in billions of yen)                                                  Proposed   Approved    ChangeSocial Security                                  Y13,111.4  Y13,145.7     Y34.3Education and Science                              5,715.1    5,820.5     105.4Pensions                                           1,739.3    1,776.6      37.3Defense                                            4,630.8    4,640.6       9.8Economic Cooperation                                 939.7      957.1      17.4Public Works                                       8,458.9    8,458.9       0.0Disaster Reconstruction                               68.2       68.2       0.0Small Business Measures                              190.2      195.1       4.9Food Control Programs                                301.3      311.3      10.0Energy Measures                                      641.0      655.1      14.1Other                                              4,831.6    4,729.4    -102.2Infrastructure Investment                            186.6      186.6       0.0Reserves                                             350.0      350.0       0.0Unallocated Expenses                                 100.0       --          --                 Table 3:  FY 1993 Public Works Spending Plan*                              (in billions of yen)                                                  Initial     Initial                                                  FY 1992     FY 1993    ChangeFlood Control                                    Y1,428.2    Y1,478.7      3.5%Roads                                             2,300.0     2,410.1      4.8Harbors and Airports                                650.6       681.5      4.7Housing                                             931.1       988.0      6.1Water Supply and Sewers                           1,340.9     1,435.1      7.0Agricultural Projects                             1,109.4     1,154.3      4.0Other                                                12.9        13.6      5.4Forestry Projects                                   219.0       230.1      5.1Repayment of Interest-Free Loans                    110.7       105.9     -4.3  Subtotal                                        8,102.7     8,497.3      4.9Disaster Relief                                      68.2        68.2      0.0Total                                             8,170.9     8,565.4      4.8*Includes transfer of proceeds from the sale of government-owned shares ofNippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp. to the special account for public works.       The revenue side of the FY 1993 general account budget reveals theimpact of sluggish Japanese economic activity and MOF's commitment to fiscalausterity (see Table 4).  Tax and stamp receipts are projected to decline forthe first time in a decade, mainly due to a plunge in corporate profits andmuch lower growth in personal incomes.  This is quite a reversal from the boomyears of the late 1980s when tax receipt estimates regularly were exceeded.The amount of money transferred to public works projects funded by the sale ofgovernment-held shares of NTT also will continue to dwindle; the government hasnot replenished these funds since the last auction of NTT shares was held inOctober 1988.  Given that the current price of NTT shares is only aboutone-fourth its historic high, further sales have been put on hold.  Despite aprojected 23.4 percent rise in nontax revenues (mainly expected to come fromBank of Japan foreign exchange operations), MOF will be forced to raise issuesof construction bonds by 11.7 percent.  This will push reliance on debt to 11.2percent in FY 1993, up from the 10.1 percent level estimated for the currentfiscal year.    Table 4:  Summary of General Account Revenue Estimates, FY 1992-FY 1993                              (in billions of yen)                                                  Initial     Initial                                                  FY 1992     FY 1993    ChangeTax and Stamp Receipts                          Y62,504.0   Y61,303.0     -1.9%Nontax Receipts                                   2,217.4     2,735.2     23.4Proceeds from Sale of NTT Shares                    216.6       186.6    -13.9Bonds                                             7,280.0     8,130.0     11.7  Construction                                    7,280.0     8,130.0     11.7  Deficit-Financing                                   0.0         0.0      0.0Total                                            72,218.0    72,354.8      0.2Source:  Ministry of Finance       The Fiscal Investment and Loan Program, a separately funded budgetdirected mainly at capital spending, again will play an important role in thegovernment's effort to boost the economy (see Table 5).  FILP spending willrise 12.2 percent to a record Y45.8 trillion ($366.4 billion) on the strengthof double-digit increases in nine of 13 categories.  While nearly all publicworks-related categories will post solid gains, trade promotion and economiccooperation (which funds the Japan Development Bank and the Overseas EconomicCooperation Fund) will get a minuscule increase of just Y500 million ($4million).  As for FILP funding (Table 6), the role of government trust fundsand life insurance monies deposited in the government-run postal bank systemwill continue to grow.  FILP's reliance on debt financing, which is expected topost a large jump after several years of cuts, further shows MOF's constraintsunder the economic downturn.     Table 5:  Fiscal Investment and Loan Program Outlays, FY 1992-FY 1993                              (in billions of yen)                                             Initial FY 1992    Initial FY 1993                                             Amount   Change    Amount   ChangeHousing                                     Y9,799.3    3.4%  Y10,798.9   10.2%Other Social Infrastructure                  5,157.9   20.1     6,069.6   17.7Welfare                                      1,109.7    8.1     1,397.1   25.9Education                                      582.9    0.1       649.9   11.5Small Business                               4,830.1    7.5     5,341.6   10.6Agriculture                                    907.9   -0.0       914.5    0.7Land Conservation and Disaster Relief          374.0   13.1       531.8   42.2Roads                                        3,375.3   13.1     3,626.9    7.5Transportation and Communications            2,230.4   51.9     2,889.8   29.6Regional Development                           824.6   16.3       981.5   19.0Industry and Technology                        965.6    3.0     1,289.0   33.5Trade Promotion and Economic Cooperation     2,104.5   10.9     2,105.0    0.0Capital Utilization                          8,540.0   10.9     9,175.0    7.4Total                                       40,802.2   10.9    45,770.6   12.2     Table 6:  Fiscal Investment and Loan Program Revenues, FY 1992-FY 1993                              (in billions of yen)                                             Initial FY 1992    Initial FY 1993                                             Amount   Change    Amount   ChangeIndustrial Investment Special Account          Y58.1  -11.6%      Y57.7   -0.7%Trust Fund Bureau Fund                      33,489.1   14.9    37,659.5   12.5  Postal Savings                             9,900.0   12.5    10,400.0    5.1  Pension Contributions                      7,230.0   12.4     7,190.0   -0.6  Other Revenues                            16,359.1   17.6    20,069.5   22.7Postal Life Insurance Fund                   6,055.0   -4.0     7,053.4   16.5Government-Guaranteed Bonds and Borrowings   1,800.0   -5.3     2,000.0   11.1Total                                       41,402.2   10.7    46,770.6   13.0       While government officials and ruling Liberal Democratic Party leadershave stressed that the FY 1993 spending plan is the maximum that can be done atthis time, critics have focused on several points of the budget.  The sharpdrop in the cost of servicing the national debt, some argue, merely disguisesthe deferral until next year of between Y700 billion and Y1.5 trillion ($5.6billion to $12 billion) worth of payments.  Moreover, even though issues ofconstruction bonds are expected to be increased to the current legal limit, thepublic sector's reliance on borrowing is understated because the centralgovernment will cut tax revenue transfers to local governments whilesimultaneously instructing them to boost their borrowings by 18 percent to aprojected record Y10.3 trillion ($82.4 billion).  The expected fall in incometax receipts also highlights Tokyo's excessive dependence on direct taxes.Some critics of the government plan are calling for both a boost in the 3percent consumption tax and a cut in income taxes.  While the LDP and thegovernment have been discussing these moves, there is no sign that any officialproposals will be made on these issues.       Some business leaders welcomed next year's budget, but others criticizedthe proposed outlays as being too little, too late to revive the economyquickly.  This unhappiness already has spurred Prime Minister Miyazawa tosuggest that a supplementary budget will be considered for the first half of FY1993.  The scandal-plagued LDP, however, may encounter the same difficulties inpushing the FY 1993 spending package through the Diet as it ran into when itsought to win Diet approval of a large supplemental spending bill for thecurrent fiscal year (see JEI Report No. 43B, November 13, 1992).Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 08, 1993INCREASE IN FY 1993 DEFENSE BUDGET SMALLEST IN 33 YEARS by Barbara Wanner       Against a backdrop of reduced East-West tensions and recession-relatedfiscal constraints the Japan Defense Agency's spending plans for FY 1993 andbeyond were hit hard by Ministry of Finance budget crunchers.  The cabinetapproved a plan December 18 that calls on JDA to slice some Y580 billion ($4.6billion at Y125=$1.00) from the FY 1991-FY 1995 defense buildup program, whichwas budgeted initially at Y22.8 trillion ($182 billion).  The five-yearprogram, which was based on annual spending increases of roughly 3 percent,will take its first hit in the upcoming fiscal year.  At Y4.6 trillion-plus($37.1 billion) in FY 1993, defense spending will be not quite 2 percent higherthan in the current fiscal year.  That increase is the smallest in 33 years.       JDA was not unprepared for MOF-imposed belt-tightening.  FinanceMinistry officials had indicated in no uncertain terms during November that thedays were long gone of defense spending increases in the 5 to 6 percent range(see JEI Report No. 44B, November 20, 1992).  In light of the apparentdiminution of the threat from the republics of the former Soviet Union as wellas an anticipated drop in tax revenues in the coming fiscal year even the 3.6percent spending increase that JDA had proposed for FY 1993 could not bejustified, MOF maintained.  Finance officials initially wanted to slash up toY1 trillion ($8 billion) from the five-year defense program and hold FY 1993spending to a mere 1.7 percent increase.       Defense planners countered that cuts this substantial riskedjeopardizing attainment of the FY 1991-FY 1995 plan and, in turn, underminingJDA's efforts to comply with the equipment and the manpower goals contained inthe National Defense Program Outline, the overarching blueprint for Japan'sself-defense strategy.  After two rounds of National Security Council meetingsand numerous cabinet-level discussions in December MOF evidently decided tocompromise on the cut in the five-year plan.  During subsequent budget talksbetween defense planners and finance officials MOF also softened slightly onFY 1993 defense spending.       JDA officials evidently viewed those outcomes as the best they couldhope for, given domestic and international developments.  Defense plannerssuspected when the FY 1991-FY 1995 plan was approved in December 1990 thatinclusion of a special provision requiring a review in FY 1993 could result inleaner times at JDA if developments continued in line with what appeared to berelaxed East-West tensions.  At the time JDA budget analysts estimated theagency would be pressured to scale back spending in the last two years of thefive-year program.  Given the subsequent dissolution of the former Soviet Unionas well as the pinch on government revenues, Prime Minister KiichiMiyazawa -- no doubt urged on by MOF -- decided to push up the timetable by oneyear.       Speaking to reporters following his Christmas Day discussions withFinance Minister Yoshiro Hayashi, JDA director general Toshio Nakayama soughtto assure the Japanese defense community as well as Japan's allies that thecountry's defense effort would not be compromised unduly by the tightening lidon defense spending.  "Despite a very difficult fiscal situation and a downwardrevision in the five-year program, we were given a sufficient budget in bothfrontline military spending and for improving living facilities," Mr. Nakayamareportedly said.  The defense chief added that the revision of the currentfive-year plan is a "starting line" for a review of the National DefenseProgram Outline.  Numerous commentators and politicians have been pressing fora reevaluation of the 1976 blueprint on the grounds that its Cold War-basedstrategy no longer is relevant to the current international environment.       The defense chief's positive remarks belie the impact of the revisedFY 1991-FY 1995 plan on procurement of frontline military equipment, which willbear the brunt of the revised spending plan.  Of the Y580 billion ($4.6billion) carved from the FY 1991-FY 1995 plan, Y440 billion ($3.5 billion) hadbeen earmarked for frontline equipment purchases.  As a result, the GroundSelf-Defense Force will have funds for 108 new tanks rather than the 132 it hadplanned to purchase; the Maritime Self-Defense Force will be able to procureonly 37 combat aircraft instead of 45; and the Air Self- Defense Force will getfunding for 29 F-15s, rather than 42.  The Table shows other, similarly severeequipment cuts.  Training and rear support will receive Y60 billion ($185million) less in funding than originally outlined by the five-year plan, whileprojected personnel costs will be trimmed by Y80 billion ($205 million).              Revision of FY 1991-FY 1995 Defense Buildup Program              Equipment                           Revised Quantities                           Ground Self-Defense Force              Tanks                                 108 (132)              Artillery                             536 (716)              Multiple Launch Rocket Systems               36              Armored Vehicles                      193 (218)              Surface-to-Ship Missile Launchers            40              Antitank Helicopters (AH-1S)            18 (20)              Transport Helicopters (CH-47J)          12 (14)                          Maritime Self-Defense Force              Escort Ships                             8 (10)              Other Vessels                           15 (20)              Total Tonnage of MSDF Ships               to be Constructed              87,000 (96,000)              Antisubmarine Patrol Planes (P3-C)        5 (8)              Antisubmarine Helicopters (SH-60J)      31 (36)              Minesweeping Helicopter (MH-53E)              1                            Air Self-Defense Force              Fighter Intercepters (F-15)             29 (42)              Transport Aircraft (C-130H)               1 (3)              Transport Helicopters (CH-47J)                2              AWACS                                         4              Jet Trainers (T-4)                      68 (90)              Surface-to-Air Missile (Patriot)      1 (group)              Note:  Original number of units in parentheses.              Source:  Japan Defense Agency, December 1992.       Despite the tightening purse strings, Tokyo has decided to proceed withthe planned procurement of several big-ticket U.S.-made weapons systems.  Keptin the FY 1991-FY 1995 plan are four AWACS (airborne warning and controlsystems), 36 multiple launch rocket systems and two Aegis destroyers.  Two ofthe AWACS will be purchased during FY 1993.  Although Japanese defenseofficials maintain that these systems are needed to address certain weaknessesin Japan's self-defense capabilities, some commentators contend that Tokyo feltpressured by Washington to go through with these purchases for both strategicand political reasons.  At Y57 billion ($456 million) apiece, the AWACSprocurement, for example, would put a dent in the U.S. trade deficit withJapan, these analysts have remarked.  Mr. Miyazawa also had a personalpolitical incentive, according to some observers; he did not want to renege ona commitment to outgoing President Bush that Japan would purchase thesophisticated Boeing Co.-built radar aircraft.       In any event, the government's decision to sacrifice the procurement ofother frontline equipment to finance expensive, U.S.-made systems has raisedmore than a few eyebrows in Tokyo.  Some Japanese defense officials reportedlyare concerned that the AWACS purchases could force additional cuts in AirSelf-Defense programs as well as those of the other services.  "The hugeexpense for the AWACS might destabilize the equipment balance among the threeservices," according to a JDA official who did not want to be identifed.  Somedefense commentators question whether the AWACS, Aegis and MLRS really areneeded since the threat of the Soviet monolith no longer exists.       Japan's defense industry, already feeling the sting of FY 1992procurement slowdowns, has made its objections known regarding Tokyo'sreordered spending priorities.  Japan's six major aerospacemanufacturers -- Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd., Kawasaki Heavy Industries,Ltd., Fuji Heavy Industries, Ltd., Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries, Co.,Ltd., ShinMaywa Industries Ltd., and Japan Aircraft Manufacturing Co.,Ltd. -- estimate that their total defense sales will decrease by 35 percentfrom 1991 to 1998, forcing the transfer to other divisions or subsidiaries ofsome 900 engineers and 1,400 plant workers currently working in their defenseaerospace divisions.       As Japanese defense planners begin to reassess how the country'ssecurity needs have changed since 1976, their analysis no doubt will becomplicated by the uncertain transition to a new world order, the globaleconomic slump and Japan's sluggish economy, a shrinking international defensemarket and Tokyo's long-standing policy banning the export of weapons systems.Those anticipating a timely evaluation of Japan's overall self-defense policyand weapons development programs should not hold their breath.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 08, 1993JAPANESE AID TO SOMALIA       Aid to Somalia - The Japanese government announced plans December 18 toprovide $100 million to the United Nations-sanctioned multinational forcesguarding distribution in Somalia of famine supplies for the 2 million peoplethought to be at risk of starvation there.  Tokyo set no restrictions on howthe contribution to the Trust Fund for the Somalia-Unified Command can bespent, government officials said.  The contribution will be disbursed from thereserve fund of the FY 1992 general account budget.       Representatives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs indicated that the$100 million figure was determined based on the ministry's assessment of thelikely length of the multinational operation.  The funds augment the $27million-plus Japan provided earlier in 1992 for humanitarian aid in Somalia andfor Somali refugees in the region (see JEI Report No. 45B, December 4, 1992,and No. 46B, December 11, 1992).  Both Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa and theForeign Ministry in late December urged other nations to support U.N. effortsto raise $400 million for the costs of Somali operations.       Tokyo also is considering sending personnel to Somalia and neighboringcountries to provide medical and other humanitarian assistance.  Inmid-December Yoshiji Nogami, deputy director general of the Foreign Ministry'sMiddle Eastern and African Affairs Bureau, headed a mission to Somalia,Ethiopia and Kenya to study the feasibility of such assistance.  ForeignMinister Michio Watanabe has indicated that after reviewing the mission'sreports Tokyo will consider ways to channel direct help for refugee and medicalneeds in Somalia and the region.  Japanese participation in U.N.-ledpeacekeeping activities in Somalia also will be studied, Mr. Watanabe said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 08, 1993NTT PROCUREMENT       NTT Procurement - Washington and Tokyo quietly agreed December 22 torenew for another three years a 1980 bilateral arrangement governing NipponTelegraph and Telephone Corp. procurement.  Although both sides had identifiedsome areas for change in the opening round of extension talks in mid-November,the 1993-95 pact is a carbon copy of the one in effect from 1990 through lastyear.  That leaves unresolved the question of whether NTT procurement will bebrought under the disciplines of the international government procurement codeif that code is renegotiated as part of a successful Uruguay Round.  TheJapanese government still hopes to make this switch, which encountered stiffopposition from the Bush administration (see JEI Report No. 16B, April 24,1992).  But, like the 1990-92 pact, the new arrangement merely provides for areview of the bilateral accord should the long-running multilateral tradenegotiations be concluded.       The American negotiating team proposed the straight extension of theexisting NTT procurement agreement in the third and final round ofdiscussions.  In the initial talks U.S. trade officials had indicated placeswhere the pact could be strengthened based on an eight-point list drafted bythe American Electronics Association.  Although Japanese negotiators said thesechanges were unnecessary, they were willing to incorporate some of them in thenew arrangement.  In exchange, however, Tokyo wanted to exempt from certainpact provisions products that NTT buys but later resells or leases.  Thisexclusion, which was part of a tentative agreement reached in early December,proved unacceptable to U.S. equipment suppliers.  They worried that it couldlock American companies out of important market segments, including, possibly,equipment bought by the communications giant for resale or lease to its NTTMobile Communications Network Inc. and NTT Data Communications Systems Corp.subsidiaries.       Both companies previously had promised to adhere to the terms of thebilateral procurement pact (see JEI Report No. 29B, July 31, 1992).  Officialsof NTT Power and Building Facilities Inc., which was spun off as wholly ownedsubsidiary December 1, 1992, also have indicated that the firm will notdiscriminate against foreign suppliers in its purchases.  With domesticindustry unwilling to rely solely on these assurances, U.S. trade negotiatorsapparently concluded that a straight extension was the only way to resolve thelinkage problem.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 08, 1993GOVERNMENT ANTICIPATES SLOWER GROWTH IN FY 1993 by Douglas Ostrom       Just on appearances, Tokyo could be forgiven for believing that itsofficial economic outlook for the fiscal year beginning April 1 is, ifanything, too pessimistic.  The 3.3 percent projected rise ininflation-adjusted gross national product (see Table) is the lowest growthestimate adopted by a cabinet since the dark days of December 1973 when, in themidst of the first oil crisis, Tokyo put the economy's expected growth at 2.5percent.  The FY 1993 figure, if achieved, would represent one of the lowestrates of expansion over 12 months in postwar Japanese history.       Some analysts -- apparently including some in government -- believe,however, that Tokyo was insufficiently gloomy in its December 20 announcement.In a twist on the usual bureaucratic wrangling that pits the conservativeMinistry of Finance against the fiscally aggressive Ministry of InternationalTrade and Industry, MOF and MITI reportedly ganged up on the Economic PlanningAgency in insisting that a figure of approximately 3.5 percent be used.  EPAargued for a number around 3 percent on the grounds that the government'seconomic outlook should be realistic.  A compromise developed at 3.3 percent.       EPA has both history and private-sector experts on its side.  Thegovernment's outlook consistently has failed to anticipate fully either severedownturns in the economy or sharp upturns.  For example, the economy actuallycontracted 0.2 percent in FY 1974, implying that even the gloomiest outlook ofthe past two decades was too optimistic.  Similarly, in revising its FY 1992real growth estimate to 1.6 percent slightly more than three months before thefiscal year ends, Tokyo now admits that its initial outlook of 3.5 percentgrowth was too rosy.  If the revised figure is approximately correct, theincrease in GNP during the current fiscal year will be the smallest since FY1974.                     Government's FY 1993 Economic Outlook                                         Original        Revised        Initial                                         FY 1992         FY 1992        FY 1993                                         Outlook         Outlook        Outlook                              (percentage change)Real Gross National Product                3.5%            1.6%           3.3%  Consumer Spending                        3.7             1.5            2.8  Housing                                  2.8             2.5            7.1  Plant and Equipment Spending             4.5            -3.8            2.4  Contribution of Domestic Demand          3.6             0.7            3.4  Contribution of External Demand         -0.1             0.8           -0.1Nominal Gross National Product             5.0             3.0            4.9Wholesale Prices                          -0.2            -1.3            0.3Retail Prices                              2.3             1.8            2.1                             (billions of dollars)Current Account Surplus                  $71.0          $116.5         $115.5Trade Surplus                             96.5           136.0          135.0Source:  Economic Planning Agency       Twenty-one well-known private economic forecasters also made predictionsduring December.  Their average estimate of real economic growth in FY 1993came to 2.7 percent, with the range between 1.7 percent (Japan ResearchInstitute) and 4 percent (Daiwa Institute of Research).  This same group wasless optimistic a year ago about the prospects for FY 1992 than the governmentbut, on the assumption that the government's revised estimate for the yearthrough March 1993 is approximately correct, even these private-sectorforecasters were too optimistic at this time last year concerning FY 1992growth.       The disagreements among economists inside and outside governmentconcerning the likely direction of the Japanese economy are reflected indifferences over two key variables:  private plant and equipment spending plusthe current account surplus.  For example, the pessimistic Japan ResearchInstitute envisages a 3.4 percent drop next year in business investment.  Bycontrast, the government expects a 2.4 percent rise.  Given the large weight ofprivate capital spending in the Japanese economy, this single category explainsmost of the discrepancy between the least and the most optimistic forecasts.In light of the fact that plant and equipment spending remained at historicallyhigh levels in 1992 despite the rapid deceleration of overall growth, a furthercorrection may be in store, implying a substantial drop in FY 1993.  As aresult, even the most pessimistic of the private research organizations mayhave too rosy a view of this key component of the economy.       Those making higher forecasts of overall growth tend to expect smallerexternal imbalances because imports are assumed to grow in sync with theeconomy.  For example, the Japan Center for Economic Research, which expects 3percent GNP growth, projects a current account surplus of $143.1 billion for FY1993, far above the government's figure of $115.5 billion.  By contrast, EPAofficials now estimate that the current account surplus will reach $116.5billion in the year through March 1993.       Even the government's relatively upbeat numbers are not likely to pleasethe incoming Clinton administration despite the suggestion reported in thepress that the president-elect was very much on the minds of MOF and MITIofficials pushing for a higher projected GNP growth figure.  Slow growth inJapan, coupled with the expected sluggishness of European economies, could puta crimp in U.S. exports, one of the few bright spots during America's recentrecession.       The government's FY 1993 economic outlook, unlike the projectionsdeveloped by private forecasters, did not assume any major policy changes.JCER analysts, for example, built into their estimate the prediction that thediscount rate would be lowered an additional half point sometime in FY 1993 andthat the government would adopt a modest fiscal stimulus package in the comingfiscal year.  In addition, an increasing number of business leaders are callingfor a substantial income tax cut.  Against this backdrop, the government'soptimistic economic outlook for FY 1993 marks a continuation, rather than theend, of the prolonged debate concerning appropriate countercyclical economicpolicy in Japan.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN ECONOMIC INSTITUTE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 08, 1993GROWING GLOBAL ROLE IN JAPAN'S FY 1993 FOREIGN AID BUDGET by Margo Grimm       While the FY 1993 foreign aid budget did not emerge unscathed from thebudget deliberations of the past few months, spending for official developmentassistance will show less of the strain imposed by Japan's current fiscaldifficulties than most areas of the general account budget (see precedingarticles).  Ministry of Foreign Affairs officials said that Prime MinisterKiichi Miyazawa firmly supported a plan to increase the general account portionof Japan's foreign aid budget beyond Y1 trillion ($8 billion at Y125=$1.00) forthe first time.  As approved by the cabinet December 26, the ODA outlays fundedthrough the general account will total Y1,014.4 billion ($8.1 billion) in theyear starting April 1.  A Ministry of Finance budget examiner responsible forforeign aid asserted in a news conference prior to cabinet consideration of thebudget: "With these aid figures, Japan made the maximum fiscal effort to liveup to its obligation to help developing nations despite its severe fiscalsituation."       The FY 1993 foreign aid budget's 6.5 percent increase over thecomparable FY 1992 figure is more than double the expansion in totaldiscretionary spending.  Even so, that growth rate is the lowest for foreignaid spending since the 6.5 percent rise posted in FY 1988.  Next year's 6.5percent figure represented a compromise between the 9.7 percent increaserequested by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Finance Ministry's effortsto restrict the growth of spending.  The draft budget issued by the FinanceMinistry held the increase in ODA expenditures to 4.7 percent, but in aDecember 25 meeting Finance Minister Yoshiro Hayashi agreed to Foreign MinisterMichio Watanabe's request to restore certain foreign aid funds cut during thecompilation of the budget.  Mr. Watanabe said that, among other things, the twoministries negotiated an increase in the funds budgeted for bilateral grants toY243.1 billion ($1.9 billion), 6.7 percent more than allocated for the currentfiscal year.       The Y1 trillion-plus ($8.1 billion) authorized for foreign aid in thegeneral account budget will be supplemented by Y675 billion ($5.4 billion) fromthe Fiscal Investment and Loan Program, which mainly funds capital projects.The Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund, which oversees the concessionary loanportion of Japan's economic assistance, will disburse this money as part of itsY930 billion ($7.4 billion) lending program for the next fiscal year.       The expansion of Japan's foreign aid budget for FY 1993 allows forincreased outlays in several categories, although some areas have beentrimmed.  Technical assistance, for example, is slated to grow 7.6 percent toY210.2 billion ($1.7 billion).  The Y147.7 billion ($1.2 billion) budgeted forthe United Nations and other international humanitarian organizationsrepresents a 0.2 percent drop, however, from the current fiscal year's level.Among specific U.N. agencies to benefit from increased funding in FY 1993 willbe the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, which is targeted to get Y10.1billion ($80.8 million), a boost of 4.7 percent, and the U.N. Children's Fund,which is to receive Y3.3 billion ($26.4 million), a 0.2 percent increase indollar terms.       According to Japanese news reports, the Finance Ministry's foreign aidbudget examiner noted that Tokyo will disburse in addition to officialdevelopment assistance $5.3 million-plus to support U.N. peacekeepingactivities in FY 1993, more than double the amount appropriated for the currentfiscal year.  These funds will come from the Foreign Ministry portion of thebudget and will be separate from anticipated Japan Defense Agency expendituresfor the support of U.N. peacekeeping operations.       Observers note that the Japanese government's plans to increase officialdevelopment assistance outlays in the next fiscal year reflect a recognitionthat its contributions to the international community should match its economicstanding.  Alluding to the diverse objectives that factored into the draftingof the FY 1993 spending plan, one Foreign Ministry official commented, "Japancan impress the world of the seriousness of its international contributionsonly by increasing the ODA budget."  Japan's commitment to meeting growingglobal needs is expected to be spotlighted when the seven major industrialdemocracies meet in Tokyo in July.       International expectations for Japan's aid program have grown in tandemwith its expansion.  Tokyo's current foreign aid projections for the 1993-97period are for outlays of $75 billion.  The Japanese government also is workingto address questions about the quality of its economic assistance (see JEIReport No. 46A, December 11, 1992).  At the same time the growing demand forresources worldwide coincides with domestic economic problems; that raisesissues of balance regarding domestic concerns and escalating foreign aidexpenditures.  As Japanese decisionmakers take these matters underconsideration, the focus of attention will point to how broadly Japan ismapping out plans for greater international cooperation.Back to Headline List WT03-B05-16IA087-000634-B039-252http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it24.html 205.156.212.5 19970122025703 text/html 143095HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:54:35 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:20 GMTContent-length: 142907Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it24.html Sample Issue Copyright JAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SECURITY Japan Securities Finance to ease mortgage requirements+ (93 words) Stock market rebound reflects gov't policy, says official+ (73 words) Kankaku Securities to shut down L.A. branch+ (81 words) Greater disclosure needed by firms listing on new mart++ (246 words) Levi Strauss Japan to pay 120 yen per share dividend+ (93 words) Foreigners net buyers of domestic demand stock in '95+ (172 words) BONDS Local gov'ts to issue 13% more bonds in FY' 96+ (131 words) BANKING Speculators buy bankrupt Hyogo Bank shares on TSE+ (84 words) Long-tern bank forecasts 2.3% economic growth in FY '96+ (220 words) BOJ to inspect New York units of several Japanese banks++ (359 words) Creditors to be lenient toward failed Hyogo Bank+ (157 words) Norinchukin Bank to go into red, farm minister says+ (219 words) Tokai Bank may issue preferred stock+ (168 words) IC, paper makers to enjoy good business in '96+ (118 words) Daiwa's N.Y. branch ex-manager indicted on conspiracy++ (461 words) Ex-Im Bank to extend 24 bil. yen loan to Ukraine+ (130 words) S and P lowers Fuji rating, revises Sakura, IBJ outlooks+ (178 words) Sakura Bank sets up trust subsidiary+ (48 words) Bank managements looking to freeze salaries next spring++ (264 words) FINANCE Highlights of FY '96 budget plan adopted by gov't++ (290 words) Table of Japan's FY '96 general account budget++ (136 words) Budget investment plan shows 2nd lowest rise++ (850 words) Highlights of FY '96 fiscal loan, investment plan++ (229 words) Gov't plans 4,845.5 bil. yen defense budget for FY '96+ (559 words) Gov't ministers to discuss 'jusen' issues Tue.+ (262 words) Gov't adopts 75.1 tril. yen budget plan for FY '96++ (798 words) Fiscal reform should not mean tax hikes: Takemura++ (357 words) Hashimoto rates high FY '96 budget for MITI+ (201 words) Business leaders welcomes FY '96 budget+ (125 words) Prosecutors reindict 2 key figures in huge loan scandal+ (474 words) Ministers agree on steps to collect housing loans++ (367 words) Jan. fund surplus to shrink on slow public lending++ (142 words) Detained ex-minister made huge bad loans by stock deals+ (298 words) Shinozawa vows to tighten surveillance system+ (239 words) Nov. tax revenues rise for 1st time in 4 months++ (290 words) Shinozawa's resignation reflects poor year for MOF+ (702 words) Teramura quits as adviser to banking group+ (144 words) Shinozawa's resignation surprises financial sector+ (610 words) COMMODITY Grain prices could double by 2010, daily says+ (332 words) Gov't calls for keeping food self-sufficiency rate+ (210 words) '95 commodity futures trading volume hits record high++ (108 words) FORIGN EXCHANGE G-7 to keep dollar strong in '96, dealers say+ (727 words) ECONOMIC INDICATORS: TRADE Fisherman sentenced to 6.5-year jail term over gun trade+ (145 words) Auctioned imported rice prices sag to 262 yen per kg+ (580 words) ECONOMIC INDICATORS: PRODUCTION FY '95 crude steel output to fall below 100 mil. tons+ (158 words) Steel wholesaler Hiuka Sangyo applies for bankruptcy+ (172 words) ECONOMIC INDICATORS: CONSUMPTION Nov. supermarket sales fall 0.2% from year earlier+ (163 words) Average Tokyo CPI in '95 down for first time++ (391 words) ECONOMIC INDICATORS: LABOR Nov. unemployment rate hits record at 3.4%++ (833 words) EPA chief expects jobless rate to stay at 3% level+ (112 words) Labor minister calls jobless rate increase temporary+ (129 words) Rengo urges gov't to call meeting on employment+ (114 words) Organized workers hit postwar low of 23.8% in '95+ (220 words) Winter bonuses up 1.9%, banks, insurers boycott poll+ (184 words) Nov. overtime work hours post 1st gain in 3 months+ (284 words) Labor, management at odds over small business workweek+ (317 words) Employment of foreigners with skills on rise+ (109 words) Construction works head cases of local gov't corruption+ (151 words) Homeless in Japan face hard times due to economy, cold+ (627 words) ECONOMIC INDICATORS: CORPORATE DATA Corporate entertainment spending down 9%+ (272 words) Firms pay 36,000 yen a month for transfers+ (350 words) Yamazaki Baking expected to see lower pretax profit+ (141 words) Microbrewers bubbling but local gov'ts still thirsting+ (825 words) OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT AID (ODA) Budget holds ODA spending to record low 3.5% growth+ (660 words) Cambodian resident in Japan gets award for education aid+ (251 words) UNHCR pondering special fund for Rwandan refugees+ (132 words) CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Japan Securities Finance to ease mortgage requirements+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Japan Securities Finance Co. said Monday it will ease mortgagerequirements in bond trading to lessen the burden on borrowers,effective Jan. 5.     Japan's leading securities financing company said the assessmentvalue of collateral to be offered by borrowers will be lowered to 102%,above market value from the present rate of at least 105%.     The company said the decision is in line with deregulationimplemented by the Finance Ministry and the Japan Securities DealersAssociation.     Osaka Securities Finance Co. will take a similar step, companysources said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Stock market rebound reflects gov't policy, says official+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     The recent rebound in stock prices reflects the government'seconomic and financial policy, Vice Finance Minister KyosukeShinozawa said Thursday.     The market must have responded to the Finance Ministry's policyactions, especially to policy for liquidating ailing housing loancompanies, Shinozawa told a news conference.  ''That's verywelcome,'' he said.     The key stock market gauge topped 20,000 Wednesday in Tokyo forthe first time since October last year.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Kankaku Securities to shut down L.A. branch+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Japanese brokerage house Kankaku Securities Co. said Thursdayit will shut down its branch in Los Angeles at the end of this yearin line with its restructuring program.     The Tokyo-based company said operations at the branch, with astaff of two, will be transferred to the head office of its U.S. unitin New York.     The closure will reduce the company's overseas business bases tonine -- five subsidiaries, one branch and three representativeoffices.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Greater disclosure needed by firms listing on new mart++TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     More information needs to be disclosed by firms looking to listtheir shares on a newly created section of the over-the-counter(OTC) stock trading market as these companies may be fast-growingbut also have poor management, industry sources said Thursday.     In addition to greater disclosure, brokerages will need to bemore discerning and more responsible when underwriting the shares ofthese companies listing on the ''frontier market,'' they said.     Already, two out of 31 companies expected to be registered forOTC trading launched in July, have gone bankrupt after twicedishonoring bills.     The firms -- a Tokyo-based water processing plant operator and aYokohama-based computer development company -- were included in the31 firms designated by the Ministry of International Trade andIndustry (MITI) as subject to a new law designed to promote venturebusinesses.     The ministry is unfazed by the bankruptcy of the two firms.''They are venture businesses, and some are apt to fail,'' oneministry official said.     The company failures make it only clear, however, that it isdifficult for the ordinary investor to predict the future of venturebusinesses, and that more corporate data is necessary, industrysources said.     The frontier market was launched by the Japan Securities DealersAssociation with the aim of making it easier for entrepreneurialcompanies to raise funds by relaxing the rules of stock registration.     Next year, similar markets will be set up within the Tokyo StockExchange and other domestic exchanges.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Levi Strauss Japan to pay 120 yen per share dividend+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Levi Strauss Japan K.K., the Japanese subsidiary of the world'slargest apparel maker, said Thursday it will pay a year-end dividendof 120 yen per share for its business year ended in November.     The Tokyo-based company said the payment will consist of a 42yen regular dividend and a 78 yen special payout.     The dividend ratio is 2.4 times the par value of 50 yen.     The company said the dividend amount was decided by taking intoaccount a fair distribution of profits, including a share forinternal reserves.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Foreigners net buyers of domestic demand stock in '95+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Foreign investors in Japan tended to be net buyers of domesticdemand-related shares and net sellers of high-tech-related shares in1995, figures released Thursday by major brokerage companies showed.     The following are the top 10 shares that met with net purchasesfrom foreigners, with stock volumes in millions.  The figures forNippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp. (NTT) were calculated on thebasis of each share having a face value of 50 yen. *     1  NKK (135.05)     2  Tokyo Electric Power (121.78)     3  NTT (116.08)     4  Sumitomo Metal Industries (120.20)     5  Nippon Steel (101.20)     6  Sony (92.34)     7  Tokyo Steel Manufacturing (75.36)     8  Hitachi (63.45)     9  Mitsubishi Heavy Industries (61.15) 10  Kobe Steel (59.69)     The following are the top 10 shares that met with net sellingfrom foreigners.     1  Toshiba (58.39)     2  Advantest (45.02)     3  Mitsui Engineering and Shipbuilding (20.03)     4  Mitsui Toatsu Chemicals (19.04)     5  Toho Zinc (18.27)     6  Pacific Metals (16.52)     7  Penta-Ocean Construction (15.5)     8  CSK (15.55)     9  Tosoh (15.10) 10  Daiwa Bank (14.48) *Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Local gov'ts to issue 13% more bonds in FY' 96+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Japan's local governments plan to issue a record 18,110.3billion yen worth of bonds in fiscal 1996, which begins next April1, up 13.0% over the current year, the biggest-ever growth rate, theHome Affairs Ministry said Monday.     The funds will be used to cover residential tax reductions of1,642.5 billion yen and to invest in 2,030.0 billion yen worth ofpublic works, the ministry said.     The public debt accounts for 15.2% of the local governments'combined expenditures, up 1.5 percentage points from the previousyear, it said.     The public works to be jointly carried out by central and localgovernments include 270 billion yen for reinforcing buildings for thepublic use against a big earthquake like the Jan. 17 Kobe quake,according to the ministry.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Speculators buy bankrupt Hyogo Bank shares on TSE+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The bankrupt Hyogo Bank topped the list of most active stockson the Tokyo Stock Exchange on Monday as speculators engaged in aheavy ''money game,'' traders said.     They said an estimated 12.8 million shares were traded despitethe bank's delisting, set for Jan. 29 next year, boosting the priceof its stock to 2.00 yen per share, double its Friday closing of 1.00yen.     Hyogo Bank's operations will be transferred to newly inauguratedMidori Bank early next year.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Long-tern bank forecasts 2.3% economic growth in FY '96+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     The Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan forecast Tuesday thatJapan's economy will grow 2.3% in real gross national product (GDP)terms in fiscal 1996, led by recovery of capital investment.     The bank report, however, said the recovery will be moderate.     ''The recovery itself will make the transition from reliance onpublic investment in the first half to self-sustainable recovery ledby private-sector demand in the second half,'' it said.     The bank said capital investment will improve and the previousadverse influence caused by an investment slump which has held backgrowth in recent years will be eliminated.     Public investment will support the economy through the firsthalf of fiscal 1996 while consumption, which has been restrained,will improve.     The bank, however, said the recovery depends largely on how wellthe transition from a recovery supported by public investment to onesupported by private demand can be managed in the latter half of thefiscal year.     It said Japan's current account surplus will continue to shrink,declining to 97 billion dollars in fiscal 1996 from 113 billiondollars in fiscal 1995 and 124 billion dollars in fiscal 1994.     In fiscal 1995, which ends March 31, 1996, the strong yen willlimit growth to 1.2%, compared with a 0.5% rise in the precedingyear, the bank said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BOJ to inspect New York units of several Japanese banks++TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     The Bank of Japan said Tuesday it will complete a series ofemergency inspections of the New York branches of half of Japan's 21major commercial banks by the spring of 1996.     Earlier this month, the central bank inspected three of the NewYork branches of some 10 Japanese banks selected for an emergencyinspection, the central bank said.     BOJ inspectors have detected some defects in the three banks'risk management, central bank officials said.     The planned inspections are designed to prevent a recurrence ofan incident similar to the Daiwa Bank scandal, in which Daiwa'ssenior management is charged with ordering a cover-up for the 1.1billion dollar bond trading loss at its New York branch.     As a result, Daiwa was ordered by the Federal Reserve Board toget out of the United States by Feb. 2.     The 10 banks selected by the central bank have a relatively highdependence on overseas banking operations.  The 21 banks comprise 11''city banks,'' three long-term credit banks and seven trust banks.     In a parallel step, the central bank will increase by seven to20 the number of banks whose overseas branches are obligated toaccept a triennial inspection of their financial records and riskmanagement systems by BOJ inspectors, the central bank said.     Among Japan's 21 major commercial banks, only Nippon Trust Bankwill be exempt from the new obligation, it said.     The triennial inspection will cover the Hong Kong branches ofthese 20 banks, on top of the central bank's current requirement thatthe banks' New York and London branches be subjected to its triennialexamination.     The central bank will draw up by next spring a list of checkuppoints for reference by inspectors, according to which the inspectorswill examine the commercial banks' financial records and riskmanagement systems.     The Bank of Japan will also make the ''check list'' available tofinancial institutions, it said.     The announcement came as Finance Minister Masayoshi Takemuraunveiled a set of measures to help Japanese banks strengthen theirrisk management and auditing systems as a way to prevent questionablefinancial deals as in the Daiwa Bank scandal.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Creditors to be lenient toward failed Hyogo Bank+OSAKA, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Creditors have offered to allow the bankrupt Hyogo Bank torecover about 20% of its claims on 16 nonbanking affiliates whichhave applied for liquidation, financial sources said Tuesday.     The sources said the creditors plan to hold another meeting nextspring to adopt a final agreement on the dismantling of the 16affiliates of Hyogo Bank.     Normally, the founding banks are required to abandon all claimson the dissolved nonbanking affiliates to take responsibility fortheir failures.     The sources said Hyogo Bank may be allowed to lay claim toabout 20% of about 292.7 billion yen worth of loans to the failedaffiliates whose total liabilities are estimated at 1,545.1 billionyen.     The nonbanks have asked creditors to give up as much as 80% oftheir claims due to a sharp fall in property prices, they said.     The balance will be settled over a period of about five years,the sources said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Norinchukin Bank to go into red, farm minister says+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Norinchukin Bank, the core institution for agriculturalcooperatives, will plunge into the red in fiscal 1995 in connectionwith the planned liquidation of housing loan firms, the farmminister said Tuesday.     Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries Minister Hosei Norota tolda regular cabinet meeting that about 20 financial organs under theMutual Credit Fund Association of Agricultural Cooperatives will alsolose money because of the housing loan firm fiasco.     Financial institutions affiliated to agricultural cooperativesare major creditors of the home mortgage loan companies, seven ofwhich are to be liquidated under a government scheme.     The government's plan calls for the farm-linked institutions toshoulder only some 530 billion yen of the liquidation lossesamounting to 6.41 trillion yen.     The farm ministry will study the matter from early next year,Norota said.     In the past three years, 325 billion yen has been furnished tothe housing loan companies by the agricultural institutions in theform of cuts in interest payments, Norota said.     The burden of the 530 billion yen would undermine the farmfinancial institutions' business standing as their internal reservesare extremely small and their profit margins are also small, Norotasaid.     If they are required to take an additional financial burden,they can not survive, which would create credit turmoil in Japan, hesaid.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Tokai Bank may issue preferred stock+NAGOYA, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Tokai Bank may issue preferred stock if the domestic stockmarket recovers in order to increase funds on hand, the president ofthe Nagoya-based major commercial bank said Tuesday.     By issuing preferred shares, the bank aims to keep itscapital-adequacy ratio from deteriorating in writing offnonperforming loans to moribund mortgage companies, Satoru Nishigakisaid at a press conference.     Preferred stock is guaranteed priority over common stock inthe payment of dividends to shareholders.     Commenting on rumors that Tokai Bank may absorb Chuo Trust andBanking Co. which belongs to the Tokai Bank group, Nishigaki said''There is no likelihood of Tokai absorbing Chuo Trust in thenear future.''     He said Chuo Trust's management condition will not worsen somuch in writing off its bad loans to the mortgage companies as trustbanks are expected to be allowed to use their special reserve fundsfor guaranteeing the principals of their trust assets, in order tomake up for losses resulting from the write-offs.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996IC, paper makers to enjoy good business in '96+NAGOYA, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Tokai Bank predicted Thursday that Japanese integrated circuit(IC) and paper makers will continue to enjoy a good businessenvironment in 1996.     The bank's ''industrial weather forecast'' described the outlookfor IC makers as clear and that of paper makers as fair.     The company based its forecast on brisk demand for personalcomputers and paper for computer handling manuals and merchandisecatalogs.     The business environment will improve slightly for automobiles,machine tools and retail industries due to restructuring of theiroperations and recovery of consumer spending, the bank said.     Conditions will worsen for home electrical appliances andhousing industries in view of a continuing production shift overseasand declining housing starts, it said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Daiwa's N.Y. branch ex-manager indicted on conspiracy++NEW YORK, Dec. 27 Kyodo     A former manager of the New York branch of Japan's Daiwa Bank,was indicted by a federal grand jury Wednesday on charges ofconspiring to defraud the Federal Reserve Board by allegedlyassisting in a cover-up of 1.1 billion dollars in trading losses.     The federal indictment against former branch manager MasahiroTsuda includes a charge of failure to report a felony.  If convicted,he faces up to eight years in prison and a fine of 500,000 dollars.     Tsuda was arrested and first brought up on charges Nov. 2, whichled to an indictment against Daiwa Bank and the closing of its 15branches in the United States.     Tsuda was freed on a 500,000 dollar bond and is scheduled to bearraigned Jan. 4.     Wednesday's indictment, returned by a federal grand jury inManhattan, replaces the original criminal complaint filed by the U.S.Attorney's Office and further details Tsuda's alleged role in theconspiracy.     The charges describe how Tsuda allegedly concealed 1.1 billiondollars in trading losses incurred by the branch's former executivevice president, Toshihide Iguchi, through unauthorized trading inU.S. securities over a 12-year period.     Iguchi was arrested Sept. 23 and later pleaded guilty to fraudand embezzlement charges, and is awaiting sentencing.     The indictment alleges that Tsuda failed to report Iguchi'scrimes to the Fed between July, when he first learned about thelosses, and September.     Tsuda's lawyer, Stanley Arkin, called the charges ''unwarrantedand unjustified.''     ''Mr. Tsuda sought to be law abiding...and act consistently withwhat his employer and the Japanese Ministry of Finance determined wasthe only appropriate course here -- that a thorough investigation ofIguchi's extraordinary trading loss be conducted before a report wasfiled with U.S. regulators,'' Arkin said in a statement.     According to the indictment, Tsuda met with Iguchi and othersenior managers to discuss ways of further concealing the losses.  Itsaid Tsuda considered a plan to hide the losses through a CaymanIslands entity and asked an employee to figure out a way torepurchase securities that Iguchi had sold so that it would appearthe losses had not occurred in New York.     Prosecutors allege that Tsuda postponed an internal audit inlate August by ordering Iguchi to take a vacation so that the losseswould not be discovered.  Iguchi did not actually take a vacation butactually went to Tsuda's apartment to meet with a small group ofmanagers to review all the records of his unauthorized trading andreconstruct the trading losses, the indictment claims.     The indictment alleges that two Daiwa employees repeatedlywarned Tsuda that the bank was required to report the loss to theFed but that Tsuda refused, telling them he would take fullresponsibility if the matter was discovered.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Ex-Im Bank to extend 24 bil. yen loan to Ukraine+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     The Export-Import Bank of Japan signed agreements Thursday toextend a 24 billion yen loan to the Republic of Ukraine to helpstabilize the country's economy, the government-financed bank said.     The bank said 18 billion yen will be an ''untied'' loan, whichallows the recipient nation to purchase necessary goods and servicesfrom not only Japan but other countries.     The remaining 6 billion yen will be used to finance thecountry's exports, the bank said.     The loan is in line with an agreement reached at the Naplessummit of the Group of Seven major industrial nations in July 1994 toprovide Ukraine with a total of 4 billion dollars in loans, the banksaid.  Japan pledged to put up 200 million dollars of the total.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996S and P lowers Fuji rating, revises Sakura, IBJ outlooks+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Prolonged concern over Japan's banking system, plagued by badloans, led Standard and Poor's on Thursday to lower the debt ratingsof Fuji Bank and revise downward its outlook for the ratings ofSakura Bank and the Industrial Bank of Japan (IBJ).     S and P put Fuji Bank's senior debt rating at A-minus in lightof ''the length and severity of the problems facing the Japanesebanking sector'' as well as ''the bank's large problem loans,'' theJapanese arm of the U.S. credit rating agency said.     The outlook for the long-term rating is negative because thebank's asset value could face further erosion and it is uncertainwhen the nation's banking environment will improve, the agency said.     Meanwhile, S and P revised its outlook for the senior ratings ofthe IBJ and Sakura Bank to ''negative'' from ''stable'' due mainly tothe impact of a planned write-off of their exposure to ailingmortgage lenders, it said.     Sakura's long-term debt is currently rated A-minus by theagency, while the IBJ's has an A-plus rating.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Sakura Bank sets up trust subsidiary+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Sakura Bank said Thursday it has set up a wholly owned trustbank to begin operations from late January.     Capitalized at 10 billion yen, Sakura Trust and Banking Co. willbe headed by Akira Amaki, an adviser to Sakura Bank, bank officialssaid.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Bank managements looking to freeze salaries next spring++TOKYO, Dec. 29 Kyodo     The managements of major commercial banks are intending to headoff rises in employee salaries during wage negotiations next springin hopes of keeping operating costs down, industry sources saidFriday.     In addition to the need to stay competitive in the increasinglyglobalized financial markets, the industry's unprecented plan tofreeze salaries is spurred by public criticism that salaries at banksare high in comparison with other industries, the sources said.     Criticism about the salaries of bank workers arose after thegovernment decided to use 685 billion yen in taxpayers' money to helpliquidate seven financially strapped housing loan companies.     As a result of writing off losses stemming from the liquidationof the mortgage firms, some banks are likely to post unconsolidatedpretax losses for fiscal 1995 ending March next year.     At the same time, however, net operating profits at thecommercial banks are likely to rise to an all-time high due torecord-low interest rates which have reduced fund-raising costs.     Labor unions at the banks are expected to strongly oppose theattempts to freeze salaries.  ''They should first cut the bonuses ofexecutives,'' one labor union official at a major commercial banksaid.     The labor unions are nevertheless expected to negotiate for muchsmaller wage hikes than in the previous year as consumer prices havedeclined.  In 1995, the benchmark Tokyo consumer price index fell forthe first time since 1970, declining 0.3% from the precedingyear.     During spring negotations this year, the labor unions asked fora rise of 1.0% and finally settled for a 0.5% increase.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Highlights of FY '96 budget plan adopted by gov't++TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The following are highlights of the 75,104.9 billion yengeneral account budget plan adopted Monday by the government forfiscal 1996 starting next April. Expenditures     Financial System Stabilization     -- A total of 685 billion yen will be allocated to help coverlosses stemming from the liquidation of seven private housing loancompanies.     Public Works     -- Overall expenditures related to public works projects willsecure relatively high growth of 4.0% and total 9,719.9 billion yento help shore up the sluggish economy.     Economic Cooperation     -- Expenses for official development assistance, or foreign aid,will amount to 1,145.2 billion yen for a record low growth rate of3.5%.     Defense     -- Defense spending will rise 2.58% to 4,845.5 billion yen, forthe first rise in the growth rate in six years, due to an increasein payments for past contracts.     Social Security     -- Social security costs will rise 2.6% to 14,287.9 billionyen, giving priority to measures for the disabled and steps underthe so-called ''Gold Plan'' for the health and welfare of seniorcitizens.     Technological Development     -- Science and technology expenditures will enjoy anexceptionally high growth of 10.9% and amount to 758.8 billion yen,reflecting the government's efforts to promote structural economicreforms.     National Debt-Servicing Costs     -- National debt-servicing costs will rise a sharp 23.9% to16,375.2 billion yen. Revenue     -- Fiscal 1996 tax revenue is estimated at 51,345 billion yen,down 2,386 billion from the initial fiscal 1995 budget.     -- A record 21,029 billion yen of government bonds -- 9,031billion yen in construction bonds and 11,998 billion yen indeficit-financing bonds -- will be issued to make up for a largerevenue shortfall.     -- The bond dependency ratio will rise to 28.0% from 17.7%.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Table of Japan's FY '96 general account budget++TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The following is a breakdown of a draft general account budgetfor fiscal 1996 approved Monday by the cabinet of Prime MinisterTomiichi Murayama.     Figures are in millions of yen with year-to-year percentagechanges in parentheses. *     FY 1996               FY 1995     (Draft)              (Initial)  (Changes)     REVENUES     Tax and stamp revenues     51,345,000         53,731,000      (-4.4)     Nontax revenues      2,559,383          4,485,579     (-42.9)     Proceeds from sales of Nippon Telegraph     and Telephone Corp. (NTT) shares        171,541            172,541      (-0.6)     Government bonds     21,029,000         12,598,000      (66.9)      Construction bonds      9,031,000          9,746,900      (-7.3)      Deficit-covering bonds     11,998,000          2,851,100     (320.8)     TOTAL     75,104,924         70,987,120       (5.8)     EXPENDITURES     Government bond servicing     16,375,197         13,221,300      (23.9)     Tax grants to local governments     13,603,826         13,215,395       (2.9)     General expenditures     43,140,901         42,141,740       (2.4)     Carryover to special account     (NTT and bond proceeds)      1,300,000          2,408,685     (-46.0)     Housing lender liquidation fund        685,000     TOTAL     75,104,924         70,987,120       (5.8) *Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Budget investment plan shows 2nd lowest rise++TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The government endorsed the fiscal 1996 investment and loanprogram Monday, calling for the second lowest rise ever against thebackground of weak corporate cash demand and a trend toward limitingthe role of governmental corporations.     The investment and loan program for fiscal 1996 was approved bythe cabinet of Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama at an extraordinarycabinet meeting Monday.  The program will be presented for approvalby the Diet at a regular parliamentary session starting in lateJanuary.     The government plan earmarks 40,533.7 billion yen for the coregeneral category of the investment and loan program for the yearbeginning April 1, up 0.7% from the initial program for fiscal 1995.     The figure was revised up 80.4 billion yen from the 40,453.3billion yen in the Dec. 20 draft program after relevant governmentministries and agencies renegotiated it with the Finance Ministry torestore their requests.     Still, the growth represents the second lowest year-on-yearrise since the program started in fiscal 1953, following the 1.2%fall in fiscal 1985, a Finance Ministry official said.     The core program expanded 7.7% in fiscal 1994 and 2.1% in thecurrent fiscal year.     Under the investment and loan program, often described as asecond state budget, funds raised from state-run postal savings andinsurance systems as well as public pension programs are invested in,or lent to, government-affiliated corporations.     The overall investment and loan program -- the core programplus financial investment operations -- totals 49,124.7 billion yen,up 1.9% from the initial program for the current fiscal year, whichenvisaged a 0.7% growth.     The increase compares with a draft 0.3% rise.  The upwardrevision came mainly because allocations for financial investmentwere raised to 8,591 billion yen, up 700 billion yen from the draftstage.     The 700 billion yen goes into the new account of a governmentcorporation managing postal insurance funds to bring the totalallocation for the account to 1.7 trillion yen.     The portfolio was established in 1992 to invigorate sluggishshare prices.  The government earmarked 2 trillion yen for thispurpose in fiscal 1993, but the figure slid to 1.5 trillion yenin fiscal 1994 from 1 trillion yen in fiscal 1995.     ''The account chalked up a turnaround from recent declinesbecause of current stock market conditions,'' the official said.     By project, the government earmarks 12,143.3 billion yen in thecore program for housing-related projects, up 1.2%.     Housing Loan Corp. will receive 10,909.8 billion yen, up 2.6%,to provide loans for 630,000 home purchases in fiscal 1996 asenvisaged in the government's five-year home construction schemebeginning next fiscal year.     The budget for projects related to small businesses falls 12.6%to 5,506.6 billion yen after a 5.1% growth in fiscal 1995, theministry said.     Allocations to the government-affiliated Small Business FinanceCorp. are down 27.3% to 1.87 trillion yen for the first declinesince fiscal 1986.  The allocation was raised 3.4% in the fiscal1995 budget.     The Finance Ministry said the lower allocation resulted from thedowntrend in corporate cash demand.     But the decline also reflects falling demand for funds frompublic corporations, with the fiscal investment and loan program rate-- at which the government borrows money from postal savings andother sources -- hovering above the private-sector long-term primelending rate.     To develop social infrastructure to improve daily life, thegovernment allocates 8.73 trillion yen to local authorities, up 21.5%.     Of the figure, 450.3 billion yen will go to providing waterservices, up 12.6%, 1,495.2 billion yen will be spent on sewagetreatment, a rise of 12.9%, and 213.8 billion yen will be used tobuild public housing units, up 26.5%.     Some government-affiliated corporations have been criticized bythe private sector, which is demanding that the corporations shoulddo no more than supplement private-sector operations.     Under these circumstances, Japan Development Bank, whoseoperations are to be scaled back, will receive 1,434 billion yen fromthe investment and loan program under the ministry draft, down 24.8%from fiscal 1995.     The Export-Import Bank of Japan will have its allocation reducedby 17.1% to 1.07 trillion yen.     Meanwhile, the government earmarks 402.7 billion yen for SocialWelfare and Medical Service Corp., up 19.4%, to step up loans forbuilding nursing homes and other facilities for the elderly underits 10-year ''gold plan'' welfare policy.     On the transportation front, the government allots 21.3 billionyen to Kansai International Airport Co., up 153.6%.  Of that amount,700 million yen will be used to start constructing more runways atthe airport, which serves Osaka and opened in September 1994.     The government sets aside 1,004.7 billion yen for JNR SettlementCorp., up 10.4%.     The corporation is disposing of a 26 trillion yen debt incurredby the former state-run Japanese National Railways (JNR) by sellingland and shares in the seven private rail companies into which JNRwas split when privatized in 1987.     In October, the government called off its plan to seek a stocklisting for West Japan Railway Co., one of the seven privatizedrailway firms, within the current fiscal year to avoid upsetting thesluggish equity market.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Highlights of FY '96 fiscal loan, investment plan++TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The following are highlights of the fiscal loan and investmentprogram approved by the government Monday for the year beginningApril 1:     -- Earmarking 12,143.3 billion yen for Housing Loan Corp. andother home-related financial institutions, up 1.2% from a yearearlier, to help spur housing investment with continued sizablefinancial commitment.     -- Slashing allocations for Small Business Finance Corp. andother state-run financial institutions serving small enterprises to5,506.6 billion yen, down 12.6%, in accordance with falling cashdemand at those companies.     -- Curtailing disbursements to Japan Development Bank to 1,434billion yen, down 24.8%, in line with a policy to scale back thebank's operations.     -- Allocating 402.7 billion yen for Social Welfare and MedicalService Corp., up 19.4%, to build nursing homes and other facilitiesfor the government's new ''gold plan'' welfare policy for theelderly.     -- Allotting 1,004.7 billion yen to Japanese National RailwaysSettlement Corp., up 10.4%, to help pay down 26 trillion yen in debtincurred by the former state-run rail service.     -- Boosting allotments to local governments and a state-runfinancier for local public corporations to 10,418 billion yen, up21.5%, to help improve local government finances and developsocial infrastructure.     -- Spending 4.6 trillion yen outside regular financialinvestment accounts to take in government bonds for ensuring thesmooth sale of state bonds on the market.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Gov't plans 4,845.5 bil. yen defense budget for FY '96+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The government Monday proposed allocation of 4,845.5 billionyen for the defense budget in fiscal 1996 starting April 1, allowinga 2.58% increase over the initial budget for the current fiscal year.     The year-on-year increase is a sharp rise compared with the35-year low of 0.855% in the current fiscal 1995 that had an initialdefense budget of 4,723.6 billion yen.     The rate of the year-on-year increase expanded for the firsttime in six years after rises of 0.9% in fiscal 1994, 1.95% in 1993,3.8% in 1992, 5.45% in 1991 and 6.1% in 1990.     The increase is largely due to the 6.1% jump, to 1,778.8billion yen, in payments for equipment bought previously but to bepaid for in fiscal 1996, such as aegis ships and the airbornewarning and control system.     Other than the due payments, the proposed budget is composed of2,076 billion yen for personnel expenditures and 990.7 billion yenfor other general expenses.     Because of the sharp rise in the due payments, the governmenthas made efforts to restrain the defense budget as much as possible,a Finance Ministry official said.     The proposed budget sets aside 835.2 billion yen in freshcontracts, a major part of which will be paid in fiscal 1997 orlater, to procure hardware such as tanks, fighters and destroyers, a1.2% rise over contracts for fiscal 1995.     The sum for such equipment shows its first increase in sixyears, but if the effect of the planned rise of the 3% consumptiontax to 5% is excluded, the 1996 figure for such equipment is 820billion yen, or a year-on-year decrease of 0.6%, the official said.     The fiscal 1996 hardware procurement contracts include those for11 F-2 planes -- once called the FSX next-generation support fighter-- four F-15 fighter interceptor planes, 18 tanks, a destroyer and asubmarine.     Under the government plan, Japan's host-nation support in fiscal1996 for U.S. forces stationed in Japan will cost 273.5 billion yen,a 0.8% increase over the current fiscal budget.     The sum includes costs to move a U.S. night landing practicesite from the Atsugi base in Kanagawa Prefecture to Iwojima Island inthe Pacific, aside from wages for Japanese employees at U.S. basesand utility fees for U.S. military facilities.     The budget plan also consists of 153.9 billion yen inexpenditures for residents around military bases, a 2.9% decreaseover the current fiscal year, such as soundproofing their houses,85.4 billion yen for training, 6.8 billion yen to build a centralcommand control system in a new Defense Agency building, 2.7 billionyen to establish a unified information headquarters, and 201 millionyen for security dialogue and related works with nearby countries.     The proposal includes 139.8 billion yen in contracts forresearch and development of new midrange surface-to-air guidedmissiles and rescue flying boats, 440 million yen in contracts toresearch the so-called theater missile defense system, and 146.1billion yen in contracts to improve facilities for housing personnel.     The planned budget expenditure accounts for 0.968% of Japan's500.7 trillion yen gross national product (GNP) as estimated by thegovernment for fiscal 1996.     The 1996 defense outlays are the first annual defense budgetunder the fiscal 1996-2000 Midterm Defense Buildup Plan, which callsfor a total of 25.15 trillion yen in defense expenditures during theperiod.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Gov't ministers to discuss 'jusen' issues Tue.+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Government ministers concerned will meet Tuesday to discussmeasures to dispose bad loans on the nation's seven ailing ''jusen''housing loan companies and disclosure of information related to theproblem, Chief Cabinet Secretary Koken Nosaka said Monday.     The government is under fire over its plan to use 685 billionyen under the fiscal 1996 budget to liquidate the companies, saddledwith huge problem loans during the asset-inflated bubble economy inthe late 1980s.     Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama told Monday's meeting of seniorofficials from the government and the three ruling parties earlier inthe day his cabinet will try to gain public support for the use oftaxpayers' money, according to Deputy Cabinet Secretary HiroyukiSonoda said.     The cabinet needs to provide various types of information tothe public rather than just making arguments, Sonoda quoted Murayamaas saying.     Masajuro Shiokawa, chairman of the Executive Council of thelargest ruling coalition member Liberal Democratic Party, asked thegovernment to set timetables for the bad loan disposal under theliquidation scheme of the seven ailing home mortgage companies,announced last week.     Takanobu Nagai, chairman of the Diet Administration Committee ofthe Social Democratic Party (SDP) which is led by Murayama, said thatbefore an ordinary Diet session convenes on Jan. 22, the parliamentwill discuss whether to set up a special committee on the housingloan problem.     The House of Councillors hopes to discuss the matter on Jan. 17during a Finance Committee meeting, said Hisamitsu Sugano, chairmanof the upper chamber Diet Administration Committee of the SDP.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Gov't adopts 75.1 tril. yen budget plan for FY '96++TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The government adopted a 75.1 trillion yen budget for fiscal1996 on Monday, calling for issuing a record 21.03 trillion yen ingovernment bonds that will further tighten Japan's already strainedfiscal conditions.     The draft general account budget for the fiscal year beginningnext April totals 75,104.9 billion yen, up 5.8% from the initialbudget for fiscal 1995.     The draft budget, adopted at an extraordinary meeting of thecabinet of Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama in the afternoon, will besubmitted to the ordinary Diet session that starts in late January.     At a press conference after the meeting, Finance MinisterMasayoshi Takemura said, ''The government has compiled the fiscal1996 budget, basically giving consideration to the Japanese economywhich remains at a standstill.''     ''There is a wide gap between expenditures and tax revenues andhow to remove it will be a task for budget compilation in fiscal1997,'' he said.     To help shore up Japan's sluggish economy, the budget calls forrelatively high growth of 4.0% in overall expenditures relatedto public works projects.  The government will continue income andresidential tax cuts for the third consecutive year.     Growth in general operating expenditures as a whole, however,will be limited to 2.4%, the second lowest growth since fiscal1989.     General operating expenditures -- general account spending minussuch obligatory costs as national debt-servicing costs and tax grantsto local governments -- are used to cover government policy measures.     To make up for a huge revenue shortage stemming from a plungein tax revenues during the prolonged economic slump, the budget callsfor issuing a record 21,029 billion yen worth of government bonds,including 11,998 billion yen in deficit-financing bonds, also arecord high.     Despite budget-streamlining efforts, the 5.8% rise in totalbudget size is the biggest in five years.     This reflects a sharp increase in national debt-servicing costsand the government's decision to use general account funds for theplanned liquidation of moribund housing loan companies.     Under the fiscal 1996 budget, the government earmarks 1,145.2billion yen for official development assistance, a major pillar ofJapan's international contributions.  But this represents the lowestgrowth ever at 3.5%.     The defense budget, the first under Japan's new medium-termdefense guidelines aimed at compact but effective forces, will rise2.58% to 4,845.5 billion yen, for the first increase of thegrowth rate in six years.  The rise stems from increased payments fordefense contracts concluded in the past.     Social security spending will rise 2.6% to 14,287.9 billionyen, placing emphasis on measures for the disabled and steps underthe so-called ''Gold Plan'' for the promotion of health and welfarefor senior citizens.     While increases in many spending items are limited to lowlevels, public works-related expenditures will rise 4.0% to 9,719.9billion yen to help lift the sluggish economy.     The total includes projects to be implemented with the proceedsfrom sales of government-owned shares in Nippon Telegraph andTelephone Corp.     The budget earmarks 758.8 billion yen for science andtechnology, an exceptionally high growth of 10%, in a bid to promoterestructuring of Japan's economy.     The budget allocates 685 billion yen to help cover lossesstemming from the liquidation of housing loan companies which havehuge bad loans.  The government calls the allocation an emergencystep to help stabilize the nation's financial system.     National debt-servicing costs, meanwhile, will rise as much as23.9% to 16,375.2 billion, partly because the Finance Ministry willbe forced to resume regular allocations from the general account tothe National Debt Consolidation Fund for the first time in fouryears.     The ministry suspended fixed-amount allocations to the specialaccount, which was created to secure fiscal resources for theredemption of outstanding government bonds, from fiscal 1993 tofiscal 1995, in a bid to reduce the apparent growth of budgetaryspending.     Since a huge amount of government bonds is in the pipeline forredemption, however, the ministry will disburse 3,479.7 billion yento the national debt-servicing allocations.     Tax grants to local governments will increase 2.9% to 13,603.8billion yen.     On the revenue side, meanwhile, fiscal 1996 tax revenues areestimated at 51,345 billion yen, down 2,386 billion yen from theestimate in the initial fiscal 1995 budget.     To bridge the gap between revenues and expenditures, thegovernment will raise a total of 21,029 billion yen by issuing newgovernment bonds, up sharply from 12,598 billion yen in the initialfiscal 1995 budget.     This will bring the ratio of government bonds to overallrevenue from 17.7% in fiscal 1995 to a 16-year high of 28.0% infiscal 1996 on an initial budget basis.     The outstanding balance of government bonds will come to some240 trillion yen at the end of fiscal 1996, equivalent to as much as49% of the nation's gross domestic product.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Fiscal reform should not mean tax hikes: Takemura++TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Finance Minister Masayoshi Takemura said Monday that while itis necessary to reform Japan's fiscal system, that should not beimmediately associated with the idea of a tax increase.     ''Revenues and expenditures should be discussed as a package,''Takemura said at a press conference held after the cabinet of PrimeMinister Tomiichi Murayama endorsed a draft fiscal 1996 budget.     ''Fiscal reform needs to be dealt with in wholesale debates fromthe standpoints of how the government should function and how thepublic-sector economy should relate to people's lives,'' Takemurasaid.     Under the draft fiscal 1996 budget, the government will spend atotal of 75.1 trillion yen in the year beginning April 1, withgeneral operation expenditures -- the core spending category --totaling 43.1 trillion yen.     The budget calls for a third income and residential tax cut inas many years, a 4% rise in public works spending, and an allocationof 680 billion yen to help clean up the huge debts amassed bymortgage lenders.     ''The government had to compile a budget addressing the economy,which is still at a precarious juncture after four years ofstagnation,'' Takemura said.     However, to finance the budget, the government had to decide onthe issuance of deficit-covering bonds totaling 12 trillion yen, ofwhich 1.9 trillion yen worth will be used for tax cuts and will becompensated for with a future consumption tax hike.     Takemura said he hopes to come up with good ways to improve thecurrent budget formulation system under which the Finance Ministrysets limits on spending items.     ''Given the huge discrepancy of more than 10 trillion yenbetween revenues and expenditures, it is necessary to review theceiling-based system,'' he said.     On the housing loan fiasco, Takemura conceded there were pointsthat were ''difficult to understand'' in the process of drawing up agovernment scheme to dispose of problem loans using taxpayers' money.     ''The government failed to map out an overview of the programbefore putting the plan under discussion,'' Takemura said.  ''Itneeds to disclose as much information as possible to win a finalconsensus on the program.''Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Hashimoto rates high FY '96 budget for MITI+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     International Trade and Industry Minister Ryutaro Hashimotosaid Monday the budget allocated to his ministry for fiscal 1996 was''satisfactory'' in light of economic conditions.     Hashimoto said the 9.4 billion yen gain in the budget was a''fruitful'' result for the ministry.  He made the comments at a newsconference after the government approved the fiscal 1996 budget plan.     MITI is earmarked 394.7 billion yen, excluding spending forstructural adjustment in the energy sector, in the year startingApril 1996, up from 385.3 billion under the fiscal 1995 budget.     Hashimoto said he hopes the new budgetary allocation will helpensure smooth growth in the long term.     The budget will be put toward four priority areas -- promotingscientific research and development, boosting information-relatedtechnologies, providing assistance to financially fragile small firmsand taking comprehensive steps for the energy sector, Hashimoto said.     Hashimoto also said on the day that massive issuances ofdeficit-covering bonds was an inevitable step.     Such a move will pose a problem in the future by shifting theburden of refunding to future generations, he said.  But a ''powerfulremedy'' is needed now with tax revenues sinking due to the slumpingeconomy, he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Business leaders welcomes FY '96 budget+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The leaders of some Japanese economic and industrial bodies onMonday welcomed the government's fiscal 1996 draft budget.     Shoichiro Toyoda, chairman of the powerful Federation ofEconomic Organizations (Keidanren), said he ''appreciated'' thedecision to increase allocations for a survey on the relocation ofadministrative functions from Tokyo as it reflected the federation'srequest.     Kosaku Inaba, chairman of the Japan Chamber of Commerce andIndustry, said he welcomed appropriations for the development of newbusinesses and technologies.     The structural change of Japanese industry is an urgent task, hesaid.     Meanwhile, Jiro Ushio, chairman of the Japan Association ofCorporate Executives (keizai Doyukai), urged the government todrastically change the pattern of expenditures and distribution offunds for public works projects.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Prosecutors reindict 2 key figures in huge loan scandal+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Prosecutors reindicted the former head of the now-defunct TokyoKyowa Credit Association and the sister of detained former LaborMinister Toshio Yamaguchi on Monday on charges of breach of trust inconnection with a giant loan scandal.     Harunori Takahashi, 50, and Yoshie Yamaguchi, 60, were indictedon charges of arranging some 1.9 billion yen in illegal loans fromthe failed credit union for Yamaguchi's company.     The move brought to five the number of indictments againstTakahashi, the central figure in the huge loan scandal that hasrocked political and business circles in Japan over the last year.     Takahashi and Yamaguchi were earlier indicted for a similarillicit loan case involving another failed credit union, Anzen CreditBank.     The two have already admitted they arranged the 1.9 billion yencollateral-free loans from Tokyo Kyowa to a golf course developmentfirm run by Yamaguchi from June 1994 to December 1994, prosecutionsources said.     With the new indictment, the total amount of illegal loansTakahashi is alleged to have arranged from the two credit unionsreaches about 22.1 billion yen, the Tokyo District Public ProsecutorsOffice said.     Toshio Yamaguchi, who was arrested Dec. 6, is likely to beindicted on Wednesday on four charges -- breach of trust,embezzlement, fraud and perjury, prosecution sources said.     The detention period for the 55-year-old independent member ofthe House of Representatives will expire Wednesday.     He was arrested on suspicion of breach of trust for havingarranged 2.7 billion yen worth of illegal loans from the two failedcredit unions for a company run by his sister.     Toshio Yamaguchi will also be charged with embezzling some 180million yen from a foundation to which he had served as a director,the sources said.  He allegedly used the money as collateral forloans to companies run by his relatives, they said.     He will also be indicted on charges of fraud to the tune of some170 million yen from a university in Kumamoto Prefecture, southernJapan, in connection with a failed scheme to build a university inthe United States, they said.     The politician will also be slapped with charges of perjury forhis statements made to the Diet in June in connection with the loanscandal, the sources said.     The Diet filed an accusation of perjury with prosecutors againstYamaguchi Dec. 15 for giving false testimony before a lower housecommittee.     In the testimony, Yamaguchi denied any involvement in arrangingillegal collateral-free loans from the two failed credit unions.     Yamaguchi denies he is guilty of breach of trust.     In a related development, tax authorities have discovered thatthree companies run by Yamaguchi's 52-year-old brother Katsuto Nemotounderreported incomes by at least 420 million yen, tax sources saidMonday.     The Tokyo Regional Taxation Bureau has already instructed thecompanies to revise their tax reports, the sources said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Ministers agree on steps to collect housing loans++TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Cabinet ministers agreed Tuesday on steps toward collection ofbad loans held by housing loan companies which are to be liquidatedby using taxpayers' money.     The ministers agreed to ask the home mortgage companies tomaintain claims against bad loans and to rigorously seek to collectthem.     They also agreed that the housing loan firms should inform thefinance and justice ministries, prosecutors and police authorities ofproblems concerning their bad loans.     The ministers held the unofficial meeting in response to publiccriticism of the government plan endorsed last week to use 685billion yen from the fiscal 1996 budget to liquidate the mortgagefirms.     Justice Minister Hiroshi Miyazawa, Finance Minister MasayoshiTakemura, farm minister Hosei Norota, National Public SafetyCommission Chairman Takashi Fukaya and Chief Cabinet Secretary KokenNosaka agreed that the government should do everything possible tocollect the companies' loans, Nosaka said.     They also agreed that information about the housing loan problemshould be made available to the public, he said.     Under Tuesday's agreement, the Finance Ministry, in cooperationwith other ministries, will start work on the gathering anddisclosure of information on the housing loan problem, and on ways tohelp with the collection of loans, Nosaka said.     The ministers are likely to meet again on the issue later thisyear or early next year, he added.     The ministers also agreed on measures to improve the functioningof the Deposit Insurance Corp. and the establishment of a newloan-collecting vehicle to take over debts and claims of the housingloan companies.     The Finance Ministry is to submit a bill to revise related lawsto the next Diet session so that the Deposit Insurance Corp. can setup a section with enough staff to instruct the new vehicle on thecollection of loans .     The new vehicle will have a loan-collecting division with strongenforcement power.  Lawyers and real estate specialists willparticipate in its activities.     Both the Deposit Insurance Corp. and the new vehicle areexpected to keep close contact with Justice Ministry, prosecutors andpolice authorities.     In a related development, Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama toldreporters he instructed the ministers to cooperate toward fulfillingthe people's expectations.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Jan. fund surplus to shrink on slow public lending++TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     The Bank of Japan (BOJ) on Tuesday predicted a net fund surplusin January will shrink below the year-earlier level because ofreduced interest revenue from public-sector lending.     The net liquidity surplus will amount to 5.11 trillion yen, downfrom a 6.22 trillion yen surplus posted a year before, the centralbank said.     Public-sector loans continue to decrease, as their interestrates remain higher than those by private financial institutions as aresult of a series of cuts in the central bank's official discountrate to a record low 0.50% per annum.     Less lending by public financial organizations like thegovernmental Housing Loans Corp. has trimmed interest revenues in thebanking system, the central bank said, expecting the fund shortage tototal 428.0 billion yen in January against a surplus of 70.9 billionyen a year earlier.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Detained ex-minister made huge bad loans by stock deals+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Former Labor Minister Toshio Yamaguchi, facing impendingindictment on charges of four counts of crime, caused huge bad loansthrough stock trading on funds withdrawn from a firm affiliated witha central figure in an aggravated loan scandal, investigationsources said Tuesday.     Yamaguchi withdrew as much as 38 billion yen from a nonbankfinancial unit belonging to the EIE International group headed byHarunori Takahashi, former head of the failed Tokyo Kyowa CreditAssociation, the sources said.     The 55-year-old independent member of the House ofRepresentatives funneled about 90% of the funds into stocktrading, resulting in uncollectable loans totaling some 13 billionyen.     The Tokyo District Public Prosecutors Office is expected toindict Yamaguchi on Wednesday, the day his detention period is set toexpire, on charges of breach of trust, embezzlement, fraud andperjury.     Yamaguchi was arrested Dec. 6 on suspicion of breach of trust byhaving conspired with Takahashi and his sister, Yoshie Yamaguchi, toarrange 2.7 billion yen worth of illegal loans from Tokyo Kyowa andanother failed credit union, Anzen Credit Bank, for the sister'scompany.     The amount of loans Yamaguchi withdrew through accounts of eightcompanies and two foundations he was affiliated with from the EIE'sfinancial arm reached a peak of 38 billion yen in 1989, the sourcessaid.     Yamaguchi used most of the borrowed funds for stock trading, butthe prices of shares Yamaguchi had invested in fell sharply in tandemwith an overall bearish market.     To salvage Yamaguchi from the snowballing bad loans, thefinancial unit sold part of his stocks it had held as collateral,succeeding in cutting the outstanding bad loans to about 28 billionyen by November 1990, the sources said.     Yamaguchi claims he is not guilty of breach of trust.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Shinozawa vows to tighten surveillance system+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Vice Finance Minister Kyosuke Shinozawa said Thursday theministry will proceed with a proposed reform of its inspection andsurveillance system in a bid to prevent illicit financial operationslike the Daiwa Bank scandal.     ''The Daiwa Bank case taught the ministry a lesson and it willdo its utmost to flesh out measures proposed to make its bankingpolicy more transparent,'' Shinozawa said at a press conference.     His comment came after a former manager of the New York branchof Daiwa Bank was indicted by a federal grand jury Wednesday oncharges of conspiring to conceal huge bond trading losses from U.S.regulators.     The ministry's response to the scandal drew strong criticism athome and abroad over its obscurity.     It only reported the incident to the U.S. banking authoritiessome six weeks after Daiwa Bank notified the ministry of the lossesat the New York branch.     While declining to comment on the indictment of the former DaiwaBank manager, Shinozawa said the ministry will make clear therelations between its banking administration and inspectionactivities, in line with reform measures announced by FinanceMinistry Masayoshi Takemura.     Takemura announced on a set of measures on Tuesday to strengthenthe ministry's inspection and surveillance system, calling for ashift in its banking policy to one based on market principles fromthe current system of so-called ''administrative guidance,'' whichhas been criticized for its lack of transparency.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Nov. tax revenues rise for 1st time in 4 months++TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Japan's tax revenues rose from the year-earlier level for thefirst time in four months in November, supported by growth incorporate tax revenues, the Finance Ministry said Thursday.     Overall November revenues totaled 6,804.35 billion yen, up 1.9%,the ministry said.     But cumulative revenues for the first eight months of fiscal1995 that ends next March 31 fell 2.7% to 25,793.37 billion yen,accounting for only 48.1% of the government's current fiscal 1995tax revenue target of 53,593 billion yen.     Under a proposed third supplementary budget which reduces thetax revenue target by 2,912 billion yen to 50,681 billion yen, theratio will come to 50.9%.     ''Income tax revenues were sluggish, but this was more thanoffset by an increase in corporate tax revenues with returns fromcompanies that closed interim account books at the end ofSeptember,'' a ministry official said.     Many major Japanese companies settle their interim accounts onSept. 30 and annual accounts on March 31.     ''Compared with results for the year-earlier period, companiesposted relatively favorable earnings growth and this led to the risein corporate tax revenues,'' the official said.     November corporate tax revenues rose 7.6% to 3,142.99 billionyen, accounting for nearly half of the total revenue in the month,the ministry said.     Income tax revenues, however, fell 7.8% and totaled 1,602.82billion yen, including 1,118.76 billion yen from withheld incometax, down 6.8%, it said.     Among other items, liquor tax revenues, mainly from Septembersales, dropped 10.1% to 156.34 billion yen in reaction to ahigh level a year earlier, the ministry said.     Revenues from the securities transactions tax advanced 56.2% to36.76 billion yen as securities transactions became more activecompared with a year before, it said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Shinozawa's resignation reflects poor year for MOF+TOKYO, Dec. 29 Kyodo     The sudden year-end announcement by Administrative Vice FinanceMinister Kyosuke Shinozawa that he will resign early in the new yearreflects a series of incidents that have shaken the Ministry ofFinance (MOF) in 1995.     The ministry has come under a storm of criticism over a stringof cases during the year, ranging from the bad loan issue at housingloan companies and the huge loss cover-up at Daiwa Bank's New Yorkbranch to the involvement of ministry bureaucrats in improperactivities.     Unusually, much of this criticism has focused on the nature ofthe ministry itself, which has always enjoyed the position of king ofthe Japanese bureaucratic system.     Finance Minister Masayoshi Takemura on Friday acceptedShinozawa's offer to resign.  The ministry's top-ranking bureaucratwill formally quit on Jan. 5 and be replaced by Tadashi Ogawa,director general of the National Tax Administration Agency.     Shinozawa said, ''I have decided to step down to let some freshair into the ministry with the start of 1996 at a time when themorale of ministry officials has been shaken by a series ofincidents.''     Shinozawa stresses he is not quitting to take responsibility forthe ministry's responses to any individual case.     But observers said he had little choice but to resign todemonstrate his responsibility as the top bureaucrat.     Critics said the MOF's usual method of trying to put a lid onscandals by reshuffling officials would intensify public distrust ofthe ministry.     The MOF's poor public reputation has increased with therevelation of close relations between some of its officials andHarunori Takahashi, the central figure in an illicit loan scandalinvolving two now-defunct credit unions in Tokyo -- Tokyo KyowaCredit Association and Anzen Credit Bank.     The MOF has also angered the public by its decision to usetaxpayers' money to help liquidate housing loan companies saddledwith huge bad loans, without seeking to pursue the peopleresponsible.     The ministry has further come under fire from the United Statesfor its slow response to the Daiwa Bank case.  The MOF reported theincident to U.S. regulators only six weeks after Daiwa Bank notifiedit of its huge bond trading losses at the New York branch.     This sparked criticism that the MOF, perceived to have cozyrelations with industry, tried to collaborate with the bank toconceal the incident.     Katsuto Uchihashi, a commentator on economic issues, said,''Shinozawa's resignation does not mean an end to the series ofscandals that took place this year.''     ''It should be the real start of the ministry's reconstructionby clarifying its responsibility as an organization,'' he said.     Uchihashi pointed out that one of the most pressing issues ishow to change the concentration of power on the ministry.     The MOF currently deals with fiscal issues, while keeping aneye on the banking and securities industries.  Such a concentrationof power has been often blamed for the ministry's often insalubriousrelations with industry.     Uchihashi also said that relations between politicians andbureaucrats should be discussed as part of the ministry's reformefforts.     Politicians have to take the leadership in decision making andstop simply accepting policy measures set by bureaucrats, he said.     There have been growing calls for Takemura to takeresponsibility for the bad loan issue at housing loan companies andother financial scandals.     Takemura, however, said he currently has no intention ofresigning.  ''It is my responsibility to proceed with the liquidationscheme recently mapped out by the ministry for debt-ridden mortgageloan lenders,'' he said.     In a bid to fend off mounting criticism of the ministry,Takemura earlier this week announced a set of measures to strengthenthe ministry's inspection and surveillance system.     He called for a shift in the ministry's banking policy to atransparent one based on market principles, saying the current systembased on the so-called ''administrative guidance'' is internationallyunacceptable because it lacks clear objective criteria.     But many analysts cast doubt on the ministry's ability to giveup behind-the-scenes policy management and adopt a more transparentprofile.     Given the ministry's way of dealing with the scandals simply byaccepting Shinozawa's resignation, it is doubtful whether thebureaucrats are even conscious of the MOF's responsibility, theysaid.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Teramura quits as adviser to banking group+TOKYO, Dec. 29 Kyodo     Nobuyuki Teramura, former chief of the Finance Ministry'sBanking Bureau, quit the post of adviser to the Federation ofBankers Associations of Japan Friday, industry sources said.     Teramura assumed the post of special adviser to the bankingindustry group Sept. 1.     The reason for his retirement is not clear but is apparently dueto the strong public criticism of the Finance Ministry's policy ofusing taxpayers' money for liquidation of housing loan companiessaddled with huge nonperforming loans, the sources said.     Commercial banks which have been asked by the ministry toshoulder heavy financial burdens for the liquidation are alsoharboring resentment against the ministry.     Teramura was involved in the management of the housing lenderswhen he was head of the Finance Ministry's Banking Bureau.     His resignation was revealed through letters sent to memberbanks of the banking federation.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Shinozawa's resignation surprises financial sector+TOKYO, Dec. 29 Kyodo     Financial circles were taken aback Friday by Vice FinanceMinister Kyosuke Shinozawa's offer to resign his post just beforethe Diet begins grilling the Finance Ministry over its plan to usetaxpayers' money to help clean up bad loans at ailing Japanesemortgage lenders.     Shinozawa, the top Finance Ministry bureaucrat, tendered hisresignation to ''refresh the ministry's personnel and boost itsmorale.''  He is widely suspected to have made the decision to takeresponsibility for the mortgage debacle and a series of scandalsinvolving senior ministry officials.     The news came completely out of the blue at the end of the year,of all times, a top executive of a major commercial bank said.     The banking industry had expected the ministry would keep itsbattle array intact for the time being, given the prospect of stormyparliamentary debate on the contentious scheme involving 685 billionyen from state coffers to help offset a 6.4 trillion yen lossstemming from the writing off of irrecoverable loans amassed by themortgage companies.     Under the program, creditors of the housing loan firms willforego irrecoverable loans, with recoverable bad loans and performingassets transferred to a planned debt collection vehicle.  But theministry has yet to work out a way to make up for losses generatedwhen the vehicle fails to recover such loans.     Banks which founded the housing lenders harbor animosity towardthe ministry because the program forces them to forgive all theiroutstanding loans to the companies to compensate for 3.5 trillion yenof the 6.4 trillion yen loss on irrecoverable loans.     ''How could he step down without clarifying bureaucraticresponsibility for the mortgage fiasco?,'' an official at one of thefounder banks fumed, fearing the resignation might now deflectcriticism to the private sector when the Diet convenes early nextyear to discuss the matter.     Meanwhile, some bankers appreciated Shinozawa's decision, sayingit indicates the ministry's intention to grapple with the New Year'stasks in a fresh environment after losing public confidence both athome and abroad in 1995, which Shinozawa describes as ''the kind ofyear we never want to have again.''     On top of the mortgage problem, two senior officials were foundearlier this year to have had cozy relations with and receivedbenefits from people related to the failed Tokyo Kyowa CreditAssociation and Anzen Credit Bank that were implicated in illicitlending.     Hiroaki Taya, former chief of the Tokyo customs office, wasdemoted from the position in March because he had traveled to HongKong on a private jet owned by Harunori Takahashi, former head ofTokyo Kyowa.  Taya is to retire Sunday.     Yoshio Nakajima, former head of the Finance Ministry-affiliatedInstitute of Fiscal and Monetary Policy, resigned from his post inJuly as he had signed a sales deal for imported health drinks with abusiness consultant who was close to Tokyo Kyowa's Takahashi, andpocketed some 60 million yen in cash from another acquaintance.     On the international front, a bond trading loss scandal at DaiwaBank's New York branch pit the ministry against U.S. bankingauthorities.     Toshihide Iguchi, then a bond dealer at the branch, had incurredlosses of 1.1 billion dollars over 11 years through unauthorizedtrading.  The ministry infuriated U.S. authorities when it informedthem about the case six weeks after learning of the losses.     Shinozawa's resignation, however, had little impact on stockpri final trading day ofthe year.  Foreign exchange and other financial markets were alsounaffected.     ''A reshuffle of top Finance Ministry officials will not makeany change in the overall picture,'' a stock dealer said calmly.''It will neither spur nor dampen equity prices.''Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Grain prices could double by 2010, daily says+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Greater consumption in the developing world could causeinternational grain prices to double by 2010 from the 1992 level, anational daily reported Monday, citing a report by the agricultureministry.     In a front-page story, the Yomiuri Shimbun quoted the report onthe world's food supply-demand outlook as forecasting that prices forwheat in 2010 could be 2.12 times the level of those in the base yearof 1992 and those for rice could show a 2.05-fold climb.     The report by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry andFisheries will be made public at a cabinet meeting Tuesday, the papersaid.     Japan relies on imports for 70% of its total grain demand.     Given that household spending is greatly affected byinternational grain prices, the Japanese may not be able to satiatethemselves with rich food in the next century, the daily said.     The ministry's report prepared two scenarios, the paper said.One of the scenarios envisages growth in grain production slackeningto half the present level in the next decade, while the other allowsfor grain yield per hectare remaining unchanged.     Under the first scenario, international grain prices would risesteadily, reflecting net growth in consumption in the developingworld due to a rise in population and stronger demand for feed grains.     This would lift prices for wheat and rice by more than twotimes, while maize prices would increase by 1.95 times and soybeanprices by 1.81 times, the daily said.     Under the second scenario, growth rates for international grainprices would be limited to 10 to 18% over the period.     In either case, however, grain imports by developing countrieswill expand, mirroring greater consumption due to rises in populationand incomes, the paper said.     According to the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO),annual growth in the world's per-hectare grain harvest slowed down to2.1% in the 1980s from 3.1% in the 1960s.     Annual growth in grain output slackened to 1.8% from 3.6%, theFAO says.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Gov't calls for keeping food self-sufficiency rate+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     The government Tuesday unveiled a policy of keepingself-sufficiency rates for food at current levels until fiscal 2005.     The cabinet endorsed the policy, which is intended to stem anyfurther decline in the food self-sufficiency rates, in a long-termprospect on demand and production of agricultural products.     The overall rate should be maintained at 44-46% towardfiscal 2005 on a caloric basis compared with 46% for fiscal1992, according to the policy.     The policy calls for the farm sector to expand productivity inthe coming decade by stepping up infrastructure improvement programsand technological development.     It also proposed diversification of farm products and cost-cutting efforts by means of large-scale farming.     At Tuesday's press conference, Agriculture, Forestry andFisheries Minister Hosei Norota said the policy will help stimulateincentives for farmers in the future.     The new prospect said Japan's food self-sufficiency rate woulddecline to 41-42% if the current situation is left unattended.     The policy said the self-sufficiency rate for grain should bemaintained at the current level of 28-29%.     Rice self-sufficiency target rates in fiscal 2005 are set for96-97%, almost unchanged from the present rate, while targets arefixed at 12-15% for wheat and 5% for soybean, both up slightly fromcurrent levels.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996'95 commodity futures trading volume hits record high++TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     The combined volume of futures trading on the Tokyo CommodityExchange for Industry in 1995 increased 15% over the previous yearto hit a record high of about 35.12 million contracts, the exchangesaid Thursday.     Rubber futures trading volume surged 58% to 14.28 millioncontracts while platinum futures trading climbed 31% to 5.97 million.     The heavy trading was attributable to wild price fluctuationscaused by unstable foreign exchange rates and bad weather inrubber-producing areas in Southeast Asia, exchange officials said.     Another major factor was a rapid influx of operating funds intothe commodities market due to unprecedented low interest rates, theysaid.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996G-7 to keep dollar strong in '96, dealers say+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The pledge by the Group of Seven (G-7) industrialized countriesto promote an ''orderly reversal'' of the dollar's excessiveweakness will probably keep the U.S. currency firm against the yenin 1996, dealers and economists said.     In addition, the dollar will be supported by the downward trendin Japan's current account surplus as well as by increasinginvestments in foreign currency-denominated bonds by Japaneseinvestors, they said.     They said they expect the U.S. currency to move in a range of95 yen to 115 yen during next year, compared with 79.75-104.70 yen in1995, as of Dec. 25.     ''Cooperation among G-7 nations to keep the dollar from plungingwill continue next year, preventing the dollar from sliding againstthe yen,'' said Hirokazu Kawai, chief economist in the investment,research and strategy division of Nikko Securities Co.     His expectation stems from a joint statement issued after theG-7 meeting Oct. 7, Kawai said.     The statement said the G-7 finance ministers and central bankgovernors ''welcomed the orderly reversal in the movements of majorcurrencies that began following their April meeting.''     The October G-7 meeting took place against the background of thedollar's rebound to just above 100 yen, a rise of about 20%from April when the G-7 nations confirmed their support of the U.S.currency.     Therefore, there is little prospect of the dollar falling muchbelow the 95 yen line, given the possibility of coordinateddollar-buying interventions by Japan, the United States and Germany,said Kawai.     ''The downward trend of Japan's current account surplus isestablished and is preventing the U.S. currency from losing muchground against the yen,'' said Akira Narumi, assistant generalmanager of the foreign exchange division of Sakura Bank.     According to the Ministry of Finance, the surplus in Octoberplunged 51.8% to 4.31 billion dollars, posting the secondstraight month of falls from year-earlier levels.     The fall is the sharpest since a 59.0% plunge registeredin November 1990.     Moreover, the surplus during the April-September perioddecreased 7.4% from a year before to 58.30 billion dollars,the fourth consecutive half-year-term decline, the ministry said.     As a result, the dollar might rise to the 115 yen level sometimein 1996, exceeding the highest level for 1995 of 104.70 yen, whichwas posted Sept. 20, Narumi of Sakura Bank said.     Japan's investors, especially individuals, are expected tocontinue going after higher-yielding foreign bonds, putting sellingpressure on the yen, said Takemi Kaneko, general manager at theforeign exchange section of Marubeni Corp., a major trading house.     The Finance Ministry's yen-curbing package adopted Aug. 2,which eased regulations to promote overseas investment and loans byJapanese investors, will contribute to the expansion of Japan'sforeign investment, Nikko Securities' Kawai said.     The dollar's rise against the yen, however, is expected to belimited, said Toshikimi Kaneki, an economist in the researchdepartment of Sumitomo Trust and Banking Co.     ''Fear that the gap between Japanese and U.S. market interestrates might be reduced in the face of a slowdown in the U.S. economywill weigh down the dollar's topside,'' Kaneki said.     Furthermore, the dollar will probably be pressured by U.S.efforts to balance the budget, which could lead to a decrease in thenumber of Treasury bonds issued and thus to a possible reduction ofthe rate gap between the two countries, he said.     Lingering doubts about the planned creation of a common currencyfor European Union member countries might continue keeping the dollarfrom rising much against the yen or the German mark, Kawai said.     That is because the persistent doubts may draw investors to themark, Europe's safe-haven currency, causing the yen to strengthenagainst the dollar at the same time, he said.     In 1995 in Tokyo, the dollar briefly plunged below the 80 yenline April 19 to 79.75 yen, the lowest level since the modernexchange rate system was established in the late 1940s.     Later, however, a series of concerted dollar-buyinginterventions by central banks, in addition to the Japanesegovernment's pump-priming economic package in September, pushed upthe U.S. currency, sending it to a high for 1995 of 104.70 yen Sept.20.     The Bank of Japan's accommodative credit policies, including thecut in the official discount rate Sept. 8 to a record low of 0.5%per annum, also contributed to the dollar's recovery to abovethe 100 yen line.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Fisherman sentenced to 6.5-year jail term over gun trade+SHIZUOKA, Japan, Dec. 25 Kyodo     A Japanese fisherman was sentenced to six and a half years injail at the Shizuoka District Court on Monday for mastermindinglarge-scale gun smuggling from South Africa for supply to crimesyndicates.     Prosecutors had sought an eight-year prison term.     Presiding Judge Katsutoshi Suzuki said in his ruling thatHideaki Soga, 27, of Kagoshima, who worked aboard a tuna trawler,''had sold almost all the guns, smuggled into Japan on anunprecedented scale, to members of organized crime, who used theweapons in crimes.''     According to the ruling, Soga conspired with Hiroshi Irabu toload a total of 191 pistols during a port call at Cape Town, SouthAfrica, and to land the weapons in Shimizu, Shizuoka Prefecture,southwest of Tokyo, on Aug. 23, 1991.     Irabu's trial in connection with the gun smuggling is stillpending at the court.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Auctioned imported rice prices sag to 262 yen per kg+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     The wholesale price for two U.S.-grown rice brands dipped to anaverage 262 yen per kilogram in this year's second auctions forimported rice, organized by the Food Agency on Tuesday.     The two brands are Akitakomachi and Koshihikari.  The twohigh-grade brands were originally developed in Japan, but the seedwas exported to the United States to be grown by U.S. farmers forsale back in Japan.     The price of 262 yen was about two-thirds the average price thesame brands fetched at the first auction in July.     Even after their prices are marked up by various middlemen anddistributors, these U.S. brands are expected to be priced at aboutthe same level as middle-grade domestically grown rice brands -- andcertainly lower than top-quality domestic brands -- when they areoffered on shelves at Japanese retail outlets, agency officials said.     The lower prices materialized because the initial margin --which a wholesaler must pay to the agency to win a contract to buythe rice -- plunged to 150 yen per kg from 292 yen paid to the agencyin the first auction.     The auctions are held under a special price-setting mechanismdevised by the agency after Japan agreed in 1993 to scrap its ban onrice imports as a part of compromise arrangements under the UruguayRound of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).  At thetime Japan vowed to allow foreign rice a ''minimum access'' of 4% ofthe domestic market of 10 million tons a year, starting in 1995.     The new system allows the Food Agency to buy all the riceimported by trading houses and to resell it to wholesalers,effectively preventing distributors from bypassing the agency.     Under the simultaneous buy and sell (SBS) system, the agencyrequires competing pairs of importers and wholesalers to submit twobids simultaneously, one for the price at which the importer plans tosell rice to the agency and the second that at which the wholesaleroffers to buy the same rice cargo from the agency.     The auction mechanism mandates that the agency award contractsto pairs offering the best profits to the agency through maximizationof the gap between the two bids.     The agency-devised system allows an importer-wholesaler pair tooffer bids differing by up to 292 yen per kg of rice.     Now that the final retail prices of the two brands are expectedto drop to levels matching those of middle-grade rice brands as aresult of the latest auction, they are likely to be competitive withvarious Japanese brands, industry sources said.     Japanese wholesalers and retailers who purchased imported rice,including the two U.S brands, from the agency at the first auction,suffered sluggish sales because the official markup system forcedtheir retail prices up, the sources said.     In view of the development, the agency increased the volume ofimported rice offered for bids at the second auction from 2,800 tonsin the first auction to 10,000 tons.     Bidders applied to purchase a total of 23,194 tons of importedrice.  The government allowed the auctioning of a total of 7,894 tonsof imported rices in accordance with its preset mandatory standardson auction prices.     As a result, the ratio of the aggregate volume of rice whichbidders applied to buy on the one hand to the volume of actuallyauctioned rice on the other came to 2.3 -- a sharp drop from theprevious auction's 9.6, agency officials said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FY '95 crude steel output to fall below 100 mil. tons+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Japan's crude steel output in fiscal 1995 is projected to fallbelow 100 million tons for the first time in two years, the Ministryof International Trade and Industry said Monday.     In fiscal 1995, crude steel production is likely to reach 99.24million tons, down 2.1% from the previous year, because outputin the January-March quarter is expected to fall 9.2% to 23.2million tons.  Fiscal 1995 ends March 31, 1996.     According to the ministry, crude steel production is likely tohit 101.58 million tons in the 1995 calender year.     While the number of workdays will decline in the January-Marchquarter, the ministry said steelmakers will continue to be urged toadjust inventories, which piled up in the April-September period forreconstruction of Kobe and the vicinity hard hit by the Jan. 17earthquake.     In the January-March quarter, the ministry projects domesticconsumption of steel materials will drop 1.7% to 16.16 milliontons.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Steel wholesaler Hiuka Sangyo applies for bankruptcy+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     A steel materials wholesaler under the aegis of world leadingsteelmaker Nippon Steel Corp. virtually went bankrupt Thursday, withdebts estimated at 24 billion yen, a credit research agency said.     Teikoku Databank said Hiuka Sangyo Co., based in Tokyo, appliedto the Tokyo District Court for voluntary bankruptcy.     The agency said Hiuka Sangyo was established in May 1950 as asteel materials wholesaler designated by two steelmakers -- NipponSteel and Fuji Steel.  Nippon Steel's corporate name was later changedto Yawata Steel which merged with Fuji Steel into Nippon Steel Corp.     The company's U.S. subsidiary, Hiuka America Corp., hassuspended operations since three of its executives were arrestedrecently on suspicion of fraud for allegedly forging documents toobtain a 4.5 billion yen loan, the agency said.     Beside Nippon Steel, the company also had business ties withother major steelmakers and general trading houses, it said.     The company's sales amounted to 20.85 billion yen in the peakyear, which ended in January 1991, the agency said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Nov. supermarket sales fall 0.2% from year earlier+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Sales at supermarkets across Japan in November edged down 0.2%from a year earlier to 1.3 trillion yen, declining for the secondstraight month, an industry group said Monday.     The Japan Chain Stores Association said that although food saleswere slow, sales of most other items were good.     ''It still is too early to say that consumer spending has turnedupward,'' an association official said.     Food sales fell 2.4% from a year earlier to 579.07 billion yen.     Sales of clothing gained 0.5% to 308.10 billion yen whilehousehold goods sales increased 1.4% to 290.88 billion yen.     Sales of men's clothes rose 1.1% to 69.695 billion yen butsales of women's clothes shrank 1.1% to 97.00 billion yen.     The association said sales of home electrical appliances gained4.0% to 48.45 billion yen while drugs and cosmetics sales climbed6.2% to 36.20 billion yen.     Supermarket store sales turned sluggish for the last two monthsafter making an upturn in September.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Average Tokyo CPI in '95 down for first time++TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     The average consumer price index (CPI) in the Tokyometropolitan area in 1995 dropped 0.3% from the previous year forthe first time since such an index was introduced in 1970 as a meansto monitor price movements, the Management and Coordination Agencysaid Tuesday.     The agency said this year's overall average CPI for Tokyo's 23ward area stood at 107.0 against a base of 100 for 1990, comparedwith 107.3 registered in 1994.     In the preceding three years, the overall CPI was up 1.9% in1992, up 1.2% in 1993 and up 0.7% in 1994, it said.     Consumer prices in Tokyo in December remained unchanged fromthe previous month but were down 0.5% from a year earlier, with thepreliminary CPI standing at 106.7, the agency said.     ''Consumer prices were extremely stable,'' said an agencyofficial.     The year-on-year decrease came for the third straight month,following a decline of 0.9% in November and 0.9% in October.     The agency official said the smaller decline in December wascaused by smaller falls in the prices of fresh vegetables, whichfell 14.8% in December from a year earlier compared with November's26.7% drop.     Excluding volatile prices for perishable foods, the prices fell0.1% from the previous month and remained unchanged from a yearbefore.     In December, prices for fresh fruit dropped 11.5% from a yearearlier and those for durable consumer goods such as word processorsand videocassette recorders shrank 11.8%.     On the other hand, prices rose 7.1% in transportation and 2.6%in school tuitions, according to the agency.     The agency said overall nationwide consumer prices slipped 0.7%in November from a year earlier and fell 0.4% from the precedingmonth, with the overall index standing at 106.8 against the base of100 in 1990.     The year-on-year decline was the largest since February 1987,the agency said.     The agency attributed the steep decline mainly to bigger fallsin fresh fruit prices.     Excluding such perishables, however, the index came to 107.7,up 0.1% from a year earlier and unchanged from the previous month,the official said.     He said he expects the average nationwide CPI for 1995 to showa decline of about 0.1%, also the first decline since the agencybegan announcing such an index in 1970, because Tokyo-area pricesare considered an early indicator of nationwide price trends.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Nov. unemployment rate hits record at 3.4%++TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Japan's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate hit a record highsince 1953 of 3.4% in November, with the recent trend of higherjobless rates among young workers continuing, the Management andCoordination Agency said Tuesday.     The previous official record high rate was 3.2%, registeredfirst in April and remaining until October, except for May's 3.1%,as a result of the prolonged slump in the national economy.     In a separate report released on the same day, the LaborMinistry said the seasonally adjusted ratio of job offers to jobseekers, an indicator of demand for labor, rose fractionally inNovember to 0.63 from the preceding month's 0.61.     The reporting month's level compared with September's 0.60, thelowest level since 1986 when the Japanese economy was hit hard by thesudden appreciation of the yen against the U.S. dollar.     However, the November rate means there were still only 63 joboffers for every 100 job seekers.     The agency and the ministry said Japan's employment situationremained severe in November and is unlikely to show notableimprovement immediately.     In the unemployment report, the agency said there were a totalof 2.18 million unemployed people in November, up by 330,000 or17.8% from a year earlier.     The unemployment rate for men stood at a record high of 3.4%,up 0.2 percentage point from the previous month, while that forwomen was 3.3%, unchanged.     An agency official said the unemployment rate climbed to a newhigh probably because there were more people resuming job-hunting,believing that the economy might pick up.     Corporations, however, especially large ones, were not offeringmany jobs, the official said, adding this left more people in thesituation of seeking jobs unsuccessfully at the time of the survey.     The unemployment rate in the month was also boosted by the factthat there were more people, particularly among young male workers,who wanted to change jobs, the official added.     The agency survey showed that the unemployment rate for maleworkers in the 15-24 age bracket stood at 6.3%, up 1.1 point from ayear earlier.  The rate in the 25-34 age bracket was 3.5%, up 1.0point, while that for the 35-44 age bracket was 2.2%, up 0.5 point.     On the job seeker-offer ratio, the ministry said the number ofjob offers during the month nudged up 0.5% from the previous monthfor the second consecutive monthly rise, following a 2.6% increasein October.     The number of job seekers dropped by 1.6% from the previousmonth, a turnaround from a 0.8% increase in October.     By industry, job offers increased 7.4% from a year earlier inthe service business sector, 4.4% in the construction industry, and4.1% in the wholesale, retail and food industries.     Such offers dropped 4.8% in the manufacturing sector, whilethey rose 3.2% in the transportation and telecommunication sector,the ministry said.     Behind the surge to a record high 3.4% in the jobless rate forNovember lies a sharp increase in unemployment among youngerworkers, private-sector analysts said.     Many graduates face difficulties in finding jobs, affected bycorporate restructuring efforts which have led to a fall in thehiring of new graduates, they said.     They also noted a greater number of workers in their 20s are nowout of work because they find it hard to find new hoped-for jobs.     Masatoshi Moriyama, a researcher at the Sanwa Research Instituteaffiliated with Sanwa Bank, observed, ''There's a mismatch betweenbusinesses which are seeking those who are useful immediately andyoung workers who have left jobs to hunt for new jobs despite theirinadequate vocational ability.''     Given persistent restructuring efforts among businesses, thenation's unemployment rate will remain on a high plateau in themonths ahead, analysts say.     The ratio of workers in their 20s who left jobs in the firsthalf of this year increased from a year earlier, according to LaborMinistry figures.     That ratio is taken by some analysts as a bright indication ofeconomic recovery.  They say the burgeoning economic comeback isprompting young workers to enter the job-changing market.     But Hiromichi Kinouchi, general manager for management andplanning at the Students' Assistance Association, said the rise inunemployment among young workers stemmed largely from a drop inhirings of new graduates and a larger number of workers who left jobsunder stronger restructuring pressure.     ''Some of them easily left jobs as they are taken care of bytheir parents,'' Kinouchi said.     The higher jobless rate is also accounted for by the nation'schanging industrial structure, analysts said.     Manufacturing-sector employment is following a downward pace dueto an increasing shift of production from domestic bases to overseaswhile employment in the service sector is on the upswing.     The service industries such as retailers, wholesalers andrestaurants are dominated by low-wage part-timers and moonlighters.     ''While employment in the service industries is increasing,their workers tend to leave jobs because of lower wages.  This inturn results in a higher jobless rate,'' said Moriyama of the SanwaResearch Institute.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EPA chief expects jobless rate to stay at 3% level+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Japan's top economic planner said Tuesday the nation'sunemployment rate will likely stay at the 3% level for some time asthe economy struggles to pick up.     Isamu Miyazaki, director general of the Economic PlanningAgency, said during a press conference that deterioration in thejobless rate is ''often the case at the initial stage of economicrecovery.''     Japan's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate hit a record highof 3.4% in November, the Management and Coordination Agency saidearlier the day.     Meanwhile, Miyazaki sounded optimistic about economic indicatorsfor October, due out later in the day.     ''There are coming favorable figures, showing brightness in theeconomy,'' Miyazaki said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Labor minister calls jobless rate increase temporary+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Labor Minister Shinji Aoki said Tuesday the rise to a recordhigh 3.4% in the nation's jobless rate for November is a temporaryphenomenon in the current process of economic recovery.     ''I have little choice but to take a serious view of theunemployment figure,'' Aoki said at a press conference after aregular cabinet meeting.     ''But the jobless rate tends to rise temporarily in the courseof an economic pickup because such recovery encourages some youngworkers to seek new jobs,'' he said.     On the job seeker to offer ratio, Aoki said the rise of 0.5%in the ratio for the month under review indicates that theeconomy is picking up to some extent, although he said the recoveryis not strong enough.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Rengo urges gov't to call meeting on employment+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Japan's biggest labor union urged the government Tuesday tohold a meeting of business and labor union leaders as soon aspossible to discuss job-security measures.     The eight million-member Japanese Trade Union Confederation(Rengo) made the call in a statement issued after the Management andCoordination Agency announced that the nation's jobless rate hit arecord high 3.4% in November.     The organization said the government should make clear at themeeting a policy of putting top priority on securing jobs.     In order to avoid an unemployment crisis in Japan, it isindispensable for the government, corporate management and laborunions to introduce bold steps to secure employment, it said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Organized workers hit postwar low of 23.8% in '95+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     The ratio of labor union members to employees slid for the 10thstraight year in 1995 to a postwar low of 23.8% as the number oforganized workers fell for the first time in six years, the LaborMinistry said Tuesday.     A ministry official attributed the decline chiefly to a shift inthe nation's industrial structure toward service-oriented industriesand a subsequent decline in workers in the manufacturing sector, whoare better organized than those in the services sector.     The latest rato of organized labor, tallied on statistics madeavailable as of June 30, was 0.3 percentage point lower than lastyear's, the ministry said.     The number of union members fell by about 85,000 to an estimated12.61 million, the first decline in six years, with the number ofunions themselves down 835 to 70,839, it said.     By industry, the number of union members in the manufacturingsector was the biggest, totaling 3.92 million and accounting forabout one-third of the total union members, the ministry said.     Union members in the services sector came in second with 1.93million, followed by those in the transport-telecommunications sectorwith 1.62 million, it added.     Among major labor organizations, the nation's largest, theJapanese Trade Union Confederation (Rengo), saw its membership slideby 98,000 to 7.72 million, it said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Winter bonuses up 1.9%, banks, insurers boycott poll+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Winter bonuses paid by leading private- sector companies thisyear rose 1.9% over last year to a weighted average of 798,848 yen,the Labor Ministry said Tuesday.     The ministry said it was the second straight year of rises inwinter bonuses, showing improvement in corporate business performancein the wake of restructuring and the downturn of the yen's value.     The growth rate for last year stood at 0.1%.     The ministry said the report was based on a poll taken on majorcorporations, mostly those listed on stock exchanges, with 291companies responding.  It has been conducting the survey since 1965.     Four commercial banks and two insurance companies covered in thepoll continued to boycott the survey, disregarding a request forcooperation, the ministry said.     By industry, the ministry said bonuses paid by oil productdistributors and dealers showed the highest growth rate of 8.8% to762,867 yen, reflecting brisk exports of petrochemical products toAsian countries.     In contrast, the construction industry posted a 16.9% fall to1,253,606 yen due to the protracted real estate market slump, theministry said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Nov. overtime work hours post 1st gain in 3 months+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Overtime hours worked in November at Japanese manufacturerswith 30 staff or more picked up from October's level for the firstmonthly gain in three months, the Labor Ministry said Thursday.     Manufacturing workers put in an average 14.0 hours of overtimelast month, up 2.9% from the previous month after seasonaladjustments, the ministry said in a monthly report on laborstatistics.     Overtime hours had shrank 0.8% in September and 0.5% in October.     The figure also represents a 4.5% increase from the same montha year earlier, compared with a 3.0% rise in October.     Overtime work hours are widely counted as an indicator ofeconomic trends.  The growth for the reporting month came in linewith Wednesday's announcement of a 1.3% month-on-month pickup inindustrial output for November.     Meanwhile, jobs at manufacturers with a workforce of 30 or moretotaled 7.78 million, down 2.3% from a year earlier and the largestfall since October 1994, when the tally slid by the same margin, theministry said.     Overall industrial employment contracted 0.8% year on year to23.34 million, the ministry said.     Service-sector jobs turned up 1.5% to 6.56 million, whilewholesalers, retailers and restaurateurs saw the number of workerson their payrolls dip 1.0% to 3.55 million.     Of the 7.78 million manufacturing jobs, 7.84% were part-timepositions, down 0.36 percentage point from November 1994. Thepart-time ratio for industries overall stood at 11.81%, up 0.23point.     Monthly wages averaged 329,165 yen in the manufacturing sector,down 1.0% year on year, and came to 296,095 yen overall, up 0.6%,the ministry said.     Inflation-adjusted pay gained 1.7% from a year earlier in themanufacturing industry and rose 1.6% overall, the ministry said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Labor, management at odds over small business workweek+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Labor and management remain at odds in a government paneldiscussing whether to extend a moratorium designed to ease smallerbusinesses into a 40-hour workweek set by the Labor Standards Law,Labor Ministry sources said Thursday.     The legal workweek was shortened to 40 hours in fiscal 1994.But the law has allowed smaller businesses, which find it hard to cutworking hours due to labor shortages, to apply a 44-hour workweek oncondition that they shift to a 40-hour week in fiscal 1997.     In a separate interim measure, minor enterprises in the commercesector and three other sectors are entitled to continue with a46-hour workweek beyond fiscal 1997.     While the Labor Ministry wants the panel -- the Central LaborStandards Council -- to file a report by February, neither employersnor employees are in the mood to climb down.  The report is notlikely to mention big reforms involving labor law revisions, thesources said.     Meanwhile, the Liberal Democratic Party, the largest of thethree ruling parties, is poised to set up a task force early nextyear to study an extension of the moratorium at a request of lobbygroups representing merchants and industrialists.     The Japanese Trade Union Confederation (Rengo), meanwhile,adopted a resolution calling for full implementation of a 40-hourworkweek when they convened earlier this month to boost their moralefor ''spring offensive'' wage negotiations.     The ministry, which will effectively compile the panel report,hopes to achieve smaller businesses' transition to a 40-hour workweekas planned.  ''Our stance is to make an effort to realize what hasbeen decided under the law,'' said Vice Labor Minister Kunihiko Saito.     Given the yawning gap between labor and management, however, theministry suspects it will be difficult to guide arguments towardpresenting a bill to revise the labor law during the next regularDiet session early next year, the sources said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Employment of foreigners with skills on rise+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     The Justice Ministry's Immigration Bureau approved the entryinto Japan of 6,564 foreigners in 1994 who planned to work in thecountry using their skills, up 14 from the previous year, officialssaid Thursday.     The foreigners received permission to work in Japan as languageteachers, interpreters or other technical jobs, the officials said.     The increase shows that foreigners with certain skills are notaffected by the country's prolonged economic slump, which isdeteriorating the domestic employment condition, they said.     Of the total, the largest single group was 2,063 from the UnitedStates, followed by 890 from Britain, 710 from Canada and 704 fromChina.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Construction works head cases of local gov't corruption+TOKYO, Dec. 29 Kyodo     Some 30% of corruption cases discovered during fiscal 1994among local government officials were related to public constructionworks, a Home Affairs Ministry survey released Friday said.     A total of 106 cases were discovered in the fiscal year fromApril 1 1994 to March 31, 1995, representing a decrease of three fromthe previous year, the ministry said.  Of these, 33 involvedconstruction projects.     A total of 124 local government heads and officials wereimplicated in the cases, down 11 from a year earlier, but the numberof local governments involved in the cases increased by two to 99.     Of the 106, embezzlement accounted for 52 cases and graft 41.     The cases included one in which a vice governor of AichiPrefecture was arrested in May last year for receiving 20 million yenfrom a contractor in exchange for favorable treatment over a publicworks project.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Homeless in Japan face hard times due to economy, cold+TOKYO, Dec. 29 Kyodo     Tokyo's homeless face a particularly grim few months now thatthe metropolis is in the grip of winter.     In an underground passageway used by thousands of people dailynear the western exit to Tokyo's busy Shinjuku Station stands a smallmakeshift altar.     It was placed beside a cardboard box whose former occupant, JiroTakahashi, 53, a homeless man and sometime poet, died a week ago fromhepatic cirrhosis.     One of Takahashi's poems ironically became his own epitaph.     ''Autumn's blossom, the Chinese bellflower has bloomed.     ''To bloom and fall in underground passageways is a commonplacein the world of people.''     These days, Takahashi's colleagues pause to pay their respectsas they pass the altar.     Sachiyo Ikeda and her group of some 30 volunteers who callthemselves the ''Shinjuku Egg Patrol'' regularly distribute boiledeggs and other food to the occupants of the area's cardboard boxes.     ''There are no people here who are homeless solely because theylike it,'' Ikeda said.  ''They all say they are here because theyhave to stick with their friends, or because they can learn from themore experienced ones.''     The passageway is the future site of a moving walkway themetropolitan government plans to install, but which homeless peopleand welfare groups say is merely a way to get rid of them.     The metropolitan government says it wants to move the 200 or sohomeless people now using the passageway to facilities it is buildingon a reclaimed island on the edge of Tokyo Bay.     Faced with continued complaints from pedestrians and owners ofshops near the passageway about the foul smell in the area, themetropolitan government says the moving walkway must be installed andthat it is to assist elderly people.     Toshiya Sasaki, a pastor with the United Church of Christ inJapan and a member of a newly formed citizens' group working for thehomeless, said the numbers began to increase in Japan from 1990.     That was the year when the so-called ''bubble economy'' began tofalter and opportunities for work in the construction industrydecreased.  Hardest hit were those 50 years and more.     In August, the Tokyo metropolitan government claimed there weresome 3,300 homeless people in the 23 central wards in the metropolis.     Local administrations and citizens' organizations familiar withthe problems of the homeless say there are an estimated 700 inShinjuku, and 200 in the Sanya area, a large concentration of cheapflophouses for low-wage earners and unemployed people.     Elsewhere, the homeless are a visible presence in and aroundmany of the larger stations like Shibuya and Ueno, where they can atleast stay warm and shelter from the elements during the day.     In Osaka, the largest city in western Japan, the Airin quarterin Nishinari Ward is currently home to about 150 homeless peopleamong the estimated 20,000 day workers there.     There were twice as many homeless there this time a year ago.     Police say the decline is attributable to increased employmentopportunities due to the recovery effort after the Jan. 17 GreatHanshin Earthquake which devastated nearby Kobe and surrounding areas.     But workers at a welfare center in the area say older homelessand the sick still face the prospect of unemployment.     Kawasaki which adjoins Tokyo's southern boundary in Julyinaugurated a system of coupons which the homeless can exchange for adaily meal.  The city has as many as 600 homeless.     But residents near centers where the meals are supplied complainthat the homeless have begun settling in their neighborhoods.     Sasaki said society's contradictions are encapsulated in theproblem of the homeless.     ''They are not doing it because they are lazy,'' he said.  ''Fora start, the state and local bodies should adopt policies which givethem work.''Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Corporate entertainment spending down 9%+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     In a sobering reminder of the nation's protracted economicslump, Japanese companies spent less on entertainment expenses inthe year through January 1995 than the previous year for the secondstraight year, official figures showed Tuesday.     Japanese businesses spent an estimated 5,408.7 billion yen forentertaining customers and business partners in the reporting year,down 9.0% from a year earlier, the National Tax AdministrationAgency reported.     The agency surveyed tax reports by 61,365 companies nationwidewhich closed their books between February 1994 and January 1995,selected according to capital and business sectors.     The total number of companies edged up 1.1% to 2.37 million,but their total revenues fell 5.6% to 1,417.4 trillion yen.     Corporate entertainment expenses dropped in the year throughJanuary 1994 for the first time since 1961 to 5.95 trillion yen,after peaking at a record 6.2 trillion yen the previous year.  Theagency started compiling such figures in 1961.     In the latest year for which the statistics are available,companies spent an average of 3.82 yen on entertainment for every1,000 yen in operating profits, down 3.5% from the previous year.     Companies capitalized at less than 10 million yen shelled out7.63 yen, while those with capital of 1 billion yen or higher spent2.28 yen.     The construction industry topped the list of the most lavishspenders on entertainment, followed by printing and publishingenterprises and real estate firms.     Expenditures on donations also dropped, for the thirdconsecutive year, by 8.9% to 477 billion yen.     The most generous spenders were real estate companies, at 70.6billion yen, followed by chemical producers and construction firms.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Firms pay 36,000 yen a month for transfers+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Japanese companies pay on average 36,420 yen a month as aspecial allowance to section chiefs who are transferred to localbranches and choose not to take their families with them, a privateresearch institute said Thursday.     On top of this allowance, 21% of companies pay such workers asum for transportation enabling them to have family reunions twice amonth, and about half pay for such tickets once a month, theIndustrial Labor Research Institute said.     Four percent of the 215 surveyed companies pay transportationfees for family reunions only six times a year, according to thesurvey.     Asked why they could not take their family members to the newlocations, 63% of the workers said they did not want their childrento change schools.     An institute researcher cited the difficulties faced by seniorhigh school students who accompany their parents to local cities offinding schools with curricula corresponding to those of theirprevious schools and that readily accept students who have not satJapan's usual yearly entrance examination.     Fifty-eight percent of the surveyed workers said their elderlyparents who live with them refused to move to new communities.     Forty percent replied they did so through reluctance to selltheir homes and buy new ones in local cities, the institute said.     The companies said on average for transferred workers choosingnot to take their families with them, they give three days offbefore they start at the new office.  However, 27% said they do notgive such time off.     The average special allowance paid to senior managing directorswho are transferred to local offices was 40,275 yen, while that formanagers came to 39,143 yen, the institute said.     Such allowances for rank-and-file employees came to 32,067 yenon average, it said.     Seventy-six percent of the companies said they continue to paythese special allowances until the assignments come to an end.Usually such assignments are for a period between two and five years,the researcher said.     The survey was conducted in September and October and included66 large companies whose workforces exceed 1,000.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Yamazaki Baking expected to see lower pretax profit+TOKYO, Dec. 29 Kyodo     Yamazaki Baking Co. is expected to post an 8% fall inunconsolidated pretax profit to 22 billion yen in the 1995 businessyear ending Dec. 31 from the previous year for the second straightyear of decline, a business daily reported Friday.     The top Japanese baking company's expected profit fall isattributable to lower sales of bread and other products due tointensified competition and increased distribution costs, the NihonKeizai Shimbun said.     Overall sales for 1995, including rice products, are estimatedat 563 billion yen, up 3%, the daily said.     For the 1996 business year, the company is likely to post apretax profit of 24 billion yen, up 10% from this year, due to astreamlined distribution system, it said.     Sales are also expected to rise 3% to 578 billion yen, thedaily said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Microbrewers bubbling but local gov'ts still thirsting+TOKYO, Dec. 29 Kyodo     Private microbreweries have been making heady progress in themarket for local beers but local public bodies are having troubletapping into schemes to launch small-scale breweries to revitalizetheir economies.     In early December, the first nationwide festival of locallybrewed beer was held at the Tokyo International Fairgrounds.     More than 15,000 beer fans rushed to the site during thethree-day festival to sample some 11 different beers presented bylocal microbreweries in places ranging from Hokkaido to Okinawaprefectures.     The government's revision of the Liquor Tax Law last April easedthe license requirements for commercially brewing beer.     The revision included lowering the minimum beer productionvolume from 2,000 kiloliters a year to 60 kl, a measure which hasprompted a growing number of entrepreneurs, beer enthusiast groupsand even local governments to apply for permission to begin producinglocal beers on their own.     After issuing the first licenses to a Japanese sake maker inNiigata Prefecture and a business group in Hokkaido in December lastyear, the National Tax Administration Agency has granted 18 suchlicenses to local breweries and provisional licenses to another sixwithin the first year.     ''Private microbrewers which have started operations so far aredoing well in the business,'' said Tomoyasu Ishikawa, an organizer ofthe first Tokyo local beer festival.     ''The variety of tastes in such beer is one of the reasons forits popularity.  Major beer brewers sell many brands that have quitesimilar taste but with different labels,'' said Ishikawa, also anofficial of Japan Travel Bureau's special team designated to supportprivate microbreweries.     ''I think local beers will take root in the country in thefuture, just like 'jizake' (locally brewed Japanese sake),'' Ishikawasaid.     ''The boom in local beers is expected to continue for a while,and the number of private microbrewers will grow to about 50 by theend of next year and to about 100 within the next three years,'' saidMotoki Takahashi, an official at the microbrewery public relationssection of Sapporo Breweries Ltd.     The nation's four giant breweries are all helping localmicrobreweries launch their new businesses.     Sapporo Breweries, Japan's third ranking brewer, has set up thesection to provide local makers with know-how on beer brewing andbeer hall management.     ''We expect the local beers to stimulate the whole domestic beermarket, which has an annual production of 7 million kl and hasrecently seen a slowdown in growth,'' he said.     Kojiro Hagi at the Promotion Conference of Brewery, Communityand Package Proposal, a business group consisting of eight companiesincluding Itochu Corp., a giant trading house, established to offerassistance to local public bodies, is taking a brighter view of thefuture of microbreweries.     ''In the United States, where local beers are quite popular,such beer occupies about a 1% share of the overall beer market.Supposing local beers grab the same share in Japan, and taking intoaccount the break-even point for microbrewers, there could be some200 to 300 (such breweries) within five years,'' Hagi said.     In contrast with the solid start by private microbrewers, localpublic bodies are facing difficulties getting into the business.     ''Though many local governments have a keen interest in beerbrewing, not even one has applied for a license,'' Hagi said.     One of the major obstacles public entities face is thedifficulty of securing a consensus within an assembly to break intothe business, Hagi explained.     ''A business plan often develops into a political issue in alocal assembly and gets scrapped in the end,'' said Hagi, citing acase in the town of Kubokawa, Kochi Prefecture, where the localassembly voted down a 376 million yen brewery construction planproposed by the town last March.     The city of Sanda, in Hyogo Prefecture, is another typicalexample.     As Sanda is the birthplace of Komin Kawamoto, a Japanese scholarof Dutch studies who introduced beer during the Edo period in the19th century, city authorities had planned to set up a semiprivatebrewery and produce an original beer to attract more tourists.     The plan, however, is still pending and the prospects forlaunching the business have lost a lot of fizz.     ''Concern over profitability prevented the local community fromcoming to a consensus.  It is difficult for the city to pour taxrevenues into a business for which profits are uncertain,'' said anofficial at Sanda city hall.     ''The rejection by Kubokawa's local assembly also affected ourdecision to suspend the plan,'' he added.     The official said the central government should take somemeasures, such as a liquor tax cut, to help local public entitiestrying to launch breweries to stimulate local economies.     Hagi's group is currently providing consulting services to fivelocal governments still hoping to tap into the beer business.     Hagi said, however, that it would be the middle of next year atthe earliest before any local government-affiliated microbrewerytries its hand in the market.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Budget holds ODA spending to record low 3.5% growth+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The government Monday approved a 1,145.2 billion yen budget forforeign aid in fiscal 1996, with its growth restricted to a recordlow of 3.5%.     The rate of growth is the lowest since the government startedallocating budgets for foreign aid or official developmentassistance (ODA) in 1976.  The previous low was the 4.0% increaseallowed in the current fiscal year ending March 31.     It is the third consecutive year since fiscal 1994 for thegrowth of the ODA element in the national budget to hit an all-timelow.     The low rate of increase in the overseas aid budget is largelyattributable to the nation's severe fiscal condition and the need forthe growth of the overall budget to be curbed, government officialssay.     The cabinet of Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama gave its stampof approval to the ODA outlay, contained in the overall generalaccount budget for the next fiscal year.  The overall budget will besubmitted to a regular parliamentary session expected to open Jan. 22.     The proposed ODA spending makes it look likely that Japan willnot achieve its fifth medium-term target of disbursing 70-75 billiondollars in aid to the developing world between 1993 and 1997.     Japan remained the world's top foreign aid donor in terms oftotal amount for the fourth consecutive year in 1994, disbursing13.24 billion dollars.  The United States ranked second with 9.85billion dollars, followed by France with 8.45 billion dollars.     In its budgetary request for fiscal 1996, the Foreign Ministry,along with other government ministries and agencies, sought a 7.3%rise in ODA spending, arguing that a high growth rate is necessaryto accomplish the five-year target.     The government paid out 1.1 billion dollars in foreign aid in1993 and 1.3 billion dollars in 1994, a slower pace of disbursementthan hoped for, according to Foreign Ministry officials.     In the breakdown of the next fiscal year's ODA spending, thegovernment set aside 277.3 billion yen for bilateral grant aid, up1.8% over the current fiscal year.     Of the sum, the budget for small-scale ''grassroots''grant-in-aid amounted to 4.5 billion yen, up 50.0%, in view of theneed to meet a wide variety of local demands and to promotecooperation with nongovernmental organizations (NGOs).     The government also set aside 1.5 billion yen for freshemergency grant aid projects to help rehabilitate war-devastatedareas such as former Yugoslavia and some African countries.     The ODA budget calls for a 5.7% rise to 348.5 billion yen inbilateral technical cooperation funds.     Such funds will be used for, among other things, inviting andtraining students, engineers and researchers from developingcountries.     As part of technical assistance, 1 billion yen is set aside forsubsidies to NGOs, up 31.6% from the initial budget for the currentfiscal year.     The ODA budget recommends that low-interest yen loans, a keycomponent of Japan's ODA program, be increased 2.1% to 390.7 billionyen.     The proposal also included 76.3 million yen for new programs totackle global issues as part of the ''common agenda'' of Japan andthe U.S.     The government also proposed 8.6 billion yen, up 5.0%, for the''Peace, Friendship and Exchange Initiative'' to promote exchangesbetween Japan and its Asian neighbors.     The 10-year, 100 billion yen project was started in the currentfiscal year to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the end of WorldWar II and express the nation's remorse for its wrongdoing before andduring the war.     The government allocated 2 million dollars worth of assistanceto women in developing countries, up 100%, and 390 million yen forprograms of the Foreign Ministry-affiliated Japan InternationalCooperation Agency to tackle population problems and AIDS, up 66.6%.     The budget proposal also calls for 4.1 million dollars for U.N.efforts to expand women's roles in society, up 96.2%, 6.7 milliondollars for U.N. efforts to control drugs, up 11.7%, and 1.2 milliondollars to help the United Nations protect human rights, up 9.1%.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Cambodian resident in Japan gets award for education aid+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     A Cambodian resident in Japan has been given an award by KingNorodom Sihanouk for his contribution to reconstructing theeducation system in Cambodia, wrecked during the 1975-1979 KhmerRouge communist regime of Pol Pot, his Japanese supporters saidMonday.     Kong Vorn, 58, of Yokohama, received a first class medal fornational construction earlier this month.     Kong Vorn had filed news reports for Kyodo News Service fromPhnom Penh until the last moment the Cambodian capital was taken overby the Khmer Rouge on April 17, 1975.     Although he was forced to work in rural area by the Khmer Rouge,he managed to escape from so-called ''killing field'' to his hometown in Prey Veng Province on Cambodian-Vietnam border and hid thereuntil the Vietnamese invasion and installation of an anti-Pol Potrebel communist government in 1979.     Kong Vorn, who survived Pol Pot's liquidation of ''educatedpeople,'' came to Japan in 1981 as an immigrant.  He settled inYokohama and has been working at a Japanese company since then.     In 1990 when he temporarily returned to Cambodia, he was shockedto observe the desperate state of education in his home country.     He organized the ''Cambodian Education Assistance Fund'' in 1993and launched a fund-raising campaign for the reconstruction ofeducation, his supporters said.     The fund so far has financed the building of two junior highschools and an elementary school in Prey Veng Province, and has alsodonated more than 100,000 U.S. dollars for school projects.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN WEEKLY MONITOR via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996UNHCR pondering special fund for Rwandan refugees+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is consideringsetting up a special fund for Rwandan refugees whose houses becamein need of repairs while they were away, its chief said Monday.     Sadako Ogata, the high commissioner of the U.N. body, revealedthe planned 30 million dollar fund at a meeting with Foreign MinisterYohei Kono, a Foreign Ministry official told reporters.     The fund, to be launched within the UNHCR, will appeal to theinternational community for contributions and help for repairingdilapidated houses of Rwandan refugees.     Ogata, a Japanese national, is back in Japan for a wintervacation.     She also expressed appreciation for Kono's pledge earlier thismonth of some 20 million dollars in humanitarian aid for refugees inthe war-torn former Yugoslavia, the official said.Back to Headline List WT03-B05-17IA087-000634-B040-13http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it138.html 205.156.212.5 19970122025737 text/html 33302HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:55:29 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:37 GMTContent-length: 33115Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it138.html Sample Issue Copyright THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY via NewsNet September 20, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Korea: Firms Select 9,044 Capital Goods Related Items for Localization (680 words) Bank of Korea Reports Potential Growth Rate Drops to 6% Range (516 words) Korea: MOTIE Asks for Lower Tariff Rates on Some Imports (152 words) Korea: MFE Works Out Guidelines for Commercial Loans (392 words) Korea: Financial Support for Industrial Estates to Greatly Expand (239 words) Korea: Five Largest Groups Sell Significantly More Than Others (442 words) Korea: Farm Products Imports Rise by 21% for Several Months (202 words) Korea: Gov't Gives Port Constr. Firms Priority on Auxiliary Projects (275 words) Korea: Conglomerates Hold Shares in Eleven Banks (242 words) Korea: Life Insurers Asset Management Yields Drop to 10.7% (237 words) Korea: Kookmin Bank Issues DRs Overseas (126 words) Bank of Korea Reports Bank Lending-Deposit Spreads Increase (256 words) Samsung Electronics Floats $150 Million in CBs in London (127 words) Korea: Low-Priced US Made Cars Perform Well (127 words) Korea: Aug. Auto Sales Rise Only 1.8% Due to Sluggish Economy (163 words) Korea: Sunkyong Begins PET Production in Indonesia (113 words) CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Korea: Firms Select 9,044 Capital Goods Related Items for Localizationfrom THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996Conglomerates Discuss Import Cutbacks With FKIThe 30 largest business groups (chaebol) and other large businessenterprises reportedly have decided to go ahead with a plan tolocalize capital goods-related items.The decision came at a meeting of the chairman and vice-chairmen ofthe Federation of Korean Industries (FKI), one of the largestbusinessmen's association in Korea, on September 18.Through repeated consultations and readjustments among businesscircles and by the goods office of the federation, 78 subsidiary firmsof 24 business groups have selected a total of 9,044 capitalgoods-related items for localization schedules.Of the total items, components topped the list with 8,562, followed bymachinery and equipment with 373 and advanced raw materials with 109,sources at the federation said.If the localization schedules are carried out successfully, importsubstitution would reach 8 trillion won by 2000, along with hugetangible and intangible indirect effects, the sources predicted.Under the implementation program worked out by the federation, thelocalization projects are estimated to cost about 2.8 trillion won, ofwhich 1.5 trillion won will be covered with internal funds and therest with borrowings from banks and rights offerings, the sourcesexplained.To help raise sufficient funds by private enterprises, the governmentneeds to allow private enterprises to induce foreign cash loans, thesources said.Moreover, the business community is calling on the government toextend varied financial supporting measures and to ease itsrestrictions in a bid to help facilitate localization projects ofprivate enterprises, the sources disclosed.Despite worsening economic situations at home, largest business groupsand private enterprises are bent on localizing capital goods-relateditems, the sources said.For instance, the Samsung business group plans to pour 500 billion wonby 2000 into localization of eight items, including laser processingdevices and automatic equipment and systems.  If these items arelocalized, the group would be able to conserve about 1.16 trillion wonbetween 1996 and 2000 by replacing imports, group sources said.The Hyundai business group intends to develop 6,521 items, includingturbo chargers for diesel engines and knock-sensors for passengercars. For localization projects, the group will invest 660 billion wonfor the next five years, and it wants to conserve about 3.9 billionwon by replacing imports.The LG business group reportedly is trying to develop 73 items withits investment reaching 23.4 billion won through 2000 to attain importsubstitution totaling about 300 billion won.The Daewoo business group hopes to undertake 10 research themes, withits investments in the heavy industries sector reaching 60 billionwon, those in the automobile sector amounting to 103 billion won andthose in the communications sector with 34 billion won, all by 2000.The Sunkyong group plans to develop 68 items, including 33 quality-and function-improvement items, cooling towers, pressure gauges andthe like.The Ssangyong group is expected to develop 65 items with a totalinvestment of 258.6 billion won in collaboration with itssubcontractor firms.The Kia group will undertake research and development of 1,321research themes by 2001, such as those concerning automatictransmission gears, with a total investment of 623 billion won,including 44.3 billion won in its own fund.   If these items aredeveloped, the group would be able to conserve about 700 billion wonby replacing imports.POSCO (Pohang Iron & Steel Co.) reportedly is trying to develop 661items, including those related to the manufacture of refractorybricks, rolls and machinery components by 2000, with a totalinvestment of 52.3 billion won.The Hanjin group is pushing ahead with a plan to develop 14 items,including key items for shipbuilding and rolling stocks, with a totalinvestment of 8.4 billion won.The Hanwha group is moving to develop six items, including hub unitsand bearings, by 1998 with a total investment of 76 billion won, incollaboration of its subcontractor firms.Copyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Bank of Korea Reports Potential Growth Rate Drops to 6% Rangefrom THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996Potential rate of growth has dipped to the six-percent level, sourcesat the Bank of Korea said.The central bank announced that potential rate of growth was 6.8percent for three consecutive quarters from the fourth quarter of 1995and the second quarter of 1996.Potential rate of growth was 7.7-8.4 percent between 1980 and 1989,7.2-7.8 percent between 1990 and 1993, and 7.1-7.2 percent between1994 and the second quarter of 1995, all maintaining a level of morethan seven percent.This was the first time that the potential rate of growth dropped tothe six-percent level, sources at the central bank said.Consequently, it is inevitable for the government to readjust thefoundation for macroeconomic management such as growth, prices andinternational balance-of-payments position, the sources said.The declining trends of the potential rate of growth were ascribedmainly to the diminishing contribution ratios of capital and labor tothe economic growth deriving from the slow growth rate of fixedinvestment and slowdowns in the increase rate of the economicallyactive population, the sources analyzed.The central bank's prediction for this year's growth rate is set at7.2 percent, while the government forecast that the year's growth ratewill hover around 7.0 percent.This indicates that the year's real growth would slightly surpass theyear's potential rate of growth, the sources explained.The estimate results of the central bank showed that the potentialrate of growth between 1994 and the second quarter of 1996 was 6.9-7.1percent.In view of growing economic scales, the potential rate of growth willslow gradually, the sources predicted.As the general view that the business activities peaked in October of1995, the central bank made its prediction on the potential rate ofgrowth beginning the fourth quarter of 1995, the sources said.Amid such declining trends of the potential rate of growth, anygovernment's overheated business prop-up measures may bring aboutadverse effects such as price hikes, the sources said.Table-----       Trends of contribution ratios to potential growth rates       -------------------------------------------------------     (unit - %, on an average annual basis)                                                4th qtr./1995-          1990-1993       1994-2nd qtr./1995     2nd qtr./1996    --------------------  ------------------    ------------    Growth  Contributing  Growth Contributing   Growth ContributingSector        rate     degree        rate   degree        rate    degree----------   ------  ------------  ------ ------------   ------ ----------Labor        3.2      1.3           2.9       1.3         2.76     1.2     -      (18.3)          -       (18.5)        -      (17.5)Capital     12.1      3.5          10.4       3.0          9.9     2.6            (49.0)                  (41.7)               (38.2)Technology  18.8      1.1          11.0       0.6         12.2     0.7            (16.0)                   (8.4)               (10.4)Imports     10.4      1.2          20.2       2.3         13.7     2.3            (16.7)                  (31.4)               (33.9)---------------------------------------------------------------------------Potential    7.2                    7.2                    6.8rate of growth---------------------------------------------------------------------------Note: The figures in parenthesis denote contributing ratios.Table-----Trends of potential GNP growth and real GNP growth--------------------------------------------------       (unit - %, on an average annual basis)                  '80-9        '90-3      '94-2Q'95  4Q'95-2Q'96Real GNP growth rate         7.9         7.4         8.6          7.2Potential GNP growth rate    7.7         7.2         7.2          6.8--------------------------------------------------------------------------Source: The Bank of KoreaCopyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Korea: MOTIE Asks for Lower Tariff Rates on Some Importsfrom THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996The Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy has asked the Ministry ofFinance and Economy to apply lower import tariff rates for crude oiland 10 other items in a bid to help exporters strengthen theircompetitiveness.The ministry calls for applying zero-percent tariff rates for threeitems--central processing units for computer, raw wool and artificialcorundum--instead of the current 2-8 percent rates, sources at theministry said.The ministry also recommended that the import quota tariff rate oncrude oil should be lowered from the current 5 percent to 3 percent,for all crude oil imports during the second half of this year, thesources said.For the remaining six items, the ministry reportedly is asking thatthe current tariff rates should be lowered to 2-4 percent levels, thesources said.Copyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Korea: MFE Works Out Guidelines for Commercial Loansfrom THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996All small enterprises, including those engaged in business lines otherthan manufacturing, will be allowed to induce commercial loans for theimport of plants and equipment, beginning in October this year.At the same time, all private enterprises, small or large, may beallowed to introduce foreign loans only for early repayment of foreignloans they have already obtained, without limits, also beginning inOctober this year.Beginning in January next year, private enterprises participating inthe government-initiated projects such as huge infrastructure projectsto be financed with private capital will be permitted to induce cashloans of up to $100 million per year for the projects only.To this effect, a draft revision bill to the guideline for approvalsof commercial loan inducement, worked out by the Ministry of Financeand Economy, will be put into force step by step, sources at theministry said.Under the draft revision bill, foreign-invested firms which haveequity ownership of more than 50 percent will be allowed to induceloans for the import of plants and equipment within the framework oftheir invested amount here, effective from next year, the sourcessaid.As for large enterprises, the introduction of commercial loans will beallowed only for those big businesses engaged in the high-tech fieldin principle, and amounts have yet to be fixed, which will be based onthe foreign exchange market situations during the first quarter of1997, the sources said.Until recently, only small enterprises engaged in the manufacturingindustry have been permitted to induce loans for the import of plantsand equipment.From October this year, however, gas, communications and all otherbusiness lines will be added to the permission list, and no annuallimits would be set if small firms comply with necessary terms andconditions set by the government for the introduction of loans, thesources said.Private enterprises participating in huge infrastructure projects (thefirst-grade facility projects such as roads, harbors, airports, etc.)each involving more than 1 trillion won will be allowed to induce cashloans each of up to 20 percent of the annual net project cost perproject or up to $100 million, for the projects only, the sourcesadded.Copyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Korea: Financial Support for Industrial Estates to Greatly Expandfrom THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996The government's financial support for industrial estates inprovincial areas will be drastically expanded next year, sources atthe Ministry of Construction and Transportation said.Beginning in 1997, the government will finance construction of roadsand water-supply systems leading to industrial estates each coveringmore than 300,000 pyong (one pyong equals 3.3 square meters) inprovincial districts, the sources said.At the same time, the loomable amount for the formation of anindustrial estate each covering less than 300,000 pyong in provincialareas will also be expanded next year far more than this year's level,the sources explained.In 1997, a total of 42.5 billion won in the state budget will beallocated for construction of roads leading to nine industrial estatesin provincial areas, including Chonan, Pyongdong and Naju, the sourcessaid.The lending amount for industrial estates each covering less than300,000 pyong in provincial districts will increase by 20 billion wonto 70 billion won next year, and the loans will be repayable over 10years in installments after a grace period of five years at an annualinterest rate of 5 percent, the sources said.These draft budget plans, worked out by the ministry, will besubmitted to the forthcoming National Assembly session after furtherconsultations with the pertinent ministries, the sources added.Copyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Korea: Five Largest Groups Sell Significantly More Than Othersfrom THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996The gap between the nation's top five largest business groups and theremaining 25 other large business groups reportedly is wideningsteadily in terms of turnover.In the nation's 30 largest business groups, turnover of the top fivebusiness groups showed a whopping increase of 1.6 times over those ofthe remaining 25 other business groups in 1994.This indicates that the top five groups' concentration of economic powerhas become more involved, an analysis report of the Korea DevelopmentInstitute disclosed.The share of the 30 largest business groups in the nation's overallturnover of the manufacturing and mining sector was 39.6 percent in1994, the report showed.The share was 34.1 percent in 1977, surpassed the 40-percent level during the1982-1985 period, dipped to the 35-percent level during the 1987-1989period and began rising again sharply at the outset of the 1990s, itsaid.In particular, the share of the top five  business groups has becomehigher, thus widening the gap between the top-ranking groups andothers.The share of the top five groups in the nation's overallmanufacturing-mining turnovers in 1977 was 15.7 percent, slightlylower than 18.4 percent of the 25 other large business groups.In 1994, the manufacturing-mining share of the top five groups stoodat 24.6 percent, greatly surpassing 15.0 percent of the 25 otherbusiness groups.The ratio of the top five groups' turnover to overall turnover of the 25other groups was 22.6 against 17.8 in 1983, and the ratio changed to21.9 against 14.1 in 1988 and 23.4 against 15.4 in 1991.This means that the nation's economic power has been heavilyconcentrated on the top five business groups, sources at the institutesaid.As a result, the gap between the top five groups' turnover and overallturnover of the 25 other business groups was 85 percent in 1977, 1.2times in 1983, 1.5 times in 1991 and 1.6 times in 1994.In the overall turnover of the 30 largest business groups, the shareof the top five business groups' turnover rose from 46 percent in1977 to 55.5 percent in 1982 and 62.1 percent in 1994, thussymbolizing the deepening monopolistic trends of the top five businessgroups, the sources said.Table-----Trends of the top five groups' share in manufacturing-mining turnover(unit - %)                    1977    1983    1991    1994Top five business groups     18.4    22.6    23.4    24.625 other business groups     18.4    17.8    15.4    15.0Source: The Korea Development InstituteCopyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Korea: Farm Products Imports Rise by 21% for Several Monthsfrom THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996Imports of farm products in the first seven months of this yeartotaled $3.86 billion, up 20.8 percent from a year earlier, sources atthe Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry said.Imports of farm products from the United States have been increasingsharply, largely because of the government's import opening policy offarm products.Of the seven-month import total, imports from the United Statesamounted to $1.76 billion, up 24.7 percent from a year before, takingthe lion's share of 44.7 percent in the seven-month imports, thesources said.During the seven-month period, imports of corn from the United Statesreached $99.7 million, up 35.5 percent from a year ago, those ofpotatoes from the United States showed a rise of 59.6 percent over ayear before, those of grapes rose by 89.6 percent, those of cigarettesby 44.9 percent, those of tomatoes by 77.4 percent and those ofchocolate by 44.8 percent, the sources said.Imports of farm products from China during the seven-month periodstood at $309.7 million, up only 13.3 percent from a year earlier, thesources said.Copyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Korea: Gov't Gives Port Constr. Firms Priority on Auxiliary Projectsfrom THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996Private enterprises taking part in private capital-financed new portconstruction projects will have priority rights to undertake auxiliaryprojects, including construction of a breakwater, dredging and othersto be funded by the government, on a negotiated contract basis.To help facilitate new port construction projects, a set of varioussupporting measures will be sought for local autonomous establishmentsand organizations, sources at the Ministry of Maritime Affairs andFisheries said.Local residents who will lose fishing grounds due to construction ofnew ports will be employed by newly created business lines there on apriority basis, the sources said.To this effect, a draft bill governing the promotion of new portconstruction, worked out by the ministry, will be submitted to theforthcoming National Assembly session in October after furtherconsultations with other government ministries, the sources said.Under the draft bill, various approval and licensing procedures willbe drastically simplified, the sources said.At the same time, a promotion council for new port construction,headed by the deputy premier-finance and economy minister, will beformed with the heads of provincial governments and localestablishments to deal with basic issues such as designation ofpotential areas for new ports, key policy directives, fund supplyprograms and the like, the sources said.If so designated, construction of new ports will benefit fromsupporting measures stipulated under the draft bill, and once thedraft bill passes through the National Assembly session, new stepswill be taken for designation of new ports, the sources added.Copyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Korea: Conglomerates Hold Shares in Eleven Banksfrom THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996BANKINGThe nation's 30 largest business groups are holding shares in 11 banksout of 26 listed banks, the Korea Stock Exchange (KSE) said.According to a KSE report on 30 largest business groups' stockownership in listed financial companies, the Samsung Group has sharesin four banks through Samsung Life Insurance Co. and othersubsidiaries: a 5.6 percent stake in the Daegu Bank, 6.83 percent inthe Commercial Bank of Korea, 5.25 percent in Korea Long-Term CreditBank and 15.45 percent in KorAm Bank.The Hyundai Group has a 10.69 percent in the Kangwon Bank through itsinsurance subsidiary Hyundai Marine and Fire Insurance Co.The LG Group has a 5.83 percent stake in Boram Bank, and the DaewooGroup controls 11.77 percent of KorAm Bank.The other largest business groups which have shares in listed banksinclude Hanjin with a 5.63 percent stake in Kyungki Bank, Hanwha with13.62 percent in the Chung Chong Bank, Lotte with 14.72 percent inPusan Bank, Daelim with 3.29 percent in Hanil Bank and Hyosung with7.02 percent in Kyungnam Bank.Other 19 groups except for those 11 groups were found have no sharesin listed banks at all.In the meantime, the 30 conglomerates have shares in 13 brokerage5 houses, 7 insurance companies and 10 merchant banking companies.Copyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Korea: Life Insurers Asset Management Yields Drop to 10.7%from THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996FINANCELife insurance companies' yield on asset management has been droppingin recent months, affected by the continued bearishness of the localstock market.According to life insurance industry sources, for the four monthperiod from April to July, the nation's 33 life insurers' averageyield on asset management declined to 10.7 percent, a drop of 0.4percentage point from the corresponding period of 11.1 percent.In particular, six top life insurers -- Je Il, Samsung, Heungkuk,Kyobo and Dongah -- saw their combined yield on asset managementscaled back to 10.7 percent during the period, down 0.5 percentagepoint from a year earlier.In contrast, newly established underwriters including Daishinwitnessed a rise in their combined yield on asset management by 0.3percentage point to 10.7 percent during the April-July period,outperforming existing larger ones in risky asset management.Of the big three life insurers, Samsung Life Insurance ranked first onthe yield list for asset management with 11.1 percent involving 858billion won.Second was Kyobo Life Insurance with a yield of 11.0 percent, a dropof 0.6 percentage point from 11.6 percent a year earlier ago. Kyoboracked up 501.5 billion won in income from asset management.Korea Life Insurance came in third with 10.5 percent involving 326.8billion won.Copyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Korea: Kookmin Bank Issues DRs Overseasfrom THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996BANKINGKookmin Bank became the first Korean financial institution to issuedepository receipts (DRs) abroad.The bank said that it issued and listed $300 million worth of DRs inLondon on September 25. Its DRs was sold to foreign investors fromEurope, the US and Asia.Kookmin Bank will convert the $300 million into won currency in earlyOctober, and will loan the proceeds to small and medium-sized enterprises(SMEs).Meanwhile, a source at the Ministry of Finance and Economy (MFE) saidthat six other banks -- Korea Long-Term Credit, Hana, Boram, Cho Hung,Korea Commercial and Hanil -- are planning to float overseas DRs.Copyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Bank of Korea Reports Bank Lending-Deposit Spreads Increasefrom THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996BANKINGLocal banks are expanding lending spreads by raising lending ratesmuch more than deposit rates, the Bank of Korea (BOK) said.In a survey on the nation's 30 commercial banks' weighted averageinterest rates conducted in July, the central bank said that theiraverage lending spreads edged up to 2.39 percent, an increase of 0.11percentage points from the previous month's 2.28 percent.The reason for this is that commercial banks' average lending ratesurged 0.15 percentage point to annual 11.45 percent in July from the11.30 percent a month earlier. In contrast, average deposit rates roseby merely 0.04 percentage point to 9.06 percent from 9.02 percentduring the cited period.A closer look at the deposit rates by each instrument shows that onlythose for time & installment deposits with maturity of three to fouryears inched up to 10.57 percent in July from 10.42 percent in June.Those for free savings deposits rather dropped to 5.67 percent from5.90 percent, and those for time deposits with maturity of one to twoyears skidded to 9.83 percent from 9.85 percent.When it comes to lending rates, those for overdraft loans rose to16.13 percent from 14.70 percent on an annual basis during the period.And those for household loans also edged up to 12.31 percent from12.17 percent. However those for corporate loans were lowered to 10.85percent from 11.15 percent.Copyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Samsung Electronics Floats $150 Million in CBs in Londonfrom THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996FINANCESamsung Electronics Co. (SEC) successfully floated $150 million worthof overseas convertible bonds (CBs) in London.The nation's No.1 semiconductor manufacturer said that it had asigning ceremony to issue $150 million worth of CBs in London onSeptember 20 with Samsung Securities Co. and SBC Warburg acting asmanaging underwriters.The CBs carry a coupon rate of 0.25 percent, and yield to put (YTP) of5.8 percent.Conversion premium was fixed at 25 percent. Given that most overseasdepository receipts (DRs) traded in the international markets have apremium of 10 to 15 percent, SEC CBs' conversion premium is offeredunder more favorable conditions.Copyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Korea: Low-Priced US Made Cars Perform Wellfrom THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996Low-priced US cars maintained their robust popularity in August.Ford sold 77 Mondeos, maintaining the first slot following July.Closely behind the Mondeo was Stratus of Chrysler with sales of 68units.Among European cars, Volvo 940, Saab 9000 and Audi A6 performedrelatively strongly, with sales unit of 59, 54 and 52, respectively.Mercedes Benz, whose autos relatively high-priced, recordedsluggish sales. Its total sales for various models were 84 units.Industry watchers forecast the strength of low-priced US cars willmaintain for the time being.Best-selling foreign car in August    Mondeo      Stratus  Volvo 940    Saab 9000  Audi A6      77          68         59           54        52Copyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Korea: Aug. Auto Sales Rise Only 1.8% Due to Sluggish Economyfrom THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996Domestic auto sales edged up a mere 1.8 percent to 121,278 units inAugust over last August, due to the stagnant economy. Daewoo Motorenjoyed the highest sales growth of 14.2 percent to 21,872 units,while Kia Motors saw its sales fall 8.4 percent to 31,374 units.Hyundai Motor sold the most with 58,151 units.Hyundai's Avante was the best selling car. Accent leaped to the thirdposition from seventh in July. Sales of Kia's Pride reached2,576 units, exceeding sales of Avella. Elan, Kia's sports coupe,only recorded one sale.Ssangyong's jeep-type utility, Korando, turned in a fine performancewith sales of 543 units, helping Ssangyong to recover the second slotin the jeep-type utility market with total sales of 1,850.  Meanwhile,Hyundai Precision Ind.   suffered a set-back from 4,100 units in Julyto 2,578 units in August, hurt by a labor strike.Copyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY                      via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Korea: Sunkyong Begins PET Production in Indonesiafrom THE KOREA ECONOMIC DAILY, September 20, 1996LIGHT INDUSTRY - briefSunkyong Industries commenced operations of its Indonesianpolyethylene terephthalate (PET) chip manufacturing line which has acapacity of 80,000 tons a year.With this, Sunkyong's combined PET chip production capacity increasedto 162,000 tons including 82,000 tons from the domestic line in Ulsan.By 2001, Sunkyong will go on to pour a total of 370 billion won toextend PET chip capacity to 432,000 tons so as to ultimately leap to thefourth largest PET chip producer in the world, on the heels of EastmanKodak, Shell and Fechst.Copyright 1996 The Korea Economic DailyBack to Headline List WT03-B05-18IA087-000634-B040-46http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it139.html 205.156.212.5 19970122025806 text/html 103127HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:55:59 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:37 GMTContent-length: 102939Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it139.html Sample Issue Copyright THE KOREA HERALD via NewsNet September 25, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES President Indicates Shift in Policy Toward North (594 words) Resumption of Team Spirit Sought; Seoul to Ask Washington to Restart Military Exercise (963 words) Korean, U.S. Officials Decide to Remain Vigilant; In the Wake of Armed North Korean Agents" Infiltration Last Week (726 words) Foreign Ministry Officials Assigned to New Posts (238 words) Rep. Lee Myung-bak's Election Scandal a Political Liability for NKP (511 words) Democratic Party Moves Closer to a Breakup (301 words) Search Operations Likely to Be Protracted; Inspections on Streets Stepped Up in Case Agents Break Blockade (374 words) Controversy Expected Over Medical Compensation Bill (574 words) KATA Chairman Honored With Silver Tower (360 words) Editorial; Sober, Austere Chusok Holidays (665 words) Over 7,000 Cars Sold in January-August; Chrysler Takes Lead in Top 5 Foreign-Made Car Sales (1083 words) Market & Economic Viewpoint (By Seong C. Gweon); Are All Banks the Same? (940 words) Contemporary Korean Art on Show in Tokyo; Works of 14 Artists Reflecting "90s Trend Exhibited as Part of Exchange Program (741 words) Family Values Highlighted by Chusok Celebrations (553 words) Patent Law Worker Wins Top Prize in National Practical English Contest (288 words) Budget Bill Totals 71.6 Trillion Won; Government Projects 13.7 Percent Spending Hike Over 1996 (573 words) Current Account Deficit Surges to $15.2 Billion; Chalks up Record High of $3.4 Billion in August (391 words) LG Securities Holds Signing Rite for Korea Bond Fund (256 words) Globalization Drive Forces Companies to Hire Foreign Staffers (386 words) Business Survey Index Hits 92 in Fourth Quarter '96 (297 words) Seoul-Inchon Canal Work to Start Next Year (311 words) Cultural Dimensions (Column By Robert J. Fouser); Experiment in Korea-Japan Relations (937 words) MOTIE Plan to Issue Green Cards to Hi-Tech Experts Hits Snag (222 words) Business News Briefs; KT Develops CD-ROM Telephone Directory (107 words) Dead Leader Infiltrated South Three Times (170 words) Business News Briefs; Korean-Made Car Sales in Sweden Rise in '95 (174 words) Business News Briefs; Dainong Heavy Wins ISO 9001 Certificate (124 words) New Products; Daewoo's Microwave Oven (76 words) New Products; LGE's LCD TV (82 words) Foreign Business Briefs; Adidas AG Chairman in Seoul for 2-day Stay (119 words) Foreign Business Briefs; U.S. Firm SMC Hosts Technology Forum (112 words) Card May Carry 7 Phone, Contact Numbers; Hyosung Group to Launch One-Number Service in December (890 words) CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996President Indicates Shift in Policy Toward North from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      Employing the strongest rhetoric yet, President Kim Young-sam said yesterday South Korea will ``reconsider'' its policy toward North Korea in wake of the North's infiltration of armed commandos into the South.        Kim, meeting a group of Japanese political editors at Chong Wa Dae, did not go into details of what steps his government will be taking, but gave a clear indication of a shift to a hardline stance against the North.        ``What do you think would have happened if the same highly-trained and armed special commandos had infiltrated Japan or the United States,'' Kim was quoted as saying by presidential spokesman Yoon Yeo-joon.        ``I think that in that case, both Japan and the United States would have gone to war with the country which sent the guerrillas,'' he said.        Kim went on to say that if the United States had been put into the same situation, it might have already launched a military attack and wiped out the provoking nation.        Presidential officials said Kim's remarks should be interpreted as underscoring the gravity of the North Korean infiltration case.        President Kim has already termed the incursion not a simple matter of spying activities but a premeditated and deliberate act of military provocation against South Korea.        Senior administration officials have said that excluding military retaliation, South Korea will take all necessary measures to have the North pay due price for the intrusion of armed agents.        Kim met the Japanese editors, who are here on an exchange program, shortly after the South Korea's foreign minister, Gong Ro-myung, and its defense minister, Lee Yang-ho, discussed the issue with U.S. Amb. James Laney and Gen. John Tillelli Jr., commander of U.S. Forces in Korea.        The joint conference was part of South Korea's efforts to exert political and diplomatic pressure on North Korea.        President Kim told the Japanese editors that Seoul and Washington are in a full agreement to maintain close cooperation and deal with the incursion case in tandem.        South Korea has already taken the infiltration case to the United Nations, but neither South Korea nor the United States has taken any specific actions against the North.        Unconfirmed reports said that South Korea may ask the United States to resume the joint annual military exercise, Team Spirit, suspend economic aid to the North and slow down the pace of improvement in U.S.-North Korea relations.        South Korean civic groups are already suspending fund-raising campaigns for food aid to North Korea.        Minister Gong is scheduled to hold a series of discussions with the U.S. secretary of state, Warren Christopher, and Japan's foreign minister, Yukihiko Ikeda, in New York.        Senior diplomats from the three countries also are to hold a working-level discussion in the U.S. city, Korean officials said.        South Korea, Japan and the United States are leading the KEDO international consortium for building light-water nuclear reactors in North Korea in exchange for the North's freeze on its old nuclear program.        There has been no official word from any of the three capitals about whether the infiltration case would affect the work of the Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization.        But senior South Korean and U.S. officials said they would push ahead with the four-way Korean peace talks with North Korea and China.        The peace talks, aimed at replacing the Korean armistice regime with a permanent peace mechanism, were proposed by President Kim and U.S. President Bill Clinton last April.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Resumption of Team Spirit Sought; Seoul to Ask Washington to RestartMilitary Exercise from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996By Lee Sung-yul Staff reporter       South Korea will seek the resumption of Team Spirit, a massive ROK-U.S. joint military exercise, which has been suspended since 1992.        Apparently angered by the incursion of a North Korean submarine and 26 commandos, the Defense Ministry said yesterday that it would ask the Pentagon to restart the exercise, describing the infiltration on the East Coast as the most serious violation in decades following the Armistice Agreement that brought truce to the Korean War (1950-53).        The suggestion for resumption of Team Spirit will be officially delivered to the United States during the annual ROK-U.S. Security Consultative Meeting slated for Oct. 31-Nov. 1 in Washington D.C., a ministry official said.        The ministry's moves came while thousands of South Korean troops and reservists were searching for the five remaining infiltrators in the rugged mountains in the southern outskirts of Kangnung on the East Coast for the seventh consecutive day.        Team Spirit, which started in 1976, was suspended since 1992 except in 1993 to help ease tension in the Korean Peninsula. The ministry said that the suspension of the exercise was conditional on North Korea's promise to refrain from military provocations.        But the latest North Korean provocation is a direct challenge to the joint South Korea-U.S. efforts to ease tension on the Korean Peninsula, the ministry charged, calling the submarine incursion ``a grave act of military provocation.''        The ministry's statement came after early-morning high-level talks in Seoul between Foreign Minister Gong Ro-Myung, Defense Minister Lee Yang-Ho, U.S. Amb. James Laney and Gen. John H. Tilelli, the top U.S. general in South Korea.        Team Spirit was one of the world's largest-scale military maneuvers, involving some 218,000 troops at its peak in 1986, including 37,000 U.S. Forces Korea and thousands of other troops flown from overseas bases.        North Korea, describing it as a rehearsal to invade the North, called for its suspension as a precondition for its agreement in 1994 to stop its suspected nuclear weapons program.        The manhunt for the die-hard infiltrators continued, but there was no contact with the die-hard fleeing North Korean agents since Sunday morning till yesterday afternoon, the ministry said.        An estimated 26 armed North Korean agents have infiltrated the nation, abandoning their stranded submarine before dawn Sept. 19.        Three South Korean soldiers have been killed, while 20 North Korean intruders were either killed or found dead. One has been captured.        On Monday evening, the South Korean government flatly rejected a North Korean demand to return the submarine, which was found wrecked on a reef on a beach near Kangnung some 240 km east of Seoul.        ``The North Korean demand to return the submarine is not worth even a consideration, in that all the provocative intention surrounding the submarine has been brought to light,'' said Defense Ministry spokesman Yoon Chang-ro.        The North Korean submarine ``apparently had a well-planned, intentional mission which amounted to an armed provocation,'' said Yoon.        He also said that ``the North Koreans' intention is well demonstrated by the fact that all of the crew members were well-armed officers at the Reconnaissance Bureau under the North Korean Ministry of the People's Armed Forces, which specializes in infiltrating special agents and spies into the South.''        Yoon concluded that the Communist regime's demand to return the submarine, ``made six days after the infiltration, is just a sheer attempt to ease the worsening international atmosphere against its absurd infiltration.''        Another government spokesman said that the South could comply with a negotiation for the return of the submarine only after North Korea apologizes for the infiltration and punish those North Koreans responsible for the incursion.        Defense ministry officials said that the North Korean submarine never drifted nor had any engine trouble, but that it successfully infiltrated into the beach south of Kangnung.        The tide flew northward at that time, and it doesn't make sense that the submarine drifted southward. In addition, the submarine never sent an SOS message, the officials said.        The dead leader of the infiltrators, identified as Col. Kim Dong-won, had infiltrated into the South twice before, the officials said, quoting the captured North Korean, Lee Kwang-soo, 31.        They noted that North Koreans last week refused to accept a protest message of the United Nations Command at a meeting at the truce village of Panmunjom. At that time, the North Koreans alleged they never sent a submarine to the South, the ministry officials noted.        The submarine just ran aground while trying to return to the North after an unspecified mission, the officials said, adding that the stranded submarine actually had a clear-cut mission, which has yet to be known.        They also noted that some of the North Korean infiltrators were in South Korean Army uniforms and armed themselves with South Korean Army rifles. In addition, 11 of them were found dead, allowing themselves to be shot dead by their colleagues, apparently at orders from Pyongyang, they said.        ``North Koreans are trying to deceive the world, but all the evidence ran counter to their absurd allegation,'' a ministry official said. The official said that ``we are willing to return the bodies of the dead infiltrators.''        He further said that ``we are simply concerned how far the unpredictable nature of the North Korean regime would go.''        In a statement released Monday by the North Korean Central News Agency, Pyongyang called on the South to return the submarine and its crew.        The submarine was found wrecked on a reef just scores of meter from a beach before dawn Wednesday, from which an estimated 26 North Korean agents have landed.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Korean, U.S. Officials Decide to Remain Vigilant; In the Wake of ArmedNorth Korean Agents" Infiltration Last Week from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996By Kim Kyung-ho Staff reporter       Top South Korean and U.S. officials decided yesterday to maintain a higher degree of vigilance in wake of armed North Korean agents' infiltration into South Korea last week.        The decision was made at a meeting among Foreign Minister Gong Ro-myung, Defense Minister Lee Yang-ho, U.S. Amb. James Laney and Gen. John Tilelli, Jr., commander of the U.S. forces.        The top foreign policy and defense officials reaffirmed the South Korean and the United States' position to maintain strong joint defense capabilities to cope with any possible military adventure by North Korea.        At a breakfast meeting at Gong's residence, the four officials also agreed to issue a strong warning to North Korea against its infiltration of ``armed commandos'' into the South.        ``Participants agreed on the necessity of sending North Korea a strong warning that the military provocation not only betrays Korean people's sincere wish to establish peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula through inter-Korean talks, but also runs counter to the efforts of the international community that has donated humanitarian aid to North Korea,'' said a press release issued after the meeting.        The officials agreed the infiltration of armed North Korean commandos is not only a violation of the 1953 Armistice Agreement that ended the Korean War but also a serious threat to the security of the Korean Peninsula and its surrounding region.        They emphasized that the armistice agreement should be maintained until a new peace regime is established on the peninsula through direct negotiations between South and North Korea.        Furthermore, the officials agreed to take strong measures to dissuade North Korea from what they termed the anachronistic illusion of unifying the Korean Peninsula by military means.        They also agreed South Korea and the United States will maintain close coordination in bringing the whole truth about the infiltration to the light.        But the South Korean and U.S. officials did not discuss whether to resume the South Korean-U.S. joint military exercise, Team Spirit, suspended in 1994, said a South Korean Foreign Ministry official.        ``At this stage, adding new military capabilities is not being considered,'' he said.        Specific measures to be taken against North Korea, including details of the warning, will be discussed at a meeting between Gong and U.S. Secretary of State Warren Christopher in New York Tuesday, the official said.        Gong left for New York after yesterday's meeting.        Following his talks with Christopher, he is scheduled to meet with his Japanese counterpart Yukihiko Ikeda to discuss the North Korean provocation.        The foreign ministers' meetings will be followed by tripartite consultations among senior officials from South Korea, the United States and Japan to be held in New York Thursday.        While seeking measures to make North Korea pay the price for the armed provocation, South Korean officials have suggested they will maintain the framework of the existing policy toward North Korea.        Gong recently said the infiltration of armed North Korean agents would halt economic cooperation with and humanitarian aid to North Korea for a considerable time.        Seoul officials have left open the possibility of South Korea reconsidering its commitment to a U.S.-initiated international project to build light-water reactors in the North in return for Pyongyang freezing its suspected nuclear weapons program.        They have also pledged to pursue punitive measures against North Korea within the U.N. Security Council when the details of the incident are uncovered.        But Gong said South Korea will continue to push for the four-way peace talks Seoul and Washington proposed to hold with Pyongyang and Beijing.        While rejecting North Korea's claim its submarine was on a routine mission when it ran aground off South Korea's eastern coast, Washington expressed its hope that the incident will not worsen tensions on the Korean Peninsula.        U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry told a news conference in Stockholm Monday ``All of our evidence suggests that this North Korean submarine was not on a routine mission.''        But he said Washington wants South and North Korea to ``work to try to keep this from becoming an incident beyond the damage that has already been caused.''        He said it is still important to proceed with the proposed four-way peace talks.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Foreign Ministry Officials Assigned to New Posts from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      The government yesterday appointed Kim Hang-kyung, deputy foreign minister for planning and management, as ambassador to Canada.        In a reshuffle of eight high-ranking diplomatic posts, Moon Dong-suk, chief of protocol at the Foreign Ministry, was named as ambassador to Australia.        Kim and Moon were replaced by Chung Tae-ik, deputy foreign minister for political affairs, and Chung Kie-ok, ambassador to Poland, respectively.        Ambassador-at-Large Song Young-shik took up the post of deputy foreign minister for political affairs.        Choi Dae-hwa, deputy foreign minister for economic affairs, was appointed as ambassador to India, and Chun Yong-duc, former deputy director general of the ministry's Treaties Bureau, was named as ambassador to Zambia.        Choi was succeeded by Hong Jung-pyo, ambassador to Sri Lanka.        New ambassador to Canada Kim, 55, a graduate from the college of law at Seoul National University (SNU), had served as director general for consular and overseas residents affairs, ambassador to Myanmar and consul general to Los Angeles before he was appointed as deputy foreign minister for planning and management in January 1995.        The new envoy to Australia, Moon, 53, who majored in international relations at SNU, had worked as presidential secretary for foreign affairs, director general of the ministry's International Organizations and Treaties Bureau and ambassador to Turkey before he was named as chief of protocol in January 1995.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Rep. Lee Myung-bak's Election Scandal a Political Liability for NKP from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996By Shin Yong-bae Staff reporter       With two of his staff members under arrest, Rep. Lee Myung-bak accused of election fraud, has become a political liability for the ruling New Korea Party.        The ruling party is considering expelling Rep. Lee from the party in an effort to contain fallout from the scandal involving Lee's campaign spending during the April general elections.        While the ruling party is trying to extricate itself from the uproar, the main opposition National Congress for New Politics is stepping up an offensive against its rival.        Ruling party leaders were embarrassed when the secret departure of one of Rep. Lee's former campaign workers, Kim Yu-chan, to a foreign country was found to have been arranged by Lee's aides.        Kim disappeared after alleging two weeks ago that Rep. Lee had spent more money than legally allowed in the April vote.        On Sunday, the prosecution arrested two of Lee's aides on charges of helping Kim escape to Hong Kong Sept. 15. They were under suspicion of giving him $18,000 in travel expenses.        In a statement issued Monday, the ruling party apologized to the public for the alleged involvement of Lee's aides in Kim's escape.        The ruling party also offered an apology to the National Congress for New Politics for its previous claim that the opposition party helped Kim leave the country.        It is unusual for the ruling party to offer an official apology to an opposition party.        Ruling party officials expressed anger that the party was humiliated because Rep. Lee had allegedly lied about the accusations. They were referring to a news conference last week, in which Rep. Lee denied Kim's allegations.        The officials said party leaders are nearing a consensus that Rep. Lee should leave the party, holding himself responsible for the scandal.        Party Secretary-General Kang Sam-jae hinted that the party will soon expel Rep. Lee if he should refuse to leave the party voluntarily.        ``It will not take much time for the party to decide what measures it will take against him because the outcome of the prosecution's investigations into the scandal will come out soon,'' Secretary-General Kang said.        The opposition National Congress for New Politics, which welcomed the ruling party's apology, demanded Rep. Lee resign immediately.        A spokesman for the opposition party said that Rep. Lee should resign as a member of the National Assembly for his alleged implication in Kim's escape though it has yet be confirmed.        A ruling party official, who contacted Lee, quoted him as saying that he did not order his aides to arrange Kim's escape.        The National Congress for New Politics also urged the prosecution to summon Rep. Lee immediately and take legal action.        The opposition party, which believes that the scandal is the tip of the iceberg of election fraud allegedly committed by the ruling party during the April vote, is preparing to intensify its attack on the ruling party.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Democratic Party Moves Closer to a Breakup from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      The small opposition Democratic Party (DP) is moving closer to a breakup, with its leader, Lee Ki-taek, demanding that Rep. Jei Jung-gu from his rival faction resign as floor leader.        Lee's mainstream faction's attack on the minority group of reform advocates is fueling speculations that the party is headed for a breakup.        ``Rep. Jei should resign as floor leader because he abandoned his job as party official and joined a reformist group,'' Rep. Lee Choong-jae, a leader of the main faction, said on behalf of the main-stream faction in a party caucus held in the National Assembly yesterday.        Rep. Jei, a leading member of the party's reformist faction, has been under pressure to step down since his faction launched an organization, the Council for National Unification, Monday in a revolt against party president Lee's leadership.        The launch of the council was seen as the reform-minded group's move to seek a divorce from Lee Ki-taek's main faction.        Earlier this week, the DP leadership accused the reformist group of damaging party unity by launching a separate faction.        The strife between the DP's rival factions surfaced when Lee was elected to the top post in a national convention in June.        Members of the reformist faction, including Rep. Jei, have since refused to work under Lee's command.        Rep. Jei refused to accept the main faction's demands, saying, ``Our council is only part of regular party affairs. Party president Lee should take proper procedures before demanding my resignation.''        Among the members of Rep. Jei's group, led by former party Chairman Kim Won-ki, are Reps. Lee Soo-in, Lee Mi-kyung and Kim Hong-shin and former lawmakers who failed to retain congressional seats in April's elections.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Search Operations Likely to Be Protracted; Inspections on Streets SteppedUp in Case Agents Break Blockade from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      With five North Korean intruders presumed to be still at large in mountains near Kangnung, the search operations showed signs yesterday of becoming protracted.        Military officials said they were preparing for the possibility of long-term operations, as the manhunt for the fleeing infiltrators was at an impasse.        Thousands of troops continued to comb through mountains and possible escape routes, but failed to track down the North Koreans.        Out of an estimated 26 North Koreans from a submarine which was found wrecked on the Kangnung shores Wednesday, 21 had been accounted for as of yesterday _ nine were killed in shootouts, 11 found dead and one captured alive.        The search operations focused on Mt. Chilsong, where some of the remaining North Koreans were believed to be hiding.        Loudspeakers blared taped messages of the captured submarine crewman, Lee Kwang-soo, and leaflets calling for surrender were scattered from helicopters.        The Army also stepped up security along coastal roads to block the North Koreans from attempting to escape by sea.        It was unlikely that the intruders escaped through several layers of cordon in the areas, the officials said.        They, however, began to talk about the possibility of changing tactics if the intruders are not rounded up within a few days.        No traces of the North Koreans have been found since the captain of the submarine was killed in a shootout on Mt. Chilsong around 6:40 a.m. Sunday.        Some analysts said some of the North Korean agents might have escaped the cordons and were heading toward North Korea via mountain routes. They also raised the possibility that the intruders might have sneaked into Kangnung after camouflaging themselves as South Korean civilians.        To cope with such possibilities, the officials said, the military has stepped up inspections along the streets of the city.        They also said they were considering mobilizing Cobra combat helicopters for pursuit operations in mountains.        While search operations were under way on Mt. Chilsong Monday evening, a light suspected to be reflected from a weapon was spotted moving along a ridge. Search teams, however, could not find traces of the intruders.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Controversy Expected Over Medical Compensation Bill from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996By Song Jung-tae Staff reporter       Years-long controversy will likely flare up again as the Ministry of Health and Welfare is seeking to legislate a law designed to mediate medical disputes between doctors and patients.        The ministry made public yesterday a draft bill on mediating medical disputes, which would make it mandatory for doctors, herb doctors and dentists to join the tentatively named ``Medical Compensation Mutual-Aid Association.''        Concerned parties who does not join the association will be fined up to 10 million won.        The ministry, after collecting from opinions from the parties concerned, plans to submit the bill to the National Assembly within this year for legislation, officials said.        They said the ministry, if things go well, plans to put the law into effect beginning 1998.        According to the draft bill, the association would compensate for patients or their families when disputes occur over accidents, which occur without any remarkable errors committed by doctors.        `` Anyone who wants to receive compensation would be required to go through mediation before bringing accident cases to court,'' said Rhie Dong-mo, director general of the ministry's Bureau of Medical Affairs.        For this, a mediation committee on medical dispute would be set up under the ministry, and city and provincial governments beginning 1998, he said.        Those who can file a mediation with the mediation committee would be limited to patients, or their representatives. Those who are eligible to become representatives would include lawyers, medical personnel, legal representatives, spouses and direct family members such as brothers and sisters.        Anyone who assaults doctors or is involved in other violent actions during medical disputes would be severely punished.        There has been many reports that family members of patients have destroyed medical equipment or facilities, employed violence against doctors when patients die in the process of medical treatment.        The draft bill, however, faced opposition in part from the medical society.        The Korean Hospitals Association (KHA), a group of hospitals, said that it is irrational for the government to force the Medical Compensation Mutual-Aid Association alone to compensate the patients for accidents which occur without any remarkable errors committed by doctors. In other words, these cases involve accidents whose exact cause is not revealed.        Lee Jun-hyup, a spokesman for the KHA, said, ``In such cases, government should shared a burden together with the Medical Compensation Mutual-Aid Association.''        The Korea Medical Association, a group of doctors, took a similar stance.        Kim Jung-soo, a spokesman for the KMA, said, ``We cannot accept the bill. It is absurd for medical personnel to take the whole responsibility for accidents.''        He asked back, ``When patients die despite every effort by doctors, who should take responsibility for the cases? In the cases, the government should compensate.''        Doctors are regulated to provide medical treatment for all patients including those who in their terminal stage. However, such cases involves the likelihood for doctors to be engaged in dispute, Kim explained.        In 1994, a similar bill was submitted to the National Assembly by the ministry for legislation amid desperate opposition from the medical society, and was under deliberation at the National Assembly's Health and Welfare Committee last year.        But the bill was discarded in the wake of the end of the term of the 14th National Assembly in earlier June.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996KATA Chairman Honored With Silver Tower from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      Chung Un-sik, chairman of the Korea Association of Travel Agents (KATA), yesterday received the Order of Industrial Service Merit, Silver Tower, becoming the first representative from the travel agent industry to be honored by the government for their contribution to spurring the nation's economy.        The tourism industry has been promoted by the South Korean government as an ``industry without chimneys,'' and Culture and Sports Minister Kim Young-soo conferred the order and other awards at the Seoul Sejong Cultural Center yesterday in commemoration of the 23rd World Tourism Day which fell on Sept. 27.        Chung, 61, who also heads the Edu Tours Co., is widely hailed in the industry as a pioneer in the development of new travel products and diversifying tourism markets including the former Communist bloc of Eastern Europe and Latin American countries.        The most representative of his innovative approach to new travel products is the ``Backpack Europe Trip with the Eurail Pass,'' which enjoyed phenomenal success with collegians after foreign travel was completely liberalized in 1989.        His lifetime devotion to the tourism industry started out in 1959 as a travel manager. He then was promoted to executive sales director of C.F. Sharp Co., a representative agency for Northwest Airlines sales office in Korea.        From these experiences, he set up his own company, the Seoul Travel Co., in 1971, the predecessor to Edu Tours.        He is widely involved in international tourism associations. As a member of the Pacific Asia Travel Association (PATA), he brought the 43rd PATA Annual Conference to Seoul in 1994 as the city celebrated 600th anniversary as the nation's capital.        In 1993, he was elected the first international representative from the Asian region of the American Society of Travel Agencies.        For his work in furthering international tourism, he received the ``Golden Helm'' Award at the 1992 International Travel and Tourism Berlin held in Germany.        Chung was awarded along with Chung Hee-ja, president of Hilton Hotel Seoul who received the Gold Tower, and Her Tae-hak, head of Yongin Everland, who received the Bronze Tower.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Editorial; Sober, Austere Chusok Holidays from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      An intrinsic desire of human beings to lead a better life often serves as the strongest motive to propel society to further develop itself. History testifies, however, that a society's ability to enjoy enduring development depends largely on how it values the better life. Invariably, overindulgence in luxuries has ended in catastrophes.        In Korea, moderation and decency have long been regarded as overriding virtues and a guiding philosophical value inherent among the Korean people for centuries. Certainly, Korea has achieved remarkable progress, especially economically, in the past decade or two. And we Koreans can surely deserve and afford to lead a life matching our economic affluence.        Yet, it is a pity to see some people indulging in indiscreet consumption and extravagance. Korea's per capita GNP is still in the neighborhood of $10,000. But the lifestyle pursued by some people makes us wonder if our per capita income has already reached the $30,000 mark. A Seoul department store reports that it daily sells about 500 ready-made suits that each costs more than 600,000 won, or roughly $700, offering us an example of the trend of the times.        Imports of such nonessential consumer goods as chocolate and golf clubs are reported to be increasing sharply. For instance, imports of carpets increased 32 percent to more than $15 million last year, while that of refrigerators rose 58.4 percent to $32 million during the same period. The nation, of course, needs to import more products to defuse foreign trade pressure and to live up to the spirit of reciprocity in world trade. However, excessive importation of luxury consumer goods poses problems outside the sphere of economics.        Moreover, our country is divided, the northern half of which is dominated by constantly belligerent Communists whose ultimate goal remains the communization of the whole Korean Peninsula. At this very moment, armed North Korean infiltrators are foraying our countryside in a vicious scheme to frustrate our stability and integrity. It is in such an environment that we must pursue and maintain our national harmony. Overindulgence in luxury by some segments of society undermines that harmony and solidarity. Some may argue that it is up to the individual to lead the lifestyle of his choosing. Yet it must be fully realized that they cannot be immune to the obligations and morality of society.        During the Chusok holidays that begin tomorrow, people are inclined to be a bit too lavish with their clothing, gifts and shopping sprees. That people make sure they enjoy every bit of the festive season is good and laudable. However, they should plan for the holidays within their means and in ways possible. A more simple, austere and streamlined lifestyle, corresponding to the realities he or she faces, should be in place. Everything that is traditional cannot necessarily be considered good. As regards to gift-giving, choosing prohibitively expensive luxury items comparable to bribery may reveal bad taste and could endanger the good will of the receiver.        Local mass media could be chided for their sensational treatment of such joyous holiday activities as superfluous shopping and merrymaking. They allegedly are serving the interests of their audiences and that may be true to some extent. However, they are guilty of engaging in what amounts to advertisement and agitation for a variety of Chusok sprees.        In order to help ease horrendous traffic gridlocks, visitors to homes and ancestral graveyards in the countryside could either stagger their traveling times or advance the dates for visits under the guidance of a credible public organization.        Extravagance by some indiscreet people leads to the detriment of others. The wasteful quest for luxury never results in good. Moderation and decency is what must supplant such a quest. The overall tenor of Chusok events is centered not so much on the material side as it is on the showing of gratitude for the bountiful blessings of the season.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Over 7,000 Cars Sold in January-August; Chrysler Takes Lead in Top 5Foreign-Made Car Sales from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996By Lee Kap-soo Staff reporter       Despite the worsening economic situation in the country, foreign automakers here are enjoying a lucrative business performance nowadays.        According to statistics released by the Korea Automobile Importers' Association (KAIA), the domestic sales of foreign-made cars totaled 7,073 units in the first eight months of this year, up 52.9 percent from the 4,627 units recorded in the same 1995 span.        The number of foreign-made cars sold in Korea rose sharply from 1,827 units in 1992 to 1,975 units in 1993, 3,903 units in 1994 and further to 6,399 units in 1995.        The top five best-selling foreign cars on the domestic market so far this year were Chrysler of the United States, Volvo and SAAB of Sweden and BMW and Mercedes-Benz of Germany.        Chrysler sold the most on the domestic market during the January-August period of 1996 with 1,398 units, followed by BMW with 1,064 units and Mercedes-Benz with 961 units.        Volvo ranked fourth with 821 units, followed by SAAB with 586 units, Audi with 485 units, Ford with 432 units and General Motors with 412 units.        By country, U.S.-made cars topped the list of domestic sales with 3,238 units during the first eight months of 1996, accounting for 45 percent of all the foreign-made cars sold in the country.        Cars from Germany came next with 2,428 units (34 percent of the total), followed by those from Sweden with 1,210 units (17 percent) and those from France with 177 units (2 percent).        By size, foreign-made cars with an engine capacity ranging from 2,001cc to 3,000cc sold the most on the domestic market with 3,508 units during the January-August period of 1996, representing 49.6 percent of the total sales of foreign cars here.        Mid-size foreign cars with an engine capacity of less than 2,000cc ranked second with the domestic sales figure of 2,072 units (29.3 percent of the total), followed by big-size sedans with an engine capacity of 3,001cc-4,000cc with 1,125 units (15.9 percent) and super-size luxurious sedan with an engine capacity of over 4,000cc with 368 units (5.2 percent).        Auto experts here attributed the surge in foreign car sales on the domestic market mainly to the lowering prices of foreign cars stemming from a sharp reduction in the acquisition and special excise taxes on medium- and large-size cars and intensified sales activities of foreign automakers here.        In July alone, 1,320 foreign-made cars were sold in Korea, a whopping rise of 78.8 percent from a year earlier, indicating that the domestic demands for foreign cars are showing an explosive growth, even though the Seoul government strongly calls for the curb of excessive consumption out of fear about the nation's snowballing trade deficits.        If this trend continues, the domestic sales figure of foreign-made cars is expected to reach some 14,000 units this year and 30,000 units next year, far exceeding the 7,804 recorded in 1995, they said.        The Korea Automobile Manufacturers Association (KAMA) also forecasts that the nation's import of foreign-made cars would exceed 100,000 units in 2000, accounting for some 3-5 percent of the domestic automobile market.        The comparable portion of foreign automobiles was 0.44 percent in 1995, 0.55 percent in May this year and 0.7 percent in August.        Most market watchers even predict that foreign automakers will rapidly encroach upon the domestic passenger car market over the coming 10 years at the least.        One of the key factors behind these rosy prospects is the changing attitude of Korean consumers toward foreign-made cars.        According to a recent survey of car owners conducted by Hyundai Motor Co., for instance, 39.9 percent of the respondents replied that they would choose a foreign-made car rather than a Korean-made one if the prices of the both are pretty much the same.        Aggressive sales promotion activities and the introduction of new and diversified models by foreign automakers here have also greatly contributed to the brisk sales of foreign-made cars in Korea, market experts say.        Among those are the introduction of relatively low-price foreign-made cars ranging from 10 million won (some $12,300) to 20 million won per unit, the free supply of some expendable auto parts to consumers and guaranteed vehicle maintenance lasting for three years after the purchase.        However, there are still several negative factors.        ``We can cite the social climate here as the Achilles' heel for foreign automakers. Accordingly, the domestic sales of foreign-made cars may turn from a sharp rise to a steep drop if the nation's current account deficit continues snowballing rapidly and the social environment turns against excessive consumption in the future,'' said Kim Young-tae, a senior official of the KAMA.        ``At the same time, the competitiveness of foreign automakers still lags behind that of domestic car producers in terms of after-sales service mainly because of the insufficient number of service centers and vehicle maintenance technicians-plus the slow supply of some auto parts,'' he said.        If foreign automakers remove such negative factors, the domestic market share of foreign-made cars is likely to expand at a rapid pace in the years ahead, he added.        Reflective of the brisk sales of foreign-made cars here, in the meantime, two out of the 11 importers and sales agents for foreign cars in the country saw the annual sales figure exceed 1,000 units for the first time.        The annual sales figure of 1,000 cars is regarded by most auto experts as the break-even-point of foreign automakers.        Woo Sung Industrial Co., an importer and domestic sales agent for Chrysler, sold 1,398 units during the first eight months of the year, a significant rise of 79.2 percent from the same period of 1995.        Kolon International Corp., a sales agent for BMW, also sold 1,064 units in the eight-month period, a 121.1 percent surge from a year ago.        The domestic sales figure during the same period stood at 961 for Han Sung Motor Co., a sales agent for Mercedes-Benz; 821 for Hanjin Engineering & Construction Co., a Volvo agent; 693 for Hyosung Corp., a Volkswagen and Audi agent; and 602 for Inchcape Korea, a sales agent for General Motors, Jaguar, Land Rover, Rolls-Royce and Avalon of Toyota.        Ford Korea, a subsidiary of Ford Motor Co. in Seoul which initiated the domestic car sales business in early June, sold 432 units during the June-August period of 1996.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Market & Economic Viewpoint (By Seong C. Gweon); Are All Banks the Same? from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996By Seong C. Gweon       This is what actually happened in an executive meeting of a major bank, according to a recent (Sept. 21) report in the Korea Economic Daily. The bank had to reach a final decision to submit a bid for a deposit as much as 118.5 billion won to the Ministry of Information and Communication. ``An annual rate of 13.5 percent is a must,'' said a director of business at large while another director in charge of investment argued for 13 percent at the highest. The latter said, ``The going market rate is a little over 12 percent and thus it is almost impossible to earn more than 13 percent even if we get the money.'' Guess what? The majority opted for 13.5 percent, the higher rate, as usual.        Many Korean banks _ firms in other sectors as well _  still think size or market share is more important than profitability. Operations of banks have been heavily controlled by the government, which would like to pump money into strategic sectors. Therefore, the management of a bank is more sensitive to what the government wants to do rather than how much its shareholders want them to earn.        This can explain the differences in profitability between Korean banks and foreign banks. For example, the average return on assets for 25 Korean banks in 1995 was 0.32 percent whereas that for the branches in Seoul of foreign banks was 1.17 percent. This difference is too big to be explained by the fact that domestic banks operate in a more restrictive environment. Here are a couple of more comparisons: The seven largest U.S. banks as a whole earned 1.62 percent on their assets and the top seven British banks earned 1.29 percent. Net income per employee for Korean banks was only one fifth of that for U.S. banks and a third of that for Japanese banks.        Is the bank mentioned at the beginning going to lose money to pay more than they will be able to earn? Better not. After all, they will not lose because it won't be a difficult task to charge more than 13 percent on their lendings. How? It's almost certain that there will be a sufficient number of companies, more often smaller ones, which are in desperate need of money. This is said to be one of many reasons why Korean firms are suffering from a low margin. In other words, firms, i.e., their clients, fall victim to less competitive, and thus less productive banks.   Banks on buy list        Still, banks are making money! Ironically, as the economy becomes weaker, they seem to be better positioned than any other industries in Korea. A broker in the international marketing department of a major securities company said the other day that foreign institutions showed more interest in Korean banks, but the question is: Are all banks the same?        The 12 banks headquartered in Seoul and the 13 provincial banks were analysed. Prices as of Sept. 18 are on the y-axis in the chart shown and earnings per share (EPS) on the x-axis. The regression line fits the 25 points, which stand for the banks (their names appear only if they are specifically mentioned) and expresses the ``positive'' relationship between price and EPS. The line cuts the y-axis at 6,813 which means that a bank with a ``zero'' EPS may still sell for 6,813 won. A bank located above the line is considered to be relatively overvalued and vice versa. For example, Cheju and Shinhan look way off this line, meaning they are ``more expensive'' in a relative sense than the other banks.        There are three more diagonal lines, denoting the price-earnings(p/e) multiples equal to 5, 10 and 20 times. For example, the price being equal to 10,500 won and the EPS equal to 2,198 won, the multiple for Kyongnam is 4.7 times, which makes the corresponding point just off the p/e5 line. Similarly, the p/e for Foreign Exchange is 10.2 times with the price being equal to 9,150 won and the EPS equal to 893 won. Those 25 banks have been grouped arbitrarily. The banks in the first group realized a loss in the first half of this year. Those in the second group, 13 in total, have a p/e multiple of 10 times or above. Considering that the market multiple is about 18 times and that bank stocks in general are supposed to be less volatile than the market average, they seem to be somewhat overvalued except those near or below the p/e10 line such as Cho-hung, Foreign Exchange and Commercial. The last group consists of 6 banks whose p/e's are a little larger or smaller than 5 times. If the p/e multiple sums up everything relevant in valuing a stock, these stocks should be fundamentally undervalued.        What if the two valuations were combined? Stocks below both the p/e10 line and the regression line may be said to be ``truly'' undervalued. Those belonging to this category are Commercial, Pusan, Daegu and Kyongnam.        Although this kind of analysis has its own merit, one caveat should be properly given. The earnings per share used in the analysis were computed by doubling the first-half figures, assuming the full-year results would be as good, or bad for some banks, as the first-half ones. Instead, the most recent full-year figures (the second half of 1995 plus the first half of 1996) may be used.  ____       Dr. Gweon is a financial economist at the Joong-Ang Ilbo. _ Ed.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Contemporary Korean Art on Show in Tokyo; Works of 14 Artists Reflecting"90s Trend Exhibited as Part of Exchange Program from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996By Cho Yoon-jung Staff reporter       The last major exhibition of Korean art to be held at the National Museum of Modern Art in Tokyo, Japan, was in 1968. Almost 30 years later, a show titled ``An Aspect of Korean Art in the 1990s'' opens there today through Nov. 17 featuring the work of 14 artists in their 30s and 40s.        The exhibition is part of an exchange relationship with Korea's National Museum of Contemporary Art and has been in the works since 1992. In preparation, three curators from Japan have been coming to Korea regularly over the years to meet with artists and see the major exhibitions going on around the country.        Next year, an exhibition of Japanese art will be held in Korea.        While small shows of Korean art have been held in Japan on a private level, none has been able to give a comprehensive view of the state of art here. For Korea, Japan has always been a country which has been ``so close and yet so far away'' but, in the idealistic view perhaps, art has the power to break down barriers and prejudices and spark understanding, and this is the context in which the exhibition is considered to be important.        The 1968 exhibition featured Korea's monochrome art, one of the country's most unique art movements when seen in an international light. In the time between, art has changed and expanded its territory greatly. Into the '90s, art here is as varied and complex in expression as it is in other parts of the world reflecting greater exposure to international movements and greater dialogue and exchange with other artists around the world.        The 14 artists chosen cover the fields of painting, sculpture, photography and installation. Together their work points to a certain emerging direction for Korean art, a direction which has yet to be defined in any concrete way even in Korea.        The art form to come out of the great expansion in artistic expression is the installation though as recently as five years ago installations were quite a novelty on the scene.        Five artists in the exhibition work on installations _  Kim Soo-ja, Park In-churl, U Son-ok, You Maeung-gyun and Yun Suk-nam. Of these Kim and Yun tackle the subject of women. Kim makes her statement with bundles wrapped in brightly colored cloths, called ``pojagi,'' which were indispensable in Korean households. The motif of cloth and sewing is one which links generations of women in silent sisterhood.        Yun is a popular artist who took up her art after first fulfilling the expected roles of wife, mother and daughter-in-law. A proponent of feminist art here, she presents wooden figures of ``mother,'' often using wooden washboards, to symbolize the pains and sorrows of women in this society.        Both Yun and Kim are also taking part in an exhibition in New York titled ``Contemporary Art in Asia: Traditions/ Tensions,'' presented by the Asia Society.        With the great expansion in artistic mediums, Oum Jeong-soon and Kim Ho-deuk are two artists who are still into drawing. Oum is into finely detailed, skeletal and almost scientific pictures of plants while Kim takes a Zen approach to nature.        The environment is an important issue for Bae Bien-u and Kim Myung-sook, the trees lovers. Bae is a photographer who concentrates on the pine tree, a symbolic tree for the Korean people. Kim draws forests, detailed, fine and dense packed with lines going over and over each other in pencil, conte and charcoal, leaving no blank space on the paper.        The rest of the artists _ Je Yeo-ran, Lee Young-bae, Kim Hong-joo and Kim Jong-hak _ are painters with a strong experimental streak.        Je's work is especially interesting as it shows how the monochrome tradition has developed into the '90s. Kim Jong-hak's work shows how painting overlaps into the world of installation by incorporating nuts and bolts, movie posters, apples and pears. Kim Hong-joo presents realist portraits created by inspecting himself in a mirror.        Realism is an art area where exchange between Korea and Japan is also taking place on a private level. While the exhibition of Korean art is under way in Tokyo, 12 Japanese artists are taking part in ``Beautiful Fiction _ Exhibition of Contemporary Realism'' at POSCO Gallery in Samsung-dong through Oct. 24.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Family Values Highlighted by Chusok Celebrations from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996By Kim Min-hee Staff reporter       Koreans will celebrate Chusok, the traditional Korean Full Moon Day, Friday. The nation's biggest holiday after New Year's Day, the day is devoted to ancestral worship and family reunions.        Coming on the 15th day of the eighth lunar month, Chusok is also called Chungchujol, meaning ``mid-autumn day'' or Hangawi, the origin of which is unclear.        This year, the official Chusok holiday begins tomorrow to last through Saturday. But as Sunday follows immediately, most people will take four days off in a row.        Similar to America's Thanksgiving Day in spirit, the holiday, whose unique custom dates back to the reign of King Yuri (24-57 AD) of the Silla Kingdom, is originally a time of offering thanks for a bountiful harvest combined with the ritual of ancestral worship.        Although the tradition is still kept intact, for modern-day Koreans, the day's primary function has shifted to the reunion of families as a result of the disintegration of the country's extended family system.        As in the past years, the expressways and other major roads throughout the nation are expected to be jampacked with cars carrying millions of hometown visitors during the holiday period. Last year, more than 27 million people were reported to have crisscrossed the nation. This year, the number is expected to be less.        The festive mood surrounding Chusok is accompanied by a solemn spirit. On Chusok, people get up early, change into their Sunday best and conduct memorial services, called ``charye,'' at home and visit the graves of their ancestors.        For the services for the ancestors, people set up tables laden with offerings of freshly harvested crops such as rice, an assortment of dishes, fruit, and wine made from fresh rice. The day's most popular delicacy is ``songpyon,'' half-moon shaped rice cakes. It is made of well-kneaded steamed rice powder, stuffed with chestnuts, beans, dried Chinese dates or powdered sesame.        For those who plan to remain in Seoul during the holiday period, a number of cultural events have been organized by the Ministry of Culture and Sports.        The five ancient palaces in Seoul, Toksu Palace, Kyongbok Palace, Changgyong Palace, Chongmyo and Changdok Palace, and the National Folklore Museum will remain open to the public.        Under the administration of the Cultural Property Preservation Bureau, Toksu, Kyongbok and Changgyong palaces and the museum will make available their outside grounds for visitors to enjoy some of Korea's outdoor folk games, such as ``nolttuigi'' (sea-saw jumping) and ``chegichagi'' (shuttlecock kicking).        Various concerts of Korean music are also scheduled.        In a concert titled ``Song of Hometown'' on Sept. 26, 7:30 p.m., at the National Theater, Hanwoori Opera Company will perform lyric and popular songs of Korea, targeting specifically those who have left their homes in North Korea. Also to be held at the National Theater are a pansori performance by Choi Yong-gil and a performance of popular and screen music by Seoul Romance Orchestra, at 3 and 7 p.m. Saturday, respectively.        Sponsored by the Foundation for the Preservation of Cultural Properties, there will also be a performance of traditional Korean songs and dances Sept. 27-29 at Seoul Norimadang, an outdoor stage in Chamsil in southeastern Seoul.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Patent Law Worker Wins Top Prize in National Practical English Contest from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      The first prize of the 1996 National Practical English Contest, which was held Sept. 21 at KM-TV Hall in Nonhyon-dong, southern Seoul, was awarded to Jang Young-yun, who works for Koreana patent law firm in Seoul.        The second prizes went to Kim Joo-hoon and Jeong Eun-young and the third to Kim Young-sook, Kim Young-hwa and Park Jung-chul.        Winners of the special prizes for the foreigners who participated in the seminar as non-contestants were Aya Katsurayama from Japan and Li Jiangping from China.        Kim Joo-hoon, one of the two second prize winners, is a junior at Yonsei University in Seoul majoring in English language and literature. The other winner Jeong Eun-young is a freshman of English education at Kyungnam University.        The National Practical English Contest is totally different from conventional speech contests. At this year's event, each contestant was asked to randomly choose a topic regarding the 2002 World Cup or an everyday scenario written on a scrap of paper, and then each had a spontaneous three-minute conversation with a native speaker based on the topic.        Fifteen finalists who passed interviews and semifinals held across the country competed.        The contest was supported by The Korea Herald along with MBC-TV and BCM Publishers, Inc. Its sponsors included Daishin Group and WICOM Co., Ltd.        The first prize winner has been given an opportunity to participate in a four-week English language program at the University of California, San Diego. The second prize winners will have the chance to attend a three-week intensive English- language program at New York University, American Language Institute, and at Pacific Gateway International College in Vancouver, Canada.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Budget Bill Totals 71.6 Trillion Won; Government Projects 13.7 PercentSpending Hike Over 1996 from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996By Kwak Young-sup Staff reporter       The government yesterday unveiled its 1997 budget plan, which calls for total spending of 71.6 trillion won ($89.5 billion), a 13.7 percent rise from this year's 63 trillion won.        The budget proposal is composed of a general-account portion of 67.78 trillion won, up 12.8 percent from 1996, and a 3.82-trillion-won special account for fiscal investment and financing, a 33.9 percent increase from this year, the Ministry of Finance and Economy (MOFE) said yesterday.        Approved at a cabinet meeting yesterday, the budget bill will be submitted to the National Assembly Oct. 2 for approval.        Korean taxpayers face a heavier tax burden next year than this year in proportion to the budget increase.        The total tax revenues will rise to 21.6 percent of gross national product (GNP) next year from this year's 20.9 percent. A Korean taxpayer will shoulder an average of 2.06 million won in national taxes.        The total tax receipts will be composed of 64.23 trillion won in national taxes and 3.54 trillion won in nontax revenues.        Ministry officials said the 1997 budget bill focuses on expanding the nation's infrastructure to help reduce growing logistical costs and minimizing a rise in the public sector's fixed expenditures.        ``The 1997 budget proposal is characterized by a drastic rise in spending on infrastructure projects,'' said Kim Jung-gook, MOFE's assistant minister for budget. ``Great emphasis has also been placed on improving the productivity of the government sector by cutting fixed costs as much as possible.''        According to the budget bill, fixed expenditures such as defense spending, wages for government workers and grants will rise 11.1 percent to 37.16 trillion won from this year, while spending on government-initiated projects will increase 16.7 percent to 34.44 trillion won.        Defense spending will surge 12 percent to 14.27 trillion won next year from this year's 12.73 trillion won, the highest year-on-year growth rate since the current ``civilian'' government took office in 1993.        ``We had to take into account the present security situation on the Korean Peninsula in raising the defense spending,'' said Kim, the chief architect of the 1997 budget proposal.        About 47 percent of the defense budget will be used to purchase advanced weapons.        Spending for the expansion of infrastructure such as ports, highways and railroads will jump 24.4 percent to 10.13 trillion won next year from this year.        The sharp rise in spending on infrastructure projects is designed to ease the nation's growing physical distribution costs, which is cutting into the overall national competitiveness, Kim said.        The government will take the lead in eliminating the nation's high-wage structure by restricting growth in the number of government workers and their wages.        A wage freeze will be imposed on 6,000 senior government officials next year, while lower-level employees will be given a 5 percent rise in their basic pay only.        Spending on education will surge 17.6 percent to 18.63 trillion won and 6.67 trillion won will be earmarked for improving the structure of the agro-fisheries sector.        The 1997 budget will also include a 27.3 percent increase in spending for technology and computerization, or 3.22 trillion won; a 36.3 percent rise in spending on environmental protection, or 2.11 trillion won; and a 43.4 percent jump in spending for culture and sports, or 540.8 billion won.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Current Account Deficit Surges to $15.2 Billion; Chalks up Record High of$3.4 Billion in August from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      The nation's current account deficit surged to a record monthly high of $3,487 million in August, bringing the cumulative shortfall in the first eight months of the year to $15,243 million, according to the Bank of Korea (BOK) yesterday.        The aggregate January-August figure already exceeded the government-revised latest shortfall prediction of $15 billion for the entire year.        The central bank predicted Korea's current account deficit for the year would reach about $18 billion, accounting for about 3.6 percent of the nation's gross national product (GNP).        The BOK attributed the galloping current account shortfall mainly to a slowdown in exports and a rise in imports and invisible trade deficits.        ``The January-August current account deficit represents about 3 percent of the nation's GNP and the expected deficit for September would amount to $1.5 billion,'' said Paeng Dong-joon, director of the BOK's Statistics Department.        The BOK said that trade deficit amounted to $2,848 million in August, compared with a trade shortfall of $387 million in August last year and $1,662 million in July this year.        Exports decreased 8.7 percent from a year ago to $9,553 million on a free-on-board basis in August.        Cumulative trade deficits during the January-August period amounted to $9,715 million, compared with a shortfall of $4,814 million during the same 1995 period.        ``The slowdown in exports was mainly affected by a continued low export price of semiconductor prices,'' Paeng said.        He said that the unit export price of Korean-produced 16 mega DRAM chips averaged $11.5 in August, a sharp decline from $40 to $45 last March. ``But there would be no further drop in the export prices of 16 mega DRAM chips.''        August saw its invisible trade shortfall amount to $592 million, up from a deficit of $557 million in July.        The central bank cited as major reasons for the hike in invisible trade shortfall a surge in overseas travel and shipping expenses.        Korea saw a net capital inflow of $1,103 million in August, from a net outflow of $140 million in July this year.        The nation's foreign exchange holdings decreased from $35 billion at the end of July this year to $33.56 billion as of the end of August on an outstanding basis.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996LG Securities Holds Signing Rite for Korea Bond Fund from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      An international fund investing in Korean bonds has been launched for the first time, offering foreign investors an opportunity to acquire stakes exclusively in the local bond market.        LG Securities Co. held a signing ceremony for its Korea Bond Fund (KBF) at the Rainbow Hotel in London Monday. LG is acting as the lead manager for the $105 million fund with the participation of Nomura International PLC.        This is the first time that a country fund designed exclusively for foreigners seeking to invest in local bonds has been set up. The Korea Fund, the first overseas fund for investment in the Korean stock market, was set up 12 years ago.        Scudder, Stevens and Clark, Inc., an American investment firm which acted as a manager for the Korea Fund, is also acting as a fund manager for KBF.        Originally planned as a $100 million fund, the KBF had to be increased by an additional $5 million due to popular demand by foreign investors. The fund is due to be listed on the London Stock Exchange in October.        The KBF portfolio will be composed of financial and development bonds (50 percent or more) and nonguaranteed bonds (20 percent or more), both issued by small- and medium-business; nonguaranteed bonds with a five-year maturity (10 percent or less) and nonguaranteed convertible bonds (10 percent or less), both issued by large businesses; and short-term fund management including cash (10 percent or less).Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Globalization Drive Forces Companies to Hire Foreign Staffers from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      Korea's giant industrial conglomerates, while cutting back on domestic employment to cope with slow business, are sharply increasing the hiring of foreign workers as part of their globalization strategies, business sources said.        The employment of overseas staffers, previously focused on a few industrial countries such as the United States, Japan and Canada, are now spreading to newly industrializing nations, including China, they said.        Major conglomerates _  Samsung, Hyundai, LG and Daewoo _  are hiring twice as many foreigners as last year to meet the international manpower demand in such areas as automobiles, telecommunications and computer software. Among the local staff are Korean students studying abroad, ethnic Koreans abroad as well as other foreigners.        Hyundai Group, for instance, is set to employ 1,000 foreign workers, up 200 from last year and has already hired 100 among the majors of electronics, bioengineering and high molecule at a recent employment fair in the United States. It plans to hold similar fairs in Japan, China and Europe to employ 900 others.        Samsung Motors Inc., scheduled to roll out assembled passenger cars from 1998, picked up seven veteran technicians who retired from Japan's Nissan Motor as managers responsible for model development, R&D, design and car test. It lately has hired Dr. Song Ji-oh, a Korean with career at the General Motors Corp. as the head of the in-house research institute.        The company plans to hire 110 foreign staff by running ads at foreign news media, holding manpower recruitment sessions in major industrial countries and accepting recommendations from foreign business associations, the sources said.        Daewoo Group, under its managerial watchword of global management, has recently opened a``global manager's course'' and hired 200 international staff members who will operate its 16 overseas offshoots in Britain, France, Germany and other countries.        LG Group also hired 100 foreigners among majors of telecommunications and semiconductor in the United States in July to meet the manpower demand in these new businesses.        The brisk employment of foreign staff, while providing Korean employees with fresh incentives for self-development, has its own problems, such as the relatively long period of one-to-two years required for the foreigners to adapt themselves to the Korean corporate culture, the business sources said.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Business Survey Index Hits 92 in Fourth Quarter '96 from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      The ongoing business slump is expected to continue to grip the nation's manufacturing industry in the fourth quarter of the year, the Bank of Korea (BOK) said yesterday.        In its survey of 2,480 manufacturing and nonmanufacturing companies with an annual turnover of 500 million won in the country on their business prospects, the central bank has found that the business survey index (BSI) for the fourth quarter stands at 92 on average.        A BSI reading of 100 means that respondents who see improvements in business conditions equal those who expect declines.        The fourth-quarter BSI of 1,429 manufacturing companies stands at 94 and of 1,051 nonmanufacturing companies it is 88.        In the meantime, the BSI for the third quarter was 81 for manufacturing companies and 76 for nonmanufacturing companies.        The manufacturing companies' BSI of 81 for the July-September period was the lowest since the index marked 72 in the first quarter of 1993.        Major reasons behind the gloomy prospects for the October-December period are the weak value of the Japanese yen, the slow growth in domestic consumption, and the decline in export prices of major export items, including semiconductors, steel, and petrochemicals, BOK officials said.        Reflective of the bleak prospects, domestic manufacturing companies are moving to curtail their facility investment volume in the months ahead with the facility investment BSI standing at 83 for the third quarter and 86 for the fourth quarter.        The turnover BSI in the fourth quarter was 103 for manufacturing companies, up from 90 in the third quarter, and the comparable BSI stood at 92 for nonmanufacturing companies, up from 86, indicating that their sales are likely to recover from their slump.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Seoul-Inchon Canal Work to Start Next Year from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      Work to build an intracity canal passing through the western tip of Seoul to the western port city of Inchon will be launched in the second half of next year, the Ministry of Construction and Transportation said yesterday.        The two-phase project for the 18-km waterway primarily intended to alleviate heavy inland cargo traffic will be completed in 2010, according to the ministry's basic plan.        Bidding applications will be accepted until next January and the successful bidder will be announced next March.        Corporations wishing to participate in the project are required to form a consortium with the Korea Water Resources Corporation.        The canal will be built for feeder container ships with a maximum capacity of 2,500 tons. The waterway will measure six meters in depth and 100 meters in width.        The project is valued at about 1,000 billion won ($1.25 billion). Of the amount, the land acquisition cost which is estimated at 260 billion won ($325 million), will be funded from the state coffer and the remaining cost will be provided by private builders.        The successful bidder will have the right to operate the canal and charge tolls for 40 years.        The canal essentially aims at reducing the ground transportation linking Seoul to port facilities of Inchon.        Sand excavated from the seabed of the West Sea, containers, steel and automobiles will constitute the bulk of the traffic on the canal.        Upon completion, the canal is expected to help to relieve the serious traffic congestion of the Seoul-Pusan highway.        ``Currently, the transportation of containers to Seoul from Pusan is heavily dependent on the Seoul-Pusan Expressway,'' said a ministry official. ``When the canal is completed, containers will be carried on sea to Inchon and then through the canal, to Seoul.''Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Cultural Dimensions (Column By Robert J. Fouser); Experiment in Korea-JapanRelations from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996By Robert J. Fouser       Many Japanese writers on Asian affairs refer to Korea as the ``near-but-far country.'' By this, they mean that Korea is culturally and geographically near to, but emotionally far from, Japan. Despite the Japanese media's emphasis on distance, changes in Japan in the 1990s offer the hope of bringing Korea and Japan closer.        These changes are occurring the following three areas: travel, Korean language education, and research on Korea.        An increasing number of Koreans now visit Japan for tourism and business. About one third of all foreigners entering Japan are Korean. The rapid increase in numbers of Korean tourists means increased interaction with Koreans in Japanese tourist and business centers. The sight of well-dressed Korean tourists enjoying themselves in Japan has dispelled the image of Korea as a poor country. Growing trade and business contacts bring more Korean business people to Japan.        In reverse, a large number of Japanese continue to visit Korea; about forty percent of all foreigners visiting Korea are Japanese. Intimidated by the high cost of travel in Japan, many Japanese, particularly those in western Japan, find it cheaper to visit Korea than to go to Tokyo. An increasing number of high school students visit Korea for school trips to learn about Korean history.        Language learning often follows increased travel and cultural exchange. Until the Seoul Olympics in 1988, most Korean language education took place in schools for Korean residents in Japan. Since the Olympics, Korean language education has spread rapidly beyond the Korean community.        Although few universities offer a major in Korean language and literature, many famous universities now teach a variety of Korean language courses. A recent survey by Keidanren, the largest business association in Japan, showed that people in their twenties and thirties ranked Korean as the third most important foreign language for Japanese people to learn. English ranked first, followed by Chinese. People in their forties and fifties placed sixth out of the eight choices given.        Korean language education has also entered the commercial language teaching market. A growing number of language institutes offer Korean conversation courses. The educational service of NHK TV offers a regular course in Korean. A Korean language proficiency test is offered twice a year, attracting an rapidly growing number of testees.        A recent poll by the Japanese Agency for Culture showed that 76 percent of those polled believe that Japanese people should make a greater effort to learn Asian languages (no languages were specified in the poll). All of these developments point to continued growth of Korean language education in Japan.        Related to the boom in Korean language education, is the continued growth of research on things Korean in Japan. Armed with ample research materials and excellent language skills, Japanese scholars of Korean studies produce more research on Korea than in any other country outside Korea. Many Koreanologists in Japan have received graduated education in Korea and have close contacts with Korean researchers.        In recent years, Korean studies in Japan has done much to shake off the residue of its colonial past. In history, for example, many younger scholars have condemned the distortions of Korean history in Japanese history textbooks. Internationalization of universities in Japan has helped to give institutional support for Korean studies and academic exchanges with Korea.        None of these developments guarantees that Korean-Japanese relations will become chummy over night. Different interpretations of history continue to make emotional reconciliation difficult. Korean residents in Japan continue to face discrimination in critical areas, such as housing and employment. Politicians in both countries use mutual feelings of antipathy to whip up nationalist feeling for their own political purposes.        At the level of human exchange, however, the growing presence of Koreans and the Korean language in Japan brings about a sea change in Japanese attitudes toward Korea: Korea is now worth taking seriously. As a competitor or partner, Japan can no longer afford to pretend that Korea is far away.        The change in Japanese attitudes is not an accident of history. Throughout Japanese history, sudden threats from the outside have forced Japan to recognizes changes in the world order. The military alliance between the Silla and Tang China against Paekche stimulated the growth of strong centralized rule in Japan in the seventh century. Commodore Perry's black ships in 1853 led to the Meiji Restoration in 1868, which opened Japan to the West.        On a smaller scale, the decision to co-host the World Cup in 2002 is a similar shock to the collective Japanese psyche. The World Cup is also a useful metaphor for recent changes in Japanese attitudes toward Korea because the bitter competition to host the event ended with both countries being forced to cooperate as partners. With the aura of World Cup legitimacy, changes in Japanese attitudes toward Korea will accelerate as 2002 approaches.        Competition and partnership between Korea and Japan is, like the co-hosting of the World Cup, an experiment in relations between the two countries: never before have these two countries worked together as equal partners. From early sixth century, when the Korean scholar Wani gave the Japanese emperor Buddhist sutras and Confucian classics, to the controversies over textbooks and the comfort women, dominance, whether cultural, political, or military, was the prevailing paradigm in Korean-Japanese relations.        Soon, the average Japanese person will probably point to Russia when asked to find the ``near-but-far country'' on a map. And who knows, maybe other geographical controversies will become a thing of the past.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996MOTIE Plan to Issue Green Cards to Hi-Tech Experts Hits Snag from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      The attempt of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy to issue special identification cards for high-tech foreign manpower has hit a snag, officials said yesterday.        It has been pushing for the introduction of the so-called ``green card'' system for foreigners with Ph. D degrees or who are technological experts with M.A. or M.S. degrees as part of its plan to lure more foreign industrial and scientific experts.        Under the system, the government will treat the foreign experts like overseas Chinese in Korea, by issuing them permanent resident permits and allowing them to purchase land up to 660 sq. meters. They will also enjoy medical insurance benefits and be able to make savings deposits at domestic banks.        The ministry had tried to include the related clause in the revised External Trade Act but reportedly abandoned the attempt, faced with opposition from other ministries, the officials said.        Instead of introducing a special ID card system, it decided to dispense with the inconveniences foreigners suffer by revising the relevant decrees and regulations, they said.        The abortive bid is expected to make it more difficult for  the nation's major conglomerates to recruit foreign talent, while their demand for overseas experts is ever increasing, the officials said.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Business News Briefs; KT Develops CD-ROM Telephone Directory from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      The Korea Phone Directory Co. (KPDC), a unit of Korea Telecom, has introduced a CD-ROM (compact disc-read only memory) phone directory.        The CD-ROM phone directory, the first of its kind here, contains all of the 4.3 million phone subscribers in Seoul on two diskettes.        Equipped with a multimedia service function, the electronic directory is capable of classifying all of the paper directory's listings into 3,300 kinds of different business or brand groups.        KPDC has manufactured 30,000 units of the CD-ROM directories and plans to distribute them free of charge.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Dead Leader Infiltrated South Three Times from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      It was the third time for the dead leader of the estimated 26-member North Korean infiltrators to have intruded the South since last year, a captured North Korean agent has been quoted as saying.        Lee Kwang-soo, who was captured unhurt Wednesday evening near Kangnung on the East Coast, has told investigators that Col. Kim Dong-won had infiltrated into the South aboard a submarine on three occasions since last year, a reliable intelligence source said yesterday.        Col. Kim was the head of a North Korean spy department in charge of transporting secret agents, said the source, quoting Lee. He was one of the 11 North Korean infiltrators who were found dead on a mountain near Kangnung after they deserted their wrecked submarine.        It demonstrated that North Koreans have several times sent submarines to the South on various missions, said the source who demanded anonymity. Lee was brought to Seoul Saturday evening for further interrogation.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Business News Briefs; Korean-Made Car Sales in Sweden Rise in '95 from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      A total of 2,365 Korean-made cars were sold in Sweden last year, up 96.4 percent from 1,204 cars in 1994, according to the Korea Trade-Investment Promotion Agency (KOTRA) yesterday.        The Korean cars accounted for 1.3 percent of 169,756 cars sold in the Swedish auto market last year.        KOTRA's Stockholm Trade Center, quoting statistics released by the Association of Swedish Automobile Manufacturers and Wholesalers, reported that the 2,365 cars break down to 2,289 from Hyundai and 76 cars from Ssangyong Motor Cos.        During the January-August period of this year, 2,196 Korean automobiles were sold, up 65 percent from the same period of last year.        The report said sales of Korean cars have continued to grow sharply especially after Hyundai's subcompacts ``Accent'' and ``Elantra'' have received good response from young Swedish customers.        The strong Swedish krona has weakened the competitiveness of Swedish cars such as ``Volvo'' and ``Saab,'' while increasing the sales of foreign cars, it said.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Business News Briefs; Dainong Heavy Wins ISO 9001 Certificate from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      Dainong Heavy Industries, Inc. has received an international certificate acknowledging the high standards of several of its products used in agriculture and construction, a Dainong spokesman said.        Chun Chul-soon, president of the Korea Productivity Center for Quality Assurance, conveyed an International Standard Organization (ISO) 9001 certificate to Ku Ja-yoon, chief executive officer of Dainong Heavy Industries, during a ceremony held in Seoul Monday. The company is an affiliate of the Dainong Business Group.        Products for which the firm received the certificate include a truck-mounted concrete pump, a trailer-mounted concrete pump, a hydraulic breaker, a hydraulic crawler drill, a silo lifting system, a mini excavator and a mini loader.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996New Products; Daewoo's Microwave Oven from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      Daewoo Electronics Co. has introduced a new microwave oven model, which is built by the company's French design research center on the basis of the latest designing concepts.        The elegantly-designed microwave oven features a variety of automatic and supplementary functions, including finish alarming, cooking-method memory and locking for the safety of children, the company said. Price: 178,000 won Phone: (02) 360-7472Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996New Products; LGE's LCD TV from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      LG Electronics Inc. (LGE) has developed the nation's first wide-screen LCD (liquid crystal display) TV, which has a screen size of 15 inch.        The wide-screen LCD TV, developed after 10-odd LGE researchers spent 2 billion won over the past 10 months, can also be used as a PC monitor.        The new LCD TV adopts the ``edge-type back-light'' and ``double scanning'' technologies to sharply improve picture clarity.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Foreign Business Briefs; Adidas AG Chairman in Seoul for 2-day Stay from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      Robert Louis Dreyfus, chairman of Adidas AG, a globally recognized sportswear brand, arrived in Seoul yesterday for a two-day visit.        During his stay in Korea, he looked into plans for a joint venture with a local partner, Jewoo Trading Co., according to a Jewoo spokesman. The company, temporarily named ``Adidas Korea,'' will be in charge of manufacturing, as well as importing Adidas sports goods, including shoes, bags, clothes and accessories.        The Jewoo spokesman said the joint venture is a natural result of the growing demand in the Asia-Pacific region, and that the venture will help solidify the commitment Adidas has in this region.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Foreign Business Briefs; U.S. Firm SMC Hosts Technology Forum from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996      Standard Microsystems Corp. (SMC), a network solutions and computer component manufacturing company, held a technology forum entitled ``Korea Tech Forum '96: Move into the Future with Korea,'' at Hotel Lotte in central Seoul yesterday.        Speaking at the forum were Steve Schmid, SMC's vice president of product development and Richard Geasey, SMC's international marketing manager. The event drew some 200 members of the local network solutions industry.        SMC, an American company based in Hauppauge, N.Y., has offices worldwide, including those in Canada, Australia, Asia, Europe and Latin America. The firm has annual sales of over $300 million.Copyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE KOREA HERALD                              via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Card May Carry 7 Phone, Contact Numbers; Hyosung Group to Launch One-NumberService in December from THE KOREA HERALD, September 25, 1996By Yoo Cheong-mo Staff reporter       How many telephone numbers are printed on your customer's business card?        The card may carry up to seven different phone and contact numbers _ office phone, car or cellular phone, home phone, pager, fax and Internet address.        Such a labyrinthine card may cause a lot of confusion, in case you would want to contact someone immediately.        With the imminent launch of the so-called ``one-number service,'' however, your troublesome guesswork of whether to call someone's office phone, pager, computer, fax or car phone will soon become a thing of the past.        The Hyosung Group, ranked 28th in the corporate hierarchy, is now pushing to launch the nation's first commercial one-number service in Seoul in December. To that end, Hyosung has already created ties with AccessLine Technology Inc. (ATI) of the United States, and NTT and Marubeni, both of Japan, to establish a 3-billion-won joint-venture company, named ``Hyosung One Number Co.'' Hyosung, ATI, NTT and Marubeni raised the initial capital at a ratio of 61 percent, 19 percent, 10 percent and 10 percent.        O Hyo-won, who took office as representative director of Hyosung One Number Co. early this month, said, ``The individual one number will soon emerge as a new symbol of VIP status here.''        ``An important business call, if missed because of your absence at a certain place, would create billions of won in losses to your business. The one number service will prevent such a mishap one hundred percent,'' O said.        One-number service is a wholly new concept of intelligent communications, which is intended to make it easier for people on the move to stay in constant touch with their important business and personal contacts. One-number subscribers are given a single personal number which will integrate all different numbers of their communication devices, including office phones, home phones, cellular phones, pagers, faxes or car phones. Then, they can always be tracked and contacted through one of the six communicators, wherever they are staying within the country.        Personal numbers are different from regular phone numbers in that they're tied to a person, not a place.        ``In the near future, nearly a quarter of cellular users will subscribe to the one number service,'' O quoted a U.S. market research firm as forecasting. ``High-ranking government officials, business executives, lawyers, self-employed men, public accountants, entertainers and others who are constantly on the move but need to be contacted, are among the potential customers of the service,'' he said.        Despite such enormous convenience and market opportunities of the one-number service, the majority of local telecom experts are painting a gloomy picture of its future.        The number of pagers now in use in Korea has recently exceeded the 11 million mark. With the paging service already covering the entire country, the one-number service will not appear attractive to many people.        In addition, a new cellular-phone model with built-in paging functions will soon come on the market, further narrowing the room for Hyosung's successful entry into the one-number market.        ``Hyosung has cleared the regulatory hurdle of the Ministry of Information and Communication (MIC), which regards the one-number service as a value-added service. But it may be too early for the one-number service to settle in the Korean market, due to a host of unpredictable factors,'' said an industry analyst.        ``Considering the unique characteristics of the one-number service, active cooperation from existing telecom service carriers, such as Korea Telecom (KT), Korea Mobile Telecom (KMT) and paging service operators, will be indispensable for the success of the service,'' he said. He predicted that it would be very difficult to expect that Hyosung can gain proper support and network accesses from KT, KMT and paging companies, which are themselves preparing to enter the same market.        The service's excessively high charges will also pose a big obstacle to the immediate popularization of the service, he noted. Hyosung forecasts that its one-number subscribers may have to pay more than 20,000 won in monthly service charges, in addition to an initial membership fee of 30,000 won. At present, monthly service rates for paging and voice mail services do not exceed 8,000 won and 3,000 won, respectively.        Hyosung's O countered the mounting pessimistic views by saying,``We're well aware that potential profitability of the one-number service is not as high as it could be. But Hyosung sees the one-number industry as a kind of niche market, which may be able to secure substantial subscription bases particularly from corporate customers.''        Commercial one-number services, launched by carriers in the United States, Japan and Europe last year and this year, are also suffering from a shortage of subscribers.        AT & T, which kicked off a $45-a-month one-number service early last year, has managed to secure just 280,000 customers so far. The number of subscribers to NTT's one-number service, launched in May, now totals just 5,000. NTT's subscription target for this year does not exceed 10,000. Partly because of the highly uncertain prospects for the one-number service, KT, KMT, paging carriers and other domestic companies are reportedly taking a very careful approach to the market. Hyosung One Number Co. aims to secure about 20,000 subscribers by the end of next yearCopyright 1996 The Korea Herald.Back to Headline List WT03-B05-19IA087-000634-B040-105http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it52.html 205.156.212.5 19970122025920 text/html 150610HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:56:31 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:15 GMTContent-length: 150422Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it52.html Sample Issue Copyright KYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNet June 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * KYODO NEWS SERVICE (JAPAN) * Japanese morning newspaper headlines+ (97 words) Volkswagen to halt Beetle production in Brazil+ (168 words) Reform of pension fund system outlined, says paper+ (232 words) Health ministry distributes 'mad cow' booklet+ (253 words) Communication to start between PHS, cellular phones+ (178 words) Gasoline decontrol forcing oil companies to cut workers+ (213 words) Mistress hidden in Picasso masterpiece, scholar+ (266 words) Red Army member holding forged Japanese passport+ (153 words) Flood of new rice retailers riding deregulation wave+ (214 words) Main events scheduled for Sun., June 2+ (41 words) Hashimoto calls on Israel to continue peace process+ (137 words) 21% of companies increase or resume dividend payments+ (252 words) Japanese evening newspaper headlines+ (157 words) 88% of firms not paying during holidays for nursing+ (181 words) China agrees to CTBT banning of all types of nuke tests+ (233 words) Regulations on foreign entertainers to be tightened+ (265 words) Ministry to review dioxine control guideline+ (281 words) Hashimoto, Kim vow cooperation in co-hosting World Cup+ (484 words) Casual wear popular as present for Father's Day+ (247 words) Miyamoto flatly denies alleged takeover bid against Ascii+ (426 words) Yeltsin to attend politico-economic talks at G-7 summit+ (354 words) Hatoyama questions moving U.S. bases in Okinawa+ (192 words) Landowners to seek compensation after U.S. base return+ (199 words) Ex-Premier Hata threatens to leave opposition party+ (156 words) Stocks expected to continue to be mixed next week++ (714 words) Dollar expected to remain firm against yen in Tokyo++ (481 words) Short-term money rates expected to weaken next week++ (200 words) Sensitive trading seen on Tokyo bond market next week++ (188 words) Clinton renews MFN status for China+ (487 words) Asian editorial excerpts+ (929 words) U.S. pondering more food aid to N. Korea+ (296 words) Kim Jong Il likely to emerge from isolation soon+ (532 words) Toyota Tianjin venture holds opening reception+ (606 words) MITI to promote environmental equipment market in Asia+ (270 words) China-Taiwan trade up 2.9% in 1st qtr+ (190 words) Korean share prices rise+ (82 words) India's new premier Gowda sworn in+ (85 words) Mongolian fire fighters have tough road: journalist+ (244 words) S. Korea posts 1.44 bil. dlr trade deficit in May+ (139 words) Japan promises to consult S. Korea over North issue+ (170 words) H.K. dailies rap high-ranking official's remarks on press+ (247 words) Bus accident kills at least 26 in Bangladesh+ (70 words) 500 Vietnamese apply to return home from Philippines+ (347 words) 21-member coalition government in India sworn in+ (312 words) Backers of 'comfort woman' to seek apology from premier+ (260 words) Suu Kyi thanks Japan for pressuring junta+ (214 words) Brazil sports media blasts co-hosting of 2002 World Cup+ (320 words) Sports schedule for Sun., June 2+ (152 words) Japan, S. Korea back World Cup co-hosting+ (461 words) Mitsubishi Denki Ladies 2nd-day results+ (144 words) JCB Classic Sendai golf 3rd-day results+ (139 words) Terasawa takes 2nd-round lead in Mitsubishi Denki Ladies+ (208 words) Okano takes JCB Classic lead, but looking out for Ozaki+ (196 words) Japan's World Cup 'virtual stadium' left in the air+ (292 words) Japan, S. Korea to meet in World Cup final? (192 words) J.League Cup summaries+ (50 words) Cuba loses to Mitsubishi in baseball friendly closer+ (140 words) Chung calls for new int'l club competition in Far East+ (141 words) Osaka to bid for 1999 rhythmic gymnastics worlds+ (91 words) S. Korea to propose extension of no-visa visit to Japan+ (143 words) J.League Cup summaries -2-+ (43 words) Japanese pro baseball standings/results+ (144 words) News focus on problems of World-Cup co-hosting+ (642 words) Winless Kyoto grabs draw in J.League Cup opener+ (251 words) J.League Cup summaries -3-+ (31 words) Korean FIFA exec believes W-Cup co-host is trouble-free+ (239 words) Japan, Netherlands, Ukraine get v'ball Olympic berths+ (171 words) Date beats Wild, advances to 4th round+ (116 words) Yomiuri rallies past Chunichi, drops Dragons from first+ (349 words) Kyodo news summary+ (234 words) Kyodo news summary -2-+ (252 words) Kyodo news summary -3-+ (328 words) Kyodo news summary -4-+ (263 words) Kyodo news summary -5-+ (283 words) Kyodo news summary -6-+ (297 words) Kyodo news summary -7-+ (260 words) Kyodo news summary -8-+ (291 words) Closing Korean stock quotations Saturday+ (185 words) CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Japanese morning newspaper headlines+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Saturday morning newspaper headlines:     -- Japan, S. Korea to co-host 2002 World Cup. (Asahi, Yomiuri,Mainichi, Nihon Keizai)     -- Netanyahu beats Peres in Israel election. (Yomiuri, Asahi,Mainichi, Nihon Keizai)     -- Welfare ministry studying pension fund reform. (Nihon Keizai)     -- Health minister to take 20 pc salary cut over HIV scandal.(Mainichi)     -- LDP's Kato to give unsworn testimony at Diet. (Nihon Keizai)     -- Pretax profits of all listed companies to go up 6.1 pc in FY'96. (Nihon Keizai)     -- Nippon Housing Loan's net losses at 1,156 billion yen. (NihonKeizai)Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Volkswagen to halt Beetle production in Brazil+RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil, May 31 Kyodo     Brazilians will have to say goodbye for the second time to thehottest-selling car in the nation's history -- the ''Beetle'' modelmanufactured by the Brazilian subsidiary of Germany's Volkswagen AG.     Volkswagen do Brazil announced a plan Friday to cease productionof the popular old-fashioned model June 30, due to the model's lowprofit margin.     Volkswagen has been turning out a sluggish 1,300 Beetles amonth against 2,500 the company had targeted when it resumed assemblyof the model in 1993 after production was halted in 1986.     Since the first Brazilian-made Beetle left the assembly line in1959, the model has been the country's best seller, known today asthe ''Fusca.''     The terminated production of the Beetle will leave millions of''orphaned fans'' grouped in several fan clubs around the country,industry analysts said.     Output of the Beetle has been already ceased in Germany.  As ofJuly 1, Mexico will be the only country left which still assemblesthe model.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Reform of pension fund system outlined, says paper+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     A government study group has drafted an outline for the reformof the nation's welfare pension fund system, calling for the use ofmoney pooled under a government-managed pension plan to rescuefinancially troubled corporate pension funds, a business daily saidSaturday.     Corporate employees are entitled to receive pensions from thegovernment's pension plan for welfare purposes.  Apart from thissystem, many business corporations have established their own pensionfunds for their employees.     Each corporate pension fund also manages part of the premiumscollected under the national pension plan, making the lattersusceptible to the former's financial plight.     The drafted reform, prepared by the study group of the Healthand Welfare Ministry, proposes the government-managed pension planprovide financial assistance to corporate pension funds when theirinvestment yields slip below certain levels, the Nihon Keizai Shimbunsaid.     The step is in response to the deteriorating financial standingof corporate pension funds following the bursting of the ''bubble''economy, the daily said.     The reform plan also calls for the mandatory participation ofcorporate pension funds in a deposit insurance system to protectagainst bankruptcy, the newspaper said.     Under the system, corporate pension funds put up a certainamount of money to ensure pension payments even in the event ofbankruptcy.  At present, participation in the system is voluntary,making it difficult to raise deposit rates, the paper said.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Health ministry distributes 'mad cow' booklet+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     The Health and Welfare Ministry has distributed an informationbooklet to municipal and prefectural offices and other agenciesconcerning the ''mad cow'' disease, officials said said Saturday.     Topics such as the safety of imported beef from Britain, where arecent outbreak of mad cow disease occurred, and how people may beaffected by the disease are discussed in a question and answer format.     For example the booklet asks, ''Is imported beef from Britaindangerous?'' coupled with the reply, ''Because we cannot verify thesafety of British beef, Japan is not allowing British beef into itsmarket.''     The booklet is called ''Questions and answers about bovinespongiform encephalopathy.''     Scientists believe there is a link between the disease and itshuman equivalent, Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease, a debilitating anddeadly ailment that damages the brain.     A ministry spokesman said, ''The people in charge of this arepreparing the booklet because there is much confusion about theissue.''  He added the booklet will provide answers to frequentlyasked questions through case studies.     Ministry officials are hoping to quickly distribute the bookletto those in the meat importing business and to overseas travelers andhave so far distributed the booklet to about 120 places nationwide,including airport quarantine offices.     Information from World Health Organization (WHO) reports andBritish authorities has been incorporated into the booklet, ministryofficials said.     A ministry official said, ''In the end there are many questionsleft unresolved.  Our report is based on the knowledge that has beenaccumulated so far.''Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Communication to start between PHS, cellular phones+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Japanese telecommunications carriers are set to link personalhandy-phone system (PHS) users with those of ordinary cellularphones, to allow communication between the devices just like ordinarytelephones, a business daily reported Saturday.     The carriers reached the linkup agreement Friday, the NihonKeizai Shimbun said.     The carriers originally planned to start such an arrangement atthe end of 1997, but decided to advance the plan in response tostrong demand from subscribers, the paper said.     The new arrangement will eliminate the communication headachesof 11 million cellular phone users and two million PHS users who arecurrently unable to link up with each other.     Users will have to dig even deeper into their pockets, however,as the carriers are likely to charge around 400 yen for every threeminutes regardless of the distance between conversation partners,according to the paper.     PHS users will be able to initiate calls to cellular phones fromJuly, but the cellular phone system will not be technically ready todial up the PHS before September, the paper said.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Gasoline decontrol forcing oil companies to cut workers+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Japan's recent deregulation of gasoline imports has eroded theearnings of two large oil refiners, forcing one to cut staff andanother to give up on hiring new graduates next spring, a businessdaily said Saturday.     Nippon Oil Co. and its wholly owned subsidiary, Nippon PetroleumRefining Co., will shave their workforce by combined 600, or 14%, to3,700 in a four-year program ending in fiscal 1999, the Nihon KeizaiShimbun said.     Japan Energy Corp. will stop recruiting fresh graduates forfiscal 1997 for the first time since its 1992 creation through themerger of Nippon Mining Co. and Kyodo Oil Co., the newspaper said.     The move is part of Japan Energy's streamlining program toeliminate 800 jobs from the current 4,100 by the end of fiscal 1997,the paper said.     Domestic oil wholesalers and refiners have faced intensecompetition from cheaper imports following the April 1 repeal of alaw that confines gasoline imports virtually to refiners.     Gasoline prices dropped sharply in Japan even before the law'sscrapping, cutting into the refiners' earnings.     In fiscal 1995 ended in March, Nippon Oil, for example, postedan operating loss for the first time in nine years.     Cosmo Oil Co. and Showa Shell Sekiyu K.K. earlier unveiledsimilar streamlining plans.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Mistress hidden in Picasso masterpiece, scholar+NARA, Japan, June 1 Kyodo     Hidden beneath a masterpiece of Spanish artist Pablo Picasso isan image of a woman snuggling up with the man who appears in the oilpainting, an art scholar said Saturday.     According to Sadatoshi Miura, director of scientific preservationfor the Tokyo national cultural assets study center, the 1923 paintingon display at Tokyo's Bridgestone Museum is considered to be aself-portrait of Picasso (1881-1973).     Miura used infrared video technology and computer analysis tofind the hidden picture of the woman underneath the painting titled''Saltimbanque seated with arms crossed.''     Miura will present his findings about the canvas Sunday at asymposium of art preservation scholars, which started Saturday in thecity of Nara in western Japan.     He took 20 images from the infrared camera and analyzed themwith computers to reach his conclusion.     William Rubin, a Picasso scholar and former curator at the NewYork Museum of Modern Art, said he believes the original painting ofthe woman, which has remained hidden for more than 70 years, was of amistress of Picasso.     Rubin said that during a three-week period in August 1923,Picasso drew about 200 images of the mistress and she was a model forabout 40 of his oil paintings.  He added that in one of thesepaintings, the face of the mistress supplanted that of Picasso's wife.     Officials at the Bridgestone museum had no comment about thefindings but said the painting is currently on display, and to theuntrained eye it is impossible to tell if there is another workhidden beneath the painting.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Red Army member holding forged Japanese passport+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     A Japanese woman believed to be a member of the Japanese RedArmy wanted by police for more than 20 years was holding a forgedJapanese passport when she was taken into police custody lastSaturday in Peru, sources close to Japanese security authorities saidSaturday.     The National Police Agency has sent officials to Peru to confirmthe identity of the woman, who is believed to be Kazue Yoshimura, 49,the sources said.     Police are expected to prepare an arrest warrant on a charge ofusing a forged official document, they added.     She was detained by Peruvian authorities investigating terroristgroups in the capital of Lima, the sources said.     Yoshimura, a member of the Japanese Red Army accused of dozensof international terrorist crimes, was put on an international wantedlist in 1975 for her alleged involvement in the 1974 seizure of theFrench Embassy in the Netherlands.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Flood of new rice retailers riding deregulation wave+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     About 80,000 newly authorized rice retailers stormed into thenation's deregulated rice distribution system Saturday, doubling thenumber of rice retailers in Japan to 170,000, industry sources said.     The newcomers were encouraged by the new food control law thattook effect the same day, which allows rice retail business by suchsectors as supermarket chains, fast food restaurants, conveniencestores and gas stations.     One of the entrants to the market, Lawson Inc., a largeconvenience store chain operator, started selling packaged ricethrough its network of 5,700 retail outlets nationwide, the sourcessaid.     Clerks at Lawson's Toranomon branch in downtown Tokyo were seenhustling about the store setting up a display of the new goodsSaturday morning.     While large-scale retailers are waging high-profile marketingcampaigns for their new rice sales business, smaller retailers arelimiting their efforts to telephone orders, the sources said.     A shop in Tokyo's Ota Ward which previously sold primarily tofusaid it will focus on local newspaper ad inserts.     A clerk at the shop said, ''Although we would like to sellhigh-quality rice at lower prices, we feel restricted by ourrelations with conventional rice retailers in the neighborhood,''with whom the shop is entering competition for the first time.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Main events scheduled for Sun., June 2+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     -- Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto, Transport MinisterYoshiyuki Kamei to review Maritime Safety Agency's annual trainingstarting at 2:35 p.m. in Tokyo Bay.     -- Japan Airlines to open new route between Narita and Kona,Hawaii.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Hashimoto calls on Israel to continue peace process+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto said Saturday he hopes theelection of Benjamin Netanyahu in the Israeli prime ministerialelection will not cause the Middle East peace process to regress.     When asked by reporters to comment on Netanyahu's victory overincumbent Prime Minister Shimon Peres, Hashimoto said ''The result(of the election) is a judgment by the people of Israel, but I hopethat it will not reverse the Middle East peace process.''     ''Because the percentages of votes were so close, I will watchthe formation of the new government very carefully,'' the premiersaid in front of his official residence in Tokyo.     Netanyahu, leader of the Likud Party, edged out Peres, a NobelPeace Prize laureate, 50.4% to 49.6% in Wednesday'snational election in Israel, the result of which was announced Friday.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 199621% of companies increase or resume dividend payments+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Reflecting signs of an economic recovery, an increasing numberof polled Japanese companies increased or resumed their dividendpayments for fiscal 1995 that ended March 31, a Kyodo News tallyshowed Saturday.     According to the tally, a combined 21.5% of 1,447 companieswhich are listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) and closed theirbooks at the end of March increased or resumed their dividendpayments.  The figure represented a rise of 6.2 percentage pointsfrom the previous year.     Companies that increased payments accounted for 249 or 17.8%while those that resumed payments came to 52 or 3.7%.     In contrast, the ratio of companies which decreased or skippedsuch payments fell by 0.8 percentage point from the previous year toa combined 12.3%.     Of those companies, 143 or 10.2% paid a smaller dividend while30 or 2.1% passed a dividend.     Other companies kept dividend payments unchanged from theprevious year or continued to skip the payments.     By industry, pharmaceutical and chemical companies generallypaid larger dividends or resumed payments due to higher profitsstemming from rationalizing efforts.     Pulp and paper makers also gave better dividend payments asincreased demand boosted prices, as did precision instrument makers,owing to brisk sales of semiconductor-related products.     On the other hand, many banks decreased or skipped payments dueto huge pretax losses to write off bad loans to failed ''jusen''housing loan companies and other nonbank moneylenders.     Construction companies also showed lower business results,reflecting sluggish demand from the private sector.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Japanese evening newspaper headlines+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Saturday evening newspaper headlines:     -- Japan, S. Korea to unconditionally accept co-hosting of 2002soccer World Cup finals. (Asahi)     -- Japanese cities bidding for hosting World Cup confused byFIFA decision. (Mainichi)     -- Japan, S. Korea to discuss next week how to co-host WorldCup. (Yomiuri)     -- Industries urged to recalculate economic impact of hostingWorld Cup. (Nihon Keizai)     -- World Cup co-hosting may give impetus to lawmakers trying tointroduce 'soccer lottery' in Japan. (Nihon Keizai)     -- Israeli premier-elect Netanyahu vows cooperation with U.S. onpromoting peace process. (Asahi)     -- Netanyahu pledges to Arab leaders continuation of peaceprocess. (Yomiuri)     -- U.N. to call for 50 mil. dlrs worth of aid to N. Korea.(Yomiuri)     -- U.S. farm exports to hit record 60 bil. dlrs in '96. (NihonKeizai)     -- Bond, stock prices fall in N.Y. (Nihon Keizai)     -- Japanese, Chinese environmental groups to jointly tackleChina's air pollution. (Nihon Keizai)Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 199688% of firms not paying during holidays for nursing+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     About 90% of polled companies that allow workers to take a leaveto take care of family members who need nursing care do not payemployees during the period, a survey by a nonprofit institute showedSaturday.     The survey covered 2,190 listed companies and 366 unlistedcompanies, with a combined 329 responding, the Institute of LaborAdministration said.     According to the findings, companies that have introduced thenursing-care leave system accounted for 52.6% of the total.     By size, 79% of companies with 3,000 employees or more alreadyhave such a system, followed by 56.5% for firms between 1,000 and2,999 employees and a 33.1% of those with less than 1,000 workers.     Of those that already have the system, only 2.3% of companiespay a regular salary to the worker during the period while 8% do notpay a salary but provide a special allowance.  Those that do not payanything amounted to 88.5%.     All companies are obliged by law to introduce the system fromApril 1999 but the law does not cover payments to workers.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996China agrees to CTBT banning of all types of nuke tests+GENEVA, June 1 Kyodo     China has dropped its opposition to a proposal for a plannedcomprehensive nuclear test ban treaty (CTBT) that would ban all typesof nuclear explosions, Western negotiation sources said Saturday.     The Chinese government has virtually given up its own proposalthat the CTBT allow ''peaceful nuclear explosions,'' the sources said.     However, Beijing still wants the treaty to stipulate that theissue of peaceful explosions will be discussed in a conference toreview the treaty 10 years after it goes into effect, they said.     Participants in the nuclear test ban talks at the Geneva-basedConference on Disarmament plan to draw up the treaty by the end ofthis month and send it to the U.N. General Assembly for it to besigned in September.     Sha Zukang, China's ambassador to the Disarmament Conference,said in May that China is ready to make compromises on its demandthat peaceful nuclear explosions should be exempt from the CTBT inorder to settle the issue as scheduled.     Some nonnuclear states, including Japan and Canada, arereportedly strongly opposed to referring to the term of peacefulexplosions in any form in the text of the treaty.     Nuclear powers such as the United States and Russia arediscussing an alternative proposal of releasing a statement that theissue will be discussed in a review conference, so that China willnot lose face, the sources said.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Regulations on foreign entertainers to be tightened+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     The Justice Ministry will tighten regulations on foreignentertainers and athletes performing in Japan to prevent them fromoverstepping the bounds of their visas, ministry officials saidSaturday.     The officials said a revision of the ordinance governing foreignentertainers and professional athletes will be posted in theirofficial gazette Monday, effective Sept. 3 this year.     Under the new regulations, foreign entertainers and professionalathletes will not be permitted to perform in Japan unless they arelicensed by their home governments or public organizations and havemajored in their areas of specialty at educational institutions intheir home countries for more than two years, the officials said.     The existing ordinance requires them only to have more than twoyears of experience in their home countries.     As for organizations sponsoring their visits to Japan, the newlaw stipulates that they must have no record of violating threerelevant laws governing immigration, prostitution and refugees, theofficials said.     At present, organizations are allowed to sponsor foreignentertainers and pro athletes if the organizations, their executivesand regular employees have not broken the law over the past threeyears.     The officials said regulations on cultural interchangessubsidized by central and local governments and public organizationswill be eased.     The officials said the ministry decided to tighten theregulations in light of a growing number of foreign entertainers inJapan working in fields not permitted by their visas, such as workingat clubs as hostesses.     Of about 60,000 foreign entertainers who entered Japan in 1995,12,200, mostly Philippine nationals, overstayed their visas, theysaid.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Ministry to review dioxine control guideline+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     The Health and Welfare Ministry has decided to review theexisting guideline for combating highly toxic dioxine for the firsttime in five years, ministry officials said Saturday.     The officials said the ministry was alarmed by reports that highlevels of the chemical have been detected in the air and soil neargarbage incinerators in recent years.     The organic chlorine-based chemical, which is said to causecancer and birth defects, is contained in insecticides, bleachingagents and ash recovered from garbage incinerators.  It is also usedin a defoliant.     The officials said the chemical has even been detected indrinking water and in breast milk.     The officials said pollution was notable in areas wheresmall-capacity incinerators are currently in operation.     The existing guideline set in December 1990 aims to limit thetolerable level of dioxine discharged from garbage incinerators atabout 0.5 nanogram.  A nanogram is a billionth of a gram.     The guideline, however, has come under criticism fromenvironmental groups because it applies only to about a dozenlarge-scale incinerators in Japan which operate around the clock.     Experiments at pollution research institutes in Kyoto and Hyogoprefectures in western Japan said a greater amount of dioxine iscreated in small-scale incinerators where temperatures in the furnaceare stable and combustion tends to be imperfect.     The new guideline will be worked out by an expert panel formedby the ministry in mid-May.     The ministry officials said the tolerable level will be loweredto less than 0.1 nanogram for large-scale incinerators, the samelevel set in Germany and the Netherlands.     Discussions by the panel will focus on the ceiling for obsoleteand small-scale incinerators, the officials said.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Hashimoto, Kim vow cooperation in co-hosting World Cup+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto and South KoreanPresident Kim Young Sam on Saturday pledged full support from theirgovernments for the 2002 soccer World Cup finals which will be hostedjointly by the two nations.     Japanese officials said Hashimoto and Kim reached agreement onmutual cooperation during talks over the telephone Saturday afternoon.     The two leaders agreed that co-hosting will provide anopportunity for the two countries to shape a ''future-orientedrelationship'' between them, a Japanese official said.     Hashimoto and Kim made the pledge a day after soccer's worldgoverning body FIFA awarded the 2002 World Cup, the first to be heldin Asia, jointly to the two Asian neighbors.     Hashimoto told Kim that Japan is determined to cooperate withSouth Korea and make the 2002 tournament, to be contested by 32nations, ''an example to the world.''     Kim replied he was all for it, Japanese officials said.     Japanese officials said Kim initiated the telephone call, anindication that the Korean leader is eager to use the occasion toerase the bitter rivalry which had engulfed the two countries duringthe bidding process.     Earlier in the day, Hashimoto told reporters that his governmentwill give its full backing to the co-hosting plan.     ''There are areas where naturally the government has a role toplay, like (the issue of) passports,'' Hashimoto said.     The 2002 World Cup will mark the first time that the tournamentwill be co-hosted by two nations.     Japan had vigorously opposed co-hosting the World Cup with SouthKorea prior to FIFA's decision Friday but Hashimoto suggestedSaturday political considerations had prevented the government fromspeaking out for joint hosting.     ''It is wrong for politics to stay in front of sports,'' he said.     The FIFA decision to split the 64-match tournament between Japanand South Korea has brought anxiety and unease among the 15 Japanesecities competing to get part of the World Cup action.     Celebrations that had been scheduled in most of the candidatecities if Japan had won the sole right to host the World Cup werecanceled.     ''I feel like I suddenly lost enthusiasm.  Children who werelooking forward to attending the celebration were disappointed,''said an official in Sapporo, northern Japan, which called off acelebration scheduled at Atsubetsu Park stadium.     Ceremonies scheduled in Hiroshima, Kobe and Aomori, northeasternJapan, were also canceled.     However, in Toyota, Aichi Prefecture in central Japan, municipalofficials decided to go ahead with their ceremony in a show ofsportsmanship.     Hisashi Fukuoka, one of the ceremony's organizers, said, ''It'sgood that Japan and South Korea will co-host the World Cup.''     In Oita, southwestern Japan, prefectural officials also decidedto go ahead with their festivities.  One official said, ''SouthKorean players are doing well for our local team and Oita is the onlycandidate city in Kyushu, so we want to take a positive view of theco-hosting plan.''Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Casual wear popular as present for Father's Day+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Casual wear like polo shirts and jackets are replacing necktiesas popular presents for Father's Day on June 16, reflecting therecent boom in outdoor activities and ''casual Fridays,'' departmentstore and super market officials said Saturday.     Seibu Department Stores Ltd.'s Ikebukuro store in Tokyo isselling about 200 styles of polo shirts with those priced at between7,800 yen and 9,800 yen selling well, officials said.     At Mitsukoshi Ltd.'s Nihombashi store in Tokyo, polo shirts andsweaters are also good sellers, officials said.     The store is providing customers who buy a sweater with a freeservice in which the salesclerk takes a picture of the customer, withthe sweater together with the picture and a message sent to thefather, they said.     The store has also introduced information on items suitable aspresents on the Internet personal computer network, they added.     Supermarket chain operator Seiyu Ltd. has also established aspecial corner to sell such items in its larger stores.     Polo shirts priced between 3,000 yen and 5,000 yen are popular,Seiyu officials said.     The company will present by lot personal handy-phone system(PHS) sets to customers who buy men's items worth more than 20,000yen at its stores, they said.     ''Flashy designed neckties and belts were main sellers in thedays of the 'bubble' economy.  But recently, customers are turningtheir appetite to polo shirts and other casual items, seeking bettergoods at cheaper prices,'' said the Seiyu officials.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Miyamoto flatly denies alleged takeover bid against Ascii+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Square Co. owner Masafumi Miyamoto on Saturday categoricallydenied allegations that he had instigated a hostile takeover bidagainst Ascii Corp.     The denial follows remarks made at a news conference Thursday byAscii President Kazuhiko Nishi that four board members of the majorpersonal computer and video game software maker have tendered theirresignations because of their involvement in an abortive attempt totake over the company.     Ascii and Square, both based in Tokyo, are locked in fiercerivalry in the computer game software market.     The takeover attempt was alleged to have been masterminded byMiyamoto, according to press reports published earlier this week.     At the news conference Thursday, Nishi declined to confirm theallegation, saying he was indirectly told that the mastermind is setto file a libel suit if his name is made public.     Miyamoto said Saturday, ''I was being made out to be a bad guy inthe latest takeover bid drama that had been written and played byNishi alone.''     ''The resignations of the four board members can be viewed as amove to restore democracy in Ascii which is run autocratically byNishi,'' said Miyamoto.     The latest stir was touched off when the former executivesrefused to affix their seals on a ''ringisho'' proposal on a 1.34billion yen loan to an Ascii subsidiary made by Nishi on the groundsit is dubious to extend such a loan to the unit, according toMiyamoto.     Asked for cooperation by them, Miyamoto, at one stage, had madeup his mind to help them leave the company and set up a new softwarepublishing house, he said.   But he did not do so, concerned thatsuch cooperation would spur the flight of Ascii employees to the newfirm, thus throwing Ascii into confusion, Miyamoto said.     He instead proposed to the Industrial Bank of Japan, Ascii'smain bank, that Nishi step aside to the post of chairman and thatAscii limit Nishi-proposed business diversification and promoterestructuring, Miyamoto said.     Miyamoto also suggested that he is ready to buy, if necessary,new shares if Ascii issues them for allotment to a third party inorder to avoid its net liabilities, he said.     These proposals were taken by Nishi as an attempt to take overhis company with its executives, Miyamoto said.     Miyamoto said he explained the restructuring plan to Nishi intheir meeting at a Tokyo hotel in late May but that Nishi rejectedit, saying there is no reason for anyone outside of the company tomeddle in its affairs.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Yeltsin to attend politico-economic talks at G-7 summit+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Russian President Boris Yeltsin will attend for the first time anewly created politico-economic forum at the Lyons summit of theGroup of Seven (G-7) nations in France later this month, ForeignMinistry sources said Saturday.     The sources said the forum will be an arena for comprehensivediscussions on problems such as employment, poverty and free tradewhich require both political and economic approaches.     Yeltsin's presence also is designed to support his bid forreelection as Russian president because he faces a strong challengefrom Communist Party leader Gennady Zyuganov, they said.     The leaders of the seven countries have agreed to rally behindYeltsin's reelection bid, and the June 27-29 summit is highly likelyto be held before an expected final showdown vote between Yeltsin andZyuganov in the presidential election, the sources said.     The first round of Russian balloting is scheduled for June 16.     The seven G-7 countries are Britain, Canada, France, Germany,Italy, Japan and the United States.     The sources said leaders of the seven nations will discuss aRussian request for the membership in the Paris Club, a group ofmajor creditor nations, with a positive approach.     They said the agenda for the politico-economic discussions willinclude topics of a political nature which were incorporated in aneconomic declaration issued at the previous summit held in Halifax,Canada, last year, and those which require politico-economicapproaches.     A formal agenda is being prepared at presummit meetings attendedby representatives of the seven nations and Russian Economic MinisterYevgeny Yasin, the sources said.     Specific subjects being considered for the agenda includeenvironmental problems and barriers to development, such as naturaldisasters, safety of atomic power generation, intellectual propertyand approaches to cope with expanding information society, they said.     The sources said discussions in the new forum will help Russiaand former socialist nations promote transition to a market economyand free trade.     Russia will be kept from joining discussions on foreign exchangeand monetary policy coordination as in the past, and Yeltsin'spresence will not lead to expansion of the G-7 into the Group of 8,they added.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Hatoyama questions moving U.S. bases in Okinawa+NAHA, Japan, June 1 Kyodo     A ruling coalition leader Saturday questioned the advisabilityof a plan to move the U.S. Futemma air base on Okinawa Prefecture tothe site of an ammunition depot nearby.     Yukio Hatoyama, a senior representative of New Party Sakigake,the smallest partner of the three-party coalition, told a group ofvoters in Naha that the planned relocation will damage the naturalenvironment of the area where the ammunition depot is located.     Hatoyama was in Naha, the capital of Okinawa, Japan'ssouthernmost island prefecture, to support the party's candidate whois running in an election for the prefectural assembly.     In April, the United States agreed to return the Futemmaairfield site and relocate its functions to the site of the depot oranother location.     He said the question involving U.S. military bases in theprefecture should be considered by taking environmental problems intothe account, citing reports that high levels of harmful substancessuch as mercury and polychlorinated biphenyl were detected in asewage disposal storage at the former site of a U.S. communicationfacility.     He called on voters to continue checking environmental pollutionnear U.S. military bases.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Landowners to seek compensation after U.S. base return+NAHA, Japan, June 1 Kyodo     Local landowners of the U.S. Futemma Air Station in OkinawaPrefecture said Saturday they will demand that the central governmentmake ''proper use'' of the base and pay compensation to them after itis returned by the U.S. military under a bilateral accord.     A group of landowners in Ginowan in the island prefecture, whoare leasing land to the U.S. military, decided at a rally to lobbythe central and local governments in seeking the measures.     The rally was held because some landowners of the Futemma basehave expressed opposition to the return of the base as they presentlydepend upon government fees for leasing their land to the U.S.military.     About 2,100 members, or three-fourths of the group's total, ownland at the Futemma Air Station.     The United States agreed in April to return the Futemma base inGinowan to local landowners within five to seven years as part ofplans to scale down U.S. military facilities on Japan's southernmostisland.     Seizen Hanashiro, chairman of the group, told some 500participants that he would do his utmost to realize governmentcompensation to landowners and the promotion of ''proper use'' of thebase.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Ex-Premier Hata threatens to leave opposition party+KUSHIRO, Japan, June 1 Kyodo     Former Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata hinted Saturday that he mightleave opposition Shinshinto (New Frontier Party) unless intrapartyreforms make headway.     ''It is possible that I will take new political action unlessthe party makes resolute efforts to rebuild it to meet the people'sexpectations,'' Hata said in a speech and a news conference at aKushiro hotel in northernmost prefecture of Hokkaido.     He made the remark when asked about the possibility that hemight leave the party and join Hajime Funada, former acting chairmanof Shinshinto's general affairs council, in organizing a new group.     Funada, former Economic Planning Agency chief, has repeatedlyexpressed his intention to form a new party with Yukio Hatoyama,secretary general of New Party Sakigake, the smallest party of thetripartite ruling coalition.     Hata, however, said he will stay in the party for the time beingto contribute to the promotion of the party's reforms.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Stocks expected to continue to be mixed next week++TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Stocks are expected to continue to be mixed in Tokyo next week,as shares are expected to be sandwiched between selling on ralliesand bargain hunting by public funds and investment trusts.     It will be hard for the barometer Nikkei Stock Average to stayabove the 22,000 line because an increasing number of market playersare ready to take profits above that mark, traders said.     Given the expansion of the outstanding balance ofarbitrage-linked buying, anxiety about possible selling to unwindarbitrage positions is also depressing investor confidence, they said.     At the same time, shares will be supported at the bottom becausepublic funds, such as ''kampo'' postal life insurance money, andinvestment trusts might buy shares on dips, they said.     Ahead of the release of the Bank of Japan's ''Tankan'' quarterlybusiness sentiment survey late next week, a cautious mood mightprevail, with the Nikkei average hovering around 22,000.     Domestic financial institutions and other market players areexpected to move to sell shares on rallies if the benchmark Nikkeiaverage breaks through the 22,000 line, they said.     They also said market players are worried about possiblearbitrage unwinding ahead of the June 14 special quotations (SQ) dayfor futures and options trading on June contracts.     ''Fears of heavy arbitrage-related selling ahead of the SQ daywill continue to linger in the market,'' said Yasuo Ueki, generalmanager for equities operations at Nikko Securities Co.     Therefore, substantial gains cannot be expected, he said, butshares will be solid at the bottom due to expected buying byinvestment trusts, public funds and pension funds.     About 15 investment trusts were set up this past week, intowhich up to 366 billion yen worth of stocks will be included, sobuying by those investment trusts is expected, he said.     Given the expected tug-of-war between anxieties ahead of the SQday and bargain hunting by such players as investment trusts, theNikkei average will hover around 22,000, Ueki said.     However, Kazuyuki Suzuki, manager for equities trading at DaiwaSecurities Co., is more positive.  ''The correction phase is over andthe Nikkei average could challenge 22,500,'' he said.     As traders have been rolling over the June contract ofNikkei-225 futures to the September contract, it will be unnecessaryto worry about arbitrage-linked selling ahead of the SQ day, he said.     In the absence of other leadership, incentive-backed speculativestocks have led activity for the past several weeks, which hascontributed to the dull movement of the overall market.     But, Suzuki said, ''After speculative favorites tumbled Friday,major high-technology and telecommunications issues, including DDI,are likely to become stellar performers.''     This is attributable to reduced fears of lower prices ofsemiconductor chips, following the announcement by SamsungElectronics of South Korea that it will cut its chip output by 15%.     Market players said they will pay attention to the Bank ofJapan's ''Tankan'' quarterly survey of business sentiment, due forrelease Friday, as a clue to the direction of interest rates.     The Nikkei average closed this past week at 21,956.19, up 157.76points, or 0.72%, from the close of the previous week, when the indexsuffered a 0.54% loss.     On the Tokyo market's first section, trading became less activewith the average daily volume at 387.84 million shares, down 2.73million shares from the preceding week's average.     Trading house Kanematsu Corp. was the most actively traded stock,with a volume of 73.09 million shares.  Its price closed this pastweek at 700 yen, up 40 yen from a week earlier.     Kobe Steel, a major steelmaker based in the western Japan portcity of Kobe, ranked second with a volume standing at 32.05 millionshares.  Its price declined 8 yen to 298 yen.     The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi, the nation's leading commercialbank reborn from a merger in April, ranked third with a volume of27.05 million shares.  Its price went up 90 yen to 2,560 yen.     Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank ranked fourth with a volume of 26.94million shares.  Its price was flat at 1,950 yen.  Nippon Steelranked fifth with 20.72 million shares.  Its price fell 2 yen to 367yen.     In terms of trading volume, the five stocks were followed bycondominium builder Daikyo, Kawasaki Heavy Industries, MitsubishiHeavy Industries, Nagasakiya and Fuji Heavy Industries.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Dollar expected to remain firm against yen in Tokyo++TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     The U.S. dollar is likely to hold firm against the yen in Tokyonext week under the ongoing influence of Friday's comment by Japan'stop cabinet spokesman in favor of continuing low domestic interestrates.     Chief Cabinet Secretary Seiroku Kajiyama said at a pressconference that, given the current economic situation, Japan's lowinterest rate policy should be continued.     The dollar is expected to move in the 107.00-109.50 yen rangenext week, dealers said.     ''Kajiyama's remark strengthens views that the Bank of Japan(BOJ) will keep the official discount rate at the record low 0.5% forthe time being,'' said Nobuo Kihara, customer dealer at the foreignexchange division of Banque Paribas in Tokyo.     With the differential between U.S. and Japanese interest ratesremaining relatively large, the dollar's attractiveness can bemaintained, Kihara said.     Prospects of higher Japanese interest rates were also dampenedby a series of slack domestic economic data, dealers said.     In particular, the diffusion index of leading economicindicators for March, released Tuesday by the Economic PlanningAgency, slipped below the 50% ''boom or bust'' line in the reportingmonth for the first time in six months.     The weak economic figures reflect the fragility of the fledglingeconomic recovery in Japan, the dealers said.     The market focus has now shifted to next Friday's release of thecentral bank's ''Tankan'' quarterly survey of business confidence forfurther clues on the development of Japan's economy, they said.     The recent strengthening of the Australian dollar against theyen is also supportive of the U.S. currency's downside against theyen, said Kihara at Banque Paribas.     Japanese individuals apparently continue to invest through thenation's securities brokerages in high-yielding Australiancurrency-denominated financial assets, Kihara said.     The brokerages are believed to be underwriting large amounts ofAustralian bonds to be issued ahead of Japan's summer bonus season,in order to sell the bonds to such individuals.     The continued rise of the U.S currency against the yen, however,will be countered by mounting concerns over U.S. securities markets,said Yoshiki Hamada, senior manager at the treasury tradingdepartment of Asahi Bank.     Both the key Dow Jones industrial average and U.S. governmentbond prices are likely to continue to face downward pressure, due tothe favorable economic growth in that nation, Hamada said.     This is because fears persist that inflationary pressure couldemerge in the U.S. economy in the near future, Hamada said.  Intheory, inflation should undermine the dollar's value.     Market players are waiting for the announcement of U.S. nonfarmpayrolls for May, scheduled for next Friday, for further hints offuture trends in the nation's interest rates, dealers said.     If the economic data turn out stronger than expected, it couldprovide a significant boost to U.S. interest rates, they said.     In Tokyo this past week, the U.S. currency hovered in a narrowrange between 107.60 yen and 108.93 yen.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Short-term money rates expected to weaken next week++TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Short-term money market rates are expected to weaken in Tokyonext week under the continuing influence of Friday's comment byJapan's top cabinet spokesman favoring low interest rates.     Chief Cabinet Secretary Seiroku Kajiyama said at a pressconference that, given the current economic situation, Japan's lowinterest rate policy should be continued.     Kajiyama's remark reenforced the view that the Bank of Japan(BOJ) will maintain the official discount rate at the current recordlow 0.5% for a while to boost the economy, money brokers said.     In interbank trading, the key unsecured overnight call moneyrate is forecast to trade between 0.45% and 0.50%, compared with lateFriday's 0.49%, they said.     On the open market, the rate on key three-month certificates ofdeposit (CDs) issued by commercial banks will hover in the 0.53-0.58%range, compared with late Friday's 0.56%, they said.     Market players will be focusing on the release of the centralbank's ''Tankan'' quarterly survey of business confidence, due outnext Friday, for further hints of future developments in interestrates, they noted.     If the economic data turn out to be weaker than expected, thisshould put significant downward pressure on interest rates, they said.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Sensitive trading seen on Tokyo bond market next week++TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Sensitive trading is expected in Japanese government bonds inTokyo next week ahead of Friday's release of the Bank of Japan's''Tankan'' quarterly survey of business sentiment.     Bond prices could fluctuate wildly, traders said, due tospeculation about the key survey, conducted in May, which is seen asa clue to the future direction of domestic interest rates.     There is less risk of bond prices falling, as fears of higherinterest rates have weakened, but substantial gains cannot beexpected ahead of the release of the Tankan report, they said.     However, there are signs that investors, who retreated to thesidelines in recent sessions, may try to bring bond prices higher,the traders said.     The yield on the No. 182 cash bond fell 0.06 percentage pointduring this past week to 3.160%, while the key September contractincreased 0.40 point to 118.90.     As the prediction for the industrial output index for June camein weaker than expected, bond prices remained steady in this pastweek.  Chief Cabinet Secretary Seiroku Kajiyama's remark supportingthe current low interest rate policy also helped support bond prices.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Clinton renews MFN status for China+WASHINGTON, May 31 Kyodo     President Bill Clinton formally extended China'smost-favored-nation (MFN) trade status Friday for another year,calling it ''the best way'' to advance U.S. economic and securityinterests in Asia under his ''engagement'' policy toward Beijing.     The announcement was anticipated as the president declared hisintention earlier this month to renew the status for allowing Chinathe lowest tariffs the United States imposes on its trading partners.     ''The president has taken this step because he believes thatcontinued engagement with China is the best way to help it become aconstructive force for stability and prosperity in Asia and toadvance important American interests,'' the White House said in astatement.     Clinton's decision was immediately relayed in a letter toCongress, thus setting the stage for debate with legislators opposingthe unconditional renewal of China's MFN status amid lingeringconcerns over Beijing's human rights, weapons proliferation, trade,Taiwan and other issues.     Under the MFN procedures, Congress has until July 3 to introducea resolution to reject the president's decision or until Aug. 31 toapprove it.  Clinton has the authority to veto the resolution.     The MFN extension came as another step in the complicated zigzagapproach taken recently by the Clinton administration toward China.     Washington and Beijing on May 15 announced tit-for-tat lists ofsanctions they would impose upon each other if the dispute over theFebruary 1995 bilateral agreement on intellectual property rightsremains unresolved June 17.  The two nations are to resume talksnext week.     Shortly before announcing the sanctions list, the U.S. decidednot to impose sanctions over China's alleged sale of nuclear weaponstechnology to Pakistan after Beijing gave assurance it would preventsuch exports in the future.     Addressing these issues, the White House statement said revokingthe MFN status ''would effectively sever our economic relationshipwith China, undermining our capacity to influence China in a broadrange of areas, including human rights, nonproliferation, trade,Taiwan relations and others.''     But it said, ''Engagement with China does not mean acquiescenceto Chinese policies or practices we oppose.''     ''Far from giving China a special deal, renewal of MFN conferson it a trading status equal to that enjoyed by most other nations.Simply put, it gives China normal trade status.  It is not beinggranted as a favor to China,'' the statement said.     ''The president has demonstrated that he is prepared to usesanctions and other means at his disposal to promote America's goalsregarding China, whether it is protecting U.S. intellectual property,deterring dangerous (weapons) proliferation or promoting humanrights,'' the statement said.  ''These are the right tools to use inadvancing U.S. interests.''     In 1994, Clinton adopted a policy of unlinking Beijing's humanrights situation from the MFN issue.     The statement also said MFN revocation ''would not advancethe interests of Taiwan or Hong Kong'' because the two economies ''areenormously dependent on continued trade between the U.S. and China.''Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Asian editorial excerpts+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Excerpts of selected editorials carried by Asia-Pacificnewspapers in the latest week:     Defecting N. Korean Pilot's Testimony (The Korea Times, Seoul):     We often hear that communist North Korea is busy preparing forwar against the South.  But our particular attention was drawn topress remarks by the defecting North Korean air force Capt. Lee CholSu that Pyongyang is poised to attack the South and to defeat it inone week.     It appears that a positive, serious assessment is needed of thewar plan claimed by the North Korean defector, as the pilot is likelyto have had access to up-to-date information on changes in NorthKorean plans to invade the South, and an attack is more likely to bea surprise one than not.     At the same time, Lee's remarks appear to chime in with otherevidence, indicating a need to go onto a national alert against thecommunists in the North, who have never abandoned their belligerentplan to take over the South militarily.     We are obliged to note that the shocking war scenario envisagesSeoul being seized in 24 hours, Taejon in the next couple of days andPusan and all the rest of the country in seven days.  In preparationfor the three-stage war plan, 270 fighters have been or are beingdeployed in forward positions for a surprise attack, according to Lee.     This war plan information and North Korean leader Kim Jong Il'scontinued warmongering behoove us to take all necessarycountermeasures and to tighten the discipline of governmental andnongovernmental organizations and strengthen overall state ofvigilance against the North.(May 30)     Dangerous for nations to ignore yen debts (Nation, Bangkok):     Japan takes great pride in being the world's largest donornation, and boasts as well that its development aid policies havecontributed in a big way to the rapid economic growth of SoutheastAsia.     But while Japan is due some applause for maintaining itscomparatively high level of official development assistance (ODA), aless considered phenomenon is the debt accrued by recipient countries-- especially when seen against a strong yen.     Of total Japanese bilateral credit, around 60% is loaned to Eastand Southeast Asian countries.  The increasing indebtedness to Japanis reflected in the rise in their yen-donominated long-term debt.     The Japanese yen started to appreciate in value against the U.S.dollar in the second half of the 1980s.  This trend became moredramatic in the 1990s.     Whether on the force of the market or through directed policy,an appreciation of the Japanese yen was forthcoming.     Ironically, many countries heavily indebted to Japan turn ablind eye to the yen appreciation's real effect on theirindebtedness.  This is primarily because of the importance of Japanin crucial areas of their economies.     But borrower nations have to be aware that an appreciated yenwould impact negatively on their balance of payments situation.Also, the additional cost of projects financed by Japanese loans thatresult from the yen appreciation put to question the economicviability of individual projects since the appreciation can result inserious long-term losses.     However, to simply ignore the impact of the yen appreciation onnational budgets as well as the economic viability of projectsfinanced by Japanese loans, would be foolhardy for its bears seriousimplications on priority, equity and development questions amongdebtor countries.     A more detailed review of the impact of yen appreciation onspecific countries is thus in order.  When this is done, the nextstep will be to find mechanism through which Japan can share part ofthe costs of the yen appreciation to the debtor country.     Such a gesture may seem magnanimous, but it is in the interestof Japan and other creditor nations that debt service repayments donot become so much of a burden that they threatens the economic andsocial stability of recipient nations.(May 26)     Donors only in name? (Business Times, Kuala Lumpur):     Some Western countries in the International Labor Organization(ILO) are good at making verbal pledges but not necessarily as goodwhen it comes to honoring them.  The United Nations, theInternational Monetary Fund and the Asian Development Bank are justsome of the agencies that are facing financial crisis because certaincountries will not pay their dues.     Developed countries' commitment at the Rio (de Janeiro) EarthSummit have also yet to be met and the importance that they onceattached on development aid and generalized system of preferences isdeclining rapidly.     Yet, these are the same countries that try to dominate theprocess in the ILO and in its governing body.  When Malaysia voicedits views that the ILO should be ''more representative'' ofdeveloping countries' views, it was seen as a nuisance.     Malaysia has been a member of the ILO since 1957 and hasratified a fair number of its conventions and recommendations, whichsometimes suggest that the world body lacks empathy for the realitiesin developing and least-developed countries but, generally, the ILOhas been involved in measures that are aimed to help improve workers'lot and improved their rights.     In this regard, we would not want the ILO to go under justbecause some developed countries are not paying their dues.  Perhaps,the relatively poor countries like Malaysia will have to contributemore.  But if that is the case, we should have our fair share of sayin the ILO and in the recommendations and conventions that the bodyadopts.  At the same time, the ILO will have to learn to beeconomical and trim its expenses.(May 30)Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996U.S. pondering more food aid to N. Korea+WASHINGTON, May 31 Kyodo     The United States is about to decide on whether to provideadditional food aid to North Korea, which is suffering a serious foodshortage since the heavy flooding of last summer, an administrationofficial said Friday.     ''There is a positive inclination'' toward further humanitarianaid, the official said, noting that Washington sees the North Koreansas near the brink of starvation.     ''The issue is under active consideration,'' the official toldKyodo News.     In February, Washington decided to extend 2 million dollarsworth of humanitarian assistance to North Korea through a U.N.program for flood-related relief, brushing aside the cautiousapproach taken by Japan and South Korea over further aid.     The February decision came on top of a 225,000 dollarcontribution made last year.     During a trilateral subcabinet-level meeting May 14, the U.S.agreed with Japan and South Korea not to extend further food aid toNorth Korea for the time being.     But U.S. sources said South Korea, which has been less positiveabout providing food aid before North Korea agrees to the proposedfour-way peace talks on the Korean Peninsula, has begun to soften itsposition on further aid.     U.S. President Bill Clinton and South Korean President Kim YoungSam in April proposed talks among the U.S., China, and North andSouth Korea to negotiate toward a peace accord for the dividedpeninsula.     Against this backdrop, the international community, includingthe U.S. and South Korea, may decide in favor of additional food aidto Pyongyang, taking advantage of a soon-to-be announced emergencyappeal for such aid by the U.N. Department of HumanitarianAssistance, the sources said.     In Rome, the home of the U.N. World Food Program,representatives of the governments involved discussed Thursday howmuch additional aid could be provided.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Kim Jong Il likely to emerge from isolation soon+WASHINGTON, May 31 Kyodo     North Korean leader Kim Jong Il is expected to emerge fromisolation and his control should become ''more public'' later thisyear, U.S. congressman Bill Richardson said Friday.     ''Kim Jong Il is in control, and I think this will be made morepublic later in the year,'' Richardson told a press conference heldto discuss his recent three-day visit to North Korea.     ''I'm not firmly convinced, but I saw a lot of signs, media andotherwise and in discussions with officials, that he will be emergingfrom his isolation,'' said Richardson, a Democrat from New Mexico.     ''I think this is positive because that's a civilian leadership,and it is encouraging for the West because I think there is apragmatic streak in those that operate ministries like foreignrelations,'' he said.     Kim has been considered the de facto leader of North Korea sincethe death in July 1994 of his father Kim Il Sung, who headed thenorthern half of the Korean Peninsula since its founding in 1948.     But he has yet to formally assume the nation's top two posts --state president and general secretary of the Workers Party of Korea.     This, along with rarity of his public appearances, has sparkedvarious speculation about the condition of his health and thepossibility of an internal power struggle.     But Richardson said, ''On the positive side that I saw, thecivilian leadership of North Korea seems to be stronger...I believenow that through the Foreign Ministry, specifically Vice MinisterKang Sok Ju who I dealt with, there is strong impressive leadershipthat is more moderate and pragmatic.''     As for conflict with South Korea, Richardson said North Koreanofficials ''were more conciliatory toward South Korea than in thepast.  They were more positive.  They have wide differences, but someof the hostility that I saw before was absent.     Richardson said the United States, South Korea, Japan and othernations should help North Korea with its current food shortage toopen the way for Pyongyang to move ahead with dialogue, especially onthe proposed four-way talks for a permanent peace agreement toreplace the current truce accord on the divided peninsula.     U.S. President Bill Clinton and South Korean President Kim YoungSam proposed the quadrilateral talks among North and South Korea,China, and the U.S.     ''I think this is a good juncture to move with some type ofpositive engagement with North Korea, and I think the food andhumanitarian assistance is the key,'' Richardson said.     The additional food aid ''should be done immediately,'' he said.''I think the situation is very grave.  I didn't see famine, butclose to it.''     ''We should provide food assistance on a humanitarian basis,and I believe that will trigger some positive responses on theirpart'' on the proposed four-way talks, Richardson said, noting thathe has made ''this recommendation'' to the White House and Congress.     North Korea has yet to offer its response to the proposed talks,but it ''did not eliminate the possibility of participating,''Richardson said.  ''That is still an option.''     He added that Pyongyang wants more details such as the venue,the agenda, and the level of the proposed talks.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Toyota Tianjin venture holds opening reception+TIANJIN, China, June 1 Kyodo     A newly established joint engine venture between Toyota MotorCorp. and its Chinese partner held an opening reception in Tianjin onSaturday in a move expected to accelerate the Japanese automaker'sfull-scale Chinese operations.     Toyota President Hiroshi Okuda and some 10 executives ofJapanese auto parts makers in the Toyota group attended the ceremonyfor the equally owned Tianjin Toyota Motor Engine Co., which was setup in the Chinese city in mid-May with a capital of 248 milliondollars.     It marks the first time for Toyota, Japan's biggest automaker, toestablish production of such a key auto component in China.     The new company will manufacture 1.3-liter engines from early1998 at an annual pace of 150,000 units, Toyota officials said.     Most of the engines will be installed in the Charade passengercars which the Chinese partner, Tianjin Automobile Industrial (Group)Co., manufactures with the backing of Daihatsu Motor Co., a Japaneseautomaker in the Toyota group, the officials said.     Some of the engines will be exported, the officials said.     They said the new company is considering producing 1.6-liter and1.8-liter engines for use in the Corona passenger car.     Tianjin Automobile is one of China's eight major auto groups.     Toyota also established a joint company with Tianjin Automobilein December last year to manufacture drive trains.     Toyota is the latest major Japanese automaker that has acquiredChinese government approval to produce vehicle engines in a jointventure with a Chinese concern.     Already, Honda Motor Co. and Mitsubishi Motors Corp. havereceived the go-ahead.     But industry analysts say Japanese automakers, notably big ones,will face an uphill battle against their U.S. and Europeancompetitors in the vast Chinese market with a population of 1.2billion as they are far behind in entering the China market.     Volkswagen AG of Germany, which entered the Chinese market asearly as the 1980s, now holds a dominant position, with its joint carproduction ventures with Shanghai Automotive Industry Corp. andanother venture with a carmaker based in Jilin Province, northeasternChina, performing steadily.     Chrysler Corp. of the U.S. and the French maker of Citroen andPeugeot cars have consolidated their footholds in China, whileGeneral Motors Corp. and Ford Motor Co., both U.S. firms, havereached the point where they will be able to find joint-venturepartners in Shanghai and Nanjing, respectively, in the near future.     Among Japanese carmakers, Suzuki Motor Corp. is turning outminicars in the city of Changan, Shaanxi Province, central China, ina joint venture with a Chinese concern.     Daihatsu Motor Co. of the Toyota group and Fuji Heavy IndustriesLtd. are extending technological cooperation for vehicle production.     But Japanese auto giants have yet to acquire a stake in carproduction ventures in China.     This stems largely from the judgment they made in the 1980s thatit was still premature to enter the Chinese car market, analysts say.     In an automotive industry policy unveiled in 1994, the Chinesegovernment called for combining a number of automobile enterprisesinto eight major groups in an effort to develop the sector into thenation's key industry.     Assuming that motor vehicle demand in China will grow by 8 to 9%a year until 2010, the government established rules for theintroduction of foreign capital for car production.     Flocking foreign carmakers, however, have made the Chinese carmarket a ''seller's market'' where the Chinese are able to strikefavorable deals for themselves with foreign makers, analysts say.     In the latest deal with Tianjin Automobile, Toyota appears tohave had little choice but to accept unfavorable terms in order notto lose the deal, industry sources said.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996MITI to promote environmental equipment market in Asia+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     The Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) and 12companies have jointly launched a full-scale study of how best tonurture markets for environment-related equipment in developingcountries in Asia, according to ministry officials.     The move represents an upgrading of the Green Aid Plan initiatedin 1992 with the aim of transferring environment-friendlytechnologies to such countries.     MITI plans to draw up a plan by this fall and will earmark fundsfrom the nation's official development assistance (ODA) for specificprojects, the officials said.     Asian developing economies are increasingly concerned thatenvironmental degradation will put a dent in their economic growth,analysts say.  But they are giving priority to improving socialinfrastructure through the construction of such facilities aselectric power plants, highways and railroads.     These countries thus lag far behind industrialized nations inenvironmental protection measures, they said.     MITI intends to help expand the overseas operations ofenvironment-related businesses while striving to check thecross-border spread of pollution such as acid rain, the officialssaid.     The 12 companies involved in the study include Nippon SteelCorp., Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd., Ebara Corp. and Chiyoda Corp.     A joint study panel of MITI and these companies will considerways to promote the application of low-cost technologies whichprotect the environment and foster environment-friendly industriesthrough joint ventures with Japanese businesses, the officials said.     Under the Green Aid Plan, which covered six Asian countries, MITIand participating companies installed desulfurization equipment intwo electric power plants in China.     In addition, they developed an exhaust heat recovery system foruse at a cement plant in the Philippines.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996China-Taiwan trade up 2.9% in 1st qtr+HONG KONG, June 1 Kyodo     Merchandise trade between China and Taiwan for the first quarterof this year rose 2.9% from a year earlier to 4.84 billion U.S.dollars, Taiwan's Central News Agency reported Saturday.     The figure was released Friday by Taiwan's Ministry of EconomicAffairs, the news agency said.     The ministry attributed the low growth in the value of thetwo-way trade in part to a rate cut in China's tax refund on itsexports as well as to recent tensions between Beijing and Taipei, itsaid.     Taiwan's trade with China accounted for 9.3% of the total valueof its foreign trade, it said.     Trade between China and Taiwan was especially sluggish in Marchwhen China conducted a series of missile tests in the Taiwan Strait,dropping 5.8% from the same month last year to 1.63 billion dollars,it said.     Taiwan's exports to China came to 4.13 billion dollars in theJanuary-March period, up 3.7% from a year earlier, while its importsfrom China fell 1.7% to 708 million dollars, leaving Taiwan with atrade surplus of more than 3.4 billion dollars, the ministry wasquoted as saying.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Korean share prices rise+SEOUL, June 1 Kyodo     Korean share prices were buoyed Saturday by the announcementthat Korea has been named to co-host of 2002 world cup finals withJapan, reports Yonhap.     The leading stock price index rose 4.89 points from Friday toclose at 907.98.     There were 18.06 million shares worth 387.6 billion won.     Winners outpaced losers 463 to 246, wit 180 remaining unchanged.     Mining, food and beverages, wood, medicine and electricmachinery issues rose while securities, rubber, machinery andinsurance issues fell.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996India's new premier Gowda sworn in+NEW DEHLI, June 1 Kyodo     Hardanhalli Dodde Deve Gowda was sworn in as India's 12th primeminister Saturday following the collapse of the country's first HinduNationalist government earlier this week.     Gowda, 63, was administered the oath of office a little past noonby President Shankar Dayal Sharma at the presidential palace.     The peasant-turned politician will be heading a coalitiongovernment comprising two national and three regional parties.     The new government will be India's fourth coalition governmentsince its independence from Britain in 1947.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Mongolian fire fighters have tough road: journalist+SAPPORO, June 1 Kyodo     A Japanese journalist who recently returned from fire-plaguedMongolia has said fire fighters are still having a difficult time aswater is running out and high winds are spreading the blaze.     Tadanori Matsuda, chief of the Sapporo-based Japan bureau of theweekly Mongolian newspaper Mongol Times, said he witnessed themassive fire that has raged through the forests, fields and mountainsof Mongolia for almost six weeks.     Matsuda went to the Mongolian capital of Ulan Bator in early Mayand visited a mountain where the fire was burning.  About 10 nomadsworking with shovels and tree limbs were trying to snuff out the fire.     Matsuda said a total of 322 places have caught fire and as ofMay 23, 29 grasslands and 84 mountains were still ablaze.     Although firefighters had once put out the blaze, strong windshave rekindled it, he said.     The military has been called out around the capital to helpquell the inferno, but efforts to put out the blaze in rural areashave not made progress, he said.     In the eastern Mongolian frontier near the Chinese border inDornod Province, fire has rolled across 70 to 80% of thearea's grasslands, he said.     Nomads and other people who live on the frontier lacknecessities for daily life, according to Matsuda.     Matsuda is conducting a fund raising campaign for relief effortsand is halfway to his goal of collecting 1.5 million yen from donorsin Japan.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996S. Korea posts 1.44 bil. dlr trade deficit in May+SEOUL, June 1 Kyodo     South Korea posted an external trade deficit of 1.44 billionU.S. dollars in May, bringing its cumulative trade deficit for thefirst five months of the year to 7.46 billion dollars, theInternational Trade and Industry Ministry said in a preliminaryreport Saturday.     Exports for the month under review increased 6.8% from a yearearlier to 11.37 billion dollars while imports advanced a larger 8.3%to 12.8 billion dollars, the ministry said.     The May figure came close to the government's revised tradedeficit projection for all of this year of 8 billion dollars.     The South Korean government projected the 1996 trade deficit tobe 7 billion dollars at the beginning of the year but recentlyrevised it upward in the face of a rapid deterioration in thenation's trade balance which started in April.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Japan promises to consult S. Korea over North issue+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto told South Korean President KimYoung Sam on Saturday that Tokyo will consult with Seoul beforemaking any decision on whether to provide additional food aid toNorth Korea, Japanese officials said.     Hashimoto made the remark in a telephone conversation inconnection with an expected call from the United Nations for theinternational community to offer humanitarian aid to the North tohelp alleviate the food shortage there, the officials said.     Kim replied that he hopes Japan will talk with South Korea whenmaking a decision on the issue, they said.     The two leaders also pledged to cooperate with one another inco-hosting the 2002 World Cup soccer finals.     As for proposed four-way peace talks on the Korean Peninsula,Hashimoto said Japan hopes Pyongyang will agree to participate in thetalks soon.     Kim and U.S. President Bill Clinton during their meeting in Aprilproposed that the Korean peace talks be held among North and SouthKorea, China and the United States.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996H.K. dailies rap high-ranking official's remarks on press+HONG KONG, June 1 Kyodo     Hong Kong newspapers Saturday criticized the top Chineseofficial in charge of Hong Kong and Macao affairs for remarks he madehinting at possible limitations on freedom of the press after theBritish colony's reversion to China.     Lu Ping, director of the Hong Kong and Macao Affairs Office ofChina's State Council, said in an interview with Cable News Network(CNN) on Friday that no statements voicing support for ''two Chinas''would be allowed after Hong Kong's return to China on July 1, 1997.     Lu told CNN that the news media in Hong Kong will have freedomto criticize the Chinese government but that if it leads to movementsto overthrow the government, it would be a different matter.     The Ming Pao Daily News in an editorial asked for explanation ofwhat he meant by the remarks, saying if he will not reveal his realintention, it will create apprehension among Hong Kong citizenstoward the reversion.     The Hong Kong Economic Journal expressed anger, sarcasticallysaying the paper might be forced to carry only Xinhua News Agency'sreports that have criticized Taiwanese President Lee Teng-hui.     The Apple Daily carried a headline in Chinese that asked, ''Isthis what China means by freedom of the press?''     Pro-Beijing papers such as the Wen Wei Po, however, onlyreported Lu's remarks.     Lu will start a weeklong official visit to Japan starting Sundayto discuss with Japanese political and business leaders about HongKong affairs.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Bus accident kills at least 26 in Bangladesh+DHAKA, June 1 Kyodo     At least 26 people were killed and 45 others injured when apassenger bus careened off a bridge and into a ditch Saturday west ofDhaka, a local television report said.     State-owned Bangladesh television said the bus was travelingalong the Dhaka-Aricha highway when the accident happened.     The report said 22 people were dead at the scene, while fourothers died at a local hospital.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996500 Vietnamese apply to return home from Philippines+PUERTO PRINCESA, Philippines, June 1 Kyodo     More than 500 Vietnamese asylum seekers have applied forvoluntary repatriation and are expected to take Air Vietnam flightsto their homeland starting June 11, administrators of a refugee campsouthwest of Manila said Saturday.     The group constitutes the biggest number of asylum seekers whohave volunteered for repatriation before the closure, at the end ofthe month, of the Philippine First Asylum Camp some 570 kilometerssouthwest of Manila, said Maj. Gen. Guillermo Ruiz, the campadministrator.     Ruiz said another flight is scheduled for June 15 and more areexpected in the weeks afterward to accommodate all those who havevolunteered to go back and whose return to Vietnam has been clearedby the government there.     The camp currently houses some 2,000 asylum seekers whoseapplications for resettlement to third countries have been denied.Earlier efforts to persuade them to go home have resulted only intrickles of volunteers.     Asked about the fate of those who refuse to go back or have notbeen granted clearances, Ruiz said, ''It will be up to the church totake care of them.''     The Catholic Church has proposed a plan that includes thegradual turnover of the camp to nongovernment organizations, thelegalization of the Vietnamese' interim stay, and assistance ingetting travel documents for remaining asylum seekers.     The plan was drawn up following church criticism of the violentdispersal of demonstrators who tried to prevent the forcedrepatriation of 84 asylum seekers Feb. 14.     Estimates of Vietnamese who would be unable to go home forvarious reasons were unavailable, but Ruiz said the Catholic Churchhas signaled its intention to take care of those people.     Despite appeals from government officials and the church for theasylum seekers to return voluntarily to Vietnam, few of the asylumseekers have returned to Vietnam, officials said.     In an earlier interview, camp leader Che Nhat Giao said manyVietnamese families, especially those with children, have decided togo home because of slim prospects for finding jobs in the Philippineswhen the camp closes June 30.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 199621-member coalition government in India sworn in+NEW DELHI, June 1 Kyodo     A 21-member coalition government was sworn in Saturday followingthe collapse of India's first Hindu nationalist government earlierthis week.     While the Hindu nationalist government was formed May 16 inaccordance with the results of the recent general elections, it fellMay 28 following its failure to secure enough support to win aparliamentary majority.     The new five-party coalition government headed by H.D. DeveGowda was administered the oath of office by President Shankar DayalSharma in a simple ceremony at the presidential palace.     Apart from Prime Minister Gowda, 12 cabinet ministers and eightministers of state took oaths of office in the new coalitiongovernment.     Prominent among the cabinet ministers whose portfolios have yetto be announced are P. Chidambaram, the popular commerce minister inthe previous congress and one of the architects of its economicliberalization program, Inder Kumar Gujral, a former foreignminister, Mulayam Singh Yadav, a powerful regional leader andchampion of the lower castes and minorities, and Ram Vilas Paswan andS.R. Bommai, heavyweights in the Janata Dal (People's Party).     The five-party coalition government comprises the dominantJanata Dal, the Samajwadi Party (Socialist Party), Telegu Desam,Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam and Tamil Maanila Congress.     Aside from those groups, the coalition is supported by eightother parties, including the left front comprised of four communistparties, Madhya Pradesh Vikas Congress, Karnataka Congress, AsomGana Parishad and All India Indira Congress.     Asom Gana Parishad, an important constituent of the coalitiongovernment, is still unrepresented because the party has yet todecide on participation in the new setup.  The Communist Party ofIndia is also expected to make a decision by Sunday on whether totake part.     Gowda, who is the second prime minister from southern India, hasseven ministers of cabinet rank from the three southern states ofKarnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Backers of 'comfort woman' to seek apology from premier+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Some 100 supporters of a South Korean woman, forced to providesex service for Japanese soldiers before and during World War II,adopted Saturday a note of protest to be sent to Prime MinisterRyutaro Hashimoto seeking a letter of apology.     Hashimoto has decided to send letters of apology to theso-called ''comfort women'' along with compensation payments from aprivate fund, government sources said last month.     The 74-year-old South Korean woman told the gathering that shewas abducted by Japanese Imperial Army at the age of 16 and sent tobrothels at the front line in such Chinese provinces as Hebei.     She said the Japanese government should shoulder part of theone-time payments to be given from the fund to surviving women inSouth Korea, the Philippines and Taiwan.     The Asian Women's Fund was inaugurated at the government'sinitiative last July as an event marking the 50th anniversary of theend of the war.     As the first batch of payments from the fund, its operatorsplan to start making one-time payments of 3 million yen in July orlater to each of some 300 ''comfort women.''     The government has maintained a policy that it will not extendcompensation from state coffers to former sex slaves despite a U.N.report calling on it to compensate them and punish those responsiblefor their recruitment.     Historians estimate that 80,000 to 200,000 women, mostly fromthe Korean Peninsula which was then under Japanese colonial rule,were forced into sexual slavery in front-line brothels for theJapanese Imperial Army.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Suu Kyi thanks Japan for pressuring junta+YANGON, June 1 Kyodo     Myanmar pro-democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi expressedgratitude Saturday to Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto forJapan's help in putting pressure on the ruling military junta torelease arrested members of her party.     Suu Kyi said in an interview with Kyodo News that such pressurehelped to keep the junta from fully preventing a three-day conventionheld by Myanmar's National League for Democracy (NLD) in Yangon fromSunday to Tuesday.     The junta arrested some 250 NLD members in an apprent bid toprevent them from attending the meeting, the first large-scaleopposition meeting since Suu Kyi was released from six years of housearrest last July.     Soon after the junta's arrests, the Japanese and othergovernments criticized the military regime, calling for the releaseof those arrested.     Of those detained, 111 have been released so far, according toNLD sources.     Suu Kyi also said Japanese pressure can help lead the junta torelease all the arrested people.     She said the junta's reported action to have forced two of thearrested members to sign a paper to leave the NLD is illegal andshould be nullified.     The NLD won 392 seats of the 485 at stake in the May 27, 1990,general election, but the junta ignored the results.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Brazil sports media blasts co-hosting of 2002 World Cup+RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil, May 31 Kyodo     The Brazilian sports media, which had largely anticipated thatJapan would be picked to host the 2002 World Cup finals, has heavilycriticized the decision by the world soccer governing body to jointlyaward the competition to Japan and South Korea.     Sports editors were unanimous in saying FIFA's decision willbring on unforeseeable problems for the competition organizers andhas set a troublesome precedent.     ''What will happen if three countries apply to host the 2006cup?  If two countries have been selected now, why not three?'' saidSergio Garcia, editor of the sports magazine Placar.     Garcia said the co-hosting scheme is an indication thatBrazilian FIFA chief Joao Havelange's influence is waning.     On the diplomatic front, Garcia speculated on whether the cupwill be officially dubbed the Japan-South Korea, South Korea-Japan oreven the Asia cup 2002.     In a reported attempt to gain Havelange's support, South Koreanauto manufacturer Hyundai had inked a sponsorship contract withFluminense Football Club, of which Havelange is honorary president.     Last month, however, Hyundai announced its decision not to renewthe contract, which expired Friday, one day before FIFA's officialmeeting to choose the host country, and the move was seen to indicatea successful bid by Japan for the cup.     ''This decision will trigger unprecedented political problemswhich will drag on through the coming months,'' Carlos Macedo, editorof sports daily Jornal do Sports, told Kyodo News.     The Jornal do Sports published Friday a full-page storyanalyzing why Japan should definitely be appointed to host the cup.     As with everything related to soccer, in the so-called ''Land ofFootball'' the Brazilian media followed the battle of the Japanversus South Korea hosting bid with great interest.     Brazil is the only country to have won a World Cup four timesand ironically lost to Uruguay 2-1 in 1950, the only year the countryever hosted the finals.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Sports schedule for Sun., June 2+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Major sports events scheduled for Sunday, June 2:   BASEBALL     Central League:     Yomiuri vs Chunichi.  Tokyo Dome.  6 p.m.     Yakult vs Hanshin.  Chiba Marine Stadium.  1:30 p.m.     Yokohama vs Hiroshima.  Yokohama Stadium.  2 p.m.     Pacific League:     Seibu vs Kintetsu.  Seibu Stadium, Tokorozawa, SaitamaPrefecture.  1 p.m.     Orix vs Lotte.  Green Stadium Kobe. 1 p.m.     Daiei vs Nippon Ham.  Fukuoka Dome.  1 p.m.     -----   GOLF     JPGA - JCB Classic Sendai, final day.  Omotezao Kokusai GolfClub, Shibata, Miyagi Prefecture.  8:30 a.m.     JLPGA - Mitsubishi Denki Ladies, final day.  Kitarokko CountryClub, Kobe.  9:30 a.m.     -----   RACING     Japan Derby.  Tokyo Racecourse.  3:30 p.m.   RUBGY     Barbarians vs Kansai association president invitational XV.  AtNishikyogoku stadium, Kyoto.  2:30 p.m.     -----   TRIATHLON     Japan Cup, 3rd leg, World championships Asian qualifiers.  Hondoand other venues, Kumamoto Prefecture.  7:30 a.m.     -----   VOLLEYBALL     Women's final Olympic qualifying round, final day.  OsakaMunicipal Central Gymnasium.  11 a.m.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Japan, S. Korea back World Cup co-hosting+ZURICH, Switzerland, June 1 Kyodo     Japan and South Korea have unconditionally accepted FIFA'sdecision to award the 2002 World Cup finals to the two nations amidhopes that the tournament will break new ground in World Cup history,Japanese soccer officials say.     ''We believe a new age has arrived, one in which we will be ableto stage the World Cup finals with South Korea,'' said ShunichiroOkano, vice president of the Football Association of Japan (JFA), onthe FIFA executive committee's vote Friday.     JFA President Ken Naganuma said neither Japan nor South Koreamade any conditions when the 21-member FIFA committee took theunprecedented move in an unanimous vote.     FIFA's current rules forbid the World Cup from being staged inmore than one nation, apparently out of concern of having to facemomentous problems on how to divvy the matches, revenues and otherorganizational work.     Okano, speaking to reporters after the FIFA vote, said Japanhopes to avoid a sharp cut in the number of Japanese venues for theWorld Cup but conceded that any action will depend on a FIFA taskforce report due by December.     ''We will certainly state our position (to FIFA),'' Okano said.     The 2002 World Cup finals will be contested by 32 nations, witha total of 64 matches scheduled to be played throughout thetournament.     Okano also gave an outline of the events leading to Japan'sturnaround in its decision to change its all-or-nothing stance forthe bid.     He said the Japanese delegation received on the eve of the FIFAexecutive board meeting a letter from FIFA Secretary General SeppBlatter noting that South Korea had offered to consider joint hostingif the move is endorsed by FIFA.     Blatter asked what Japan's position would be.     The Japanese delegation, joined by former Japanese PrimeMinister Kiichi Miyazawa, leader of a Japanese Diet lobbying groupfor the World Cup, met for close to two and half hours and decided togo along.     The Japanese response was then put in writing and Okano wasdispatched to deliver the letter to the FIFA headquarters Fridaymorning.     ''I personally thought we could have won at the ballot.  But wethought it would be bad policy to ignore (Blatter's) letter since wedidn't know how the FIFA executive board would react,'' Okano said ofJapan's reversal of its position.     Saburo Kawabuchi, deputy chairman of the Japanese bid committeeand chairman of the Japanese professional soccer J.League, said hewould have liked to see FIFA award the 2002 World Cup finals to onecountry alone.     ''It would much easier to understand if there are only winnersand losers, as in the J.League.  But then, draw matches are allowedin the advanced soccer countries, and we can't help that,'' he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Mitsubishi Denki Ladies 2nd-day results+KOBE, June 1 Kyodo     Second-day results of the 50 million yen Mitsubishi Denki Ladiestournament Saturday at the 6,263-yard, par-73 Kitarokko Country Clubcourse in Hyogo Prefecture (Japanese unless otherwise noted): *  1) Norimi Terasawa           69-70--139  2) Cheng Mei-chi, Taiwan     72-70--142  2) Yuka Shiroto              71-71--142  4) Mayumi Murai              71-72--143  4) Akiko Fukushima           69-74--143  6) Chikako Matsuzawa         71-74--145  7) Yumiko Akagi              75-71--146  7) Ku Ok Hee, S. Korea       74-72--146  7) Kim Ae Sook, S. Korea     74-72--146  7) Natsuko Noro              72-74--146  7) Kikuko Shibata            72-74--146  7) Miyuki Shimabukuro        71-75--146  7) Kaori Higo                71-75--146  7) Wu Ming-yeh, Taiwan       68-78--146 15) Aki Takamura              75-72--147 15) Huang Bie-shyun, Taiwan   74-73--147 15) Jennifer Sevil, Australia 74-73--147 15) Fuki Kido                 73-74--147 15) Kayo Yamada               73-74--147 15) Kiyoe Yamazaki            73-74--147 15) Toshimi Kimura            72-75--147 15) Aki Nakano                71-76--147 15) Reiko Kashiwado           71-76--147 15) Huang Yu-chen, Taiwan     71-76--147 *Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996JCB Classic Sendai golf 3rd-day results+SHIBATA, Japan, June 1 Kyodo     Third-day results of the 100 million yen JCB Classic Sendaitournament Saturday, played at the 6,645-yard, par-71 OmotezaoKokusai Golf Club course in Miyagi Prefecture (Japanese unlessotherwise noted): *  1) Masayuki Okano      67-69-68--204  2) Masashi Ozaki       69-69-67--205  2) Hideyuki Sato       69-69-67--205  4) Ryoken Kawagishi    69-67-71--207  5) Hidemichi Tanaka    69-72-67--208  5) Nobuo Serizawa      68-68-72--208  7) David Ishii, U.S.   70-69-70--209  7) Hajime Meshiai      66-71-72--209  9) Tatsuo Takasaki     68-71-71--210 10) Shoichi Yamamoto    69-70-72--211 11) Yoshinori Mizumaki  69-75-68--212 11) Ken Tanigawa, U.S.  71-71-70--212 11) Takaaki Fukuzawa    71-69-72--212 11) Akiyoshi Omachi     72-67-73--212 11) Kazuyoshi Yonekura  69-68-75--212 16) Katsuyoshi Tomori   72-73-68--213 16) Tsukasa Watanabe    72-73-68--213 16) Hiroshi Ueda        73-72-68--213 16) Shigemasa Higaki    76-68-69--213 16) Shoichi Yokota      71-71-71--213 16) Isamu Sugita        70-72-71--213 16) Eiichi Itai         71-71-71--213 16) Seiki Okuda         69-72-72--213 16) Shigeki Maruyama    70-70-73--213 16) Kaname Yokoo        71-69-73--213 *Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Terasawa takes 2nd-round lead in Mitsubishi Denki Ladies+KOBE, June 1 Kyodo     Norimi Terasawa shot a 3-under-par 70 Saturday, equaling theday's best score to take a three-stroke lead after the second roundof the 50 million yen Mitsubishi Denki Ladies tournament.     Terasawa carded a lone bogey on the par-5 first hole beforerolling in four birdies for a two-day total 139 on the 6,263-yard,par-73 course at Kitarokko Country Club in suburban Kobe.     ''I think victory will come to me tomorrow if I play the same asI have yesterday and today,'' Terasawa said.  ''A 2-under-par roundwill be enough for me to win.''     The 36-year-old veteran, who narrowly obtained this year's seedby finishing in 50th place in last year's money rankings, has won twoJapan LPGA events but has been winless since capturing the 1991 FujiSankei Ladies title.     Cheng Mei-chi of Taiwan, who matched the second-round best withher own 70, and Yuka Shiroto are tied in second place at 142.     Mayumi Murai and Akiko Fukushima are another shot back.     Overnight leader Wu Ming-yeh of Taiwan carded a 78 for a total146, seven strokes off the pace.     A field of 53 players survived the cut at 151 in the 54-holeevent.  The winner Sunday will take home 9 million yen.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Okano takes JCB Classic lead, but looking out for Ozaki+SHIBATA, Japan, June 1 Kyodo     Unheralded Masayuki Okano heads into Sunday's final round at theJCB Classic Sendai tournament with a one-stroke lead, but his hopesfor a first tour title are overshadowed by hard-charging Masahi''Jumbo'' Ozaki.     Okano, a 34-year-old pro in only his fifth year on the Japan PGAtour, shot a 68 with five birdies and two bogeys Saturday for athree-day total of 204 on the par-71 Omotezao Kokusai Golf Clubcourse in Miyagi Prefecture.     ''I can't believe I will be part of the final group in the finalround.  I'm afraid my legs will be shaking tomorrow,'' said Okano,whose official earnings totaled only 400,000 yen through last year.     Ozaki, who has already won three tour events this year includinglast week's Mitsubishi Galant in a playoff, and Hideyuki Sato eachshot a 67 to equal the day's best score and stand one shot behindOkano.     Defending champion and overnight leader Ryoken Kawagishi is twostrokes further back in fourth at 207, followed by Hidemichi Tanakaand Nobuo Serizawa who share fifth place at 208.     The winner will pocket 18 million yen Sunday in the 72-hole, 100million yen tournament.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Japan's World Cup 'virtual stadium' left in the air+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Japanese bidders for the 2002 World Cup left the highly touted''virtual stadium'' virtually up in the air Saturday, a day afterFIFA decided to split the World Cup finals between Japan and SouthKorea.     A senior official of the Japanese bid committee said the fate ofthe proposed virtual stadium will hinge on the report from a newlycreated FIFA working group in charge of looking into the implicationsof the co-hosting decision.     ''We won't know anything until we find out what the FIFA workinggroup is up to,'' said Morimasa Kondo, deputy director of theJapanese 2002 World Cup bidding committee.     Japan offered the so-called virtual stadium -- essentially ahuge screen to carry high-definition three-dimensional televisionimages of matches in other venues -- as a major feature of its bidfor the 2002 World Cup finals.     Japanese bid committee officials argued that the virtual stadiumwould enable more fee-paying fans to go out and watch World Cupmatches and promised to channel World Cup proceeds into a trust fundfor the benefit of international soccer.     The co-hosting decision by FIFA's 21-member executive committeeFriday means Japan will get only a portion of the 64 matchesscheduled to be played during the tournament.     Kondo said he has no idea how many Japanese cities will losetheir bids to become host venues because of the co-hosting decision.     ''It is entirely a blank piece of paper,'' he said but notedthat Japanese World Cup organizers intend to utilize as many of thebidding cities as possible.     A total of 15 Japanese cities have offered to be venues forWorld Cup matches, and 16 South Korean cities are also looking for apiece of the World Cup action.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Japan, S. Korea to meet in World Cup final?TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     If Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto and President Kim Young Samhad their wish, Japan and South Korea would meet in the final of the2002 soccer World Cup finals.     Pipe dream?     Not really, said Kim in a telephone chat with the Japanese primeminister Saturday.     ''The power of Japanese and Korean soccer has gone upconsiderably and it is not impossible (for the two countries to meetin the final),'' Kim was quoted as telling Hashimoto.     Japanese officials said Kim placed the phone call to HashimotoSaturday afternoon, a day after FIFA awarded the 2002 World Cupjointly to the two countries.     After the two leaders pledged full cooperation from theirgovernments to make the unprecedented co-hosting a success, Hashimotoraised the possibility for a World Cup final between the twocountries, Japanese officials said.     ''If our teams can meet in the final, it would be nice,''Hashimoto was quoted as telling Kim.     Japan, which has never qualified for the World Cup finals, willreceive an automatic berth this time as a host.  South Korea hasqualified four times but has never gone beyond the first round.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996J.League Cup summaries+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Summaries of J.League Cup matches Saturday:     Yokohama M 2 (Miura 56th, 77th) Osaka G 3 (Isogai 15th, Gillhaus18th, Isogai 52nd penalty).  Halftime 0-2.  Attendance: 9,552.     Nagoya 1 (Hirano 50th) Yokohama F 1 (Zinho 16th).  0-1.  21,713.     Shimizu 1 (Oenoki 55th) Kashima 0.  0-0.  15,039.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Cuba loses to Mitsubishi in baseball friendly closer+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Mitsubishi Motor's Kawasaki baseball team upended BarcelonaOlympic champion Cuba 7-6 in the final game of the Baseball Week inJapan series Saturday.     The Cuban amateur squad finished the exhibition with five wins,three losses and one tie in playing Japan's national team plus a hostof Japanese corporate and minor league pro ballclubs.     Cuba rallied for three runs on RBI hits by Luis Ulacia and MigelCaldes to knot the score 5-5 in the fifth, but reliever Omar Ajetegave up a two-run homer in the bottom of the same inning.     The Cubans scored another run in the sixth to make it 7-6 butcame up short of extra firepower in losing the game at Tokyo's Otastadium.     Cuba and Japan will compete in the eight-nation Olympictournament in this summer's Atlanta Centennial Games.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Chung calls for new int'l club competition in Far East+ZURICH, Switzerland, June 1 Kyodo     South Korean soccer chief Chung Mong Joon on Saturday proposed anew international soccer competition among the club champions ofChina, Japan, North Korea and South Korea.     Chung, also a vice president of the world soccer governing bodyFIFA, said the proposed Far Eastern version of the European ChampionsCup will help boost the sport's popularity in the region.     Chung also called for a resumption later this year of regularinternational friendlies between Japan and South Korea, which havebeen suspended since the last match took place in Nagasaki in July1991.     He unveiled an idea of such bilateral friendlies being held inSeoul in October and in Japan in December this year.     Chung's proposals came after the FIFA executive committeedecided to allow Japan and South Korea to co-host the 2002 World Cupfinals.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Osaka to bid for 1999 rhythmic gymnastics worlds+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Osaka will bid to host the 1999 rhythmic gymnastics worldchampionships, Japanese gymnastics officials said Saturday.     The Japan Gymnastics Association decided on a domestic candidatevenue at an executive committee meeting held the same day.     The site of the 1999 championships, which will also serve as thequalifier for the 2000 Sydney Olympics, will be decided at thegeneral assembly of world gymnastics body FIG this July in Atlanta.     Osaka, Japan's second largest city, has announced it will make abid to host the 2008 Olympics.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996S. Korea to propose extension of no-visa visit to Japan+SEOUL, June 1 Kyodo     South Korea will propose to Japan that the two countries extendthe period of stay without visa in anticipation of travel growthahead of and during World Cup soccer competition in 2002, Yonhap NewsAgency reported Saturday.     Soccer's biggest event will be co-hosted by South Korea andJapan, according to a decision made by the world soccer governingbody FIFA on Friday.     The proposal calls for both countries to extend the period ofstay without visa to three months by 2002, the news agency said.     Under the existing procedures, Japanese tourists are allowed tostay in South Korea for a maximum of 15 days without visas.  ButSouth Korean tourists must obtain visas under Japan's presentimmigration law unless they are on transit to a third country.  Ontransit, they may stay in Japan up to three days.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996J.League Cup summaries -2-+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Summaries of J.League Cup matches Saturday:     Urawa 1 (Fukunaga 89th) Kashiwa 3 (Watanabe 32nd, own goal 60th,Edilson 68th).  0-1.  20,230.     Hiroshima 1 (Huistra 57th) Iwata 0.  0-0.  11,468.     Osaka C 0 Kawasaki 1 (Bismarck 30th).  0-1.  13,389.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Japanese pro baseball standings/results+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Standings in Japanese professional baseball after games playedSaturday (tabulate under games won, lost, tied, winning percentage,games behind): *     Central League:              W   L   T    PCT.    GB Hiroshima   27  18   0    .600    -- Chunichi    25  18   0    .581    1.0 Yomiuri     24  21   0    .533    3.0 Yakult      23  23   0    .500    4.5 Yokohama    22  25   0    .468    6.0 Hanshin     15  31   0    .326   12.5    Saturday's results: Hiroshima 3, Yokohama 2, 10 innings Yomiuri  6, Chunichi 3 Yakult 9, Hanshin 0     Pacific League:              W   L   T    PCT.    GB Nippon Ham  28  19   1    .596    -- Orix        27  21   1    .563    1.5 Kintetsu    26  21   0    .553    2.0 Lotte       24  25   1    .490    5.0 Seibu       21  25   2    .457    6.5 Daiei       15  30   1    .333   12.0     Saturday's results: Kintetsu 12, Seibu 9 Lotte 6, Orix 3 Nippon Ham 5, Daiei 1 *Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996News focus on problems of World-Cup co-hosting+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     By awarding the 2002 World Cup finals jointly to Japan and SouthKorea, FIFA has stepped into unknown territory, raising more problemsthan it has set out to resolve.     FIFA chief Joao Havelange said FIFA will create a working groupto look into the matter and the following are some of the issues thatmust be addressed in its report due back to FIFA by December.     Logistics.     Organizers in Japan and South Korea, two countries withdifferent communications and transport systems, immigration controlsand security apparatuses, must work things out to ensure the freemovement of millions of fans and to cope with an invasion of nationalsupporters for the 32 nations to contest the tournament.     Take visa requirements, for instance.     South Koreans coming to Japan must obtain a visa under Japan'scurrent immigration law unless they are on transit to a thirdcountry.  For transit proposes, Korean visitors may stay in Japan forup to three days.     On the other hand, Japanese traveling to South Korea are exemptfrom a visa if their stay in the country as a tourist is less than 15days.     World Cup operation.     Operation of the World Cup tournament itself, some World Cupexperts say, is the easy part.     One solution to co-hosting, these experts suggest, is to splitthe World Cup down the middle, letting 16 nations compete in Japanand the remaining 16 in South Korea.     The idea does not sound totally absurd.     Actually, only 16 nations had been allowed to compete the WorldCup finals until the tournament held in Argentina in 1978.     Between the 1982 World Cup held in Spain and the last World Cupheld in the United States in 1994, there were 24 nations.     And starting from the 1998 World Cup in France, the tournamentwill feature 32 national teams.     If the 2002 World Cup is split down the middle, the 16 teams canbe divided into four teams of round-robin play and the two top teamsin each group would advance to the final in each country.     The South Korea champion would meet the Japan champion to decidethe final World Cup champion.     This split-down-the-center formula would eliminate the necessityfor the national team supporters -- and their teams -- to crisscrossbetween the two countries during the tournament.     One hiccup, of course, is whether Japan or South Korea will getto be the defending World Cup champion in 2002, which will be decidedin the 1998 World Cup.     Also, where will Brazil, the only four-time World Cup champion,play?  Japan?  South Korea?     The final.     Under current FIFA rules, the World Cup final is decided by asingle match.     There are already suggestions that FIFA should adopt thetwo-match ''home-and-away'' formula used in Europe's UEFA Cup,organizing the first leg of the two-match final, say, in Japan andthe second leg in South Korea.     The home-and-away formula, proponents suggest, wouldsubstantially boost revenues for the World Cup organizers not onlyfrom entrance tickets but also from TV broadcasting rights.     Opening ceremony.     Diplomatic protocols could create a headache in organizing theopening ceremony, which is traditionally attended by the hostnation's head of state.     If South Korea gets the opening ceremony, will Emperor Akihito,who serves as Japan's head of state, travel there and become thefirst Japanese monarch to visit the former Japanese colony and risk abacklash from the Koreans, many of whom still harbor bitter memoriesof Japan's 35-year colonial rule?     The list of issues does not end there.  Dividing sponsorshipmoney, TV broadcasting rights, fees and other sources of marketingrevenues will require leadership from FIFA.     For their part, the political leaders in Japan and South Koreavowed Saturday that they will cooperate for the success of the 2002World Cup and turn the tournament into an ''example to the world.''Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Winless Kyoto grabs draw in J.League Cup opener+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Kyoto Purple Sanga, following a record 15 consecutive losses inthe first half of J.League play, opened the J.League Cup with a 1-1draw against Bellmare Hiratsuka on Saturday.     Ruy Ramos, playing as a forward, injected dynamism into Kyoto'sattack in the first half and the strategy paid off with a 33rd minutestrike by new Brazilian midfielder Raudnei.     Koji Seki, however, picked up a poor Kyoto clearance and scoredthe equalizer in the 64th minute.     ''The team has changed incredibly,'' said Ramos, a former VerdyKawasaki midfielder.  ''But change alone is not enough.  If there areno results...'' He left the sentence unfinished.     The two clubs will travel to Hiratsuka stadium Wednesday fortheir second-leg match.  The side with more goals on aggregate willearn three points.     The 16 clubs are divided into two groups and will conduct sevenpreliminary rounds on a home-and-away basis through Aug. 21.     The top two sides in both groups will play in the Sept. 4semifinals, followed by the final Sept. 25.     Kashiwa outclassed host Urawa Red Diamonds 3-1 while Gamba Osakastaged a 3-2 away win over reigning J.League champion YokohamaMarinos.  Emperor's Cup holder Nagoya Grampus Eight salvaged a 1-1draw against visiting Yokohama Flugels.     Shimizu S-Pulse claimed a 1-0 victory over Kashima Antlers, asdid Sanfrecce Hiroshima over Jubilo Iwata, Avispa Fukuoka over JEFUnited Ichihara, and Kawasaki over Cerezo Osaka.     League play, which ended after the 15th round of matches May 18,resumes Aug. 28.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996J.League Cup summaries -3-+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Summaries of J.League Cup matches Saturday:     Kyoto 1 (Raudnei 33rd) Hiratsuka 1 (Seki 64th).  1-0.  9,254.     Ichihara 0 Fukuoka 1 (Troglio 50th).  0-0.  9,964.(End summaries)Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Korean FIFA exec believes W-Cup co-host is trouble-free+ZURICH, Switzerland, June 1 Kyodo     South Korean soccer chief Chung Mong Joon, the reputedmastermind behind FIFA's decision to split the 2002 World Cup finalsbetween Japan and South Korea, said Saturday the two countries shouldbe able to co-stage the tournament without much fuss.     ''There is no major problem toward co-hosting.  (Even if thereis), it can be settled through sportsmanship,'' Chung said in aninterview with Kyodo News.     Chung, who serves as one of the eight vice presidents in the21-member FIFA executive committee, also said he believes that jointhosting will help boost mutual understanding between Japanese andSouth Koreans.     Chung said he is sorry to see that the 2002 Cup was not awardedto a single nation, but added, ''I believe joint hosting has meritsthat you don't see in unilateral hosting.''     ''Not only Korean-Japanese relations, I hope the 2002 World Cup,the first in Asia, will turn into a festival to foster peace andprosperity in Northeast Asia,'' he said.     Chung said, however, he does not expect the World Cup alone willdo away with all historical animosities between the two countries.     ''Sports alone cannot resolve all these problems.  Historicalfact is historical fact,'' he said.     Chung said he believes South Koreans and Japanese should be ableto get to know more about each other through the 2002 World Cup andopen up a new page in bilateral ties in the 21st century.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Japan, Netherlands, Ukraine get v'ball Olympic berths+OSAKA, June 1 Kyodo     Japan, the Netherlands and Ukraine earned women's volleyballberths in this summer's Atlanta Olympics on Saturday by securing thetop three spots in the final qualifying tournament.     Japan overwhelmed Croatia 15-10, 15-4, 15-1, the Netherlandsbeat Bulgaria 15-7, 15-9, 15-6 and Ukraine defeated Italy 15-8, 15-8,15-6 in the eight-nation round robin at Osaka Municipal CentralGymnasium.     Japan, the Netherlands and Ukraine have identical 5-1 records.     Croatia stands at 4-2 while Italy and Bulgaria are 2-4.     Japanese women qualified for the Olympics for the ninth straighttimes since volleyball became the Olympic event in 1964, winning thegold medals in 1964 and 1976.     ''By qualifying for the Olympics, we've moved one step towardreaching my dream.  The next step is to get a medal in Atlanta,''said ace spiker Tomoko Yoshihara.     Romania downed Taiwan 16-17, 15-8, 15-9, 15-12 to pick up itsfirst victory in the tournament and Taiwan is winless.     Japanese men, the Olympic gold medalists in 1972, failed toqualify for the Atlanta Games.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Date beats Wild, advances to 4th round+PARIS, June 1 Kyodo     Seventh-seed Kimiko Date of Japan defeated American Linda Wild6-3, 7-5 on Saturday to advance to the fourth round in the FrenchOpen tennis tournament.     Date, the world's No. 9 and semifinalist in the Grand Slam eventlast year, overcame several easy mistakes by capturing decisivepoints in beating the 33rd-ranked player.     ''My service is getting sharper, while I have some technicalproblems,'' said Date, who is still recovering from a left leg injurysuffered last month in the Fed Cup competition aganst Germany.     In second-round doubles action, Martina Hingis of Switzerlandand Helena Sukova of the Czech Republic beat the Japanese pair ofRika Hiraki and Naoko Kijimuta 6-1, 6-3.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Yomiuri rallies past Chunichi, drops Dragons from first+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     Daisuke Motoki hit a bases-loaded triple with two out in theeighth inning Saturday to spark the Yomiuri Giants to a 6-3 win atthe Tokyo Dome and drop the Chunichi Dragons from first place in theCentral League.     With the Giants trailing 3-2 in the eighth, Motoki looped aslider from reliever Sun Dong Yol over the head of rightfielderShigeki Oto, clearing the bases, and then came home on a single byKosuke Yoshihara.     Sun from South Korea, 1-1, absorbed the loss for the Dragons,which fell one game behind the victorious Hiroshima Carp, while MarioBrito struck out the side in the Chunichi ninth for his sixth save.     Chunichi roughed up Giants starter Balvino Galvez for three runson three hits in the first inning, but managed only one more hit theremaining eight.     At Chiba Marine Stadium, the Yakult Swallows eased past theHanshin Tigers 9-0 on a pair of two-run homers by Hensley Meulens andTom O'Malley and Tatsuki Yamamoto's four-hit pitching.     In an afternoon contest, pinch hitter Itsuki Asai arched a solohomer inside the leftfield foul pole in the top of the 10th inning tolift the Carp over the host Yokohama BayStars 3-2.     Asai's four-bagger saddled Yokohama starter Takashi Saito, 4-3,with the loss despite a 12-strikeout performance while givingHiroshima sole possession of first place in league.     In the Pacific League, Hiroshi Shibakusa, 4-1, scattered fivehits over eight innings, and the front-running Nippon Ham Fightersdowned the last place Daiei Hawks 5-1 at the Fukuoka Dome.     The Kintetsu Buffaloes overcame five-run deficits twice to claiman 12-9 victory over the homestanding Seibu Lions in a game  thatincluded 21 walks and two batters hit by pitches on both sides.     Norihiro Nakamura wielded the big bat for the Buffaloes, going4-for-5 with a walk and his 11th homer of the season.     In Kobe, the Chiba Lotte Marines pounced on Orix starter HiroshiKobayashi, 3-5, for seven hits and four runs early and held on for a6-3 win over the BlueWave at Green Stadium Kobe.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Kyodo news summary+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     -- U.S. President Bill Clinton formally extended China'smost-favored-nation (MFN) trade status Friday for another year,calling it ''the best way'' to advance U.S. economic and securityinterests in Asia under his ''engagement'' policy toward Beijing.     -- Stocks are expected to continue mixed in Tokyo next week, asshares are expected to be sandwiched between selling on rallies andbargain hunting by public funds and investment trusts.     -- The U.S. dollar is likely to hold firm against the yen inTokyo next week under the ongoing influence of Friday's comments byJapan's top cabinet spokesman in favor of continued low domesticinterest rates.     -- Short-term money market rates are expected to weaken in Tokyonext week under the continuing influence of Friday's comments byJapan's top cabinet spokesman favoring low interest rates.     -- Sensitive trading is expected in Japanese government bonds inTokyo next week ahead of Friday's release of the Bank of Japan's''Tankan'' quarterly survey of business sentiment.     -- Brazilians will have to say goodbye for the second time tothe hottest-selling car in the nation's history -- the ''Beetle''model manufactured by the Brazilian subsidiary of Germany'sVolkswagen AG.     -- The United States is about to decide on whether to provideadditional food aid to North Korea, which is suffering a serious foodshortage since the heavy flooding of last summer, an administrationofficial said Friday.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Kyodo news summary -2-+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     -- The Brazilian sports media, which had largely anticipatedthat Japan would be picked to host the 2002 World Cup finals, hasheavily criticized the decision by the world soccer governing body tojointly award the competition to Japan and South Korea.     -- A government study group has drafted an outline for thereform of the nation's pension fund system, calling for the use ofmoney pooled under a government-managed pension plan to rescuefinancially troubled corporate pension funds, a business daily saidSaturday.     -- North Korean leader Kim Jong Il is expected to emerge fromisolation and his control should become ''more public'' later thisyear, U.S. congressman Bill Richardson said Friday.     -- The Health and Welfare Ministry has distributed aninformation booklet to municipal and prefectural offices and otheragencies concerning the ''mad cow'' disease, officials said Saturday.     -- Japanese telecommunications carriers are set to link personalhandy-phone system (PHS) users with ordinary cellular users, to allowcommunication between the two like ordinary telephones, a businessdaily reported Saturday.     -- Local officials of candidate cities in Japan bidding to hostWorld Cup matches expressed mixed feelings Saturday, one day afterthe world soccer governing body FIFA decided to allow Japan and SouthKorea to co-host the 2002 extravaganza.     -- Japan's recent deregulation of gasoline imports has erodedthe earnings of two large oil refiners, forcing one to cut staff andanother to give up on hiring new graduates next spring, a businessdaily said Saturday.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Kyodo news summary -3-+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     -- Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto said Saturday he welcomessoccer governing body FIFA's decision to have Japan and South Koreaco-host the 2002 World Cup.     ''It is really a good thing.  There is nothing bad for bothcountries to pursue one goal,'' Hashimoto said.     Hashimoto, speaking to reporters at his official residence, saidthe government will give its full backing to the co-hosting plan.     -- About 80,000 newly authorized rice retailers stormed into thenation's deregulated rice distribution system Saturday, doubling thenumber of rice retailers in Japan to 170,000, industry sources said.     The newcomers were encouraged by the new food control law thattook effect the same day, which allows rice retail business by suchsectors as supermarket chains, fast food restaurants, conveniencestores and gas stations.     -- A newly established joint engine venture between Toyota MotorCorp. and its Chinese partner held an opening reception in Tianjin onSaturday in a move expected to accelerate the Japanese automaker'sfull-scale Chinese operations.     Toyota President Hiroshi Okuda and some 10 executives ofJapanese auto parts makers in the Toyota group attended the ceremonyfor the equally owned Tianjin Toyota Motor Engine Co., which was setup in the Chinese city in mid-May with a capital of 248 milliondollars.     It marks the first time for Toyota, Japan's biggest automaker, toestablish production of such a key auto component in China.     -- A Japanese woman believed to be a member of the Japanese RedArmy wanted by police for more than 20 years was holding a forgedJapanese passport when she was taken into police custody lastSaturday in Peru, sources close to Japanese security authorities saidSaturday.     The National Police Agency has sent officials to Peru to confirmthe identity of the woman, who is believed to be Kazue Yoshimura, 49,the sources said.     Police are expected to prepare an arrest warrant on a charge ofusing a forged official document, they added.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Kyodo news summary -4-+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     -- Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto said Saturday he hopes theelection of Benjamin Netanyahu in the Israeli prime ministerialelection will not cause the Middle East peace process to regress.     When asked by reporters to comment on Netanyahu's victory overincumbent Prime Minister Shimon Peres, Hashimoto said, ''The result(of the election) is a judgment by the people of Israel, but I hopethat it will not reverse the Middle East peace process.''     -- The Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) and12 companies have jointly launched a full-scale study of how best tonurture markets for environment-related equipment in developingcountries in Asia, according to ministry officials.     The move represents an upgrading of the Green Aid Plan initiatedin 1992 with the aim of transferring environment-friendlytechnologies to such countries.     MITI plans to draw up a plan by this fall and will earmark fundsfrom the nation's official development assistance (ODA) for specificprojects, the officials said.     -- Reflecting signs of an economic recovery, an increasingnumber of polled Japanese companies increased or resumed theirdividend payments for fiscal 1995 that ended March 31, a Kyodo Newstally showed Saturday.     According to the tally, a combined 21.5% of 1,447 companieswhich are listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE) and closed theirbooks at the end of March increased or resumed their dividendpayments.  The figure represented a rise of 6.2 percentage pointsfrom the previous year.     Companies that increased payments accounted for 249 or 17.8%while those that resumed payments came to 52 or 3.7%.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Kyodo news summary -5-+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     -- Japan and South Korea have unconditionally accepted FIFA'sdecision to award the 2002 World Cup finals to the two nations amidhopes that the tournament will break new ground in World Cup history,Japanese soccer officials say.     ''We believe a new age has arrived, one in which we will be ableto stage the World Cup finals with South Korea,'' said ShunichiroOkano, vice president of the Football Association of Japan (JFA), onthe FIFA executive committee's vote Friday.     JFA President Ken Naganuma said neither Japan nor South Koreamade any conditions when the 21-member FIFA committee took theunprecedented move in an unanimous vote.     -- Merchandise trade between China and Taiwan for the firstquarter of this year rose 2.9% from a year earlier to 4.84billion U.S. dollars, Taiwan's Central News Agency reported Saturday.     The figure was released Friday by Taiwan's Ministry of EconomicAffairs, the news agency said.     The ministry attributed the low growth in the value of thetwo-way trade in part to a rate cut in China's tax refund on itsexports as well as to recent tensions between Beijing and Taipei, itsaid.     -- Korean share prices were buoyed Saturdy by the announcementthat Korea has been named to co-host 2002 World Cup finals withJapan, reports Yonhap.     The leading stock price index rose 4.89 points from Friday toclose at 907.98.     -- Harhanhalli Dodde Deve Gowda was sworn in as India's 12thprime minister Saturday following the collapse of the country's firstHindu Nationalist government earlier this week.     Gowda, 63, was administered the oath of office a little pastnoon by President Shankar Dayal Sharma at the presidential palace.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Kyodo news summary -6-+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     -- A Japanese journalist who recently returned from fire-plaguedMongolia has said fire fighters are still having a difficult time aswater is running out and high winds are spreading the blaze.     Tadanori Matsuda, chief of the Sapporo-based Japan bureau of theweekly Mongolian newspaper Mongol Times, said he witnessed themassive fire that has raged through the forests, fields and mountainsof Mongolia for almost six weeks.     -- China has dropped its opposition to a proposal for a plannedcomprehensive nuclear test ban treaty (CTBT) that would ban all typesof nuclear explosions, Western negotiation sources in Geneva saidSaturday.     The Chinese government has virtually given up its own proposalthat the CTBT allow ''peaceful nuclear explosions,'' the sources said.     However, Beijing still wants the treaty to stipulate that theissue of peaceful explosions will be discussed in a conference toreview the treaty 10 years after it goes into effect, they said.     -- Norimi Terasawa shot a 3-under-par 70 Saturday, equaling theday's best score to take a three-stroke lead after the second roundof the 50 million yen Mitsubishi Denki Ladies tournament.     -- The Justice Ministry will tighten regulations on foreignentertainers and athletes performing in Japan to prevent them fromoverstepping the bounds of their visas, ministry officials saidSaturday.     The officials said a revision of the ordinance governing foreignentertainers and professional athletes will be posted in theirofficial gazette Monday, effective Sept. 3 this year.     Under the new regulations, foreign entertainers and professionalathletes will not be permitted to perform in Japan unless they arelicensed by their home governments or public organizations and havemajored in their areas of specialty at educational institutions intheir home countries for more than two years, the officials said.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Kyodo news summary -7-+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     -- The Health and Welfare Ministry has decided to review theexisting guideline for combating highly toxic dioxine for the firsttime in five years, ministry officials said Saturday.     The officials said the ministry was alarmed by reports that highlevels of the chemical have been detected in the air and soil neargarbage incinerators in recent years.     The organic chlorine-based chemical, which is said to causecancer and birth defects, is contained in insecticides, bleachingagents and ash recovered from garbage incinerators.  It is also usedin a defoliant.     -- Japanese Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto and South KoreanPresident Kim Young Sam on Saturday pledged full support from theirgovernments for the 2002 soccer World Cup finals which will be hostedjointly by the two nations.     Japanese officials said Hashimoto and Kim reached agreement onmutual cooperation during talks over the telephone Saturday afternoon.     The two leaders agreed that co-hosting will provide anopportunity for the two countries to shape a ''future-orientedrelationship'' between them, a Japanese official said.     -- Casual wear like polo shirts and jackets are replacingneckties as popular presents for Father's Day on June 16, reflectingthe recent boom in outdoor activities and ''casual Fridays,''department store and super market officials said Saturday.     Seibu Department Stores Ltd.'s Ikebukuro store in Tokyo isselling about 200 styles of polo shirts with those priced at between7,800 yen and 9,800 yen selling well, officials said.     At Mitsukoshi Ltd.'s Nihombashi store in Tokyo, polo shirts andsweaters are also good sellers, officials said.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Kyodo news summary -8-+TOKYO, June 1 Kyodo     -- Unheralded Masayuki Okano heads into Sunday's final round atthe JCB Classic Sendai tournament with a one-stroke lead, but hishopes for a first tour title are overshadowed by hard-charging Masahi''Jumbo'' Ozaki.     -- Gamba Osaka defeated reigning J.League champion YokohamaMarinos 3-2 in a first-leg match of the J.League Cup on Saturday.     -- Japanese bidders for the 2002 World Cup left the highlytouted ''virtual stadium'' virtually up in the air Saturday, a dayafter FIFA decided to split the World Cup finals between Japan andSouth Korea.     -- Square Co. owner Masafumi Miyamoto on Saturday categoricallydenied allegations that he had instigated a hostile takeover bidagainst Ascii Corp.     -- Russian President Boris Yeltsin will attend for the firsttime a newly created politico-economic forum at the Lyons summit ofthe Group of Seven (G-7) nations in France later this month, ForeignMinistry sources said Saturday.     -- Seven Seibu hurlers and four Kintetsu pitchers struggled tofind the strike zone Saturday and when they did the ball was beingsprayed around the ballpark like buckshot as the Buffaloes came frombehind for an 11-9 win.     -- South Korea posted an external trade deficit of 1.44 billionU.S. dollars in May, bringing its cumulative trade deficit for thefirst five months of the year to 7.46 billion dollars, theInternational Trade and Industry Ministry said in a preliminaryreport Saturday.     -- If Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto and President Kim YoungSam had their wish, Japan and South Korea would meet in the final ofthe 2002 soccer World Cup finals.     -- Mitsubishi Motor's Kawasaki baseball team upended BarcelonaOlympic champion Cuba 7-6 in the final game of the Baseball Week inJapan series Saturday.Back to Headline List CopyrightKYODO NEWS SERVICE via NewsNetJune 1, 1996Closing Korean stock quotations Saturday+SEOUL, June 1 Kyodo Hankuk Glass        23400 UP  200 Ssangyong Cement    21300       0 Dong Bu Steel       18800 UP  200 Kang Won Ind        14300 UP  500 Daewoo Heavy         7750 DN  230 Lg Electronic       21900 UP  200 Samsung Electronic  73100 UP 4100 Daewoo Electronic    7610 DN  150 Amnam Ind           15600 UP  200 Kia Motors          16200       0 Hyundai Motor       33200 DN  100 Cheil Sugar         57000 UP  900 Haitai Confect      10300 UP  200 Miwon               17900 UP 1000 Oriental Brewery    33000 UP 1500 Hanil Synthe Fiber   7100 UP  400 Choongnam Spinning  14000 UP  300 Kolon               20200 DN  300 Han Yang Chemical   10200       0 Lg Chemical         14800 DN  100 Pacific             17500       0 Dong-A Pharm        22000 UP  500 Yukong              25100 UP  600 Hanjin Const        18100 DN  100 Daewoo               8890 DN   10 Samsung             20200       0 Sunkyong            18500       0 Hanjin Transport    24000       0 Korea Express       32400 DN  100 Samsung Fire Ins   538000       0 Korean Air          23500 UP  600 Daishin Securities  11700 DN  300 Daewoo Securities   21600       0 Lg Securities       16000 DN  300 Hyundai Const       40200 UP  400 Posco               53600 DN  600 Shinsegae           62200 UP  700 Kepco               30200       0 (By Yonhap News Agency)Back to Headline List WT03-B05-20IA087-000634-B040-151http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it111.html 205.156.212.5 19970122030006 text/html 145796HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:57:42 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:48 GMTContent-length: 145608Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it111.html Sample Issue Copyright LATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS via NewsNet July 4, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES BRAZIL: RATES OF EXCHANGE AND RECOVERY (598 words) BRAZIL: REALISTIC FORECASTS: AS TRADE ACCOUNT TURNS AROUND (1646 words) MEXICO: GETTING BETTER: BUT STILL NOT OUT OF THE WOODS (1248 words) MEXICO: THE REAL ECONOMY: STILL TILTED: TOWARDS EXPORTS (564 words) ARGENTINA: A BIT OF A JAGGED RECOVERY: QUESTIONS ABOUT FIRST QUARTER GROWTH (950 words) VENEZUELA: INFLATION KEY: AND CUTTING THE BUREAUCRACY (957 words) CHILE: BANK LAW READY FOR APPROVAL: FROM IMPORTER TO EXPORTER (662 words) COLOMBIA: SAMPER CLEARED: BUT QUESTIONS REMAIN (271 words) ECUADOR: BUCARAM AHEAD: BUSINESS ALARMED (344 words) PERU: MORE BUREAUCRATS TO BE SACKED: TO BOOST CAPITAL EXPENDITURE (586 words) BOLIVIA: DEBT NOT A PROBLEM: SAYS CAMDESSUS (135 words) COSTA RICA: MISSING THE IMF TARGET: AS FIGUERES SNUBBED (398 words) CUBA: LAGE FORECASTS 5%: GROWTH THIS YEAR (337 words) DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: ELECTIONS AND FRAUDS: FROM IMPORTER TO EXPORTER (172 words) EL SALVADOR: MAKING A GESTURE: BOOSTING PUBLIC WORKS (308 words) GUATEMALA: THE RIGHT SURFACES: AS GUERRILLAS DROP TAX (308 words) CHILE: CODELCO AND THE COPPER MARKET: LINKS BETWEEN DAVILA AND HAMANAKA (649 words) CHILE: CORPORATE PROFILE/IANSA & PATHFINDER: QUITE A SUCCESS STORY: Developing from sugar into agribusiness (1282 words) REGION: INFLATION (221 words) REGION: INTEREST RATES (90 words) REGION: EXCHANGE RATES (106 words) REGION: STOCKMARKETS (26 words) PERU: PRIVATISATION: OIL SALES START: AND RESIDUAL TELEFONICA SHARES ON sale (965 words) BRAZIL: CVRD: SOLD AS ONE: SAYS BNDES PRESIDENT (945 words) MEXICO: DEBT PAGE:PREPAYING THE US: US DOLLARS 4.7BN (806 words) HONDURAS: THE GRAINS PROBLEM: FROM EXPORTER TO IMPORTER (354 words) NICARAGUA: INFLATION PICKS UP: BUT ECONOMY ON COURSE, ACCORDING TO CENTRAL bank (169 words) PANAMA: GROWTH STEADY: BUT SHRIMPS IMPROVE (338 words) PARAGUAY: DEFICIT PROBLEM: WARNS IMF (150 words) TRINIDAD & TOBAGO: WRITING OFF: MOST OF THE LOANS TO GUYANA (258 words) URUGUAY: CONSTRUCTION PLANS: AND SCANDALS (474 words) BRAZIL: COFFEE: WHY THE DROP IN EXPORTS MAY BE STRUCTURAL: RATHER THAN JUST temporary (967 words) ARGENTINA: AGRICULTURE: ON THE UP: LAND PRICES JUMP BY 30% (788 words) MEXICO: OIL: PRODUCTION UP BY 7% IN FIRST THIRD: EXPORT PRICES INCREASED (614 words) PERU: GAS: CAMISEA: BACK ON (321 words) ECUADOR: OIL: HOLDING STEADY: BUT NO EFFECT FROM HIGHER PRICES (859 words) REGION: COPPER: PRICE PROBLEMS: TURMOIL ON THE LME (643 words) PERU: LOOKING FOR A BOOM: AS NEW INVESTMENT FLOODS IN (613 words) SURINAME: BAUXITE: DEMAND: BY UNION (307 words) CUBA: FOCUS ON CUBA'S BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY: TRYING TO BOOST EXPORTS (752 words) CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 BRAZIL: RATES OF EXCHANGE AND RECOVERY Rudiger Dornbusch's claim that the Brazilian real is heavily overvalued has once again raised the question of whether Brazil and indeed the whole of the region is running a sustainable mix of economic policies. Dornbusch, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, claims that Brazil is in the same position Mexico was in 1994 and that the real is between 30% and 40% overvalued. We do not believe him, as we explain overleaf in our commentary on Brazil. We argue that unlike Mexico, the real's exchange rate against the dollar is not a proxy for an overvalued or undervalued exchange rate.  Brazil does much less trade (about 20% of its total) with the US than most Latin American countries. Mexico by contrast does more:  almost 70% of its trade is with the US. We argue that this difference means that whether Brazil's currency is overvalued should be assessed on a trade weighted basis. We would argue that Brazil's ability to maintain export growth suggests that its currency is not too overvalued. The Brazilian government's ruthlessness in slapping on tariffs when domestic industries are threatened makes it difficult to gauge whether the currency is overvalued, judging by whether imports are rising or falling.  What does seem clear to us is that Brazil is more likely to follow Argentina than Mexico in its method for adjusting domestic prices. Mexico devalued, and thus made domestic prices internationally competitive. Argentina is sticking to the more difficult, but probably ultimately more rewarding, policy of using a fixed exchange rate to force the domestic economy to become competitive.  Like Mexico, the result of this has been a painful recession, huge numbers of unemployed and more recently a pretty feeble economic recovery. The economic recovery, like Mexico's, is being led by investment and exports, rather than by growth in domestic spending.   Argentina's problem is its tax structure. This is tilted heavily towards consumption taxes which are not very productive in periods of recession. The government has to push on with its tax reform plans, and actually get some of them through congress if it is to avoid disaster.  What Argentina's policymakers are doing is using the recession to force domestic prices to adjust to international prices in real terms. Under the convertibility scheme goods and services in Argentina appeared to be expensive and imports started to flood the market. Although imports fell as Argentina's economy slowed down and then went into recession last year, exports actually continued to rise. Although Argentina's export performance is distorted by its heavy exports of wheat and other grains, it does seem that manufactured goods have managed to find export markets, particularly in Brazil. This suggest that the economy is adjusting successfully. Of course the same could be said of Mexico. If anything, its increase in manufactured exports has been more impressive: 30% last year and on top of that 25% this year. The problem though is that the performance of Mexican manufactures is distorted firstly by the effects of the maquiladoras, which are simply cheap labour operations, and secondly by the dominance of the US market in its foreign trade. This means that it is far from clear that the whole of the economy is benefitting from the devaluation. Even the government is now concerned by the fact that exports are so concentrated. It should be even more concerned by the sharp increase in luxury car imports which we report on in our analysis of Mexico. This suggests that the centrifugal forces in the economy are getting stronger. Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 BRAZIL: REALISTIC FORECASTS: AS TRADE ACCOUNT TURNS AROUND Pedro Malan, the finance minister, gave a realistic assessment of where the Brazilian economy stood to two senate commissions, finance and tax, last month. He has downgraded the official forecast of growth for this year from 5% to between 3% and 3.5%. He said that over the first two quarters of the year the economy had actually contracted, though there was now evidence that this recessionary phase had ended and the economy would grow strongly in the second half of the year.  The Instituto de Pesquisa y Economia Aplicada (Ipea), which is attached to the planning ministry, said the GDP growth rate for the 12 months to June 1996 was 1.2%. It pointed out that this was an improvement on the minus 2.1% figure to the end of March. Other Ipea indicators are also beginning to flash green for growth. Its survey of industrial production found that there was a 3.9% increase in April compared to March. This franked the findings by the Federacao das Industrias de Sao Paulo (Fiesp) which reckoned that industrial output had surged by 4.7% between March and April.  Fiscal deficit. Malan was equally optimistic about the prospects for the fiscal deficit. He told the senate committees that the operating deficit would come down from 5% of GDP (last year) to 2.5% this year, and the nominal deficit would be about 5% of GDP, compared to 7.3% last year. He added that progress on the fiscal deficit depended on the government getting its constitutional reforms through congress. In particular, it wants to reform the social security system and the bureaucracy, the two main consumers of tax revenues. The treasury reckons that it ran a 671m reais surplus in May after collecting taxes worth 7bn reais. The surplus was largely because it did not have to make any extraordinary payments. The accumulated deficit for the first five months of the year is around 3.8bn reais, the treasury reckons.  The deficit is likely to increase sharply in June as the 13th month bonus falls due and 500m reais of holiday payments to bureaucrats fall due. Foreign debt payments are also likely to increase from May's 1.26bn reais. Trade. The really encouraging statistic comes from the trade account. According to Malan, export revenues are up by 10% in the first five months of the year (despite the collapse of coffee revenues), while the import bill is down by between 8% and 9%. Export revenues in May were US Dollars 4.5bn, and imports were worth about US Dollars 4.1bn.  The government is calculating on the trade account being more or less in balance by the end of the year. Some trade officials though believe this could be an underestimate and that the country is on course to  register its traditional trade surplus. The authorities are certainly doing their best to boost exports. On 19 June, President Fernando Henrique Cardoso announced that the government was restoring an export credit scheme which had been suspended as part of its cost cutting programme. The Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econ^mico now has US Dollars 1bn to finance particular categories of exports. It is offering credit at the rate of 5.5% over Libor for 15 months.  Antonio Kandir, the planning minister, said that rate was around a third of what the commercial banks were charging. The credit is aimed at 10 industries: shoes, clothes, carparts, furniture, ceramics. whitegoods, electrical products, ironmongery, plastics and ornamental stone.  The credit is designed to help industries such as clothes and shoes which have been badly hit by the trade liberalisation policies while boosting the prospects of industries such as whitegoods and ceramics in which Brazil reckons it has a competitive advantage. The government is particularly keen on boosting ornamental stone exports: exports of marble and granite trebled last year to US Dollars 35m. Industrialists were pleased by the credit line. Luis Fernando Furlan, director of foreign trade at the Federacao das Industrias de Sao Paulo, reckoned that the effects of the credit line would be as beneficial to exports as a devaluation.  Besides putting the credit line in place, the government is also musing over creating an export credit guarantee agency, which would be capitalised largely with money from the private sector. This agency would try to compete with the Eximbanks, Cofaces and Hermeses of the developed world, which offer long term specialised finance to exporters. Brazilian industrialists reckon that this financing often offsets higher production costs in OECD countries and keeps exports from these countries competitive. Brazilian industrialists and trade officials moan that the system does not give exporters as much help: in fact they often face export taxes. Malan said that the government was trying to reform this, but its tax reform package was being stalled by congress.  Dagoberto Godoy, president of the Federacao das Industrias de Rio Grande do Sul, said that one possible answer would be to copy what Argentina had done: it had ended taxes on exports.  Current account. Malan's testimony to the senate committee was optimistic about the country's overall balance of payments. He reckoned that the country would run a current account deficit of around 2.5% of GDP, largely because of interest payments. He said the country should have little trouble financing this deficit because inflows of long term capital were so strong. In the first five months of the year longterm investments amounted to US Dollars 3.2bn, he said. The government was forecasting US Dollars 7bn by the end of the year. The country also had US Dollars 60bn in foreign exchange reserves at the end of May.  Dornbusch. The reserve figure and the strong inflows of foreign capital do not support Rudiger Dornbusch's claim that Brazil is about to face its own version of the 1994 Mexican devaluation crisis. Dornbusch claimed that the real is between 30% and 40% overvalued. He asserted that bringing the currency back towards its proper value would cause an economic dislocation on a par with what has happened in Mexico. We disagree with both Dornbusch's premise and his conclusion. To take the conclusion first. We believe that the quality of economic management in Brazil is far superior to that in Mexico.  There are two reasons for this. The first is that Brazil produces superior statistics and economic research: this breeds a lot more objective criticism of economic policy.  The second reason is related to this. The Brazilian government tends to be more responsive to alternative ideas and follows policies that are broadly related to what is happening in the Brazilian economy. Mexico is still far too interested in doing what pleases its international creditors. That attitude, above all else, was the reason for the Mexican crisis. Gimmicks such as Tesobonos which guaranteed investors against a devaluation boxed the Mexican government in and prevented it from devaluing until the economy was past the point of caring.  We do not accept Dornbusch's premise that the real is 40% overvalued. It may well be 10% to 20% overvalued against the dollar, but on a trade weighted basis the real is probably pretty fairly valued. The dollar is still cheap compared to DM and Yen. Unlike Mexico, Brazil's trade is not dominated by the US: almost 70% of Mexico's exports go to the US; only about 35% of Brazil's do. This means that a trade weighted measure of whether the real is overvalued is a more appropriate analytical tool, than a simple calculation against the dollar. (By analogy, the Swiss franc, French franc and DM all may be overvalued against the dollar but fairly valued against each other which is much more important from an economic point of view because so much of the three countries trade is with each other).  We would say that the Argentine peso is certainly at least as much overvalued against the dollar as the real. Yet the pattern of trade between Argentina and Brazil suggests to us that the two currencies are now pretty much fairly valued against each other.  The growth in Brazilian exports and drop in imports, plus the strength of direct investment in Brazil all suggests that the real is not massively overvalued.  Inflation: The government is forecasting an inflation rate of between 12% and 13% for the year. In the first five months of the year, inflation was 5.1% according to the Fundacao Getulio Vargas and 14% for the 12 months to May. In May the rate of 1.55% was higher than the rate of devaluation against the dollar and the return on 30-day fixed deposits (1.5%).  Textiles: The government has imposed quotas on textiles from Panama, China and Taiwan (none of these countries yet belongs to the WTO) and is considering taking measures against four WTO members: Pakistan, South Korea, Hong Kong and Thailand. The authorities are under pressure from the textile industry to curb cheap imports. According to the textile industry, the number of companies has fallen from 832 in 1994 to 621 this year and that 20,000 workers have lost their jobs because of unfair competition.  Unemployment: The Departamento Intersindical de Estudios Socioeconomicos calculates that unemployment is 15.9%. The government maintains that the official figure (which has risen from 5.7% to 6.4%) is more accurate.  The government admits that 2.1m jobs have been lost between 1988 and 1995. It blames the combination of the 1988 constitution, which guaranteed workers an annual bonus of a month's salary, maternity leave and lavish pensions, for pricing Brazilians out of jobs. It also says that the heavy investment in improved technology might have had something to do with the job losses.  Black economy: One in four workers in Rio de Janeiro makes a living from the black economy. That is 625,000 out of a total of 2.5m.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 MEXICO: GETTING BETTER: BUT STILL NOT OUT OF THE WOODS The gulf between what international investment bankers think is happening in Mexico and what Mexican businessmen know is happening seems to be getting even wider. On 22 June, Carlos Abascal, president of the Confederacion Patronal de la Republica Mexicana (Coparmex) urged his members not to panic. He said that while it was impossible to ignore reality and to believe that things were starting to improve, industrialists should not just give up and believe that things would never get better.  Abascal called upon the government to face reality and to stop pretending that everything was going swimmingly. He pointed out that the government could make a good case for itself, without saying that everything was rosy. Abascal is particularly concerned about the state of the banking system. He claimed that the government had so far done pretty well, pointing out that the rescue of the financial system had cost a mere 6.5% of GDP compared to the 30% of GDP Chile had to spend at the beginning of the 1980s when its financial system was wrecked by a devaluation following a period of peso overvaluation.  Coparmex, however, is not sure that the financial system has got over all its difficulties. Abascal said that the government needed to pay more attention to the banks' bad debt problems and come up with more schemes to convert debt into equity. He said that more help for the agricultural sector, which is also facing another year of drought, is urgently needed. Abascal also said that the government needed to introduce a more stimulatory fiscal policy (reduce taxes on new cars and corporate assets and rethink income taxes) and to ensure that the exchange rate remained competitive.  By contrast. The investment banks, on the other hand, can barely see further than the next mandate. Guy Erb, head of Goldman Sachs's Mexico office said that there was no sign that Mexico had saturated the international capital markets with its paper. John Donelly, head of Chase Manhattan's Mexico operations, said that the international markets were pleased by President Ernesto Zedillo's implementation of last year's economic plan. He said that the President had stuck to the letter of the plan.  Jaime Alatorre, from the Consejo Mexicano de Inversiones, claimed that foreign investors had poured US Dollars 1bn into the Mexican stockmarket this year. This was twice what they invested in the whole of 1995. Overall Mexico expects to attract financial investments (ie foreign investment in the Bolsa, GDR issues or debt issues on international markets) of US Dollars 8bn this year.  Unemployment. To be fair there is some evidence that the economy has touched bottom. The most obvious indicator of this is the drop in unemployment. According to the official statistics agency, the Instituto Nacional de Estadistica, Geografia e Informatica, the rate in May was 5.4%. This is a whole percentage point below the 6.4% recorded in January. This means that 2.67m Mexicans were officially unemployed in May. Inegi also reported that the percentage of workers either on strike or looking for a job has fallen from 10% in January to 8.8% in May. According to the agency 21% of Mexican workers still work less than 35 hours a week. Car sales. Another encouraging statistic is the pick up in car sales. In the first quarter domestic car sales were 24% higher than in the same period of 1995. Car imports increased by 65%. The most popular imports have been off-road vehicles (such as Explorer, Cherokee, Voyager and Land Rover) though imports of Mercedes Benzes and BMWs also increased sharply.    Even so, car sales still have some way to go to make up the ground they lost last year. The value of car sales dropped by 70% in 1995; volumes fell by 17% and sales of imports dropped by 65%. The industry, which supplies 18% of the country's manufacturing jobs, pulled through by increasing exports: these jumped by 28% in 1995. Exports are still strong. In the first quarter they increased by 39%. Overall production was 305,592 units.   Growth. The finance minister, Guillermo Ortiz, is still confident that the economy will grow by 3% this year. He said that his main concern now was ensuring that the growth rate remained at or above this level for the next few years. Even Ortiz is now conceding (what industrialists know) that the domestic market is still in difficulties. He said that domestic demand would grow by about 2% this year: a pretty feeble recovery after the 14% fall in 1995. Ortiz admitted that the recovery of the domestic economy was slower than had been expected because of the over-indebtedness of individuals and companies.  Inflation. The OECD's forecast for inflation in Mexico this year is 33%. This is well above the government's forecast of 21%. For 1997, the OECD is forecasting 17%.  In May, the CPI figure was 1.81%, well below the 2.8% recorded in April. The rate for the 12 months to June was 34%. The rate for the first five months of the year was 13.5%. What is slightly alarming about the inflation figure is the sharp rise in fruit and vegetable prices in May. Agriculture. The rise in food prices is partly due to the drought in the north of the country. This has hit the cattle industry particularly hard: Mexico's imports of meat increased by 94% in the first quarter of the year (admittedly to only US Dollars 11m) while its imports of milk almost quadrupled (to a more economically significant US Dollars 136m).  Already the number of cattle has fallen by a third to 9m as farmers cut their losses by slaughtering stock rather than buying expensive feed.  The government is also expecting to have to increase its imports of grains, especially maize.  OECD. Besides being more realistic about inflation than the government, the OECD is also pretty gloomy about growth prospects. It reckons that the economy will grow by at most 3% this year, but does not offer a figure for 1997. The OECD highlights the fragility of the banking sector and the weakness of domestic demand: two of our themes over the past year.  More encouragingly, the OECD expects imports to pick up this year, but it does not expect more than a small current account deficit. The OECD expects this deficit to increase to 2% of GDP (US Dollars 6bn) in 1997. Trade account. The Secretaria de Hacienda reported that the country had record exports in May. It exported goods worth US Dollars 8.046bn and ran a trade surplus of US Dollars 532m. This brings the trade surplus for the first five months of the year to US Dollars 3.17bn. In 1995, the country ran a trade surplus of US Dollars 7.35bn after running a deficit of US Dollars 18.5bn in 1994. What is encouraging is the increase in imports. These rose by 25% (year-on-year) in May to US Dollars 7.5bn. This is sharply higher than the increase for the first five months as a whole which was only 8%.  Equally encouraging is the continuing growth in manufactured exports: these amounted to US Dollars 31bn for the first five months of the year (22% above the comparable figure for 1995). Oil revenues accounted for 12% of Mexico's total export revenues of US Dollars 37.7bn. This was 16% more than for the same period of 1995. Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 MEXICO: THE REAL ECONOMY: STILL TILTED: TOWARDS EXPORTS The economic recovery is still heavily skewed. A study by the newspaper El Financiero, based on data from the finance ministry and the central bank for the first quarter, found that while exporting companies grew by 13.4% in real terms, domestic consumption grew by just 1.3%. and investment fell by 4%. The investment figures are particularly disappointing. Another newspaper, Reforma, took a look at how companies had made out on the investments they promised to make in November 1995. The government had trumpeted the fact that the private sector would invest US Dollars 6bn in 1996. In fact, as Reforma found, very little of this investment has actually been made. Of the 28 companies quoted on the stockmarket which promised to invest US Dollars 4.4bn, 11 have invested nothing and have no plans to do so this year. Among these companies are ICA, a construction company, which promised to invest US Dollars 590m but has invested nothing; Bufete another construction company which promised US Dollars 255m but has invested nothing. Nine other companies have invested less than they promised (including Telmex, Iusacell and Alfa).  On the other hand three companies, Televisa, Gissa and Soriana have invested more than they promised and 14 have delivered on their promises.  EU: The European Union has formally given the go-ahead for the commission to start negotiations with Mexico about a free trade agreement. The agreement had been blocked by Britain as part of its non-cooperation policy with the EU in order to force concessions from its EU partners over the EU ban on exports of British beef and beef products. The EU and Mexico have agreed to set up a bilateral steering group which will decide on methods and a schedule for overcoming both the tariff and non-tariff barriers which block the way to freer trade.  Mexico believes that it should benefit from freer trade with the EU. In 1995, it ran a deficit of US Dollars 3.35bn with the EU.  Steel production: Mexico's steel production in the first four months of the year was 11% higher this year (at 4.3m t) than in the same period of 1995, the Camara Nacional de Acero reported. The Camara says that if the industry keeps on at the current rate the country will produce 13m t of steel this year. This would represent a capacity utilisation rate of 92%. The biggest increase has been in laminated products where output has increased by 52% to 1.6m t.  Teachers: A large number of the country's most important group of employees, the teachers, has rejected the government's offer of a 12% wage increase which was accepted by the official teachers union. The teachers launched a series of protests and demonstrations in the first half of June to back up their demands for a doubling of their wages. They currently receive US Dollars 226 a month. What unnerved the government was the strength of support for the claim. On five consecutive days over 20,000 people marched through the capital, demanding higher wages. The government felt that it had to respond, and officials from three ministries (interior, education and finance) met leaders of the dissident teachers. President Zedillo also asked the head of the capital's police force to resign after his heavy handed policing of the teachers' demonstrations left a dozen people injured.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 ARGENTINA: A BIT OF A JAGGED RECOVERY: QUESTIONS ABOUT FIRST QUARTER GROWTH The claims by the economy minister, Domingo Cavallo, that the economy contracted by only 3.2% in the first quarter has been greeted with scepticism in Buenos Aires. Given that in the first quarter, agriculture probably declined by 5%, industry by 6% and construction by 17%, the rest of the economy (which accounts for the remaining 60% of output) must have done remarkably well. To be fair, the evidence is that oil and gas production, mining, power generation and other utilities had a good quarter. Equally, anecdotal evidence suggests that the tertiary sector of the economy had a poor quarter. More worrying is the most recent industrial trends survey from the Fundacion de Investigaciones Economicas Latinoamericanas which suggests that industrialists are revising downwards their expectations for business in the next six months. Just as alarming is the data for bankruptcies. Although the number of companies seeking reschedulings with their creditors fell by 10% between February and May 1996 (compared with the same period of 1995), the size of the debts involved increased by 13% in real terms. As for bankruptcies, the number of companies going bust increased by 74% although the amount of money involved increased by only 7%.  Lowest interest rates. Even the steady increase in bank deposits is not yet having a beneficial economic effect. Bank deposits topped US Dollars 50bn at the end of the May. This is a third more than in the same month of 1995 and 11% up on 1994's figure. The government points out that this increase in liquidity has allowed interest rates to fall by two and a half percentage points: the prime rate is now 6.4%. These are the lowest rates since the convertibility plan started in 1991.   Bankers say that this abundance of liquidity has yet to tempt consumers to start borrowing again. They say that both companies and households are not yet confident enough about their economic prospects to gear up.   External sector. What seems clear  is that the external sector is still doing much better than the domestic part of the economy. Car exports to Brazil are still strong and agricultural exports have risen impressively. According to the Instituto Nacional de Estadisticas y Censos, agricultural and food exports, (excluding rice, sunflowers and soya oil, which are major revenue earners) were US Dollars 910m for the first two months of the year. This was 28% up on the comparable period of 1995.  Indec noted that meat, fish and fruit had been the biggest revenue earners but the biggest increases had come from sugar and alcoholic drinks.  The government is continuing to revise upwards its figure for agricultural exports. It now reckons that the country could export US Dollars 10bn worth of primary and processed foodstuffs.  Brazilian business. Exports are hugely dependent on what happens in its larger neighbour. The Argentine ambassador to Brazil, Alieto Guadagni, said that Argentina's exports to its neighbour should be worth US Dollars 7bn this year. Last year Argentina shipped US Dollars 5.6bn worth of goods to Brazil. Cavallo himself underlined how important a flourishing Brazil now is to Argentina's economic recovery. He paid a quick visit to Brasilia to meet the whole of the Brazilian economic team to check that they would not change the economic policy in early June. During a series of meetings with everyone from President Cardoso down, Cavallo said that it was clear that Brazil would not change its exchange rate nor its economic policy.  Cavallo claims that the two economies were now in some sort of economic sync: both would grow this year and register low inflation. Low inflation is likely. A more open question is whether Argentina will hit Cavallo's target of 5% growth this year: the consensus in Argentina is that the economy will do well to grow by 3%.   Deficit. The government's fiscal position is still under pressure. The fiscal deficit may not just be a temporary problem caused by the sluggishness of the economy which has hit revenues. The creation of private pension funds has deprived the government of an important source of cash. It can also be argued that the decision to lower employers' compulsory inflation adjust for pensions (a liability which has been switched to the government) will also put pressure on government finances, even when the economy recovers.  The government has already consulted the IMF about getting some leeway for this year's fiscal targets. In the first four months of the year it had already run up a deficit equivalent to 70% of the US Dollars 2.5bn that was envisaged for the year as a whole.  The government is likely to be able to muddle through this year, but next year the problems will be even worse. Firstly its debt service payments will rise, as principal payments started on Bocones and the costs of the huge amount of borrowing in the past year or so start to have an effect. The other problem will be the consolidation of the (bust) provincial pension funds into the national state fund.  The government is still shirking structural reform measures: its only response to the growing problem has been to borrow more to shore up this year's accounts. In 1995 the country increased its net debt by US Dollars 5.8bn and this year it has borrowed between US Dollars 4bn and US Dollars 6bn. This is a dangerous policy. If US interest rates start to rise in the autumn, as the US credit markets expect, Argentina could find the door to the international credit markets slammed shut in its face. The crunch could come at the beginning of 1997. Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 VENEZUELA: INFLATION KEY: AND CUTTING THE BUREAUCRACY The planning minister, Teodoro Petkoff, is clear about the economic variable which will determine the success or failure of the current economic plan: inflation. He recently told an audience of New York bankers and businessmen that nothing was more important for the poor and lower middle class than a lower inflation rate. Petkoff is still confident that the inflation rate will start to ebb this month: he is still aiming for a 2% monthly rate by December.  Petkoff was more guarded about the government's spending plans: he said that the government could not slash the social payments, but would take action to reorientate them. This is a reference to the increased social security payments the government announced along with its adjustment package in April. The government doubled the value of the payments it makes under its food stamps programme: this enables the poor to buy staples such as milk, eggs and rice. The government also doubled pensions and announced youth job creation schemes and an increase in the subsidised medicine programme. The IMF has put pressure on the government to reduce these payments.  Bureaucracy. The government is unwilling to cut these payments by as much as the IMF wants. Petkoff has made it clear that he would prefer to cut government spending by slimming down the civil service. He notes that Venezuela has 800,000 civil servants: that is 300,000 more than Brazil, he claimed.  Petkoff said that he did not expect to push through a six month programme to slash civil service numbers, as this would produce chaos and unrest. The first government move, he said, would be the imposition of a hiring freeze. Managing this process, Petkoff reckons, will be far from easy. But he said that the bureaucracy had to be cut back if the fiscal deficit was to be brought under control.  The banking system. There are signs that the banking system is on the mend: Jose Maria Nogueroles, president of Banco Provincial, the country's solidest bank, said that the bank's capital position was 13% stronger in real terms in March 1996 than in March 1995. The government is hoping to take advantage of this favourable wind to sell two of the banks it rescued in 1994. The big sale will be Banco de Venezuela, the country's second biggest bank but the government is also trying to sell the smaller Banco Tequendama. Banco de Venezuela now has assets of US Dollars 812m and according to a private consultancy, Softline, deposits of US Dollars 700m. Salomon Brothers is advising the government on the sale. Prequalification for potential bidders closed on 7 June.  The government has also pencilled in November as the date for the sale of Banco Consolidado, the country's fourth biggest bank.  Petkoff said the country hoped to get a loan of US Dollars 1bn from the multilaterals to help pay for the restructuring of the banking system. He reckoned this would be about half the total cost of sorting out the system. IMF. Petkoff has refused to give details on exactly how much the country is hoping to get from the multilaterals. The IMF has agreed to lend the country US Dollars 1.4bn over 12 months, and the deal is scheduled to be signed this month.  According to Petkoff, the loan can be converted into a structural adjustment facility at the end of the year if the government and the IMF agree.  Petkoff is also negotiating loans from the World Bank and the IDB. The country is expecting to get US Dollars 900m from the World Bank and US Dollars 1bn from the IDB. These loans will be designed to help pay for the restructuring of the financial sector and to ease the adjustment burden. It is likely that these loans, especially the money from the World Bank, will be tied to the privatisation programme.  Airlines: Other airlines are joining American Airlines in demanding compensation from the government for the losses caused by the government's exchange rate policies. American Airlines has asked for US Dollars 8m. Another 10 airlines say that the changes in the exchange rate have cost them US Dollars 21m. The airlines say that the losses were caused by the government's policy of exchange controls which tried to hold the bolivar at 170 (and then 290) to the dollar.  American and the other airlines claim that their applications to exchange bolivars for dollars were blocked from July to September 1995 (when the rate was 170) and that they were only paid when the bolivar had dropped to 290 to the dollar. Under international agreements with the airlines, countries undertake to recompense airlines for losses caused by exchange rate variations.  Although the government is fighting the case in the courts, the finance minister, Luis Matos Azocar, is making conciliatory noises and says that an out-of-court settlement should be reached. He also pointed out, however, that the exchange control regime did not guarantee that companies would be able to get all the dollars they had asked for.  Reformulated petrol: The government is pleased by the WTO's decision in its favour. The WTO has ruled that the US was acting in a protectionist way by allowing US refineries more time to meet clean air standards. Imported reformulated petrol had to meet the new standards immediately. Venezuela, which was exporting between 55,000 and 60,000bpd of reformulated petrol, argued that the measure discriminated against its exports because US produced products did not have to meet the same standards. The state oil company PDVSA said that the unfair trade practice cost it about US Dollars 50m because it had to ship the product to less profitable markets.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 CHILE: BANK LAW READY FOR APPROVAL: FROM IMPORTER TO EXPORTER Congress is on the point of passing a new banking law. This would both free the banks to do more internationally and domestically, define bank secrecy and force banks to meet the so called Basle committee's minimum, risk-weighted capital adequacy standards. The law was designed by the previous government and included provisions to sort out the subordinated debt question. The state still holds a lot of subordinated debt issued by Chilean banks to stave off their collapse at the beginning of the 1980s. This issue has now been separated from the other issues which will modify the Ley General de Bancos.  Chile has 34 banks, of which 19 are foreign owned, three are sociedades financieras and one is state owned, Banco del Estado. Standard & Poor's, one of the world's most important credit rating agencies, recently issued a report which claimed that Chile had the solidest banking system in the region. Indeed the banks' non-performing loans have fallen from 2.1% of total assets in 1990 to about 1%.  The new businesses that banks will be able to get into are insurance (but not life assurance) stockbroking, factoring, running mutual funds and funds for investment overseas, custody of securities and financial advice. Subordinated debt. The banks have until 23 July to do a deal with the central bank to sort out the subordinated debt issue. The central bank now holds US Dollars 4.58bn worth of subordinated debt. The banks with the biggest amounts still outstanding at the end of March 1996 were Banco de Santiago (US Dollars 1.7bn);  Banco de Chile (US Dollars 1.7bn); Banco de Concepcion (US Dollars 654m); BHIF (US Dollars 380m) and Banco Internacional (US Dollars 127m). Under the terms of the deal to rescue banks in 1982 the central bank bought the bank's non-performing loans from them with subordinated debt: the banks undertook to buy the debt back over time, but no deadline was set.  The economy: The government is still concerned about inflation. It wants to hit its target of 6.5% for the year and is prepared to keep the currency overvalued (at least against the dollar) until the 12 month lagging rate comes closer to that target. The 12 month lagging rate stood at 8.6% at the end of May. The government has also indicated that it will not hesitate to increase interest rates (as it did in March) if it believes that the economy is growing too fast. In the first quarter the rate of growth was verging on 9%. Growth last year was 8.25%, the highest in Latin America.  Investment: The finance minister said that the public sector would spend US Dollars 7.89bn between 1996 and the end of the millennium on infrastructure projects. He hoped that the private sector would invest a similar amount.  The president of the Camara Chilena de Construccion, Eugenio Velasco, reckoned that the country needs US Dollars 14.2bn worth of infrastructure over the next five years: he said that bottlenecks at ports and poor roads cost the country US Dollars 1.65bn in lost exports and repairs every year.  This year private sector investment in infrastructure is likely to increase. In 1995 it jumped to US Dollars 509m from US Dollars 31m in 1994. The government's target for 1996 is US Dollars 2.5bn. Most private sector construction projects are financed by bank loans.  Pension funds: The pension funds are finding the going tough. In the year to May they have returned only 1.2%., well below the average annual return of 12.6% since 1981.  The fund administrators point out that the worst may now be over: the funds rose by 1.7% in May. The best performers were Habitat, Aporta and Valora, which rose by 9%. The funds have assets of US Dollars 26.8bn, 40% of which is in Chilean government debt, a third in shares and 24% in private sector debt. Less than 0.2% of the funds' assets are invested internationally.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 COLOMBIA: SAMPER CLEARED: BUT QUESTIONS REMAIN President Ernesto Samper was cleared of knowing that his successful election campaign was financed by the drug cartels. He was cleared after an investigation by the Camara de Representantes. The US attitude to Colombia is still unclear though the omens are not good. Although the US ambassador to Colombia, Myles Frechette, said that the US wants to boost trade between the two countries, the Colombians are fretting about sanctions that may be taken because of a dispute involving American Airlines. Until 1993 American flew from new York to Bogota; but it then suspended the service, saying it was not making money. The Colombian authorities awarded the route to Continental Airlines earlier this year, producing squawks of outrage from American. The US government has taken up American's complaint and threatened Avianca's daily flight from Bogota to New York. The Colombians have rejected the suggested compromise from the US that two airlines from each country should fly the route: the Colombians say that this would produce too much capacity.  Car sales: Sales of imported cars fell by 23% in the first four months of the year. Sales of domestically assembled cars dropped 13%.  Investment: Foreign investment in Colombia increased by 19% in the first two months of the year to US Dollars 160m, according to the Corporacion Invertir en Colombia. The financial sector was the most popular, accounting for US Dollars 75m of new investment. Ganadero: A Spanish bank, BBV, bought 40% of Banco Ganadero for US Dollars 300m. Ganadero has assets of US Dollars 3bn and made US Dollars 14m in the first quarter of this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 ECUADOR: BUCARAM AHEAD: BUSINESS ALARMED Businessmen are alarmed at the strong support for the Guayaquil populist Abdala Bucaram. He did much better in the first round than the opinion polls had suggested and looks more confident going into the run-off with Jaime Nebot on 7 July. Nebot is the candidate of the firmly middle class Partido Social Cristiano and if he should lose there is likely to be a bout of sucre weakness. The new government does not take office until August.  Bucaram's economic policies are not particularly clear. He has refused to debate with other candidates, preferring to issue pamphlets saying that he will not follow the current economic policies which he says pander to the 20 national monopolies. Exactly who he will use to advise him on how to run the economy is unclear: all Bucaram will say is that he is a friend of Roberto Isaias, the owner of Filanbanco, one of the country's biggest banks, and interests in sugar and the media. Bucaram made his career as a populist mayor of Guayaquil where he developed a taste (reputation) for wild rhetoric. He was not generally considered to be a likely winner of the election.  Nebot, by contrast, was the longtime favourite. He is known to support more liberalisation and privatisation.  The country's electoral law bars opinion polls from being published in the run up to the election. One of the last, published on 2 June, after the first round results, gave Bucaram 44% of the votes against 31% to Nebot and 24% undecided. The problem for Nebot is that the supporters of the third and fourth candidates in the first round, Freddy Ehlers and Rodrigo Paz, are unlikely to support his economic policies which form a key part of his platform: Ehlers was against opening up the economy and Paz and his party have opposed economic reform.  Although the second round will determine who becomes President, the first round has elected the members of congress. Here Nebot seems to have fallen short of the 30 seat target he set himself. Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 PERU: MORE BUREAUCRATS TO BE SACKED: TO BOOST CAPITAL EXPENDITURE The government wants to cut the number of bureaucrats. This was one of its main promises to the IMF in its recent letter of intent. Over the past five years the government has already trimmed its workforce by 1m. Nevertheless, 900,000 people still work for the government.  Despite these cuts, paying for the bureaucracy still swallows 65% of the country's tax revenues. The country collects US Dollars 242m a month in tax and customs duties.  This heavy bureaucratic expense means, the government says, that its spending on capital projects and debt payments is reduced.  In parallel with its plans to reduce the bureaucracy, the government is also trying to create 130,000 jobs a year as part of its anti-poverty programme.  The government wants to streamline both the central government and regional government. It says that there are still too many rules and regulations covering budgeting, accounting, cash management and procurement.  The government now wants to get each part of the administration to set its own systems, which it hopes will be more practical than a generalised system to cover every bureaucratic eventuality. The government also says that it will try to make individuals in the bureaucracy responsible for their actions. Tax overhaul. The government points out that the IMF has already welcomed some of its bureaucratic reforms, in particular its achievement in increasing the tax take from 5% of GDP to 14% in only four years.  The government also says that the IMF has said its privatisation and anti-poverty programmes are models for other countries to follow.  The IMF has agreed to lend Peru US Dollars 150m to finance its Brady plan. This involves buying back debt and US Treasury bonds to back new bond issues. The government expects to sign its Brady deal in October.  Pension problems: The country's private pension system has lost US Dollars 3m so far this year. Of the six Administradoras de Fondos de Pensiones, only two, Horizonte and Integra, made profits. Both figures were marginal.  The companies say they are losing money because their marketing and operating costs are higher than their income. The main reason for this is that Peruvian companies are well behind on their payments to the AFPs. The official figure is that they are 50% in arrears. The AFP superintendency is mulling over the idea of offering companies easy terms to bring themselves back up to date.  So far the pension funds have signed up 1m people and built up funds of US Dollars 1bn.  Chilean investment: The Camara de Comercio de Santiago expects Chilean investment in Peru to hit US Dollars 3bn this year. This will be 30% more than the US Dollars 2.7bn registered at the end of 1995. The surge of Chilean investment has increased trade between the two countries, and led to a hefty Chilean trade surplus. Of the US Dollars 586m in total trade between the two countries, Chilean exports amounted to US Dollars 438m.   Tariffs: The government says that it will only move its tariff system to harmonise with the Andean Group's when that group lowers its tariffs to Peruvian rates. Peru still does not seem inclined to adopt the Andean Group's four rates for external tariffs (20%, 15% 10% and 5%). Peru's external tariff rates are 5%, 10% and 15%.  Currently Peru has partial free trade agreements with Colombia, Ecuador and Venezuela but does not apply the Andean groups external tariff system. Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 BOLIVIA: DEBT NOT A PROBLEM: SAYS CAMDESSUS Michel Camdessus, the IMF's managing director, said that the country's foreign debt with the multilaterals should not impede its growth and economic development. Camdessus, who stopped in Bolivia during his tour of South America, said he was not coming to La Paz as some sort of international monetary policeman. He also said that it would be wrong to muddle up Bolivia's efforts to reduce its foreign debts with its fight against poverty.  Exports: The government is hoping that it can increase its soya exports once it is linked to the transport systems of the Mercosur. Banking system: Two thirds of the country's US Dollars 2.2bn in bank deposits are fixed term. A further 20% are held in current accounts, the Superintendencia de Bancos y Entidades Financieras reported in its 1995 annual report. Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 COSTA RICA: MISSING THE IMF TARGET: AS FIGUERES SNUBBED The government has admitted that it will miss the fiscal deficit target it agreed with the IMF this year. The target is 0.5% of GDP, but Fernando Herrero, who resigned as finance minister in June said that the likely outcome for this year would be a deficit of 2%.  Herrero said the government had been undone by two things: higher interest expenses (the government has run up domestic debts of US Dollars 2.9bn) and lower than expected tax revenues. The latter he said was due to the poor growth of the economy.  Herrero, who is handing over to Francisco de Paula Gutierrez, said the IMF may well take a lenient view of the missed targets, especially if it thought that other parts of the structural reform programme were going well. He did add, however, in his resignation report on the economy, that the government would need to raise new taxes to pay for its education, infrastructure and health programmes. De Paula Gutierrez. Herrero said he had resigned for personal reasons. He was married to another former member of the cabinet, Florisabel Rodriguez.  Herrero had presided over a fierce adjustment package to undo economic damage done in the first two years of President Jose Maria Figueres' administration. The worry is that political pressures will mean that the government will try to engineer a boom in the run-up to the elections in 1997. The President has promised not to go for growth, but with over 50% of Costa Ricans reckoning that he has been a lousy President, this might change.  De Paula Gutierrez is a professional economist and has said the government's economic policy should not change. Before joining the government he was head of the Instituto Centroamericano de Administracion de Empresas. He is considered to be more of a free-marketeer than Herrero.   Contralor general: The government was forced to drop its contralor because of his closeness to the President. This made it doubtful that he could take an objective view of government spending. The new contralor, selected after three months of political bickering, is Luis Fernando Vargas, a member of the ruling PLN and a deputy labour minister in the Oscar Arias administration. Vargas's election is another snub to the President who supported another candidate. The (PLN) president of the legislative assembly, Walter Coto, led the rebellion by three PLN members. Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 CUBA: LAGE FORECASTS 5%: GROWTH THIS YEAR The country's Vice President Carlos Lage reckons that the economy will slowdown after registering a 7% growth rate in the first quarter. He is sticking to a forecast of 5% growth for the whole year.  Lage said that the economy was boosted in the first half of the year by the increase in sugar production. The country just scraped through to  the 4.5m tonne target set by the government. In mid-June, with two or three sugar mills still grinding, the country had produced 4.45m t of sugar. This year's crop though was a big improvement on 1994/95's 3.3m t. Lage claimed that the economy grew by 2.5% last year, but the government's statistical information is still rudimentary and there are few ways of verifying statements made by leading politicians.  One of the fastest growing sectors of the economy appears to be the nickel industry. The government says that the country will produce a record 50,000t of nickel this year. This is a 40% increase on the 1995 figure. The problem is that nickel mining does not have much effect on the rest of the economy. At most  2,000 people benefit directly from the increase in production.  More important is the increase in tourism. Last year 730,000 people visited the island (20% more than in 1994) and the government is hoping for 1m visitors this year. Also important is the 25% increase in tobacco production and the 22% increase in agricultural output. The only downbeat part of Lage's report on the state of the economy concerned foreign investment. He noted that this had stalled, following the decision by the US Congress and then the administration to turn the Helms-Burton bill into law. This allows the US to take punitive action against companies and individuals who have bought assets in Cuba claimed by US companies or individuals. Lage said that although new investment had not been forthcoming, no companies had yet said they would pull out of Cuba because of the law. Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: ELECTIONS AND FRAUDS: FROM IMPORTER TO EXPORTER The country faces a second round of the presidential elections on 30 June. The issue is whether the frontrunner in the first round, Jose Francisco Pena Gomez, can hang on and win. Ranged against him is not only the runner-up in the first round, Leonel Fernandez, but also the ruling party and the current President Joaquin Balaguer whose candidate, Jacinto Peynado, came a poor third. Balaguer is, apparently, very much against Pena Gomez, largely because Pena Gomez is black. Pena Gomez from the Partido Revolucionario Dominicano won 46% of the votes in the first round, well ahead of the 395 won by Fernandez from the Partido de la Liberacion Dominicana. Peynado, from the Partido Reformista Social Cristiano, won 16%.  Corruption. The Contraloria de la Republica Dominicana revealed that 800,000 state cheques had been forged, costing the government US Dollars 47m. The contralor, Victor Grimaldi, pointed out that no official had yet been charged or convicted of any crime. The cheques seem to have been issued by the Tesoreria Nacional. Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 EL SALVADOR: MAKING A GESTURE: BOOSTING PUBLIC WORKS The government is still under pressure from industry to take the brakes off the economy. The government was obliged to tighten monetary policy last year in order to stop credit growing at a destabilising rate and inflation getting out of hand. The private sector still reckons that policy is too tight. It wants the economy to be growing by at least 6% a year. The Camara de Comercio e Industria de El Salvador said that achieving stability was not enough: the economy had to also recover its dynamism. In 1992 and 1993 the economy grew by over 7% a year in real terms. This rate dropped to 6% in 1994 and 1995.  The government of President Armando Calderon Sol clearly felt that it had to at least make a gesture. So at the beginning of June, on its second anniversary of accession to office, it announced a US Dollars 114m public works programme.  Besides this, the President also announced that the tariff reform programme would be slowed down: in particular the government says that it will give local industry more time before tariffs on consumer goods are lowered. The government is still planning to lower tariffs on capital goods to zero by the end of the year. Exports are also eligible for a 6% tax refund.  Crime. The opposition is linking the problems in the economy with the huge increase in crime. Marta Valladares, a leader of the former guerrilla group, the Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberacion Nacional, claims that there were 8,000 murders in the country last year. This was more than the annual casualties in most years of the civil war she said. Even some members of the ruling Alianza Republicana Nacionalista (ARENA party) concede that more needs to be done to build up civil society and reduce poverty.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 GUATEMALA: THE RIGHT SURFACES: AS GUERRILLAS DROP TAX The hardliners opposed to any peace deal with the guerrilla Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca have broken cover. A group of landowners, the Coordinadora Nacional Agropecuaria has criticised the government for not using the army to break up meetings called by the URNG or using soldiers to evict peasants from land they are squatting on. Conagro tried to derail the peace agreement last year by protesting against concessions offered by the government. Conagro claimed that they were unconstitutional but the constitutional court overruled this.  The government is pressing on with its programme to get a peace deal in place. Officials say that the URNG's commitment not to charge business the so-called 'war tax' seems to be holding. Gustavo Porras, president of the Comision de Paz, says that the people who seem to be levying the tax appear not to be guerrillas, but just common criminals.  Army: President Alvaro Arzu said that peace and a smaller army would not necessarily mean that the government could cut the military budget and spend the money on something else. He said that more mobile armed forces, needed to combat drug traffickers and protect forests, were more expensive. He noted that although Guatemala's armed forces had fallen from 47,000 to 32,000, little money had been saved.  Strikes: The government is pushing on with its plans to reform the labour code which will end the right to strike for people employed in  essential public services.  Tax: The government reckons that the Impuesto de Solidaridad Extraordinario y Temporal should raise US Dollars 21.6m. This is a sort of supertax on companies and individuals with earnings of more than US Dollars 8,000 in 1994/95. The tax is set at 1% for this year and will rise to 1.5% in 1997. People who make six monthly payments will get a 10% discount.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 CHILE: CODELCO AND THE COPPER MARKET: LINKS BETWEEN DAVILA AND HAMANAKA The Corporacion del Cobre, Chile's state-owned copper mining company, is likely to be badly affected by the fall in copper prices following the discovery that Yasuo Hamanaka had run up US Dollars 1.8bn in loss-making, unauthorised trades over the past 10 years. Codelco  traded heavily with Sumitomo, which was one of the few Japanese trading houses not to develop mines of its own. Instead it relied on the London Metal Exchange to buy stocks of copper to meet its clients needs. Japan, despite being a negligible copper producer, has the world's second biggest copper smelting industry. Codelco is the world's biggest copper producer.  Codelco had reckoned that the copper price would average between US Dollars 1.15 and US Dollars 1.16 a pound this year. In the week of 24 June the copper price slid to just 81 cents a pound before recovering slightly. The fear in the copper market is that Sumitomo, which had built up huge stocks of copper which it used to try and squeeze the market, will now have be a forced seller as its management tries to adjust its position.  The fall in copper prices has been dramatic. Last year the price averaged US Dollars 1.33 a pound, despite the prospect of new mines coming into production this year and weak demand from the industrialised countries. Indeed until the second week of June (one week after Sumitomo started its investigation into Hamanaka's trading) the average price for the year was US Dollars 1.17. The Comision Chilena del Cobre reckons that each one cent move in the average price of copper costs the country US Dollars 20m a year.  Complaints. Juan Villarzu, Codelco's president, blames the LME for allowing the problem to arise. He said that the market had become too speculative. He wants rules to make speculation more difficult. Villarzu's complaint seems to be a case of sour grapes. Codelco did not understand what its futures trader, Juan Pablo Davila was up to three years ago when he managed to cost the company US Dollars 175m by doing loss-making deals with brokers. Indeed it was the brokers who first alerted Codelco to the problem.  The brokers seem to have acted similarly in Hamanaka's case. Once they started to get strange requests from Hamanaka about the way trades should be recorded, they went to the LME with their worries. The LME called in Sumitomo which did nothing.  The LME has also tried to smooth the copper market by increasing the margin requirement from its usual US Dollars 200 a tonne to US Dollars 600; given the market's recent volatility such an increase seems warranted. It is expected that once the current bout of volatility is over the margin will fall back to more normal levels. That is right. All markets need a mixture of users and speculators. Without the strange combination of two hedge funds (Quantum and Tiger) and a Montreal scrap dealer, who all started to short copper on 6 June, a day after Sumitomo started its investigation into Hamanaka's trading, the false market that had developed in copper would not have been revealed. The speculators' action increased the pressure on Sumitomo and Hamanaka as their losses increased. When they came clean, the speculators appeared to take their profits and leave the market to find its own level.  Hedging. Unlike gold mining companies which have used gold loans and other techniques to hedge their future production, Codelco seems to have spurned the idea of hedging. This may be a legacy of Juan Pablo Davila's activities. The company was already feeling the effects of the drop in copper prices in its first quarter. Despite a 10% increase in production the company's net profits fell by 9% to US Dollars 433m. Its operating profits fell even more dramatically, from US Dollars 491m to US Dollars 305m.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 CHILE: CORPORATE PROFILE/IANSA & PATHFINDER: QUITE A SUCCESS STORY: Developing from sugar into agribusiness The Pathfinder group in Chile, whose shareholders were among the pioneers of debt equity swaps in the 1980s, has now carved out a reputation as a specialist in turning around ailing Chilean companies has turned its attention to Iansa, a troubled fruit company.  So successful has Iansa become that Forbes, a US business magazine picked it as one of the five best run companies in the country. Pathfinder is running Iansa as part of Campos Chilenos. It took over Iansa four years ago. Failed first privatisation. The company was founded in 1952 by the state holding company Corfo. Its core business was producing sugar from sugar beet. As sugar prices were controlled by the state and Corfo's objective was to increase agricultural production rather than make money, Iansa wracked up losses rather than profits.  Once the privatisation bug bit the government in Chile, Iansa was clearly a prime candidate for divestiture. Instead of selling the whole of the company as a going concern, the government decided to sell three of its five sugar plants to two companies. Crav bought two and Compania Industrial one.  The sales coincided with a surge in the international sugar price: this prompted Crav to start speculating on the futures market just as the sugar market turned down. Crav went bust in 1981. Compania Industrial soon followed suit.  This led the Banco de Estado, which had been the major creditor to the two companies, to reassemble the group as it had been before the sales with five sugar plants. Second shot. The government had another go at selling the company between 1986 and 1988. This time it sold the company partly through the stockmarket and in part directly to other companies. The new owners included: Campos Chilenos (which was then owned by famers who supplied Iansa with its raw materials and the company's employees); Continental Bank from Chicago; Sucden, a French commodity trading company; and Soquimich, a Chilean mining company. The current general manager of the firm, Ernesto Sahr, told the Chilean news magazine Que Pasa, that contrary to what people thought, the second privatisation did little to improve the viability of the firm. He said that conflicts between shareholders unhinged Iansa's management, marketing and financial system.  Pathfinder's chance. Pathfinder saw its chance and took it at the end of 1991 by buying Campos Chilenos, Iansa's controlling shareholder. Sahr said that immediately the company's fortune's started to improve. Pathfinder built up its stake and now controls 43% of Iansa's shares. More importantly, Pathfinder also got the company to change its business. The company had originally been set up to help national agriculture, in particular sugar producers. Under Pathfinder's management, it had two tasks: the first was to dominate the local sugar market. The second was to diversify away from relying just on sugar for its money.  Challenge. Unlike some managers, who might have decided to move the company away from sugar almost immediately, Pathfinder decided that Iansa should try to dominate the local sugar market before diversifying. Dominating the sugar market was more easily said than done. Unlike most developing (and developed) countries, Chile does not protect its domestic sugar market with high tariffs. This meant that Iansa had to grow by becoming more efficient and competitive. First it cut costs, streamlined its management and invested in new technology to increase productivity.  So successful was Iansa that the low price for sugar in Chile has kept other companies out of the market. A kilo of sugar in Chile retails at around US Dollars 0.50. In the US, by contrast, a kilo of sugar costs US Dollars 1.20.  The bottom line. Iansa's strategy has not just delivered low-priced sugar to Chilean consumers: it has also delivered a spectacular financial performance.  In 1993, Iansa's profits increased by 425% (to US Dollars 11.5m) compared with 1992. But this was almost nothing compared to what happened in 1995 when the company's profits shot up to US Dollars 48.5m. The main reason for the surge in profits in 1994 and 1995 was record sugar production in 1994/95. The company produced 550,000t of sugar: this was 20% more than it had produced in the previous season. Overall, Iansa has increased sales by an average of 18% a year since it was taken over by Pathfinder.  Diversification. Pathfinder's plan for Iansa is that it should cease to be a one product company but evolve into a diversified agro-industrial company. Sahr said that the company realised it was dangerous to depend on sugar, whose price can vary dramatically on the international market. Iansa first dabbled in agricultural supplies before moving into the tomato products market, fruit concentrates and animal feed. So successful has the diversification strategy been that Iansa has changed its corporate structure. Iansa has now become a parent company with five subsidiaries:  Iansa still runs the sugar side of the business. This consists of the original five plants and the sugar business still accounts for 64% of the group's sales. Iansa Peru and Insafrut run the fruit and fruit drink side; Iansagro looks after the supply of agricultural services and supplies and Biomaster deals with animal feed. Each company has a five year plan that calls for the whole group to invest US Dollars 230m.  Capital. Such a heavy investment programme has prompted the company to try and increase its capital. Originally the company announced that it would launch an ADR issue at the end of 1995. This issue has been delayed several times.  The company says it wants to raise about US Dollars 50m. Its international advisers have told it to hold off, despite the fact that the market for ADRs is buoyant. Instead the company is now planning a US Dollars 80m debt issue in the US. The company needs the money partly because of its capital expenditure plans and partly because it has international ambitions. Iansa is planning to add to its five Chilean plants (Curico, Linares, Chillan, Los Angeles and La Union) by buying Argentina's third largest sugar company (Ingenio San Martin del Tabacal). It is also interested in buying a sugar producer in Peru.  These acquisitions are in addition to its plans to build a maize syrup plant at Curico. Maize syrup is increasingly replacing sugar as the sweetener in soft drinks. Iansagro. Iansagro, which accounts for 16% of the group's total sales is expanding its business which currently revolves around providing agricultural services, especially technology, to beet sugar producers.  It is beefing up its operations by opening the first supermarket for agricultural products in the country. The fist supermarket will cost US Dollars 44m and the company expects to eventually roll out the concept throughout the country, if the first pilot store proves successful. Biomaster. The group's animal feed subsidiary also has ambitious plans. Its main business is providing food for sheep, pets and fish under the brands, Doko, Dokat, Cosetan, Melazan and Trucha. It is investing in a new US Dollars 10m plant to produce sheep food. It is also licensing technology from McCauley Bros from the US. Inasafrut & Iansa Peru. This part of the group plans to spend US Dollars 25m this year on expanding its four plants. It also wants to move into the frozen food market and investigate the prospects for selling (and producing its) products in Brazil, Argentina and Peru. Still on track. According to Que Pasa, the company's business is still doing well. It pointed out that in the first quarter of the year profits increased by 23%.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 REGION: INFLATION As we warned last month the financial markets seem to have overreacted to some astute new management by the Mexican authorities. The markets paid the penalty for this in June when interest rates stopped falling and even backed up slightly, and the stockmarket and exchange rate had one of their rockiest periods this year. The markets were also rather annoyed that the inflation rate for May (at 1.8%, ostensibly a marked improvement on April), was at the top end of expectations. The big worry is food prices, which are beginning to rise as the effects of the drought start to hit supplies. Even the OECD is now reckoning that inflation this year will be 33%. Over the first five months of the year the CPI has risen by 13.5%.  Venezuela's inflation rate in May was even higher than April's. The government, though, does not seem too concerned, reckoning that the rate will subside sharply in the second half of the year. The accumulated rate for the first five months of the year is 52%.  Ecuador's inflation rate dropped into minus territory after hitting almost 3% in April. In both Argentina and Brazil, inflation seems well under control. Argentina's rate for the first five months of the year is actually a fall of 0.7%. Brazil's is a modest 5.25%. Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 REGION: INTEREST RATES After their sharp falls in April and May, cetes yields trod water for most of June, hovering around the 28% mark. This means that Mexican interest rates are barely positive. As we keep on saying, interest rates are close to being negative on independent forecasts (such as the OECD's) for inflation. The government is still reckoning on 22% for the year.  In Brazil interest rates started to fall quite sharply in June as inflation fears were dispelled and the government took a more relaxed view of the currency.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 REGION: EXCHANGE RATES The Mexican peso had a much rockier month. The currency which had actually appreciated against the dollar fell from 7.4 to 7.6 as investors began to fret that the US Federal Reserve Board might start to nudge short term interest rates higher. The US economy is clearly growing lustily and there is some evidence of tightness in some markets. If US short rates start to rise, foreign investors are likely to pull money out of riskier emerging markets and keep it closer to home where the yields are almost as good. Only when US yields are skimpy do they take a punt on emerging markets. Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 REGION: STOCKMARKETS Venezuela's market has marked time while Brazil's market has risen sharply in the past month. Chile is still weak, but Peru has started its recovery.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 PERU: PRIVATISATION: OIL SALES START: AND RESIDUAL TELEFONICA SHARES ON sale The government was delighted when Refinadores del Peru, a consortium headed by Spain's biggest oil company, Repsol, along with Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales from Argentina and Mobil from the US, won the auction for La Pampilla, the country's main oil refinery. This was the first substantial sale in the controversial privatisation of the assets of the state-owned oil company Petroperu. Repsol has a 45% stake in Refinadores. The consortium paid US Dollars 181m, well above the underbidder's offer (from Marven of Venezuela) of US Dollars 166m. The minimum price fixed by the state for its 60% stake had been set at US Dollars 108m (of which US Dollars 38m could come in the form of debt paper). Besides paying the purchase price, Repsol has committed itself to investing a further US Dollars 50m and maintaining production at 102,000bpd. The company will take control of the refinery in August.  According to a former member of the board of Petroperu, Carlos Repetto, La Pampilla's accumulated debt at the end of 1995 was US Dollars 450m and this is likely to rise to US Dollars 600m by the end of this year.  Public sale. Daniel Hokama, the energy and mining minister, hinted that the government might sell its residual 40% stake in the La Pampilla refinery to the public through the stockmarket.  Hokama said that the world price for a refinery of La Pampilla's size was US Dollars 300m and the government had got US Dollars 180 for a 60% stake in it.   Oilfields. Simultaneous with the sale of La Pampilla was the sale of two concessions (blocs 8/8X near Talara and bloc 10 in the Amazonian jungle) owned by Petroperu. The 8/8X blocs hold 43m barrels of oil and the government set a minimum price of US Dollars 75m with a commitment to invest a further US Dollars 25m. The field was awarded to a consortium headed by Plus Petrol from Argentina with smaller stakes held by two Korean companies, Daewoo and Padco and a Canadian company, Yukon. The consortium paid US Dollars 142m for the field.   The first phase of Petroperu's privatisation occurred in 1992 when 78 of its petrol stations were sold and the company was broken up into bits that could be sold more easily. The parts that remain to be sold are Petrolube, the two main refiners are La Pampilla and Talara as well as the other two at Conchan and Iquitos and the oil pipeline. The oil pipeline, like the refinery at Iquitos, will be offered as a 20-year concession rather than completely sold. Telefonica. On 10 June the government then launched its international share offering for its residual stake in the telephone company, Telefonica del Peru. In February 1994, Telefonica de Espana bought 35% in each of the two state telephone companies (Empresa Nacional de Telecomunicaciones and the Compania Peruana de Telefonos) for a total of US Dollars 2bn. The government's residual offering is designed to raise US Dollars 1.2bn. The government hopes to sell 50% of the shares in the US, 35% in Europe and the balance in Asia and Latin America. The government holds a residual stake of 28.6%, but it only wants to sell 23% of its shares. It is also embarking on an ambitious programme to boost local shareholdings in the company. Tell Sid. In the first week of June, before the international marketing effort started, 20,000 individual Peruvians placed orders for shares. The government had hoped to interest a total of between 60,000 and 80,000 Peruvians and raise US Dollars 200m. It looks as though these targets will be beaten. On 10 June, the government started its marketing programme to institutional investors in Peru. These investors range from the pension funds to insurance companies and  corporate and individual investors who place orders of at least 20,000 soles (US Dollars 8,300). The government has pencilled in takings of US Dollars 50m from institutional investors. The government has high hopes of building on the initial success of the telephone sale to promote shareholding to retail investors. Prime minister Alberto Pandolfi said he hoped there would be 400,000 individual sharehodlers in privatised companies by 1998. Proceeds: The Peruvian government said that it had received US Dollars 4.6bn from privatisation between 1993 until the sale of La Pampilla. In addition, the new owners of companies had promised to invest a further US Dollars 5bn. The government reckons that it will raise a further US Dollars 4.6bn from sales this year and next.  Fishmeal: Pescaperu, the state-owned fishing company, is selling six fishmeal factories and three fishoil refineries for at least US Dollars 40m. The company began issuing prospectuses at the end of May. Potential purchasers will have to put 40% down but can pay the rest in quarterly payments for two and half years plus an interest rate of 2% over six-month Libor.  Gold: The government says that it will sell the Quicay gold deposit, belonging to the state-owned Centromin, in mid-July. The minimum price is US Dollars 5m. The deposit holds a minimum of 3m ounces of ore with an average gold content of 0.3g a tonne.  Shougang: The government is holding talks with the Chinese company which bought HierroPeru about investment plans. Shougang has failed to meet the terms of the agreement it signed when it bought  HierroPeru in 1993. Shougang had promised to invest US Dollars 150m in two years, but did not do so by the end of 1995. The government said that it cannot take action against Shougang because the contract did not allow for it. Shougang has apprently offered to invest US Dollars 300m in a new pellets factory, which will also be able to handle copper. Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 BRAZIL: CVRD: SOLD AS ONE: SAYS BNDES PRESIDENT Luis Carlos Mendoza de Barros, president of the Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Economico, said the country's biggest mining company, Companhia Vale Do Rio Doce, would not be broken up before it was privatised. The company, which is currently composed of 40 subsidiaries, is likely to fetch around US Dollars 12bn.  Mendoza de Barros said the government had now dropped the idea of selling the company in parts because so many of its subsidiaries had complementary activities. He also told the senate committee, before whom he was testifying, that the government would ensure CVRD's main rivals and customers in the iron ore business would be barred from bidding. CVRD is the world's biggest producer of iron ore and Latin America's biggest gold producer.  Although mining is its main activity, the company also controls transport systems, especially railways, roads and shipping, power stations and is involved in the lumbering industry.  Cellular: The communications minister, Sergio Motta, announced that the state-owned companies offering cellular services would start to be privatised from 1997. He said that the companies which used Band A would be lumped into between seven and 10 regional groupings and then sold.  The minister said that companies bidding for Band B wavelengths in specific areas would also have to bid for the local Band A company.  He also said the state-owned telecoms company would be privatised by the end of President Cardoso's mandate. This ends on 31 December 1998.  Maracana: The state government in Rio de Janeiro has put the famous Maracana soccer stadium up for sale. It is offering the stadium, which costs US Dollars 10m a year to run, on a 30-year concession. It has advertising receipts of around US Dollars 7m a year and collects US Dollars 120,000 in ticket sales from the derbies between Flemingo and Fluminense. The stadium is built to take 180,000 spectators but its capacity has recently been limited to 120,000. The state government reckons that the new management will have to spend between US Dollars 60m and US Dollars 70m on remodelling the stadium which was built in 1950.  Light: A consortium headed by Electricite de France in partnership with AES and Houston Power Industries bought control of Light, the electricity distribution company for the state of Rio de Janeiro. The government sold 60% of the shares for US Dollars 2.2bn, the minimum set by the government. The consortium bought a 34% stake while 20% was bought by Brazilian groups and 6% was left unsold.  The government must be relieved to have sold Light. It had tried to sell it three times previously, but had been thwarted by potential investors' worries about litigation over the way the company adjusted bills in the era of hyper-inflation.  Initially the company was valued at US Dollars 3.7bn. Even at the new price, potential bidders, notably Chilectra, thought the price was too high for 60% of the shares in the company.  Telecoms: The Americas Telecom 96 trade fair in Rio de Janeiro has drawn 360 equipment manufacturers. This is a substantial increase on the numbers attending the two previous fairs in 1988 and 1992, and organisers say this reflects the increased international interest in the industry in the region. Brazil's telecoms market, which becomes properly free in 1998, is worth around US Dollars 30bn a year. Thanks to a constitutional amendment passed last year, foreign companies will now be allowed to supply services such as cellular phones. Previously the state had a monopoly. According to the Union Internacional de Telecomunicaciones, which organises the trade fair, Brazil will go from having 14m conventional telephones and 2m cellular phones in 1995 to 40m conventional telephones and 17m cellular phones by 2003.  In Argentina, where the privatisation of telecommunications is virtually concluded, the country has 20 lines per 100 people. In Brazil the figure is 12. Venezuela: Elia Ynati, president of the Corporacion Venezolana de Guayana, said that the aluminium industry would be put up for sale in November. He said that three companies had already expressed an interest in buying the companies in which the CVG is the principal shareholder. The state-owned aluminium companies have debts of US Dollars 1.3bn, of which about half is owed to foreign banks. El Salvador: Morgan Stanley and Citibank have won the contract to advise the government on the sale of the telecoms company, Administracion Nacional de Telecomunicaciones (Antel). The government has agreed a fee of 0.74% with the two banks, which will design and market the privatisation. The sale is controversial since the company is profitable and its 6,000 workers say their jobs are at risk if the company is privatised. Mexico: The government has been forced to delay its sale of the petrochemical plants. The delay has been caused by a range of factors: legal conflicts, pressure from the opposition and from oilworkers. The government had hoped to raise US Dollars 2bn from the sale of the petrochemicals industry. Privatisation under the current administration has been slow: only the four port terminals have been sold for US Dollars 165m.  The government is now trying to drum up interest in the railways. There are 32 foreign companies interested in buying bits of the system which loses around US Dollars 140m a year. Paraguay: The IMF's managing director met trade unionists who said that he believed privatisation should be more flexible. Unions had held a general strike to protest against the sale of the steel company, Acepar. The government, which has sold only two state companies to date, is currently trying to sell the Flota Mercante Paraguaya.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 MEXICO: DEBT PAGE:PREPAYING THE US: US DOLLARS 4.7BN Mexico has prepaid almost half the money it borrowed from the US ahead of schedule. On 19 June the government announced that it had prepaid US Dollars 4.7bn the previous day.  The Mexican government borrowed a total of US Dollars 12.5bn from the US. The US had offered a credit line of up to US Dollars 20bn. The Mexican government said that it had borrowed some of the money it used to repay the US from a syndicate of international banks headed by JP Morgan and Swiss Bank Corporation. The Mexican government said that the new loan was significantly cheaper than the money provided by the US and also had a longer maturity: 10 years instead of three and a half. Mexican officials reckoned that refinancing the loans from the US Treasury will save the country around US Dollars 50m a year in interest payments.  Over the first five months of the year Mexico has been a heavy borrower from the international capital markets. It has borrowed a total of US Dollars 7.4bn, bankers say. Mexico's total debt at the end of the first quarter was US Dollars 172bn. On some calculations Mexico's foreign  debt service burden this year is the equivalent of 14.5% of GDP. In 1995 it was 9.5% and in 1994 6%.  Eugenia Correa, a researcher at the economics faculty at the Universidad Autonoma de Mexico, reckons that the equivalent of 24% of GDP is being spent on sorting out the country's debt problems. This takes into account bank debts, domestic debt, and foreign debt. In dollar terms, she claims that this figure is US Dollars 73bn. Oil security. The new money does apparently have a hidden cost. Just as the US loan was secured against Mexican oil receipts so is (reportedly) the JP Morgan/Swiss Bank Corporation deal. Until the US-led rescue package last year, Mexico had refused to pledge its oil receipts.  The Mexican government though claims that there is no pledge over oil receipts and that the loan in fact gives Mexico greater freedom to use its oil revenues.  Cuba: The Cuban government is the latest in the region to admit that it needs to do something about its foreign debt. It owes US Dollars 9bn. Unlike other countries in the region Cuba is not a member of the IDB, the IMF or the World Bank and therefore does not have access to cheap credit to help to set up a debt reduction deal.  According to figures issued by the Banco Nacional de Cuba, the country's foreign debt at the end of 1995 stood at US Dollars 9.1bn, or US Dollars 500m more than at the end of 1994.  Although European countries  account for the bulk of the country's debt, Argentina is also a major creditor, owed US Dollars 1.3bn. According to central bank officials, the US Dollars 9bn figure does not include the country's debts to the former Soviet Union and other Comecon countries. These debts are said to be large and unquantifiable.  Cuba stopped paying its foreign dent in 1986 as part of a campaign led by Fidel Castro to protest against the high cost of servicing foreign debts.  Cuba is now trying to build bridges with its creditors. It has held talks with banks and banking authorities in Japan, Spain, France and Britain. Bankers say that the talks have been wide ranging, including ideas such as debtswaps.  Cuba's inability to tap the international capital markets means that it has been forced into short term loans to finance its sugar crop. It is said to have borrowed US Dollars 300m to finance the 1995/96 crop which has barely hit the production target of 4.5m t. The danger of missing the target is that Cuba will be unable to sell as much sugar as it hoped on the international market. It has swaps with China and Russia to satisfy first.  Honduras: Eduardo Villanueva, fiscal for cultural affairs, claims that according to some optimistic researchers, the San Roque galleon which sank off Honduras in 1606 has enough gold and silver on it to clear the country's foreign debt. He said that the country should take special care of these rich shipwrecks. The San Roque was the flagship of a treasure fleet and apparently held 180 boxes of gold and silver coins; 250 silver bars and 100 gold bars. The government says that it has located the site of the wreck. The site is believed to be close to the Bay Islands.  IDB: The IDB has made its first ever loan to the private sector to help finance a 2,180 metre tunnel through the El Corvocado mountain in Rio de Janeiro. The borrower is OAS, which has won the concession for a 15km Amarelo underground line.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 HONDURAS: THE GRAINS PROBLEM: FROM EXPORTER TO IMPORTER The President, Roberto Reina, has approved an emergency plan to deal with the scarcity of staple grains. The core of the plan involves setting up a committee, headed by Guatama Fonsea, a member of congress for the ruling Partido Liberal.   The country has had problems with growing its own staple foods for the past couple of years, following  changes introduced by the previous government of Rafael Callejas which its opponents say encouraged local producers to export rather than sell in the local market. Last year the harvest increased by 1.9% but demand grew by 3.5%, the government said. The grains tend to go to neighbouring countries (El Salvador, Guatemala and Nicaragua) where local prices are higher than those in the Honduran market.  Already the government has had to import 1,500t of beans (at a cost of US Dollars 1m) from Canada. The government has set aside US Dollars 5m to buy staples (beans, maize and wheat) from international markets.  Maquila. The government and the textile industry is beefing up its campaign to stop the US penalising goods made in Honduras because of the bleak labour conditions at textile factories in Honduras. Last month it sent a mission to testify to the US Senate headed by the economy minister, Fernando Garcia and Cecilio Zavala, the labour minister. Honduran industrialists say that Charles Keraghan, head of the human rights committee of the National Labor Commission is behind the lurid, usually televised, 'investigative' programmes about textile maquilas in Honduras and the rest of Central America. Textile producers in the region claim that the US textile industry, which just wants to use maquilas for bits of the clothes-making process, is behind the campaign. They say that the US industry wants to prevent a textile industry, using non-US raw materials, developing in Central America.  The industry is important. It employs between 60,000 and 70,000 people, mostly in Korean and Taiwanese factories around San Pedro Sula in the north of the country. Textile exports were worth US Dollars 186m to Honduras last year and are likely to grow to US Dollars 220m this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 NICARAGUA: INFLATION PICKS UP: BUT ECONOMY ON COURSE, ACCORDING TO CENTRAL bank The president of the central bank, Evenor Taboada, said that although inflation picked up in May, the economy was doing rather well. He said that the government had more than met the targets it set itself of increasing reserves, increasing public sector deposits at the central bank and getting the private banks to finance this year's crop.  Taboada blamed the increase in inflation on an increase in the price of perishables. This pressure would ebb, he said, in the second half of the year. The pressure here will come from the politicians as the country gears up for the presidential elections scheduled for 20 October. It now seems likely that all 22 candidates will be ruled eligible by the Consejo Supremo Electoral: there had been allegations of unfitness made against five of them, including three of the key candidates, Arnoldo Aleman, the former mayor of Managua, Daniel Ortega, the former Sandinista president and Antonio Lacayo, the current President's son-in-law. Opinion polls suggest Aleman is currently leading.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 PANAMA: GROWTH STEADY: BUT SHRIMPS IMPROVE The economy grew by 3% in the first quarter of this year, but most independent economists expect the rate to fall back to between 1% and 2% for the year, because of the complicated political situation.  Economic statistics in the country are easily distorted: bananas account for half of the country's total agricultural output. Exports for the first four months of the year were 11.6m boxes, up 2.7% on the same period of 1995. Meat production is just holding its own: in the first three months of the year 70,126 head of cattle were slaughtered. This was virtually the same number as in the first quarter of 1995. Shrimp production on the other hand is doing well. In the first two months of the year it was 13% up on the same period of 1995.  Although the consumption of electricity in the first quarter at 956m KW hours was 9% above the level for the same period of 1995, the industrial consumption index, at 128, was only two points above the level of the previous year. Construction, though, seems to be doing well. The issuance of licences was worth US Dollars 77m in the first quarter: that is 10% more than for the first quarter of 1995.  Canal traffic was also healthy in the first quarter. It was 57.8m t or 5.3% more than for the same period of 1995. The free-zone in Colon though is seeing lower volumes of re-exports.  What is depressing, though, is retail sales. At US Dollars 212m for the first two months of the year, these were 13% below 1995's figures. Tourism on the other hand was up by 50% at 72,000. The government is running a growing deficit. Spending in February was 26% up on the comparable month of 1995 at US Dollars 267m. Revenues were 2% up at US Dollars 210m. Although unemployment remains comparatively high at 14% (for February) this actually represents an improvement on the figure for the comparable months of 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 PARAGUAY: DEFICIT PROBLEM: WARNS IMF The IMF says that the government must take action to lower the fiscal deficit if the country's economic prospects are to improve. The Fund says that it fears a renewed upsurge in inflation in Paraguay if the public sector deficit is not brought under cotrol swiftly. The Fund reckons that dealing with the problem should not be too difficult. It says that the increase in public spending this year is largely due to higher personnel costs. According to the fund, the public sector's personnel costs have doubled over the past six years and amounted to 8.5% of GDP in 1995. The Fund also notes that some of the increase in public spending has been due to sorting out the financial system. It reckons that the bulk of the money has now been spent and that the recently approved banking law should start to settle things down again.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 TRINIDAD & TOBAGO: WRITING OFF: MOST OF THE LOANS TO GUYANA The government has decided, to the fury of the opposition, to write off most of the US Dollars 536m debt Guyana has run up with Trinidad & Tobago. The government has decided to write off US Dollars 357m and reschedule repayment of the remaining US Dollars 179m over 23 years.  Keith Rowley, from the opposition People's National Movement says that the write off is unnecessary: he would have preferred the debt to have been swapped for some of Guyana's forestry, rice fields or gold mining concessions. The government said that it was bound by the terms of the Paris Club meeting which it attended (and where it found itself to be Guyana's biggest creditor, above the US, Britain, Holland, Germany, France, Norway and Denmark). Trinidad started to lend large amounts to Guyana in the late 1970s and early 1980s when it was flush with oil revenues.  Neal & Massy. The stockmarket was surprised at the end of May at the decision by Neal and Massy's management to take provisions of T&T Dollars 100m against a restructuring of the conglomerate. The company is closing or selling most of its lossmaking divisions to raise money to reduce borrowings. The company which is a major conglomerate operating in both Trinidad and Jamaica, has been under pressure for the past three years since it bought T. Geddes Grant. Stockbrokers say that it failed to integrate this company (which had companies in several of Neal and Massy's businesses) and allowed debt to balloon to nearly T&T Dollars 800m.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 URUGUAY: CONSTRUCTION PLANS: AND SCANDALS The president of the Camara de la Construcccion de Uruguay, Ignacio Otegui, has asked the government to take measures to reduce the red-tape which he says is preventing the industry from recovering. The construction industry, traditionally one of the engines of the economy, has been in recession for the past 18 months or so.  In 1995 the construction industry contracted by 15% as Argentine investment in Uruguay dried up. Since the end of the year the industry has continued to decline, throwing around 1,500 people out of work a month.  Otegui wants the government just to get on with the projects that have been already authorised. He said that announcing new projects or increased investment would not be as helpful as simply signing contracts and getting authorised projects moving. Otegui said that currently the industry reckons that it takes between eight and 12 months for prices, tendering systems and subcontracting arrangements to be agreed on projects for the public sector.  Inflation: In May prices rose by 2.1%, bringing the figure for the first five months of the year to 10.8%. More encouraging is the wholesale price index. It rose by just 1% in May and is currently registering 26% for the past 12 months. Although farm food prices fell by almost 2% as meat and wool prices dropped, processed food prices actually rose. This reflects the increase in grain and oilseeds prices.  Opinion polls: Support for President Julio Maria Sanguinetti hit a new low in May, according to a poll for the daily El Observador. It found that only 18% of Uruguayans thought he was doing well, while 50% thought he was doing a poor job. The main criticism of his policies was economic: respondents complained of not being able to find jobs and of the sharp increases in prices.  Scandal: Ramifications from the Focoex scandal seem to be spreading. At the heart of the scandal are allegations that members of the former Lacalle government misused a US Dollars 200m line of credit from Spain to pay extortionate prices for basic goods. A congressional committee has already been set up to investigate the accusations which are being led by Leonardo Nicolini from the left wing opposition, the Frente Amplio. He has already suffered counter-suits for libel and damages from those he has accused of corruption. The allegations of corruption started nine months ago. The latest people to be tarred by the allegations are a former presidential secretary, Pablo Garcia Pintos, a former president of Obras Sanitarias del Estado, Villanueva Saravia, a former transport minister (who is currently a member of congress) Juan Carlos Raffo, and a former economy minister and central bank president, Enrique Braga. Braga has already disproved allegations that there were irregularities in the way a bank was sold during his time in office.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 BRAZIL: COFFEE: WHY THE DROP IN EXPORTS MAY BE STRUCTURAL: RATHER THAN JUST temporary The world's biggest coffee producer, Brazil, reports that its coffee exports in the first four months of the year were the lowest for five years at 2.27m bags. This was 37.5% down on the comparable period of 1995. Most analysts attribute the fall to the problems caused by the frosts in the winter of 1994. These cut the crop in 1994/1995 to 12.5m bags and the 1995/1996 crop to 14m bags. The expectation though is for a much bigger crop in 1996/97, which is currently on the trees.  The official forecast is for a crop of 28m bags. Independent analysts go for 25m bags.  Important though the frost damage is, it could be masking a structural change in the Brazilian coffee industry. As Oswaldo Aranha, president of the Federacao Brasileira dos Exportadores do Cafe, said, another reason for the fall in Brazilian exports has been that domestic prices for coffee are now higher than the international price. This has led, he said, to a shift from exports to the domestic market.  Indeed the domestic market is recovering strongly. In 1995, thanks to the real plan which helped restore Brazilians' purchasing power, domestic consumption of coffee increased by 9%. This bucked the world trend of lower coffee consumption.  In 1995 world demand for coffee dropped from 96.6m (60kg) bags to 93.2m. In the US, the world's biggest consumer, coffee consumption dropped by 6%. Interestingly, the increase in Brazilian consumption is not a one-off. Consumption has been growing steadily since it fell to 2.3kg a head in 1980. A decade earlier it had been 4.6kg. In 1995 consumption was just under 3kg a head. US consumption is 4kg a head.  If the current trend continues in Brazil, the domestic coffee market could be using about 15m bags a year by the end of century, up from its current consumption of 10m bags. Even now coffee traders say that Brazil might have to import more coffee to meet domestic demand since the 14m bag (1995/96) crop plus the 7m bags in store will not be enough to both meet export commitments and keep the domestic market supplied.  The Asociacao Brasileira de la Industria do Cafe reckons that if domestic consumption does increase to 15m bags a year, the country's coffee crop will have to be 35m bags.  Exports. The dismal figure for exports in April, (512,468 bags) meant that Brazil's exports have now been below 1m bags for seven months in a row. The country has exported only half of its quota granted by the Association of Coffee Producing Countries. The quota is supposed to compel countries to hold back 20% of their production from the market in an effort to drive up international prices. The fall in export volumes (and the weak international price) has diminished export revenues. In April, revenues were a mere US Dollars 82m compared with US Dollars 185m in April 1995. In the first four months of the year export revenues were US Dollars 331m, compared with US Dollars 641m in the same period of 1995.  Colombia: The Colombian coffee crop has been badly damaged by heavy rains. The Federacion Nacional de Cafeteros now says that the country expects a crop of 10.6m bags for the year starting in June 1996. Originally Colombia had forecast a crop of 12.5m bags. In 1995, the country exported 9.8m bags, 17% less than in 1994. Revenues were US Dollars 1.9bn.  Mexico: The country now expects a crop of 4.7m bags. It says that it will export 3.8m to North America. Honduras: Although the Instituto Hondureno del Cafe expects the 1995/96 crop to have increased from 2.5m (40kg) bags to 3.2m it does not expect revenues to follow suit. In fact it expects them to fall from last year's US Dollars 320m to around US Dollars 300m.  Nicaragua: Alvaro Velazquez, from the Comision Nicarag***uense del Cafe says that the country should be able to sell all of its exportable coffee from the next (1996/97) crop. He expects the country to harvest 792,000 (60kg) bags and to be able to export 707,100 (60kg) bags. He says that the quota given by the ACPC was equal to total production. At current prices that volume of exports would produce US Dollars 110m in revenues.  Dominican Republic: The country expects to export 574,752 (40kg) bags in 1995/96. This will earn around US Dollars 56m according to Jose Antonio Martinez from the Comision Nacional del Cafe at the agriculture ministry. Quotas: Brazil has been awarded a quota of 15m bags by the ACPC for the year starting in July 1996. Colombia has a quota of 10.65m bags. The ACPC is trying to get both Mexico and Guatemala to sign up. On 15 June, Central America, Ecuador and Colombia asked for their quotas to be modified. They want to move 254,000 bags from the first to the second half of the year. Colombia wants to move 100,000 bags from the final quarter of this year to the first of next year in order to match its production to its quota. Ecuador: The country's coffee revenues more than halved in the first four months of 1996, compared with the same period of 1995. They dropped from US Dollars 46m to US Dollars 22m. The fall in coffee revenues was paralleled by falls in revenues from oil, wood and shrimps. Yet overall the country's export revenues rose in the first four months of the year to US Dollars 1.46bn from US Dollars 1.44bn in the same period of 1995. The main increase was in manufactures, which rose from US Dollars 267m in the first third of 1995 to US Dollars 309m in the same period of 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 ARGENTINA: AGRICULTURE: ON THE UP: LAND PRICES JUMP BY 30% Falling grain production in the US and a drop in supplies from the EU coupled with increased demand from Asia has led to a jump in land prices in Argentina. Land agents say that the price of arable land has jumped by between 30% and 50% over the past eight months. According to land agents the price of land suitable for wheat in the province of Buenos Aires, La Pampa, Santa Fe and Cordoba) has jumped from between US Dollars 1,000 and US Dollars 1,500 a hectare eight months ago to US Dollars 2,500 and US Dollars 3,500 now. Rents have also increased: they have gone up from US Dollars 100 a month in the Pampas to US Dollars 150.  The increase in prices follows the surge in wheat prices: these have gone from US Dollars 150 a tonne in May 1995 to just under US Dollars 200. Meanwhile maize prices have jumped from US Dollars 100 to US Dollars 172 a tonne. Soya has also jumped from an average of US Dollars 190 a tonne to US Dollars 275.  Raquel Camino, from the Centro de la Industria Aceitera de Argentina says that the increase in land prices reflects the effect of the Uruguay round which has cut the export subsidies farmers in the US and the EU used to enjoy. Coupled with poor weather (notably drought in the US), prices have risen sharply.  Even the beef crisis in Europe has helped to increase grain prices. Poultry and pigs eat more maize and soya than cows. Argentine officials expect the country to harvest 60m t of grain this year and export revenues to top US Dollars 7.5bn. Of these US Dollars 5bn will come from the export of oilseeds (principally soya and sunflowers). Some investors have already done well. George Soros, the man who forced sterling out of the EMS and whose aggressive shorting of the copper market may have prompted Sumitomo to crystallise a US Dollars 1.8bn loss, bought 350,000 hectares of Argentine land 18 months ago.  The government says that the strong grain prices have led to increased demand for fertilisers and agricultural machinery. Downside. The downside to the delight of arable farmers is the grim position of stock farmers. They have been hit by the worldwide fall in demand for beef following the Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) scare in Europe.   This problem with BSE has offset the benefits Argentina has won by being declared free of foot-and-mouth disease, which had limited its exports.  Humberto Volando, president of the Federacion Agraria Argentina, the forum for small farmers, said that lots of small farmers were getting rid of their animals and switching to growing crops.  Wool: Sheep farmers in the south of Argentina say that the country's wool production will drop by 30% because of the effect of a drought.  Bananas: Banana revenues in the first four months of the year increased to US Dollars 317m from US Dollars 308m in the same period if 1995. Export volumes fell by 6% (compared with April 1995) to 349,160t. Revenues in April though were up from US Dollars 79m to US Dollars 84m.    Fishing: The Chilean government has reaffirmed its support for the New York Agreement on deep sea rights. Chile has the world's fourth biggest fishing industry and the sector's exports last year were worth US Dollars 1.7bn. Of that 88% was generated by fishmeal. The agreement will give Chile the right to vet deep sea fishing vessels which catch fish that generally come inside Chile's 200 mile limit.  Fishing industry executives are less keen on the agreement because in return for the right to vet vessels outside the 200 mile zone, Chile will lose exclusive rights over its own zone. It will also come under pressure to allow foreign vessels to use its ports.  Chile has already taken a strong line on factory ships fishing for horse mackerel and hake. The number of such ships has been cut from 120 in 1991 to just 18 now, thanks to its licensing system.  Sugar: The Cuban sugar crop is still creeping towards the official target of 4.5m t. At the end of May production stood at 4.4m t. The government said that it was happy to have increased production by a third and has set a target of 5m t for 1996/97. Officials say financing for this crop has already been arranged: this will allow increased imports of fertilisers and other inputs. President Fidel Castro said that the country had borrowed US Dollars 300m for the last harvest and had to pay an interest  bill of US Dollars 50m for the privilege.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 MEXICO: OIL: PRODUCTION UP BY 7% IN FIRST THIRD: EXPORT PRICES INCREASED The state oil company, Pemex, reported that its production in the first four months of the year was 6.5% higher than for the same period of 1995. The company said that it produced an average of 2.79m bpd of oil.  The company said that its average production of heavy oil was 1.34m bpd while production of light Isthmus oil ran at 922,000bpd and extra light Olmeca at 582,000bpd. The country's main oilfield remains the Campeche Basin. It accounted for 2.06m bpd of the total production. The southern production area (Tabasco and Chiapas) generated 634,000bpd while the northern production area produced 96,000bpd.  Exports. The company said that its exports averaged 1.5m bpd. average daily exports were 837,400bpd of heavy Maya crude; 185,800bpd of Isthmus and 480,300bpd of Olmeca.  At the beginning of June, the company increased the price of its oil sold in the US and Europe but reduced the price of its heavy crude exported to the Far East.  One constraint on exports, according to Cristian Javelly, the deputy manager for international marketing at Pemex, is the company's shortage of storage capacity. He said that the company would build two natural gas storage facilities in the south of the country. Gas. Pemex's gas production in the first third of the year was 4.247bn cubic feet a day. This was 17% up on the same period of 1995. The bulk of the gas production was in the southern production area which produced 2bn cubic feet a day. The Sonda de Campeche produced 1.5bn cubic feet a day while the northern zone produced 609m cubic feet a day. Politics. The clericalist opposition party, the Partido Accion Nacional, is putting pressure on the government to take a tough line on offshore oil reserves in the north of the Gulf of Mexico. The PAN wants the government to declare that its territorial waters extend for 200 miles.  The issue has suddenly become important because Shell, Amoco, Mobil and Texaco have all started to drill exploratory wells in an area that could be claimed by Mexico. The foreign ministry is playing down the issue saying that the wells appear to lie beyond Mexican territorial waters, though they could be tapping Mexican oilfields. The issue of territorial waters has been left on the back burner since 1976, when the US Senate refused to recognise Mexico's decision to increase its territorial waters to 200 miles. This issue has now become tricky because studies by Shell and the other oil companies reckon that the dispute area could hold between 5bn and 22bn barrels of oil and 45 trillion cubic feet of natural gas. A PAN senator, Angel Conchelo, said that Mexico could be entitled to 75% of this oil. The fact that the oil companies are drilling to depths of 7,625ft, suggests that they may well be tapping into fields which lie predominantly in Mexican territory.  Tabasco: The government has said that only 9% of the left-wing opposition Partido de la Revolucion Democratica's claims of environmental damage done by the oil industry in Tabasco are true. The PRD had lodged 19,766 protests.  The protests had led to the blockading of 20 oil wells in January and February. In order to end the unrest both the government and the PRD agreed to abide by the judgment of a committee composed of officials from the energy, environment, agriculture, agricultural reform and communications ministries and the Comision Nacional del Agua and the Procuraduria Federal de Proteccion al Ambiente y los Asuntos Agarios. The government has yet to say what action it will take over the protests it considers to be justified.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 PERU: GAS: CAMISEA: BACK ON The government says that it has reached an agreement with Shell and Mobil to develop the Camisea gas deposit. This was discovered by Shell in 1983, but its development has been in abeyance since then because of its remoteness and the previous government's hostility to foreign investment.  Some points of the deal remain unclear. The foreign companies will invest between US Dollars 2.7bn and US Dollars 2.8bn to develop the deposit. Their concession will last for 40 years. What is still not clear is what will happen to the gas. The Peruvian government says that the country will now become a net hydrocarbons exporter. Yet Shell is not absolutely committed to building a gas pipeline, either to Lima or to Bolivia to connect to the Bolivian-Brazilian natural gas pipeline. Indeed the Shell-Mobil consortium is only committed to spending US Dollars 200m over the next two years to drill three exploratory wells. The development phase of the project only starts in 1998 and is budgeted at US Dollars 2.5bn. Yet without a pipeline, it is hard to see the foreign companies investing such amounts.   Camisea contains, according to official figures, 12.2bn cubic feet of natural gas and 610m barrels of gas liquids. This is worth, oilmen say, about US Dollars 70bn.  Camisea's oil reserves are equivalent to 2.2bn barrels, or seven times Peru's current reserves.Output. The country's oil output in May, at 3.7m barrels (119,345bpd), was 6% below the figure for May 1995. Overall in the first five months of the year production was 5% down on the same period of 1995 at 17.9m (or 117,763bpd). Occidental is the biggest single oil producer in Peru contributing 1.66m barrels. It is followed by the recently sold bloc 8 which pumped 776,841 barrels.  Gas production is also down in the first five months at 3,758m cubic feet. This is 7.4% down on the same period of 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 ECUADOR: OIL: HOLDING STEADY: BUT NO EFFECT FROM HIGHER PRICES Ecuador has not benefitted from the higher-than-expected oil prices in the first half of the year. In the first four months of the year, its oil export revenues actually fell, though by only US Dollars 2m to US Dollars 464m.  This was despite a 4% increase in oil production in the first quarter of the year to 35.4m barrels (389,000bpd). Petroecuador, the state oil company, produces 81% of the country's oil. Around 60% of Ecuador's oil production is exported.  The only month which seemed to have benefitted from the higher price was March where revenues reached US Dollars 124m, the highest since October 1995.  The government announced that it would invest US Dollars 418m in the modernisation of the oil industry. Of this US Dollars 100m will go on increasing the capacity of the main TransEcuadorean pipeline from 350,000bpd to 380,000bpd.  The expansion of the Esmeraldas oil refinery (from 90,000bpd to 110,000bpd) will cost US Dollars 180m. Of that US Dollars 77m will be spent in the current year. The government is also spending US Dollars 2m on producing unleaded fuel. It reckons that this investment should be enough to meet the entire domestic demand.  The government is also embarking upon a US Dollars 72m project to increase gas production from the Amazon fields. The government has also agreed a deal with Energy Development Corporation for the exploration and production of gas in the Gulf of Guayaquil. The country has been trying to do such a deal to develop the gas resources in the Gulf for 25 years.  EDC is committed to spend US Dollars 45m over four years to explore for gas. The government offered a concession to a consortium in 1968 but this was suspended in 1972. Northwest Energy was awarded a concession in 1974 but this lapsed after five years when the government reckoned that Northwest had not met the terms of the contract. BHP King Ranch thought it had won a concession in 1995, but this was struck out by the Consejo para la Evaluacion de Licitaciones.   Court case: The Frente de la Defensa de la Amazonia has warned President Sixto Duran-Ballen to stay out of the court case it has started in New York against Texaco. The Frente is suing Texaco for the environmental damage it is alleged to have done to the Amazon during the period it produced oil there.  Texaco has told the court that the Ecuadorean government does not believe that it damaged the environment. The judge has asked the Ecuadorean government whether this is so: it has yet to reply, but if it supports Texaco, the judge says that he would be minded to throw out the case.  Last year Texaco promised the government that it would clean up the Amazon areas in which it had been operating. The Frente (and other independent organisations such as Greenpeace) say that the work Texaco has promised to do will not make-up for the environmental damage it has wrought.   The Frente initially sought US Dollars 1.5bn in damages, but it has now dropped this to US Dollars 800m.  Bolivia: Hydrocarbon production increased by 12% in the first quarter to 30,131bpd, according to the Instituto Nacional de Estadistica. The INE said that the country's total production in 1995 was 2.43m barrels (which was enough to meet domestic demand). This year it is forecasting that production will increase to 2.74m barrels. The INE also noted that production from fields operated by the state oil company Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales Bolivianos, fell by 9% to an average of 18,570bpd. The Vibora field in the north of the country is the YPFB's most productive field, producing 5,321bpd.  The good news is that private contractors increased their output by 77% in the first quarter to 11,561bpd. The biggest oilfield in the country, Surubi, which is operated by Maxus, a subsidiary of Argentina's YPF. This field produced 9,335bpd.    Venezuela: Congress has approved the contracts won by the successful bidders in the January auction for deep fields of light and medium crudes. The winning groups (LAEB 03 96 p24) had paid US Dollars 245m in bonds at the time of the auction. The contracts, which will be on a joint-venture basis, signal the end of 20 years of state control of the oil industry. The new fields are reckoned to hold 17bn barrels of crude.   The Ministerio de Energia y Minas said that the average price for its oil exports was US Dollars 16.7 a barrel in the first five months of the year. The average price in the first half of June was down to US Dollars 16.3 a barrel. Officials expects quite a sharp decline (to an average of US Dollars 14 a barrel) over the next three months as the embargo on Iraqi exports ends.  Paraguay: A US oil company, Phillips Petroleum, has ended its search for oil in the country. It drilled two dry holes and spent US Dollars 15m. Over the last 50 years fifty oil wells have been drilled in the country without finding significant amounts of oil.  Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 REGION: COPPER: PRICE PROBLEMS: TURMOIL ON THE LME The wild gyrations of the copper price on the London Metal Exchange are likely to have major effects on Latin America's two biggest copper producers, Chile and Peru. Over the past month the price of copper has dropped from US Dollars 2,800 a tonne (US Dollars 1.27 a pound) to US Dollars 1,900 a tonne (or US Dollars 0.86 a pound) before recovering to US Dollars 2,300 a tonne (or US Dollars 1.04 a pound).  We have been bears of copper for the past 18 months, though we did not expect the collapse in the market to be so sudden. We had expected a gentle glide down from last year's peaks to around US Dollars 1.10 a pound by the end of the year.  No-one seems entirely sure why the copper market has tumbled so far so fast. The two main reasons advanced by traders and analysts are (1) that China has held off from the market and (2) that Sumitomo Corporation from Japan, a major copper holder, might be about to change its policy. China is both a major producer and consumer of copper. Traders had been expecting it to start buying copper in order to meet the demand caused by its fast economic growth rate and heavy investment in infrastructure. Some analysts also expect it to want to build up its stocks of both refined copper and concentrates so that it has sufficient stocks to see it through any problems following the (long-anticipated) death of Deng Xiaoping. So far this buying has not come through, so analysts are beginning to wonder if China now reckons that it has sufficient reserves of copper. In the first half of June the copper market was riddled with rumours that Sumitomo's chief copper trader, Yasuo Hamanaka, had either resigned or been sacked. Finally. Sumitomo made an announcement on 13 June in which the company revealed that Hamanaka had been responsible for US Dollars 1.8bn worth of unauthorised trading over the past decade. The big fear in the copper market is that Sumitomo, which had a reputation for building up stocks which it then used to squeeze traders who were short of copper might now be holding more of the metal than it needs. This could mean that it would become a seller of copper, driving prices down further.  This fear drove the copper price down to US Dollars 1,850 a tonne on the day that Hamanaka's unauthorised trading was revealed. Although the price recovered to close at just over US Dollars 2,000 a tonne, we would expect the price to remain weak. So. What is clear from the tables and charts on this page is that weaker copper prices pose a big threat to both Chile's and Peru's prospects for a trade surplus this year. If copper prices were to average US Dollars 0.90 for the year, Chile's copper revenues would fall by a quarter, even assuming a 10% rise in export volumes. The same would happen in Peru's case, though the consequences could be more dramatic since the trade account is already a problem.  In 1995, copper provided 21% of Peru's export revenues, and 41% of Chile's.  So far comment from both Chile and Peru on the prospects for the copper market have been muted; Juan Villarzu, president of the state-owned Corporacion del Cobre, the world's biggest copper producer, has said that the London Metal Exchange, the world's main copper market, must do more to ensure a more stable market. Eduardo Aninat, the Chilean finance minister, has said that the budget could be affected by the fall in copper prices. Last year Codelco alone provided the government with US Dollars 1.3bn: this was more than the rest of the corporate sector put together provided. Chile's total tax revenues in 1995 were US Dollars 10bn.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 PERU: LOOKING FOR A BOOM: AS NEW INVESTMENT FLOODS IN The Peruvian mining industry expects to be exporting US Dollars 4bn worth of metals by 2005. In 1995, the industry exported metals worth US Dollars 2.6bn. The president of the Sociedad Nacional de Mineria y Petroleo, Walter Sologuren, said that the growth of the industry would be led by new discoveries, privatisation and the renewed interest multinational mining companies were now showing in the industry. He said that this made a change: he claimed that the country had been spurned by investors since 1970. Sologuren said that he expected total investment in the mining industry to be US Dollars 13bn between 1995 and 2005. Of that, he expected foreign mining companies to stump up 60%.    Sologuren said that the country would be producing around 2m t of refined metals by the year 2004. He claimed that the biggest increase would probably come in gold production. He expected that Peru would be the biggest gold producer in Latin America by the end of the century, producing around 100t. In 1995 the country produced 56t which produced export revenues of US Dollars 460m.  Copper. Copper production has increased, especially at Toquepala, Cuajone, Cerro Verde and Tintaya. The big boost has come at Cerro Verde and Tintaya, which were privatised. In 1995, copper exports were US Dollars 1.2bn, up from US Dollars 824m in 1994.  The total revenues from mining exports were US Dollars 2.60bn in 1995, up from US Dollars 1.96bn in 1994. Gold. The fastest growing export, though, was gold. Export revenues increased by 37% as export volumes rose by 35%. Peruvian goldminers talk optimistically about the world developing a shortage of gold. Jaime Uranga, president of the Comite Aurifero de la Sociedad Nacional de Mineria y Petroleo, said that the world's current gold production of about 2,268t a year was about 1,000t short of demand, which he estimated to be 3,550t. So far, he said, the shortfall had been covered by loans or sales from stocks held either by central banks or investors. The whole question of gold supply and demand is complicated by the fact that one source of demand is from mining companies which borrow gold to develop new gold mines. They pay back the loans with their new production. Frequently the goldmines also hedge their production forward to lock in prices when they believe that prices might fall.  The core of the demand argument which suggests that prices are unlikely to fall is that production from the world's largest gold producer, South Africa, is falling at an annual rate of between 15% and 20%. South Africa's deep mines are some of the most expensive to operate in the world. Peru's main goldmine is Yanacocha which is owned by the big US mining company, Newmont. Yanacocha recently discovered another gold deposit, Sipan, which holds 16.8m t of ore with an average gold content of 1.73g per t and an average silver content of 4.1g per tonne. This mine is likely to come on stream in 1998.  Yanacocha is scheduled to produce 620,000 ounces (19.2t) this year, up from 552,000 ounces in 1995.  Silver: Peru's export revenues rose by 13% even though the international price of silver fell by 13%.  New law: The government has promulgated a new law which tidies up some of the outstanding questions of ownership rights. The new law, which has been approved by congress, cleans up the register of claims, throwing out 11,000 claims and forcing another 9,000 to lapse. The new law also stipulates that the coordinates of new (and all existing) concessions must be surveyed and marked on a single geographical map.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 SURINAME: BAUXITE: DEMAND: BY UNION The Paranam Workers' Union has pulled back from a confrontation with the management at Suralco. The union had issued an ultimatum, which expired on 9 June, demanding a salary increase of 185%. The management had offered 30%, saying it could not afford higher increases.  The union points out that the official figure for inflation was 238% in 1995, so even a 185% rise would represent a fall in real wages.  Despite the rejection of its ultimatum the union has resumed talks with the management. The union says that it will not do anything to damage the company, though it points out that the company's income is US Dollars 140 per day per worker, yet the average daily wage is only US Dollars 4.  Gold: Uruguay's first gold mine is scheduled to come into production in 1998. Owned and operated by the American Resource Corporation, the Mina San Gregorio will cost about US Dollars 50m to develop. It reckons to produce 75,000 ounces (2.3t) of gold a year from processing 1m t of ore. The mine is based in the north of the country at Minas de Corrales, close to the border with Brazil. American Resource made its first venture into Uruguay in 1993 when it extracted US Dollars 8m worth of gold from a mine that was thought to be exhausted at San Jose, 90km from Montevideo. Copper: Chile's Codelco and the Australian Mutual Provident Society have revealed more about their joint venture, Los Andes. In the initial stages the company will concentrate on developing Maria Delia, Sierra Jardin, Exploradora and Sierra de Moreno. These are all copper mines. Codelco will provide US Dollars 12m while AMP will supply US Dollars 6m. Los Andes' president will be Edgardo Boeninger, a former minister and senior official at the Pacific Economic Cooperation Council. Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN ECONOMY & BUSINESS  via NewsNetJuly 4, 1996 CUBA: FOCUS ON CUBA'S BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY: TRYING TO BOOST EXPORTS Cuba has been trying to build up its biotechnology industry for at least the past two decades. It has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in government-run research institutes such as the Centro de Ingenieria Genetica y Biotecnologia, the most famous of the 30 or so biotech institutes in Cuba.  The government has long nursed ambitions of becoming a major exporter of biotechnology. Indeed, before the collapse of Comecon in 1989, Cuba claimed to be exporting US Dollars 500m worth of medicines a year. This figure has since dwindled, along with exports of other Cuban products, to US Dollars 100m. Cuba's most successful products are anti-meningitis and hepatitis vaccines and some diagnostic kits. Last year the country recently used its own anti-leprosy vaccine to fight an outbreak of that disease in Holguin, it inoculated 120,000 people against the disease. The country also has high hopes of a product that deals with Tresteza, a disease that can wipe out citrus crops. Generally, however, the performance of Cuban products in export markets has been disappointing. Cuba claims to have 5,000 scientists and technicians working in its mediacal research industry. The quality of the scientists must be open to question: Jamaica recently ended its agreement to recognise Cuban medical qualifications after some poor experiences with Cuban trained doctors.  The most success the Cubans had was in selling biotech goods to other Latin American countries. Brazil and Colombia especially had been (reasonably) enthusiastic buyers of Cuban made medicines. Last year Colombia signed a US Dollars 10m deal to buy Cuban-made hepatitis and antimeningococcal meningitis Group B vaccine. Other Latin American countries have also bought a cholesterol-reducing drug PPG.  Cuba had also managed to sell interferons (which are used for a variety of tasks from diagnosing pregnancy to dealing with AIDS infections) to China.   York deal. The government has now changed tack and started to use established companies to break into new markets. It recently signed a deal with a Canadian firm, York Medical, to develop and sell Cuban biotech products in Canada and Europe.  The government awarded York a licence to test and market human and veterinary pharmaceuticals made by the biotech industry. Under this deal, York Medical will transfer technology and test products in Canadian biotech facilities. Cubans will also be trained to develop and market products.  York says that it will not only market Cuban biotech products in developed markets, such as Canada and Europe, but it will also assist in financing new products and getting them through the regulatory and quality controls which keep them from new markets.  Immediate plans. For the moment, York will concentrate on marketing 15 Cuban biotech products (such as Heberquinasa (which eliminates blood clots); an epidermal growth factor which detects tumours; the antibiotics testing system; Diramic; Udertan (a product generated from red mangroves to disinfect cow udders); and Dermofural (an antibacterial and anti-fungal cream made from sugar cane extract. Neither York nor the Cubans expect any trouble from the Helms-Burton Act. They say that no US assets are used by the biotech industry and the intellectual property on which the industry is based dates from the early 1980s, well after the 1959 revolution.  Non-human strengths. The strongest parts of the Cuban biotech industry appear to be in products that do not have medical applications. At a conference last year attended by 250 US, European and Latin American scientists, there was considerable interest in a vaccine that protects cattle against ticks, genetically engineered crops that repel insects and industrial enzymes. One of these enzymes dissolves dextran, a gummy substance that bogs down the sugar refining process. Cuban sugar producers say that the use of the enzyme has cut the sugar mills' energy consumption by nearly half. Maquila. One idea that has been canvassed by international drug producers is to use Cuba as a cheap manufacturing base. This will only happen if the country improves its regulatory and control standards: drug companies have been scared by what happened to Fisons, a British drug company which is now part of the Rorer Group which failed to meet US Food and Drug Administration standards at an inspection. The company was forced to stop production until it improved its systems.  Cuban scientists would certainly like access to hard currencies: at present most of them earn less than taxi drivers and barmen. The CIGB is trying to improve the scientists' lot by paying some of their salaries in dollars.Back to Headline List