WT03-B06-1IA087-000634-B040-178http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it107.html 205.156.212.5 19970122030029 text/html 68286HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:58:27 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:49 GMTContent-length: 68099Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it107.html Sample Issue Copyright LATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT via NewsNet August 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES MEXICO: ZAPATISTAS AND GOVERNMENT AGREE ON FURTHER NEGOTIATING SESSION (380 words) ARGENTINA: POLITICS: CAMILION QUITS OVER ARMS SCANDAL: MENEM FINDS A JOB FOR DEFEATED BUENOS AIRES MAYOR (511 words) ARGENTINA: ECONOMY: STRIKE THREAT OVER SPENDING CUTS: MENEM BACKS CAVALLO (AGAIN) AFTER ROW WITH UNIONS AND PJ (370 words) CUBA/UNITED STATES: DIPLOMACY: CLINTON FUDGE FAILS TO SATISFY ALLIES: HELMS-BURTON CONFLICTS POSTPONED, NOT PREVENTED (691 words) SOUTHERN CONE: BRIEFS (301 words) BRAZIL: ECONOMY: SETBACK IN JUNE TRADE FIGURES: BUT TELECOMS LEGISLATION IS THROUGH CONGRESS AT LAST (912 words) BOLIVIA: POLITICS & SOCIETY: UPROAR OVER PENSIONS REFORM: DECISION ON NEW SYSTEM PUT OFF AFTER MASS PROTESTS (682 words) BRAZIL: BRIEFS (284 words) REGION: TRENDS: RESENTMENT GROWS TOWARDS WASHINGTON: THE REGION FEELS THE BIG STICK IS BEING BRANDISHED AGAIN (654 words) REGION: DEBT&LENDING ROUND-UP (600 words) GUATEMALA: ECONOMY: RESOURCE LIMITS THREATEN PEACE DEAL: QUESTIONMARK HANGS OVER ECONOMIC PROSPECTS (1092 words) GUATEMALA: SOCIETY & POLITICS: DEATH SENTENCES PROVOKE PROTESTS: ARZU REFUSES TO PARDON MURDERERS OF FOUR-YEAR-OLD (455 words) MEXICO: BRIEFS (271 words) COLOMBIA: DRUGS & DIPLOMACY: SAMPER ANNOUNCES TOUGH LEGISLATION: BUT RETURN OF VICE-PRESIDENT COULD BRING CRISIS TO A HEAD (889 words) ECUADOR: POLITICS: INDIAN CONFLICTS COMING TO A HEAD: ISSUES MAY PROVIDE EARLY TEST OF BUCARAM'S POLITICAL SKILLS (693 words) ANDEAN REGION: BRIEFS (256 words) REGION: POSTSCRIPT (784 words) CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 MEXICO: ZAPATISTAS AND GOVERNMENT AGREE ON FURTHER NEGOTIATING SESSION Two days of discussions between representatives of the government and the Ejercito Zapatista de Liberacion Nacional (EZLN) ended on 17 July with some progress. The two sides reached preliminary  agreement on the second item on the agenda of peace negotiations. The talks have been going on since April 1995 in the Chiapas town of San Andres Larrainzar. A full negotiating session on 'democracy and justice' is due to take place on 6 August, but the two sides appear to be as far apart as ever on the fundamental issues. The talks reflected the EZLN's determination to project itself as a national organisation, going far beyond issues affecting Chiapas. It set out its twin aims for the next round of negotiations as: 'Promotion of a regime of social coexistence fully covered by the rule of law and the construction of a democratic development that permits a peaceful political life and intense citizen participation.' 'Comandante Tacho' of the EZLN was dismissive of the government's proposals on these issues: 'Democracy is much more than honest elections, extending to citizens' participation in all spheres of social, productive, political and cultural life.' This projection was further seen in a subsequent meeting in the Lacandona jungle on 22 July between EZLN representatives and members of the bank debtors' organisation known as El Barzon, which claims 1m members, and sees much in common with the Zapatistas in its struggle for more favourable treatment from the federal government. The two groups signed a mutual defence pact, and agreed to form a front of civic organisations to press for changes in the Mexican economic model. In Guerrero, the new guerrilla group known as the Ejercito Popular Revolucionario (EPR) confirmed its insurgent credentials on 19 July when it issued a communique, signed by 'Comandante Antonio,'  claiming responsibility for an attack on a military patrol three days earlier near Chilapa. LOPEZ OBRADOR WINS Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, 43, was formally proclaimed the new leader of the Partido de la Revolucion Democratica (PRD) on 17 July. He received 264,565 votes, 73.9% of the total, in internal elections. Lopez Obrador, former PRD candidate for governor of Tabasco, is regarded as on the radical wing of the PRD. He replaces Porfirio Munoz Ledo on 3 August.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 ARGENTINA: POLITICS: CAMILION QUITS OVER ARMS SCANDAL: MENEM FINDS A JOB FOR DEFEATED BUENOS AIRES MAYOR When he announced the appointment of the outgoing mayor of Buenos Aires, Jorge Dominguez, as defence minister on 21 July, President Carlos Menem insisted that the departure of Oscar Camilion, who resigned five days earlier, had nothing to do with the scandal concerning arms sales to Ecuador in which the minister had become implicated. Two in one week. For the second time in a week Menem had to let a long-serving minister go, amid protestations that the departure had no particular motive (see Page 334/96). Camilion, like Rodolfo Barra, had apparently come to the end of his time, nothing more. But everybody knew that Camilion had been hanging on by his finger-nails for months, as the judicial inquiry into the arms sales drew closer and the clamour from the opposition benches grew louder (see Page 238/96). The final straw came when federal judge Jorge Urso decided there was enough evidence of a cover-up to request the lifting of Camilion's ministerial immunity. Menem took five days, during which he was on a visit to the United States, to mull over the resignation. He finally decided Camilion must go, but took care to make clear that the government was no more involved in the scandal than the minister: 'Argentina sold the arms that ended up in Ecuador to private entities,' he claimed. But Urso based his application to interrogate Camilion on the testimony of the air force commander, Brigadier Juan Paulik, who said he had warned the defence minister that the planes supposedly bound for Venezuela were stopping off in Guayaquil. The ministry took no action. The only suspects to be arrested so far are Luis Sarlenga, former president of the company that made the weapons, Fabricaciones Militares (owned by the defence ministry), and two other senior officials of the company. The departure of Camilion will help to mend fences with Peru, where indignation was widespread that an old ally should lend itself to supplying arms to an enemy in a time of conflict. Dominguez has fallen on his feet, after suffering a humiliating defeat in the mayoral elections on 30 June at the hands of the Radical candidate, Fernando de la Rua. Despite finishing third, behind the Frepaso candidate, Dominguez was told by Menem that he was 'the best mayor Buenos Aires has had.' AMIA BOMB SUSPECTS HELD Prosecutors investigating the bombing of the Amia Jewish community centre in July 1994 suspect two Buenos Aires policemen of Arab origin of supplying the pick-up truck loaded with explosives that was used in the attack, in which 86 people died. One of the two, who have not been arrested, is thought to be close to a 'prominent member of the Lebanese community' who was connected in some way with the owner of the vehicle, Carlos Telleldin, the only suspect charged with involvement in the incident. Following Telleldin's evidence, judge Juan Jose Galeano has linked the vehicle with an extortion racket run by 14 Buenos Aires provincial policemen, arrested earlier this month.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 ARGENTINA: ECONOMY: STRIKE THREAT OVER SPENDING CUTS: MENEM BACKS CAVALLO (AGAIN) AFTER ROW WITH UNIONS AND PJ While economy minister Domingo Cavallo threatened to resign unless his latest economic adjustment measures were implemented by congress, President Menem took responsibility for whipping dissident members of the ruling Partido Justicialista (PJ) back into line. Menem imposed order in the party after ratifying yet again his faith in Cavallo. The latter's attempts to make amends for failing to meet fiscal targets set by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) were bitterly criticised within the PJ (see Page 316/96). 'The adjustment measures are mine, not Cavallo's,' Menem said on 19 July. Some 2.4m workers stand to suffer from a reduction in state aid for dependent families, and from the taxation of food subsidies paid to some 1.2m employees by companies as part of their total wage. The government is also considering the abolition of transport subsidies and imposing value added tax (IVA) on bus, metro and train fares -all wildly unpopular measures with the unions. The Confederacion General del Trabajo (CGT) has called a general strike on 8 August, 10 days before negotiations begin with the IMF to secure a waiver on the agreed fiscal targets. The unions have also threatened to seek a court ruling overturning the presidential decrees implementing the adjustment measures. Opposition economists expect the result to be a big fall in consumption rather than an increase in tax revenues. The government expects the measures to save up to US Dollars 1bn a year. The main employers' organisation, Union Industrial Argentina (UIA), has given its support, regarding the measures as preferable to tax increases. The fiscal deficit of US Dollars 2.508bn for the first six months of 1996 was US Dollars 8m higher than the figure agreed with the IMF for the whole year. AUTONOMOUS BUENOS AIRES The first autonomous government of Buenos Aires will take office on 6 August, in accordance with the first decision taken by the assembly drawing up the capital's political statutes, the 60-member Convencion de Representantes. Senador Graciela Fernandez Meijide, of Frepaso, was elected president of the convention on 19 July. Frepaso has 25 seats in the assembly, against 19 for the Union Civica Radical (UCR), 11 for the PJ and five for Nueva Dirigencia.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 CUBA/UNITED STATES: DIPLOMACY: CLINTON FUDGE FAILS TO SATISFY ALLIES: HELMS-BURTON CONFLICTS POSTPONED, NOT PREVENTED The option chosen by President Clinton on implementation of the Helms-Burton Act (see Page 325/96) was a skilful fudge: the law would be applied, but not yet. It was not lost on Latin American countries that the diplomatic clout of the European Union (EU) had caused Washington to postpone taking action under the most controversial section of the law. Six-month moratorium. The President's statement on 16 July maintained the right of US citizens to sue foreign 'traffickers' in confiscated properties in Cuba under Title III of the Helms-Burton Act, but took to make sure that no cases would come to court for at least six months -that is, until February 1997. Clinton's calculation is that he will have done enough to avoid alienating the Florida Cuba lobby without driving the US into open conflict with the EU or its partners in the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta). The first reaction of Senator Jesse Helms, joint sponsor of the law, was not promising, however: his spokesman said the President's decision was a 'capitulation' to Castro and his EU allies. Clinton's best hope is that he wins the presidential elections in November, and can then extend the moratorium or, better still, quietly let Title III drop. But that will depend on the correlation of forces in the new Congress. Pressure for change. In the meantime, the US proposes to continue efforts over the next six months to persuade its allies to bring greater pressure to bear on the Castro government to introduce democratic freedoms in the island. If they do not do so, Title III could then be brought into action. In other words, Washington still insists on the 'extra-territorial' application of its national legislation -a point underlined a few days later when proposals were put forward in Washington to prosecute foreign companies trading or maintaining economic contacts with Libya or Iran. This position could be storing up trouble for the future, as it is precisely this point that has most enraged EU, Nafta and other Latin American countries. The EU has said it proposes to continue with preparations for retaliatory measures, and EU Commission president Jacques Santer has said Clinton's moratorium, while welcome, is not enough. The Spanish-based Sol-Melia hotel group, with extensive interests in Cuba, was among the first EU companies to begin its own campaign, on 22 July, to ensure that Titles III and IV are never applied. Sol-Melia is one of the foreign companies already notified that it is liable to sanctions under the Helms-Burton legislation. Title IV refers to the denial of visas to executives of companies dealing with Cuba, and is a mere pinprick compared with Title III. But pinpricks are annoying, and much has already been made by commentators in EU countries and Canada about the absurdity of refusing to allow children of, say, Sherritt International executives to visit Disneyland for their holidays. President Fidel Castro is making the most of the divisions among the Western allies. He emphasised in a briefing to Spanish journalists on 19 July that the Helms-Burton Act was a 'sword of Damocles' hanging over the sovereignty of all nations and sets a precedent with dire implications for international trading relations in general. 'AVIONETAS' AT UN Attempts by Washington to secure a resolution from the United Nations Security Council condemning Cuba for the shooting-down of two light aircraft in February seem to have come unstuck. US ambassador Madeleine Albright said on 22 July that she was satisfied there was a consensus in the Council against military attacks on civilian aircraft, but she was prepared to tone down a draft resolution prepared by the US. A report by the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) criticised the incident and appeared to back the US position that it took place in international airspace (see RC-96-06). But the ICAO board did not specifically condemn the Cuban government, and US allies on the Security Council see Washington's campaign for sanctions against Cuba over the incident as part of its policy of isolating the Castro regime, and are reluctant to go along.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 SOUTHERN CONE: BRIEFS Chile's exports will rise to US Dollars 18bn in 1997, 13% higher than the US Dollars 16bn forecast for this year, according to the finance ministry. Last year services accounted for US Dollars 3.1bn of exports, the third largest figure in the region after Brazil and Mexico. Consumer prices are expected to have risen by 0.2-0.3% in July, compared with 0.8% for the same month of 1995, bringing inflation in Chile to 7.7% for the last 12 months, the finance ministry has announced. The state copper company, Codelco, has forecast a US Dollars 500m fall in income to US Dollars 1.2bn for this year, as a result of the Sumitomo scandal causing copper prices on the international markets to plummet. Forestry exports fell 20% in value to US Dollars 769m, and 11.3% in volume, in the first five months of the year, compared with the same period of 1995. Atilio Fernandez, the former integration minister, has been appointed head of Paraguay's Privatisations Council, his explicit brief being to speed up the sell-off process begun by President Wasmosy in 1993. Uruguay's public payroll has been cut back by 16,754 posts over the past 18 months, to 239,146 officials. Uruguay's state electricity company, UTE, is to link up with the joint venture between the Uruguayan oil company ANCAP and the government of Argentina's Entre Rios province to build a gas pipeline on both sides of the river Uruguay, which divides the two countries. UTE is to invest US Dollars 120m in a 350MW natural gas station to form part of the infrastructure. A new law will end the state monopoly on the financing of the construction of new homes, leaving the Banco Hipotecario, the current credit provider, to adapt to a new and competitive market.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 BRAZIL: ECONOMY: SETBACK IN JUNE TRADE FIGURES: BUT TELECOMS LEGISLATION IS THROUGH CONGRESS AT LAST External account figures released in mid-July were not as good as expected, causing the government to promise a thorough revision of its projections for this year. But, on the positive side, real progress was made with legislation on opening up the economy. Trade back in deficit. The May trade deficit of US Dollars 268m was followed by a disappointing US Dollars 327m deficit in June, with exports 6.77% down on the previous month. The shortfall for the first half-year was US Dollars 296m -which makes the official prediction of a US Dollars 500m trade surplus for the year seem unlikely. The government concedes that the current account deficit will exceed US Dollars 2bn for the whole of 1996. The government, naturally, has been putting a favourable gloss on the results. The finance ministry's economic policy secretary, Jose Roberto Mendonca de Barros, pointed out that the growth in imports in June was largely accounted for by a 15.2% jump in machinery and equipment purchases. 'The pick-up in investments is much more important than the import figures,' he said, adding that a reviving economy was bound to suck in imports. Mendonca de Barros noted that direct investments were pouring in, most of them related to Mercosur projects, making the accumulated reserves of US Dollars 60bn an advantage rather than a problem. A record total of foreign investments of US Dollars 1.1bn was recorded in June, bringing the total for the first six months up to US Dollars 4.37bn, according to central bank figures released on 19 July. Mexican spectre. Not everybody agrees with the government's upbeat assessment. The June trade figures suggest to some economists -those of what might be called the Dornbusch persuasion- that the spectre of a Mexican-style crisis has still not been dispelled (see Page 268/96), and the deterioration of the external accounts should set the alarm bells ringing. Non-government projections of the current account deficit this year are in the range of US Dollars 4bn-US Dollars 5.6bn. And critics also point out that much of the foreign capital is coming to Brazil because of what are still among the highest real interest rates in the world. Cellular telephones law. The most impressive legislative advance was the approval on 18 July by the senate, by 55 votes to six, of the law regulating private participation in cellular telephony, satellite broadcasting and data transmission. President Fernando Henrique Cardoso signed the bill into law on the following day. Cellular telephony is expected to attract foreign investments totalling US Dollars 5bn over the next five years, opening the floodgates of investment in telecoms. The compromise that enabled the law to complete its passage through congress means that companies taking part must have at least 51% Brazilian capital for the first three years. The former state monopoly company, Telebras, is authorised to set up subisidiares to compete for concesisons. Nineteen consortia. The communications minister, Sergio Motta, said the first bids for cellular telephony services would be called in the next few weeks, and the country would be divided into 10 regions for the purpose. About 19 consortia, already in existence or in formation, are expected to participate. Cardoso said at the signing ceremony that the government was in no hurry to complete its reform programme, but wanted to be sure that they were the right ones for the country. He nevertheless did not neglect the opportunity to appeal to congress to speed up approval of the big constitutional reforms that are still bogged down there, notably the social security amendments. A much watered-down version of this reform was given a second reading and approved by the lower house of congress by 318 votes to 136 on 17 July. The concept of 'years of contributions' rather than 'length of service' as qualification for a retirement pension is preserved, but in other respects the lower house badly mauled the government's original draft (see RB-96-04). Civil servants and teachers keep their privileges, including the right to retire on full pension after 35 years' service, and no minimum qualifying age is laid down for civil servants. Worst of all, from the government's point of view, it failed to carry the proposal to reduce the  state's contribution to financing the pension funds of publicly-owned companies.[TEX] MALUF'S STAR RISES  Mayor Paulo Maluf of Sao Paulo, with a 52% approval rating in the latest opinion polls, looks increasingly likely to carry his unknown protege Celso Pitta into office on his coat-tails. While the mayoral campaign of former planning minister Jose Serra appears to be flagging, Pitta's is prospering. Pitta, born in Rio de Janeiro, is a former executive in the Maluf family business, and is clearly Maluf's man. He also has the undeniable electoral disadvantage of being black. But Maluf's vote-winning 'Projeto Cingapura', a low-cost housing and favela improvements scheme, financed with a US Dollars 150m loan from the Inter-American Development Bank, could make all the difference to his chances -as well as keeping Maluf in the public eye and serving as a springboard for his undoubted presidential ambitions. Cardoso's PSDB party regards the election of Serra as vitally important both to the government's prospects in 1997 and to the chances of Cardoso's standing for re-election. If Serra were to lose, the government would settle for a victory for the Partido dos Trabalhadores' candidate, Luiza Erundina, who is still ahead in the polls.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 BOLIVIA: POLITICS & SOCIETY: UPROAR OVER PENSIONS REFORM: DECISION ON NEW SYSTEM PUT OFF AFTER MASS PROTESTS President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada's determination to complete his programme of basic reforms before electoral politics take over completely -the presidential polls are only a year away- suffered a setback with the decision to postpone discussion of the draft pensions law until August. Popular opposition to this measure shows no sign of abating. Political moratorium. Sanchez de Lozada, whose inability to delegate is notorious, has tried to put politics on hold while he completes his grand design. But the moratorium has proved no easier to impose on the streets than on his party, the Movimiento Nacionalista Revolucionario (MNR). The pensions bill presented to a special session of congress on 10 July was met with a general strike, followed by mass demonstrations. Workers objected to the whole idea of individual policies replacing a fully state-financed scheme, particularly if the new private pension fund companies (AFPs) were to be based on Chilean models, and perhaps controlled by Chilean interests. The latter possibility was immediately struck out of the draft legislation. The President promised an international competition, and said the concessions would be awarded in November. A feature that provoked intense opposition was Sanchez de Lozada's insistence on fixing retirement age for the new system at 65. In the face of massive resistance, he conceded that workers could choose their own retirement age from 55 onwards, but if they wanted to draw their full pension, they would have to carry on working to 65. As the well-informed La Paz newsletter Siglo XXI points out, only 14% of Bolivia's 120,000 pensioners are 65 or over -and only 3.6% of Bolivians can hope to reach that age. It suggested that the next draft should lay down a minimum contributions level to qualify for a full pension -along Brazilian lines- rather than a qualifying age. One important concession has already been made: the old state pensions system will remain in existence even after the AFPs begin to operate. Sanchez de Lozada's main argument in favour of a new system is that it will extend coverage to all 3.5m adult Bolivians, rather than the tiny number covered by the present system. Everybody, wage-earner or not, is to receive a minimum of about US Dollars 200 a year for life out of the proceeds of the capitalisation programme. Opposition to the capitalisation programme, however, remains widespread -as reflected in the decision to renegotiate terms for the gas pipeline with the US company Enron and postpone the capitalisation of the state energy company, YPFB, until September. The Chilean factor is also present in political opposition to the capitalisation of the state railways, which have passed into the hands of the Chilean Cruz Blanca group. Plans for mass lay-offs of the feather-bedded workforce caused immediate uproar. Similar lay-off proposals provoked strike threats from the workforce of the national airline, Lloyd Aereo Boliviano (LAB), now controlled by the Brazilian Vasp group. Political reform. Another difficult issue postponed until the second extraordinary session of congress, opening on 22 July, was the redistribution of congressional seats, to introduce a single-candidate system in place of lists for half the country's constituencies. This long-overdue reform set off a battle royal between departments, and no political party was prepared to concede any seats, for fear of losing out in next year's elections. The proximity of the elections has caused some edginess in the MNR, despite the President's attempts to keep the lid firmly down. The president of the senate, Juan Carlos Duran, has made no secret of his ambitions, and he has a national reputation. His lower house equivalent, Guillermo Bedregal, has also begun manoeuvring, with the aim of leading an MNR backlash against Sanchez de Lozada's preference for non-party independents in his cabinet. The minister with the best prospects appears to be Carlos Sanchez Berzain (interior), while an interesting outsider could be former planning minister Enrique Garcia. But he has just been re-elected president of the Caracas-based Corporacion Andina de Fomento (CAF), and presumably has other things on his mind.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 BRAZIL: BRIEFS Banco de Credito Nacional, Brazil's fifth largest private bank, is to buy Banco Itamaraty as part of the central bank's programme to strengthen the fragile banking system, in which 100 out of 246 banks are expected to be 'absorbed' or closed down. The two banks' combined assets will exceed US Dollars 11bn. Two investment banks, Cindam and Fonte, are also to merge, with combined assets totalling US Dollars 1.7bn. The Brazilian government has extended its alcohol fuel programme, due to end this December, for a further three years due to its environmental advantages. Subsidies cost Petrobras US Dollars 400m in the first quarter of 1996 alone. Petrobras announced expected record production levels of 845,000bpd in 1996, 18% up on last year. The increase was due to productivity gains, and the discovery of new reserves in Argentina, Ecuador, and the Bahia de Campos field, off the coast near Rio de Janeiro. Brazil's tax receipts totalled US Dollars 46.9bn for the first half of 1996. The low figure, well below the government's expectations, is due to the slow-down in economic activity. The number of credit card transactions reached a record 188m and were worth US Dollars 11.8bn in the first half of 1996, a 24% rise on the same period of last year. One in 10 of the population has access to 'plastic' money. Brazil and Japan are to resume negotiations  regarding the former's 70% import tariff on foreign vehicles. The measure, introduced last year, cut Japanese car sales in Brazil by 95%. A government study suggests the country will receive US Dollars 220.5bn in private investment up to the year 2000, including US Dollars 10-12bn from privatisation.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 REGION: TRENDS: RESENTMENT GROWS TOWARDS WASHINGTON: THE REGION FEELS THE BIG STICK IS BEING BRANDISHED AGAIN Any lingering illusions about the end of the Cold War and the triumph of free-market capitalism making the world a simpler and safer place -the 'end of history' theory- must have been dispelled by the recent succession of issues concerning perceived national interests that have brought the United States into conflict with its allies and trading partners. The consequences for Latin America and the Caribbean include a growing feeling that Uncle Sam's big stick has been brought back out of the cupboard. The Helms-Burton Act, which has succeeded in lining up the European Union, Canada and the whole of Latin America against Washington, is seen by the EU as both an ideological aberration and a threat to its commercial interests. But in the US, zealots regard it as much as part of a crusade against the last remnant of Marxist totalitarianism in the Western hemisphere as a defence of citizens' property. In Latin America and the Caribbean, and particularly in Mexico, the Act is seen as part of a wider US attempt to stop the region developing independent economic relations. Such a perception may boost Mercosur, for example, at the expense of the US-sponsored Free Trade Area of the Americas. It certainly drove Chile away from Nafta and into the arms of Mercosur. These differing views reflect the extent to which US foreign policy in recent years has become a mish-mash of sometimes conflicting aims. These are highlighted by confrontations over two other issues: drugs and bananas. 1. Drugs. As far as Washington is concerned, its pressure on Colombia in general and President Ernesto Samper in particular are acts of legitimate self-defence: drugs are a threat to its society, and countries that allow them to flow into the US become liable to sanctions. The uneasy reaction of Latin America is summed up in the words of Simon Consalvi, a former senior Venezuelan diplomat. He described the withdrawal of Samper's US visa as 'part of an escalation that could lead anywhere.' Samper himself saw it as an 'imperialist' act, a unilateral assault on the 'South' -a view shared by the Non-Aligned Movement, of which he is chairman. Samper's US-born wife, Jacquin Strouss, singled out US envoy Myles Frechette as an exponent of an outmoded interventionist style of diplomacy. She warned that pressure on Colombia was stirring up an anti-American mood that she had never seen before. This feeling that US ambassadors are striking proconsular attitudes is not confined to Colombia: in Argentina, for example, the outspoken interventions of envoy James Cheek have been widely resented. Viewed from the south, officials in Washington and their representatives on the ground do not even pretend to have much respect for the institutions of the countries with which they deal. 2. Bananas. The small Caribbean producers, particularly the Windward Islands, which are almost totally dependent on exports of the fruit for their foreign exchange earnings, have been lobbying Washington frantically in an attempt to persuade it to drop its objections to the EU's market regime. But the US has proved impervious to pleading, insisting that the regime is unfair to US marketing companies and should be subjected to a World Trade Organisation disputes panel. The argument that this narrow view of US interests could rebound on Washington if island economies collapsed and sent a flood of drugs and migrants northwards has failed to make much impact. The Caribbean's experience is similar to that of countries exporting to the US, which have found non-tariff barriers mysteriously appearing even as the free-trade rhetoric flows from Washington: reformulated gasoline exports from Venezuela and Brazil, which became the first issue to be resolved by the WTO's disputes panel, are a case in point. If Latin America and the Caribbean are coming to regard US policy towards them as a mixture of bullying and blinkered hypocrisy, that is a worrying trend indeed.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 REGION: DEBT&LENDING ROUND-UP ARGENTINA/ Debt grows. The foreign debt has grown by almost 57% over the past four years, according to an economy ministry report released on 18 July. The total for both public and private sectors reached US Dollars 91.47bn in March this year, compared with US Dollars 58.41bn at the end of 1991 -a 56.59% increase. The public sector debt increased during the first quarter of 1996 by US Dollars 2.59bn. During the same period, Argentina's foreign exchange reserves increased by 109.36%, from US Dollars 8.97bn to US Dollars 18.78bn. BRAZIL/ IDB road loan. The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and Germany's Dresdner Bank group have agreed to lend US Dollars 25m for the construction of a 15km, six-lane toll road in Rio de Janeiro. Total cost of the project will be US Dollars 173.5m, of which  Rio municipal government will contribute US Dollars 112m. COSTA RICA/ Unused credits. The government is proposing to cancel US Dollars 450m worth of undisbursed loans from the IDB, including a US Dollars 400m credit to the Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad (ICE). The country is paying US Dollars 4m a year to keep the loans open. ECUADOR/ Judicial reform. The World Bank is lending US Dollars 10.7m to help finance modernisation and strengthening of the judicial system. The government is to provide an additional US Dollars 3.6m. Spanish credit. Formal signing of a US Dollars 110m credit from the Spanish government for the extension of the new trolleybus system in Quito was completed on 18 July. PERU/ Paris Club deal. President Fujimori announced in Lima on 20 July that a restructuring deal had been reached with the country's Paris Club creditors, along the lines achieved by Russia in May. Payments are to be made over 20 years, with a maximum of US Dollars 450m-US Dollars 600m for the first three years. The total to be paid will be US Dollars 7bn, a reduction from the US Dollars 9bn owed to Paris Club countries. Peru's outstanding commercial debt totals some US Dollars 10bn. REGION/ World Bank appointment. Guillermo Perry Rubio, former finance minister of Colombia, has been appointed the World Bank's chief economist for Latin America and the Caribbean from 1 August. Before serving in the Samper government, Perry was a Liberal member of congress and of the 1991 constitutional assembly. He was minister of energy and mines 1986-88. World Bank lending back to normal. Latin American and Caribbean countries borrowed a total of US Dollars 4.44bn from the World Bank in the 12 months to 30 June 1996. The total for the previous year was US Dollars 6.06bn. The fall, the Bank says, reflects Mexico's recovery from the financial crisis at the end of 1994. Assistance to the financial sector fell from US Dollars 1.4bn to US Dollars 11.9m, and lending for public sector management from US Dollars 1.06bn to US Dollars 666m. Most WB lending to the region was in International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loans at favourable market rates: US Dollars 4.05bn, down from US Dollars 5.71bn in the previous year. But lending at concessional rates, from the International Development Association, was up from US Dollars 345.2m to US Dollars 390.3m. Argentina was the bank's fourth-largest borrower, with US Dollars 1.51bn, Brazil sixth (US Dollars 875m) and Mexico eighth (US Dollars 526.5m). TRINIDAD & TOBAGO/ Help for poor. The IDB is to lend US Dollars 28m to finance community infrastructure and social services aimed at the poor. Projects include child care, education and conservation schemes.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 GUATEMALA: ECONOMY: RESOURCE LIMITS THREATEN PEACE DEAL: QUESTIONMARK HANGS OVER ECONOMIC PROSPECTS With the country now looking forward to the signing of the final peace accords between the government and the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG) guerrillas, (see Page 308/96) most likely to be initialed in September, attention is now being turned towards the economy, and the cost of peace. Questionmark over resources. A major step in the peace process was the socio-economic and agrarian accords agreed in May, from which the URNG negotiators had withdrawn their most radical demands, in particular the reference to the 'social function of land', and in return accepted somewhat loose promises of social reform. But the cost of implementing these accords is estimated to be between US Dollars 600m and US Dollars 900m, and the government's planning secretariat calculates that about US Dollars 2.3bn will be needed to pay for the rehabilitation of those areas affected by the conflict. Though some international aid is certain to be forthcoming, a questionmark hangs over the economy's ability to deliver the necessary resources. Economic indicators for 1995 were encouraging. Overall GDP growth accelerated to 4.5% from the previous year's 4%. The fastest growing sectors were mining (11%); banking & real estate (8%); construction (7.9%) and electricity, gas & water (7%). Agricultural growth was sluggish at 2.9%. Official figures for urban unemployment showed a fall from to 4.3% from 5.2% in 1994. Forecasts for 1996 place GDP growth at 5%. Export revenues increased 28.5% to US Dollars 2.2bn in 1995, mainly as a result of high coffee and sugar prices. Oil exports also performed well, rising in value by 38%. Exports to other Central American countries grew by 23%, thanks to an agreement to consult on tariff changes in April 1995. The trade deficit, however, widened by 4.3% over the previous year as the import bill rose to  Dollars 3.3bn. Imports of raw materials and capital goods outstripped consumer goods for the first time in nearly a decade. Coffee, sugar and bananas account for 42% of export revenues and the recent dip in world prices has highlighted the need to widen the range of products the country sells abroad. While Guatemala succeeded in raising the value of non-traditional agro-exports from US Dollars 50m in 1986 to US Dollars 141m in 1989, progress since has been disappointing. (See table) The manufacturing sector suffered with the decline of the Central American Common Market in the 1980s and has responded inadequately to the lifting of tariff barriers in the 1990s. The country is an important exporter of chemicals, cosmetics, paper and processed foods, but manufacturing as a percentage of GDP fell from 16.7% in 1980 to 14.3% in 1994. Last year's trade deficit of US Dollars 1.1bn could widen if world prices continue to fall, but the current account will be helped by remittances from Guatemalans abroad as the government allows commercial banks to open dollar accounts. The peace dividend may well include an increase in the number of tourists, whose numbers rose from 537,374 in 1994 to 563, 478 last year.  However the murder of one Briton and a US citizen in January has reawakened safety fears.  Domestically, President Alvaro Arzu is likely to continue the tight fiscal policy of his predecessor, who brought the fiscal deficit down from 1.4% of GDP to 0.7%, the lowest lower in Central America. Keeping inflation during the year to 8.6% was a considerable achievement. Though the three percentage point increase in VAT in January this year and the temptation to loosen monetary policy to spur growth may fuel inflation pressures, Arzu is unlikely to let prices get out of control. Privatisation on the cards. Despite strong trade union opposition the Arzu government has expressed its commitment to a privatisation programme. Least controversial are the loss-making rail network Fegua, the milk producer Prolac, and some municipal services. Electricity privatisation is going to be tricky, as the Guatemalan Electric Company, EESGA, the distributor, is refusing to pay its debts to the National Electricity Institute, Inde, the generator. However, in 1995 the Venezuelan government granted a US Dollars 35 million loan to help modernise the country's electricity network. The state telecommunications company Guatel is the most lucrative concern on the list to be sold off. It is estimated to be worth US Dollars 1bn with annual profits of US Dollars 150m. But the government may be reluctant to lose such a valuable source of revenue and delay its privatisation. Last September Guatel, together with Northern Telecom of the US, inaugurated a modernisation project worth US Dollars 42m. An advanced switching system will be set up and a network of 40,000 telephone lines, 36,000 toll trunks and an international gateway exchange based on the latest technology will update Guatel's services. Meanwhile the US subsidiary Comcel, which operates a local cellular telephone monopoly, has given Motorola's Pan American Wireless Infrastructure Division a contract worth US Dollars 20m to introduce high-tech switching equipment.  Investment in infrastructure is vital, but with government spending at only 6.3% of GDP in 1994, low even by Central American standards, there is little alternative but to rely on external financing. The Inter-American Development Bank recently approved a US Dollars 150m loan for road building, US Dollars 38.6m for healthcare improvements and US Dollars 4.3m to improve tax collection. The Japanese government has also pledged US Dollars 30m to modernise provincial infrastructure, and the Canadian government has promised to increase its contribution to the Fund for Democratic Development of Guatemala by US Dollars 3m. Foreign debt servicing soaks up about 4.8% of export earnings, well below the 10% figure regarded as 'manageable' by Eclac and better than the Latin American average of 16.4%. The May peace accords included a proposal to raise the tax to GDP ratio by 50%, currently at 7.8%, one of the lowest rates in Latin America. But weighty political lobbying from the rich will render it a difficult task. According to the latest World Bank Report, 51% of the total population is outside the wage economy, and 37% of the urban population is in the informal sector, beyond the reach of tax collectors. In rural areas, the percentage of non-wage workers rises to 65%. Despite GDP growth, average living standards remain low and income distribution highly skewed. The country has achieved a sound base, including macro-economic and competitive exchange rate, for export-led growth, but without some levelling of income, through the broadening of the tax base, some social conflict could threaten progress after the URNG-government negotiaitions draw to a close.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 GUATEMALA: SOCIETY & POLITICS: DEATH SENTENCES PROVOKE PROTESTS: ARZU REFUSES TO PARDON MURDERERS OF FOUR-YEAR-OLD President Alvaro Arzu's determination to use the death penalty as a weapon against the crime wave that has swept Guatemala, in common with the rest of Central America, has provoked a wave of protests that threaten to overshadow the final achievement of a peace accord with the left-wing guerrillas -now scheduled for 15 September. Clemency refused. Two campesinos were still waiting in the death cell as we went to press, after a last-minute stay of execution. They had been due to face the firing squad in Escuintla on 23 July, after being found guilty of raping and murdering a four-year-old girl in April 1993. President Arzu refused to exercise his power of clemency, but the constitutional court accepted a motion from two lawyers that the judge who passed sentence had committed procedural errors. Guatemala is the only Central American country that still has the death penalty on its statute book. The executions of Pedro Castillo and Gustavo Giron would be the first to be carried out since 1983. Opposition to capital punishment has come internally from the Catholic hierarchy and human rights bodies such as the Grupo de Apoyo Mutuo (GAM), an organisation of relatives of disappeared people, and also from Amnesty International. GAM described the sentence as 'judicial terrorism,' and called on the government to attack the causes of violence in Guatemalan society, not the symptoms. Amnesty likened the death penalty to other human rights violations common in Guatemala, such as torture and disappearances. The organisation said four other death sentences had been passed in Guatemala, though appeals were still under way. Chief government negotiator Gustavo Porras announced a new round of talks with representatives of the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG) before the end of the month. Their purpose, he said, would be to 'clarify' some points about the strengthening of civil power and the role of the army in a democratic society. RIOS MONTT RE-ELECTED Retired General Efrain Rios Montt, prevented from standing for President again last year, showed his determination to remain in the political frame by being re-elected as general secretary of the opposition Frente Republicano Guatemalteco (FRG) on 21 July. Rios Montt made a show of accepting the accolade with reluctance. He bowed, he said, to the will of the party assembly. Losing presidential candidate Alfonso Portillo was chosen as one of the four assistant general secretaries, along with his former running mate, Harris Whitbeck. Rios Montt is now assured of control of the FRG for the next two years. The next presidential elections are in the year 2000, and in the meantime the General has the job of consolidating the FRG as the country's main opposition force.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 MEXICO: BRIEFS Mexico's stock exchange index fell 93 points to 2,916 in one day's trading on 15 July, wiping out all gains made this year. The 3.10% fall was seen as a knock-on effect from the Dow Jones fall on the same day's trading in New York. New capitalisation rules for financial intermediaries will come into force in September, including the allocation of greater resources to guarantee savers' funds against possible risks. The Mexican government also hopes that improved supervision of the banking sector will remove any remaining anomalies and provide a platform for investment-led economic reactivation. The Bank of Mexico has predicted a 33.9% rise in manufactured exports this year, driven by high investment in the sector. Only 0.9% of companies, the largest, generate 62% of the country's wealth, while the smallest 91.6% account for only 9.1% of the total, according to a report on the polarisation of Mexican industry. Sony is to invest US Dollars 9m in a factory in Tijuana which from next year will produce video recorders for distribution throughout the Americas. The steel maker Altos Hornos de Mexico announced net earnings of US Dollars 318m in the first half of this year, three times higher than in the same period of 1995. This followed rises of 300% in exports and 30% in sales. Mexico's external trade surplus stood at US Dollars 3.93bn for the first half of the year, with a US Dollars 45.47m increase in exports, 18.4% up on the same period in 1995. Unemployment rose to 5.6% in June, a slight increase on the 5.4% figure for May.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 COLOMBIA: DRUGS & DIPLOMACY: SAMPER ANNOUNCES TOUGH LEGISLATION: BUT RETURN OF VICE-PRESIDENT COULD BRING CRISIS TO A HEAD By announcing a package of tough anti-drugs measures on 20 July, President Ernesto Samper both served notice that he would be unflinching in his determination to confront the traffickers who have all but wrecked his presidency and fulfilled one of Washington's most insistent demands. And by letting it be known that congress would be invited to modify the legislation that currently makes it impossible to extradite traffickers, he made another important conciliatory gesture to the United States. De la Calle returns. It could all be too late. Vice-President Humberto de la Calle, after conspicuously failing to give Samper his unreserved support against US pressures (see Page 326/96), finally resigned his post as ambassador in Madrid on 16 July and returned to Bogota to join in the political fray, or 'to collaborate more closely in the various and serious problems that afflict Colombia,' as he put it. He has been the focal point of innumerable scenarios and salidas for many months now -the latest came from former President Alfonso Lopez Michelsen on 21 July- and could again become the central figure in a negotiated accord that would enable Samper to step down gracefully. One option being discussed is that he, too, would step down from the line of succession, to enable a third party to serve out the remainder of Samper's term, which ends in August 1998. Names that have been mentioned include defence minister Juan Carlos Esguerra and former justice minister Nestor Humberto Martinez, both of whom are respected in Washington. But it seems highly unlikely that De la Calle would agree to such a procedure. The influential Liberal newspaper El Tiempo, after carefully sitting on the fence long after most politically-aware Colombians had taken sides, finally called upon Samper to resign, for the good of the country. 'This government is no longer viable,' said respected columnist Hernando Gomez on 16 June. And the industrialists' association, Andi, confirmed its support on 16 July for the strongly anti-Samper line taken by its president, Luis Carlos Villegas Echeverri. Since he took office in March, Villegas has been one of the loudest voices against the President within the Consejo Gremial Nacional -which feels that his remaining in power is doing serious damage to Colombia's economic prospects, particularly exports. Communications minister Juan Manuel Turbay, the most unconditional samperista of them all, has followed foreign minister Rodrigo Pardo out of the government. That leaves only the combative interior minister, Horacio Serpa Uribe, of the three ministers interrogated and acquitted by the supreme court, still standing by the President. Court cases continue. The supreme court has made clear that it will continue with its investigation of the 111 members of the lower house of congress who voted to clear Samper in April. Chief public prosecutor Alfonso Valdivieso said at the time that the representatives had failed to consider much of the concrete evidence against the President in their deliberations, and a complaint to that effect by a number of pressure groups has ensured that the matter will not be allowed to drop. The anti-drug measures are broadly speaking those promised by Samper in his speech after being cleared by congress (see Page 260/96), and can be seen as a survival strategy by the President. They followed the first steps to confiscate property belonging to imprisoned leaders of the Cali cartel, and declarations from Samper that he would press for the heaviest penalties for convicted traffickers. The proposal to debate the extradition of Colombian nationals -a marked change of tone from the defiance that characterised Samper's initial reactions to Washington's demand and to the withdrawal of his visa- was made conditional on the international community taking concerted action against drug-trafficking. This is a long-standing demand of Colombia and other South American countries, and serves to defuse the confrontation with the US by internationalising the issue. The departing foreign minister, Rodrigo Pardo, made a remark on 17 July very reminiscent of Valdivieso's comment that extradition could be a 'useful tool' for tackling the drug-trafficking problem. Successful pressure? This was a far cry from Samper's denunciation on 15 July of Washington's 'unfriendly act' in withdrawing his visa, and its 'lack of respect for Colombia's democratic institutions.' The Clinton administration might be forgiven for concluding that its policy of incessant pressure on the Samper government is producing results, whatever the bluster from Bogota and the expressions of solidarity from around the world. The promised diplomatic offensive began on 23 July, when new foreign minister Maria Emma Mejia was dispatched to Washington. Samper himself said he would tour Latin America before addressing the United Nations general assembly in New York in September. MIRAFLORES EMERGENCY The government declared a special emergency zone in the department of Guaviare after Miraflores, San Jose del Guaviare and nearby towns were occupied by thousands of angry coca-growers, protesting at the government's eradication campaign, which uses aerial spraying of the herbicide glyphosate. This is the second such action in the region in the past year, and reflects both the effectiveness of the spraying operations, carried out by police helicopters, and the government's failure to offer small farmers any viable alternative way of making a living. The government blames Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (Farc) guerrillas for organising the protests.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 ECUADOR: POLITICS: INDIAN CONFLICTS COMING TO A HEAD: ISSUES MAY PROVIDE EARLY TEST OF BUCARAM'S POLITICAL SKILLS The issue of the role that Indian organisations will have in the Bucaram government (see RA-96-06) looks like coming to a head sooner than expected. While jungle Indians are determined to resist plans for the further development of oil reserves in their territory -a declared priority of the incoming administration- highland communities are threatening an 'uprising' if the government fails to respond to their demands for assistance. The outgoing government of President Sixto Duran-Ballen has had to face a number of these levantamientos populares, generally organised by the Confederacion de Nacionalidades Indigenas del Ecuador (Conaie) in connection with national issues, such as the privatisation of public utilities. Earthquake victims. But the latest threat has much more grass-roots origins: 80,000 campesinos from Cotopaxi province who lost everything in an earthquake in March claim the central government has given them no help with rebuilding their lives, despite lavish promises. Bucaram has fiercely attacked the 'racism' of previous governments, and promised a big say for Indian groups such as Conaie in his government -including the creation of a full ministry of Indian affairs. Simmering Indian discontent, including roadblocks along the Pan-American highway, would be highly embarrassing for a leader anxious to establish his credentials both as a popular benefactor and as a man with whom foreign bankers and entrepreneurs can do business. The President-elect continued his efforts to reassure potential investors by confirming the president of the central bank, Augusto de la Torre, in his post on 19 July. De la Torre is regarded as a safe pair of hands by the private sector, and the best guarantee that the orthodox monetary policies of the present government will be continued under Bucaram. The latter has already been briefed by De la Torre on how to approach business leaders when he visits New York just before his 10 August inauguration. Oil development plans. Another of Bucaram's choices, Alfredo Adoum, as minister of energy, foreshadows an early conflict with jungle Indian organisations. Adoum, a Guayaquil businessman and old Bucaram ally, has already said he will 'open the doors wide' to foreign investment in the oil industry, particularly exploration. He is also committed to constructing new pipelines from the jungle to the coast. Such projects imply direct conflict with groups such as the Huaorani, only about 1,300 strong, who have been pressing the government to expel thousands of settlers who have moved into their territory in the Oriente jungles in the wake of the oil companies. The Huaorani have a legally-recognised 600,000-hectare reserve in Napo province, which has become a centre of oil production, involving foreign companies such as Oryx, Arco, Agip, Elf and Petrobras. The warlike Huaorani have threatened to seal off their territory and expel the oil companies and colonos themselves unless the government takes a hand. The Organizacion de Nacionalidades Huaoranis de la Amazonia Ecuatoriana (Onhae) has been claiming for some time that the companies have encroached on their territory without permission and have set one group of Indians against another with selective offers of economic aid and social services. A new, highly-recommended book* describes in detail the struggles of the Huaorani to come to terms with the encroachment of the outside world into their previosuly cloistered lives. Joe Kane, Savages, Macmillan, London, 1996, GBP 16.99/Knopf, New York, US Dollars 25. CAPITALISATION PLEDGE Alvaro Noboa, economic adviser to Bucaram and one of the triumvirate of bankers who will run the economy (see Page 329/96), has promised to halt the privatisation programme initiated by the Duran-Ballen government and replace it with 'capitalisation' of state-owned companies, along the lines adopted by the Sanchez de Lozada government in Bolivia. TAX PROTESTS Thousands of small traders marched through the streets of the main cities on 17 July in protest against attempts by the government to extend the taxation system to the 'informal' sector of the economy. Invoices are now supposed to be issued for all sales above 10,000 sucres (about US Dollars 3) in value. The Guayas small traders' association threatened an all-out strike unless Bucaram reversed the measure by 20 August.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 ANDEAN REGION: BRIEFS The Colombian government announced a US Dollars 37.6m credit line to help investment for developing industry and business in frontier regions. Ecopetrol, Colombia's state oil company, announced a US Dollars 512m trade surplus for the first five months of the year. While Ecuador's petroleum exports fell by US Dollars 19m to US Dollars 581.9m in the first five months of 1996, banana exports rose by the same amount to  Dollars 402.4m. Peru's tax revenue reached US Dollars 4bn in the first half of the year, 50% more than expected. The Iscaycruz mining complex, with zinc and lead reserves worth US Dollars 280m, has become Peru's first private zinc producer, under Swiss-Peruvian ownership. Meanwhile, the Canadian consortium, Inmet-Rio Algom, has bought the Antamina copper deposit for US Dollars 20m, and 13 foreign companies have put in offers to buy the Quicay gold deposit. Foreign investment on the Lima stock exchange rose to US Dollars 2,045m in June, 14.3% up on May's total. The government's sale of its remaining US Dollars 877m worth of Telefonica del Peru shares has ended. Venezuela's state petrochemical company, PDVSA, is to offer the reactivation of disused oil fields to private investors. The company, which predicts net profits of US Dollars 4bn for 1996, is also interested in buying refineries in the US and Ecuador, and developing wells in the Orinoco basin with Exxon. Car sales totalled 22,756 in the first half of 1996, 40% down on the same period of last year.Back to Headline List CopyrightLATIN AMERICAN WEEKLY REPORT  via NewsNetAugust 1, 1996 REGION: POSTSCRIPT ANTIGUA/ Nevis dispute. Prime Minister Lester Bird has brought in a former Commonwealth secretary-general and a university vice-chancellor to help find a solution to the political impasse between the Premier of Nevis, Vance Amory, and the St Kitts & Nevis Prime Minister, Dr Denzil Douglas. Amory has denounced the creation of an Office for Nevis Affairs on the smaller island by the Douglas administration, and has threatened to secede from St Kitts. BRAZIL/ Portuguese speakers. Portuguese, the third most widely spoken Western language, enjoyed linguistic communion on July 17, when Brazilian President Fernando Henrique Cardoso flew to Lisbon to co-found the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP). The founding act was attended by 5 African countries as well as Brazil and Portugal, with the CPLP touted as a 'model of north-south co-operation' between equals, despite the obvious population disparities: there are 160m Brazilians, but only 120,000 inhabitants of Sao Tome-Principe. CHILE/ Miners' strike. The 1800 workers from the Lota coal mine, on strike since 17 May, have rejected for the fourth time an agreement reached between union leaders and the government. The strikers are demanding better benefits for the 450 who are to lose their jobs as part of a rationalisation programme. Meanwhile, development minister Felipe Sandoval hinted that the state coal company Enacar is to be partially privatised. COLOMBIA/ Bad weather. Some 600,000 people have been affected by the worst winter for five years. Torrential rainfall, already at nearly the yearly average of 3000mm after only six months, has destroyed 20,000 homes and 100,000 hectares of crops, and claimed the lives of some 100 people. The Metereological Institute fears that the first rainy season, normally between mid-March and mid-June, is going to run into the second wet weather period, due to  begin in September. EL SALVADOR / Leftist meeting. Delegates from left wing parties from throughout the region were due to meet at the end of July in San Salvador for the 6th Congress of the Sao Paulo Forum, to be hosted by the FMLN. The Forum, founded in 1990 to promote political alternatives to neoliberalism, has also invited communist party members from China, Libya and Cuba, triggering heightened fears of subversion among El Salvador's security forces. To make matters a little more uneasy, only the previous week the 'Military Youth' organisation threatened to 'take control of the state' unless the government of President Armando Calderon Sol did not 'restore order', tackle social unrest, and investigating corruption charges against, amongst others, former president Alfredo Cristiani. GUYANA/ Floods. President Cheddi Jagan declared a State of National Emergency in mid-July after several months of some of the heaviest rainfall ever recorded in the country caused widespread flooding in coastal and riverside regions. All major rivers have burst their banks, affecting 30,000 people and destroying swathes of rice crops, livestock and the Indian groups' staple, cassava. Army and police are supporting flood relief workers distributing food and medicine donated by the government and the international community. PERU/ Ratings slip. Public approval of President Alberto Fujimori's government fell to 56.3% in July, 3.5% less than in the previous month, according to an opinion poll by Analistas y Consultores. The number of those who disapprove of his record rose to 36%, six percentage points up on June. The ratings slip, however, came at the same time as Peru climbed two places on the UN's Human Development scale to 91st position, while UNICEF announced an US Dollars 8m health, education and nutrition programme for children. VENEZUELA/ Neighbour dispute. A new offensive in the war of words between Colombia and Venezuela over guerrilla activities in their common border region was launched in Caracas when the press reported a speech by President Ernesto Samper accusing corrupt elements of the Venezuelan army of selling arms to Colombian insurgents and drug-traffickers. The comments in fact came from a non-official report, according to Samper, who also released a veiled apology. But the duel has already soured Colombia's new foreign minister, Maria Mejia's imminent trip to Caracas to arrange a bilateral summit, the first since 1994. Minister sacked. President Rafael Caldera dismissed the justice minister, Enrique Meier, on 17 July, for his outspoken criticism of his predecessor, Rubens Creixems. Meier had only held the post since mid-March. REGION/ Oil Pact. Haiti and Panama are to rejoin the nine other Central American and Caribbean member states of the Venezuelan and Mexican Energy Co-operation Programme later this month. Under the scheme, quotas of oil and its derivatives are sold to the beneficiary nations with 20% of the cost returned as super-soft loans for development projects. Haiti and Panama had been suspended for overdue credit repayments.Back to Headline List WT03-B06-2IA087-000634-B040-226http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it40.html 205.156.212.5 19970122030145 text/html 136419HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:58:56 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:19 GMTContent-length: 136231Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it40.html Sample Issue Copyright MEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNet August 1, 1992 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CORPORATE NOTES Shell and Pemex Sign MOU (100 words) Cemex to Supply Cement for Dam Construction (171 words) ICA Wins Concession for Guadalajara Highway (82 words) Metlife Announces New Mexican Venture (91 words) American Firm Buys Interest in Mexican Textile Firm (31 words) Valero Begins Natural Gas Delivery to Pemex (75 words) Mexican Resort Nears Completion (101 words) Carl's Jr. Restaurants to Open in Mexico City (133 words) Mrs. Fields Cookies Head South (109 words) Aeromexico to Cut Costs (178 words) Software Firm Expands Mexican Operations (118 words) Investor Group to Buy PPI Subsidiary (179 words) DDI's AIDS Test Approved in Mexico (65 words) Avecor Appoints New Sales Rep in Mexico (50 words) Transportacion Maritima to Repurchase Shares (49 words) Mexican Fruit Juices Recalled (91 words) Rights to N-VIRO for Latin America Acquired (112 words) Mexico Approves Epitope's OraSure~ Device (77 words) Border Toxics Case: Keelco Anodes (197 words) Mexican Trucking Company Suspended (77 words) NAFTA An Overview: Part I (5025 words) MEXICAN INVESTMENT IN THE U.S Structural Implications of NAFTA (1098 words) Legal Considerations for Mexican Businesses in the United States (5831 words) FINANCIAL SERVICES NAFTA May Bring New Opportunities (3444 words) MARKETS Ringing Up Credit Cards Sales (2335 words) CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Shell and Pemex Sign MOU     Petroleos Mexicanos (Pemex) and Shell Oil Company have signed amemorandum of understanding to pursue the formation of a jointrefining venture involving Shell's 225,000 barrels-per-day fuelsrefinery at its Deer Park, Texas manufacturing complex.  As part ofthe agreement, Pemex will purchase 50 percent of the fuels refiningfacilities and provide the refinery with a long-term supply ofcrude oil; Shell will sell Pemex unleaded gasoline on a long-termbasis to help satisfy growing demand in Mexico.  Detailed agree-ments and government filings, necessary for venture formation, areexpected to be completed by year end.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Cemex to Supply Cement for Dam Construction     Cemex, S.A. has signed an agreement with the Mexicanconstruction consortium, Consorcio Mexicano Constructor de Huites,to supply 800,000 metric tons of cement over a two-year period forthe construction of the Huites dam.   Consorcio MexicanoConstructor de Huites is composed of the following constructioncompanies:  Ingenieros Civiles Asociados (ICA), Grupo Mexicano deDesarrollo, La Nacional, and Compania Brasileira de Proyectos yObras.     The Huites dam will be built on the River Fuerte in northeastSinaloa.  Cement for the project will be supplied by Cemex'ssubsidiary, Cementos del Yaqui, S.A. de C.V., located inHermosillo, Sonora with a production capacity of 1.5 million metrictons per year.     The retaining wall of the dam will be one of the highest inMexico, holding 4 million cubic meters of water.  The dam itselfwill supply irrigation to 175,000 acres of land in the states ofSinaloa and Sonora, greatly benefiting the region's agriculture andgenerate hydroelectricity from two 200-megawatt turbines capable ofproducing 875 million kilowatts per year.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992ICA Wins Concession for Guadalajara Highway     Empresas ICA,  Mexico's largest construction company, has wonthe concession for the new Mexico-Guadalajara highway.  The highwaywill start at the northwest Toluca by-pass and end at theMaravatio-Zapotlanejo toll road.  ICA will be responsible for 31.6percent of the project.     The concession, valued at approximately US$1.1 billion, consistsof 340 kilometers of highway with a duration of 18 years and threemonths.  The project will be 30 percent financed through equity and70 percent through long-term loans.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Metlife Announces New Mexican Venture     Metropolitan Life Insurance Company has announced a jointventure partnership with Banco Santander in Seguros Genesis, aMexican insurance company.  MetLife and Spanish banking giant,Banco Santander own a 49-percent interest in Genesis, with theremainder held by Mexican investors.     The new Mexican company is selling both life insurance andpension products.  In addition to being a shareholder, MetLife willprovide administrative support and advice for the company.     The formation of this company represents MetLife's first ventureinto Latin America and is the latest in a series of internationalexpansions.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992American Firm Buys Interest in Mexican Textile Firm     International Textiles L.P., based in Lenox, Massachussetts, hasacquired a 55 percent controlling interest in Texel, S.A. de C.V.,a leading Mexican textile corporation headquartered in Mexico City.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Valero Begins Natural Gas Delivery to Pemex     Valero Natural Gas Partners L.P. of San Antonio has begunflowing natural gas through its recently completed 3.5-mile,24-inch natural gas pipeline that connects Valero's existingpipeline near Penitas, Texas to Petroleos Mexicanos' (PEMEX)42-inch pipeline outside of Reynosa, Tamaulipas.     Initial throughput volumes are 125 million cubic feet of gas perday through the pipeline which has a capacity of 400 Mmcfd.  Thecost of the pipeline was approximately US$4 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Mexican Resort Nears Completion     Minneapolis based Colony Hotels & Resorts' new five-star luxurybeachfront San Felipe Marina Resort & Spa franchise in BajaCalifornia, Mexico, will be partially opened in September.Constructora Kapha S.A. is building the resort and GrupoConstructor Ramsa S.A. is the project promotion company.  Theseentities are headed by Armando Ramos, Mario Lemos and Enrique Vaca,all of Mexico City.  The resort will be operated by a joint-venturecompany owned by the development companies and Toma G. Brashear, aformer executive of Colony Hotels & Resorts.  Estimated finalcompletion date is to be the spring of 1993.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Carl's Jr. Restaurants to Open in Mexico City     Anaheim-based Carl Karcher Enterprises Inc., parent company ofCarl's Jr. Restaurants, has signed agreements with twointernational licensees in Mexico City to open the first Carl's Jr.Restaurants there by mid-1993.     Each licensee obtained an exclusive development territory thatincluded part of the Distrito Federal.  The first licensee to signwith CKE is known as CJR de Mexico, S.A. de C.V.  The company hascommitted to open a minimum of 10 Carl's Jr. Restaurants.     The second licensee, Norteamericana de Comercio S.A. de C.V.,(NORCOM) is also expected to open a minimum of 10 restaurants.Financial terms of the two agreements were not disclosed.     Carl's Jr. now has a total of five licensees in Mexico that areexpected to establish approximately 50 restaurants in the next fiveyears.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Mrs. Fields Cookies Head South     U.S. based Mrs. Fields Cookies and Pasteleria EL MOLINO, S.A.,a leading family-owned Mexico City retail bakery chain, haveannounced the details of their multi-unit licensing agreement whichwill take the all-American sweet treat south of the border.     The agreement between Mrs. Fields and M.F.D. de Mexico calls forthe new company to open at least 50 Mrs. Fields Cookie Stores overa five-year period in Mexico.  The first Mrs. Fields Cookie storewill open in Plaza Satelite, a major regional shopping mall inMexico City, in October.  Four additional stores are scheduled toopen by the end of the year.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Aeromexico to Cut Costs     Aerovias de Mexico (Aeromexico) has launched a cost reductionprogram as well as a program to expand its charter flight servicesin the United States and Canada.     The program will be fully implemented by the end of the thirdquarter.  The target is a reduction of 4 percent of the airline'smonthly expenses, resulting in savings of about US$3 million amonth.  Measures include reducing the costs of:  fuel consumptionby 1.5 percent through preferred fuel loadings and rationalizationof reserve fuel loadings; leases by 4 percent by extending andrefinancing leases and reducing the amounts of the credit letters(a project that started six months ago); workforce by 12 percent;ramp services by 3 percent via a joint venture with ASA andMEXICANA solely to provide these services; and, maintenance perhour by 17 percent through the reduction of the number of full-timeemployees and better scheduling of maintenance services.     This winter Aeromexico will begin service to Toronto, Vancouver,Winnipeg and elsewhere in Canada, and in the northern U.S., toSeattle, Portland and other destinations.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Software Firm Expands Mexican Operations     Continuing its expanding sales and support in the Mexicanmarketplace, Informix Software Inc. recently opened a new office inMexico City.  The new office will enhance Informix's sales andtechnical services to its customers in Mexico and to its fourauthorized distributors: MPS Mayorista S.A.; Triple I Sistemas delInformacion, S.A.; Genesistemas, S.A.; and Multisistemas S.A.     Currently Informix is providing leading information managementsolutions to a variety of industries in Mexico and to suchcustomers as Comision Federal de Electricidad (CFE), FerrocarrilesNacionales de Mexico, Instituto de Seguridad y Servicios Socialesde los Trabajadores del Estado (ISSSTE), Nacional Monte de Piedad,Petroleos Mexicanos (PEMEX), Seguridad Nacional, Technologico deMonterrey and Telefonos de Mexico (TELMEX).Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Investor Group to Buy PPI Subsidiary     PPI Holdings BV, has signed an agreement for the sale of PPI DelMonte Fresh Produce to an investor group led by Grupo Cabal,including Nacional Financiera, S.N.C. and other strategicinvestors.  Grupo Cabal, the holding company of Carlos Cabal,operates a diversified industrial and financial enterprise, whichincludes a controlling interest in Banco BCH, the eighth largestcommercial bank in Mexico.  Nacional Financiera is one of thelargest financial institutions in Mexico with assets of $20billion.     PPI Del Monte Fresh Produce BV is the parent/owner of the DelMonte fresh produce operations, employing over 14,000 people in theworldwide production, transportation and marketing of fresh fruit.The company is currently one of the two leading marketers of freshpineapples in the world, the third largest marketer of bananas anda leading international supplier of melons, papayas, mangoes andother tropical fruit.  Product is sourced from company-owned farmsand independent producers in Central and South America, Hawaii, thePhilippines and Africa.  Del Monte brand produce is sold in allmajor markets around the world.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992DDI's AIDS Test Approved in Mexico     Disease Detection International, Inc. of Irvine, California hasannounced that the company's seven-minute, whole blood, AIDS testhas been approved for sale and manufacturing in Mexico by theSecretary of Health.  The company's patented, credit card-sizeddevice, SeroCard~ HIV-I, was designed for use in the physician'soffice, emergency centers, surgery departments, penal institutionsand other settings where an immediate, reliable answer isdesirable.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Avecor Appoints New Sales Rep in Mexico     Tennessee based Avecor Inc. has appointed Plasticos Polisol S.A.based in Mexico City, as its new sales representative for Mexico.     Polisol will market Avecor's complete line of color,concentrates, liquid dispersions and blended dry color throughoutMexico, especially to the major manufacturing centers in Monterrey,Guadalajara and Mexio City.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Transportacion Maritima to Repurchase Shares     Transportacion Maritima Mexicana recently announced its decisionto repurchase up to US$8 million of its shares on the Mexican StockExchange from time to time at market prices.  Following approvalfrom shareholders at a meeting held Feb. 12 of this year, a specialreserve was created to fund repurchases.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Mexican Fruit Juices Recalled     The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the MichiganDepartment of Agriculture (MDA) have issued a warning to refrainfrom drinking certain varieties of Jumex brand fruit nectars andJumex pineapple juice that are being recalled because of leadcontamination.  The high concentrations of lead in these productscould result in permanent and severe injury, particularly ifconsumed on a regular basis.     The product is being recalled by Vilore Foods Company of Laredo,Texas, which imports the product from Mexico and sells it todealers throughout the U.S.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Rights to N-VIRO for Latin America Acquired     N-VIRO Recovery Inc. of Vancouver, British Columbia has acquiredthe exclusive rights to the N-VIRO process for both Central andSouth America.  The N-VIRO process takes sewage sludge, and througha pasteurization technique that is recognized by the United States'EPA as the most effective disinfection and stabilization methodavailable, produces N-VIRO soil, a low cost, nutrient-rich, organicfertilizer product.     N-VIRO Recovery Inc. has made an initial deposit of US$200,000to N-VIRO Energy Systems Inc., the developer and patent holder ofthe N-VIRO process, for Central and South American rights.  Underthe agreement, N-VIRO Recovery Inc. will continue to pay US$100,000each 90-day period for a total of US$1 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Mexico Approves Epitope's OraSure~ Device     The Secretary of Health of Mexico has approved commercialdistribution of the Epitope Inc.'s OraSure~ oral specimencollection device.  The action follows the successful completion ofclinical trials involving more than 1,800 subjects.     Epitope, based in Beaverton, Oregon, has signed a distributionagreement for OraSure with Corporacion Medica Mexicana, S.A. deC.V., of Mexico City, and the termination of its former agreementwith Productos y Equipos Medicos de Mexico, S.A. de C.V.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Border Toxics Case:  Keelco Anodes     Two brothers, Donald and Ed Huseman of Palos Verdes, California,have been arrested for the alleged illegal disposal, storage andtransportation of hazardous lead wastes in Southern California andMexico.  Felony charges against the two were brought as a result ofa combined investigation by the California state  Department ofToxic Substances Control and the Los Angeles County DistrictAttorney.     The Husemans own and operate Keelco Anodes Inc. of Wilmington,California.  A third individual named in the complaint, Jose Kahn,owner and operator of New Frontier Trading Corp of San Diego wasreported planning to surrender to authorities.     Keelco manufactures lead keels for boats and lead anodes used inrefining copper from ore.  Keelco and the Husemans are charged withunlawfully disposing of lead waste on the ground at the Wilmingtonsite and at Quay Street, adjacent to the business.  Keelcoemployees were unnecessarily exposed to friable waste leadgrindings and that the waste was stored on site illegally for morethan 90 days at a time.     New Frontier Trading Corp. is a metals brokerage that purchaseswaste lead from Keelco and other entities and arranges for itstransportation to Metales y Derivados, a smelter in Tijuana.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Mexican Trucking Company Suspended     The U.S. Interstate Commerce Commission has announced the six-month suspension of Jorge Romo of Mexicali, Baja California forwillfully operating in violation of territorial restrictions andlimitations stated within Romo's Certificate of Registration.     The Commission acted after obtaining California Highway Patrol(CHP) information involving the CHP's issuance of numerouscitations to trucks operated by Romo in areas well beyond thelimits of the prescribed, U.S.-border commercial zone specified inRomo's Certificate of Registration.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992An Overview:  Part IThe NAFTA negotiations have been completed and a draft of theAgreement released.  With this issue MTLR begins a series ofarticles providing a broad overview of the content and terms of theNAFTA.  In the coming months, MTRL will also publish in-depthanalysis of the individual NAFTA chapters.     A North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) will create a freetrade area of 360 million people comprising a market of over US$6trillion.  Mexico will benefit through substantially increasedeconomic growth and opportunities; Canada and the U.S. will benefiteconomically, as well as politically from a more stable Mexico asneighbor.                Objectives     The opening provisions of the NAFTA formally establish a freetrade area between Canada, Mexico and the United States, consistentwith the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).  They setout the basic rules and principles that will govern the Agreementand the objectives that will serve as the basis for interpretingits provisions.     The objectives of NAFTA are to eliminate barriers to trade,promote conditions of fair competition, increase investmentopportunities, provide adequate protection for intellectualproperty rights, establish effective procedures for theimplementation and application of NAFTA and for the resolution ofdisputes and to further trilateral, regional and multilateralcooperation.  The NAFTA countries will meet these objectives byobserving the principles and rules of the Agreement, such asnational treatment, most-favored-nation treatment and procedural"transparency."     Each country affirms its respective rights and obligations underthe GATT and other international agreements.  For purposes ofinterpretation, the Agreement establishes that the NAFTA takespriority over other agreements to the extent there is any conflict,but provides for exceptions to this general rule.  For example, thetrade provisions of certain environmental agreements takeprecedence over NAFTA, subject to a requirement to minimize incon-sistencies with the Agreement.     The opening provisions also set out a general rule regarding theapplication of the Agreement to subfederal levels of government inthe three countries.  In addition, this section defines terms thatapply to the whole Agreement, to ensure uniform and consistentusage.                Rules of Origin     NAFTA eliminates all tariffs on goods originating in Canada,Mexico and the United States over a "transition period."  Rules oforigin are necessary to define which goods are eligible for thispreferential tariff treatment.     This section of the Agreement is designed to:*    ensure that NAFTA benefits are accorded only to goods produced     in the North American region -- not goods made wholly or in     large part in other countries;*    provide clear rules and predictable results; and*    minimize administrative burdens for exporters, importers and     producers trading under NAFTA.     The rules of origin specify that goods originate in NorthAmerica if they are wholly North American.  Goods containing non-regional materials are also considered to be North American if thenon-regional materials are sufficiently transformed in the NAFTAregion so as to undergo a specified change in tariffclassification.  In some cases, goods must include a specifiedpercentage of North American content in addition to meeting thetariff classification requirement.  The rules of origin sectionalso contains a provision similar to one in the Canada-UnitedStates Free Trade Agreement (FTA) that allows goods to be treatedas originating when the finished good is specifically named in thesame tariff subheading as its parts and it meets the required valuecontent test.     Regional value content may be calculated using either the"transaction-value" or the "net-cost" method.  The transaction-value method is based on the price paid or payable for a good; thisavoids the need for a complex cost accounting system.  The net-costmethod is based on the total cost of the good less the costs ofroyalties, sales promotion, and packaging and shipping.Additionally, the net-cost method sets a limitation on allowableinterest.  Although producers generally have the option to useeither method, the net-cost method must be used where thetransaction value is not acceptable under the GATT CustomsValuation Code, and must also be used for certain products, such asautomotive goods.     In order to qualify for preferential tariff treatment,automotive goods must contain a specified percentage of NorthAmerican content (rising to 62.5 percent for passenger automobilesand light trucks as well as engines and transmissions for suchvehicles, and to 60 percent for other vehicles and automotiveparts) based on the net-cost formula.  In calculating the contentlevel of automotive goods, the value of automotive parts fromoutside the NAFTA region will be traced through the productionchain to improve the accuracy of the content calculation.  Regionalcontent averaging provisions afford administrative flexibility forautomotive parts producers and assemblers.     A de minimis rule prevents goods from losing eligibility forpreference solely because they contain minimal amounts of "non-originating" material.  Under this rule, a good that wouldotherwise fail to meet a specific rule of origin will nonethelessbe considered to be North American if the value of non-NAFTAmaterials comprises no more than seven percent of the price ortotal cost of the good.                Customs Administration     In order to ensure that only goods satisfying the rules oforigin standards are accorded preferential tariff treatment underthe Agreement, and to provide certainty to and streamlinedprocedures for importers, exporters and producers in the threecountries, the NAFTA includes a number of provisions on customsadministration.  Specifically, this section provides for:*    uniform regulations to ensure consistent interpretation,     application and administration of the rules of origin;*    a uniform Certificate of Origin as well as certification     requirements and procedures for importers and exporters that     claim preferential tariff treatment;*    common record-keeping requirements in the three countries for     such goods;*    rules for both traders and customs authorities with respect to     verifying the origin of such goods;*    importers, exporters and producers to obtain advance rulings on     the origin of goods from the customs authority of the country     into which the goods are to be imported;*    the importing country to give exporters and producers in other     NAFTA countries substantially the same rights of review and     appeal of its origin determinations and advance rulings as it     provides to importers in its territory;*    a trilateral working group to address future modifications of     the rules of origin and the uniform regulations; and*    specific time periods to ensure the expeditious resolution of     disputes regarding the rules of origin between NAFTA partners.                Trade in Goods     The NAFTA incorporates the fundamental national treatmentobligation of the GATT.  Once goods have been imported into oneNAFTA country from another NAFTA country, they must not be theobject of discrimination.  This commitment extends to provincialand state measures.Market Access     These provisions establish rules governing trade in goods withrespect to customs duties and other charges, quantitativerestrictions, such as quotas, licenses and permits, and import andexport price requirements.  They improve and make more secure theaccess for goods produced and traded within North America.Elimination of Tariffs.  The NAFTA provides for the progressiveelimination of all tariffs on goods qualifying as North Americanunder its rules of origin.  For most goods, existing customs dutieswill either be eliminated immediately or phased out in five or tenequal annual stages.  For certain sensitive items, tariffs will bephased out over a period of up to fifteen years.  Tariffs will bephased out from the applied rates in effect on July 1, 1991,including the U.S. Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) and theCanadian General Preferential Tariff (GPT) rates.  Tariff phase-outs under the Canada-U.S. FTA will continue as scheduled underthat agreement.  The NAFTA provides that the three countries mayconsult and agree on a more rapid phase-out of tariffs.Import and Export Restrictions.  All three countries will eliminateprohibitions and quantitative restrictions applied at the border,such as quotas and import licenses.  However, each NAFTA countrymaintains the right to impose border restrictions in limitedcircumstances, for example, to protect human, animal or plant lifeor health, or the environment.  Special rules apply to trade inagriculture, autos, energy and textiles.Drawback.  NAFTA establishes rules on the use of "drawback" orsimilar programs that provide for the refund or waiver of customsduties on materials used in the production of goods subsequentlyexported to another NAFTA country.     Existing drawback programs will terminate by January 1, 2001,for Mexico-U.S. and Canada-Mexico trade; the Agreement will extendfor two years the deadline established in the Canada-U.S. FTA forthe elimination of drawback programs.  At the time these programsare eliminated, each NAFTA country will adopt a procedure for goodsstill subject to duties in the free trade area to avoid the "doubletaxation" effects of the payment of duties in two countries.     Under these procedures, the amount of customs duties that acountry may waive or refund under such programs will not exceed thelesser of:*    duties owed or paid on imported, non-North American materials     used in the production of a good subsequently exported to     another NAFTA country; or*    duties paid to that NAFTA country on the importation of such     good.Customs User Fees.  The three countries have agreed not to imposenew customs user fees similar to the U.S. merchandise processingfee or the Mexican customs processing fee (derechos de tramiteaduanero).  Mexico will eliminate by June 30, 1999, its existingcustoms processing fee on North American goods.  The United Stateswill eliminate its current merchandise processing fee on goodsoriginating in Mexico by the same date.  For goods originating inCanada, the United States currently is phasing down and willeliminate this fee by January 1, 1994, as provided for in theCanada-U.S. FTA.Waiver of Customs Duties.  The NAFTA prohibits any new performance-based customs duty waiver or duty remission programs.  Existingprograms in Mexico will be eliminated by January 1, 2001.Consistent with the obligations of the Canada-U.S. FTA, Canada willend its existing duty remission programs by January 1, 1998.Export Taxes.  The NAFTA prohibits all three countries fromapplying export taxes unless such taxes are also applied on goodsto be consumed domestically.  Limited exceptions allow Mexico toimpose export taxes in order to relieve critical shortages offoodstuffs and basic goods.Other Export Measures.  When a NAFTA country imposes an exportrestriction on a product, it must not reduce the proportion oftotal supply of that product made available to the other NAFTAcountries below the level of the preceding three years or otheragreed period; impose a higher price on exports to another NAFTAcountry than the domestic price; or require the disruption ofnormal supply channels.  Based on a reservation that Mexico hastaken, these obligations do not apply as between Mexico and theother NAFTA countries.Duty-Free Temporary Admission of Goods.  The Agreement allowsbusiness persons covered by NAFTA's "temporary entry" provisions tobring into a NAFTA country professional equipment and "tools of thetrade" on a duty-free, temporary basis.  These rules also cover theimportation of commercial samples, certain types of advertisingfilms, and goods imported for sports purposes or for display anddemonstration.  Other rules provide that by 1998 all goods that arereturned after repair or alteration in another NAFTA country willre-enter duty-free.  The United States undertakes to clarify whatship repairs done in other NAFTA countries on U.S.-flagged vesselsqualify for preferential duty treatment.Country-of-Origin Marking.  This section also provides principlesand rules governing country-of-origin marking.  These provisionsare designed to minimize unnecessary costs and facilitate the flowof trade within the region, while ensuring that accurate infor-mation about the country of origin remains available to purchasers.Alcoholic Beverages -- Distinctive Products.  The three countrieshave agreed to recognize Canadian Whiskey, Tequila, Mexcal, BourbonWhiskey and Tennessee Whiskey as "distinctive products" and toprohibit the sale of products under these names unless they meetthe requirements of their country of origin.                Textiles and Apparel     This section of the NAFTA provides special rules for trade infibers, yarns, textiles and clothing in the North American market.The NAFTA textiles and apparel provisions take precedence overthose of the Multifiber Arrangement and other agreements betweenNAFTA countries applicable to textile products.Elimination of Tariff and Non-Tariff Barriers     The three countries will eliminate immediately or phase out overa maximum period of ten years their customs duties on textile andapparel goods manufactured in North America that meet the NAFTArules of origin.  In addition, the United States will immediatelyremove import quotas on such goods produced in Mexico, and willgradually phase out import quotas on Mexican textile and apparelgoods that do not meet such rules.  No NAFTA country may impose anynew quota, except in accordance with specified "safeguard"provisions.Safeguards     If textile or apparel producers face serious damage as a resultof increased imports from another NAFTA country, the importingcountry may, during the "transition period," either increasetariffs or, with the exception of Canada-U.S. trade, impose quotason the imports to provide temporary relief to that industry,subject to specific disciplines.  In the case of goods that meetNAFTA's rules of origin, the importing country may take safeguardactions only in the form of tariff increases.Rules of Origin     Specific rules of origin in the NAFTA define when importedtextile or apparel goods qualify for preferential treatment.  Formost products, the rule of origin is "yarn forward," which meansthat textile and apparel goods must be produced from yarn made ina NAFTA country in order to benefit from such treatment.  A "fiberforward" rule is provided for certain products such as cotton andman-made fiber yarns.  Fiber forward means that goods must beproduced from fiber made in a NAFTA country.  In other cases,apparel cut and sewn from certain imported fabrics that the NAFTAcountries agree are in short supply, such as silk, linen andcertain shirting fabrics, can qualify for preferential treatment.     Additional provisions, responsive to the needs of North Americanindustry, include "tariff rate quotas" (TRQs), under which yarns,fabrics and apparel that are made in North America, but that do notmeet the rules of origin, can still qualify for preferential dutytreatment up to specified import levels.  The TRQs for Canada thatwere included in the Canada-U.S. FTA have been increased andprovide for an annual growth rate for at least the first fiveyears.     The NAFTA countries will undertake a general review of thetextile and apparel rules of origin prior to January 1, 1998.  Inthe interim, they will consult on request on whether specific goodsshould be made subject to different rules of origin, taking intoaccount the availability of supply within the free trade area.  Inaddition, the three countries have established a process to permitannual adjustments to TRQ levels.Labelling Requirements     A joint government and private sector Committee on Labelling forTextile Products will recommend ways to eliminate unnecessaryobstacles to textile trade resulting from different labellingrequirements in the three countries through a work program todevelop uniform labelling requirements, for example regardingpictograms and symbols, care instructions, fiber contentinformation and methods for attachment of labels.                Automotive Goods     The NAFTA will eliminate barriers to trade in North Americanautomobiles, trucks, buses and parts (automotive goods) within thefree trade area, and eliminate investment restrictions in thissector, over a ten-year transition period.Tariff Elimination     Each NAFTA country will phase out all duties on its imports ofNorth American automotive goods during the transition period.  Mosttrade in automotive goods between Canada and the United States isconducted on a duty-free basis under the terms of either theCanada-U.S. FTA or the Canada-U.S. "Autopact."Vehicles.  Canada and the United States eliminated tariffs on theirtrade in vehicles under the Canada-U.S. FTA.  Under the NAFTA, forits imports from Mexico, the United States will:*    eliminate immediately its tariffs on passenger automobiles;*    reduce immediately to ten percent its tariffs on light trucks     and phase out the remaining tariffs over five years; and*    phase out its tariffs on other vehicles over ten years.     For imports from Canada and the United States, Mexico will:*    reduce immediately by 50 percent its tariffs on passenger     automobiles and phase out the remaining tariffs over 10 years;*    reduce immediately by 50 percent its tariffs on light trucks and     phase out the remaining tariffs over five years; and*    phase out its tariffs on all other vehicles over ten years.     Canada will eliminate its tariffs on vehicles imported fromMexico on the same schedule as Mexico will follow for imports fromCanada and the United States.Parts.  Each country will eliminate its remaining tariffs oncertain automotive parts immediately and phase out duties on otherparts over five years and a small portion over ten years.Rules of Origin     The NAFTA rules of origin section provides that in order toqualify for preferential tariff treatment, automotive goods mustcontain a specified percentage of North American content (rising to62.5 percent for passenger automobiles and light trucks as well asengines and transmissions for such vehicles, and to 60 percent forother vehicles and automotive parts) based on the net-cost formula.In calculating the content level of automotive goods, the value ofimports of automotive parts from outside the NAFTA region will betraced through the production chain to improve the accuracy of thecontent calculation.Mexican Auto Decree     The Mexican Auto Decree will terminate at the end of thetransition period.  Over this period, the restrictions under theAuto Decree will be modified by:*    eliminating immediately the limitation on imports of vehicles     based on sales in the Mexican market;*    amending its "trade balancing" requirements immediately to     permit assemblers to reduce gradually the level of exports of     vehicles and parts required to import such goods, and     eliminating, at the end of the transition period, the     requirement that only assemblers in Mexico may import vehicles;*    changing its "national value-added" rules by reducing gradually     the percentage of parts required to be purchased from Mexican     parts producers; by counting purchases from certain in-bond     production facilities (maquiladoras) toward this percentage; by     ensuring that Canadian, Mexican and U.S. parts manufacturers may     participate in the growing Mexican market on a competitive     basis, while requiring assemblers in Mexico during the     transition period to continue to purchase parts from Mexican     parts producers; and by eliminating at the end of the transition     period the national value-added requirement.Mexican Auto-Transportation Decree     The Mexican Auto-Transportation Decree covering trucks (otherthan light trucks) and buses will be eliminated immediately, andreplaced with a transitional system of quotas in effect for fiveyears.Imports of Used Vehicles     Canada's remaining restrictions on the import of used motorvehicles from the United States will be eliminated on January 1,1994, in accordance with the Canada-U.S. FTA.  Beginning 15 yearsafter the NAFTA goes into effect, Canada will phase out over tenyears its prohibition on imports of Mexican used motor vehicles.Mexico will phase out its prohibition on imports of North Americanused vehicles over the same period.Investment Restrictions     In accordance with the NAFTA's investment provisions, Mexicowill immediately permit "NAFTA investors" to make investments of upto 100 percent in Mexican "national suppliers" of parts, and up to49 percent in other automotive parts enterprises, increasing to 100percent after five years.  Mexico's thresholds for the screening oftakeovers in the automotive sector will be governed by NAFTA'sinvestment provisions.Corporate Average Fuel Economy Fleet Content     Under the NAFTA, the United States will modify the fleet contentdefinition found in its Corporate Average-Fuel Economy (CAFE)rules, so that vehicle manufacturers may choose to have thoseMexican-produced parts and vehicles they export to the UnitedStates classified as domestic.  After ten years, Mexican productionexported to the United States will receive the same treatment asU.S. or Canadian production for purposes of CAFE.  Canadian-produced automobiles currently may be classified as domestic forCAFE purposes.  The NAFTA does not change the minimum fuel economystandards for vehicles sold in the United States.Automotive Standards     The NAFTA creates a special intergovernmental group to reviewand make recommendations on federal automotive standards in thethree countries, including recommendations to achieve greatercompatibility in such standards.                Energy and Basic Petrochemicals     This section sets out the rights and obligations of the threecountries regarding crude oil, gas, refined products, basicpetrochemicals, coal, electricity and nuclear energy.     In the NAFTA, the countries confirm their full respect for theirconstitutions.  They also recognize the desirability ofstrengthening the important role that trade in energy and basicpetrochemical goods plays in the North American region and ofenhancing this role through sustained and gradual liberalization.     The NAFTA's energy provisions incorporate and build on GATTdisciplines regarding quantitative restrictions on imports andexports as they apply to energy and basic petrochemical trade.  TheNAFTA provides that under these disciplines a country may notimpose minimum or maximum import or export price requirements,subject to the same exceptions that apply to quantitativerestrictions.  The NAFTA also makes clear that each country mayadminister export and import licensing systems, provided that theyare operated in a manner consistent with the provisions of theAgreement.  In addition, no country may impose a tax, duty orcharge on the export of energy or basic petrochemical goods unlessthe same tax, duty or charge is applied to such goods when consumeddomestically.     This section also provides that import and export restrictionson energy trade will be limited to certain specific circumstances,such as to conserve exhaustible natural resources, deal with ashort-supply situation or implement a price stabilization plan.     Further, when a NAFTA country imposes any such restriction, itmust not reduce the proportion of total supply made available tothe other NAFTA countries below the level of the preceding threeyears or other agreed period, impose a higher price on exports toanother NAFTA country than the domestic price or require thedisruption of normal supply channels.  Based on a reservation thatMexico has taken, these obligations do not apply as between Mexicoand the other NAFTA countries.     This section also limits the grounds on which a NAFTA countrymay restrict exports or imports of energy or basic petrochemicalgoods for reasons of national security.  However, based on areservation that Mexico has taken, energy trade between Mexico andthe other NAFTA countries will not be subject to this discipline,but will instead be governed by the Agreement's general nationalsecurity provision, described in the "Exceptions" section.     The NAFTA confirms that energy regulatory measures are subjectto the Agreement's general rules regarding national treatment,import and export restrictions and export taxes.  The threecountries also agree that the implementation of regulatory measuresshould be undertaken in a manner that recognizes the importance ofa stable regulatory environment.     In the NAFTA, Mexico reserves to the Mexican State goods,activities and investments in Mexico in the oil, gas, refining,basic petrochemicals, nuclear and electricity sectors.     The NAFTA energy provisions recognize new private investmentopportunities in Mexico in non-basic petrochemical goods and inelectricity generating facilities for "own use," cogeneration andindependent power production by allowing NAFTA investors toacquire, establish and operate facilities in these activities.Investment in non-basic petrochemical goods is governed by thegeneral provisions of the Agreement.     To promote cross-border trade in natural gas and basicpetrochemicals, NAFTA provides that state enterprises, end usersand suppliers have the right to negotiate supply contracts.  Inaddition, independent power producers, CFE (Mexico's state-ownedelectricity firm) and electric utilities in other NAFTA countriesalso have the right to negotiate power purchase and sale contracts.     Each country will also allow its state enterprises to negotiateperformance clauses in their service contracts.     Certain specific commitments relating to special aspects ofCanada-U.S. energy trade, set out in the Energy Chapter of theCanada-U.S. FTA, will continue to apply between the two countries.                Agriculture     The NAFTA sets out separate bilateral undertakings on cross-border trade in agricultural products, one between Canada andMexico, and the other between Mexico and the United States.  Bothinclude a special transitional safeguard mechanism.  As a generalmatter, the rules of the Canada-U.S. FTA on tariff and nontariffbarriers will continue to apply to agricultural trade betweenCanada and the United States.  Trilateral provisions in the NAFTAaddress domestic support for agricultural goods and agriculturalexport subsidies.Tariffs and Nontariff BarriersTrade between Mexico and the United States.  When the Agreementgoes into effect, Mexico and the United States will eliminateimmediately all nontariff barriers to their agricultural trade,generally through their conversion to either "tariff-rate quotas"(TRQs) or ordinary tariffs.     The TRQs will facilitate the transition for producers of import-sensitive products in each country.  No tariffs will be imposed onimports within the quota amount.  The quantity eligible to enterduty-free under the TRQ will be based on recent average tradelevels and will grow generally at three percent per year.  Theover-quota duty -- initially established at a level designed toequal the existing tariff value of each non-tariff barrier -- willprogressively decline to zero during either a ten- or fifteen-yearperiod, depending on the product.     Under the NAFTA, Mexico and the United States will eliminateimmediately tariffs on a broad range of agricultural products.This means that roughly one-half of U.S.-Mexico bilateralagricultural trade will be duty-free when the Agreement goes intoeffect.  All tariff barriers between Mexico and the United Stateswill be eliminated no later than ten years after the Agreementtakes effect, with the exception of duties on certain highlysensitive products -- including corn and dry beans for Mexico, andorange juice and sugar for the United States.  Tariff phase-outs onthese few remaining products will be completed after five moreyears.     Mexico and the United States will gradually liberalize bilateraltrade in sugar.  Both countries will apply TRQs of equivalenteffect on third country sugar by the sixth year after the Agreementgoes into effect.  All restrictions on trade in sugar between thetwo countries will be eliminated by the end of the fifteen-yeartransition period, except that sugar exported under the U.S. SugarRe-Export Program will remain subject to most-favored-nation (MFN)tariff rates.Trade between Canada and Mexico.  Canada and Mexico will eliminateall tariff and nontariff barriers on their agricultural trade, withthe exception of those in the dairy, poultry, egg and sugarsectors.     Canada will immediately exempt Mexico from import restrictionscovering wheat, barley and their products, beef and veal, andmargarine.  Canada and Mexico will eliminate immediately or phaseout within five years tariffs on many fruit and vegetable products,while tariffs on remaining fruit and vegetable products will bephased out over ten years.  A small number of these products willbe subject to the special transitional safeguard described below.     Other than in the dairy, poultry and egg sectors, Mexico willreplace its import licenses with tariffs, for example on wheat, orTRQs, for example respecting corn and barley.  These tariffs willgenerally be phased out over a ten-year period.Special Safeguard Provision     During the first ten years the Agreement is in effect, the NAFTAprovides a special safeguard provision that applies to certainproducts within the scope of the bilateral undertakings describedabove.  A NAFTA country may invoke the mechanism where imports ofsuch products from the other country reach "trigger" levels set outin the Agreement.  In such circumstances, the importing country mayapply the tariff rate in effect at the time the Agreement went intoeffect or the then-current MFN rate, whichever is lower.  Thistariff rate may be applied for the remainder of the season or thecalendar year, depending on the product.  The trigger levels willincrease over this ten-year period.Domestic Support     Recognizing both the importance of domestic support measures totheir respective agricultural sectors and the potential effect ofsuch measures on trade, each of the NAFTA countries will endeavorto move toward domestic support policies that are not trade-distorting.  In addition, the three countries recognize that acountry may change its domestic support mechanisms so long as suchchange is in compliance with applicable GATT obligations.Export Subsidies     Recognizing that the use of export subsidies within the freetrade area is inappropriate except to counter subsidized importsfrom a non-NAFTA country, the Agreement provides that:*    a NAFTA exporting country must give three-days' notice of its     intent to introduce a subsidy on agricultural exports to another     NAFTA country;*    when an exporting NAFTA country believes that another NAFTA     country is importing non-NAFTA agricultural goods that benefit     from export subsidies, it may request consultations on measures     the importing country could take against such subsidized     imports; and*    if the importing country adopts mutually agreed upon measures to     counter that subsidy, the NAFTA exporting country will not     introduce its own export subsidy.     Building on the bilateral discipline on export subsidies in theCanada-U.S. FTA, the three countries will work toward theelimination of export subsidies in North American agriculturaltrade in pursuit of their objective of eliminating such subsidiesworldwide.Agricultural Marketing Standards     The NAFTA provides that when either Mexico or the United Statesapplies a measure regarding the classification, grading ormarketing of a domestic agricultural product, it will provide noless favorable treatment to like products imported from the othercountry for processing.Resolution of Commercial Disputes     The three countries will work toward development of a mechanismfor resolving private cross-border commercial disputes involvingagricultural products.Committee on Agricultural Trade     A trilateral committee on agricultural trade will monitor theimplementation and administration of this section.  In addition, aMexico-U.S. working group and a Canada-Mexico working group will beestablished under the committee to review the operation of gradeand quality standards.This article is based on a summary of the NAFTA released by thethree signatory countries.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Structural Implications of NAFTAby Ewell E. Murphy, Jr., Esq.     If the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) succeeds, itwill change the economic geography of our hemisphere, creating anew North America in which goods and investment will move amongMexico, Canada and the United States with unprecedented ease.  Howwill that affect the structuring of Mexican business operations inthe United States?                Are joint ventures passe?     Transnationally, "joint ventures" blossomed in the disruptive1970s.  They were born of protectionist legal systems thatprevented the foreign investor from controlling the corporation inwhich he invested -- such systems as Malaysian Bumiputra, African"Nigerianization" and Mexico's Echeverrian Investment Law, which inmost industrial sectors limited foreigners to 49 percent of theequity.     To sugarcoat such forced marriages, they were named jointventures, a label intrinsically false.  The dictionary tells usthat "joint" means sharing or acting in common, and "common" meansbelonging equally to, or shared alike by all in question, but ajoint venture neither equally belongs nor is shared alike.Corporate shares that, held by foreigners, are forever incapable ofbeing joined with other shares to achieve a wholly-owned subsid-iary, or even 51 percent control, are in fact second-class shares.All participants in a joint venture are equal, but some (thefavored local citizens) are more equal than others.     When structured in a close ownership percentage such as 51/49,a "joint venture" is inherently difficult to manage over anyconsiderable period, especially when its investors are from dif-ferent legal and cultural systems.  Absent legislative coercionlike the Echeverrian Investment Law, there is little compellingreason for foreign investment to be structured that way,either in Mexico or in the United States.  Each investment, ofcourse, must be designed to meet its unique business objectives,but I suspect that, as a general proposition and over appreciabletime, both sides of the Rio Grande will see fewer such jointventures during the NAFTA years.                Owned or Supervised Distribution     Another traditional structure that NAFTA will probably make lesstypical is Mexican export F.O.B. the border.  All too frequentlythat structure has characterized Mexican sales for the U.S. market.Under it, the Mexican manufacturer sells for export and is paid indollars, but leaves actual foreign market penetration to thepurchaser.  After getting the product into the hands of a customsbroker in, say, Nuevo Laredo, the Mexican manufacturer calls it aday, draws down his dollars, and goes home.     That structure allocates to the purchaser the risks andresponsibilities of the U.S. market, to be sure, but it alsoallocates to him the corresponding value-added.  Consequently theMexican manufacturer is an exporter in name only, both as to risksand as to return.     One can only speculate why the structure of sales F.O.B. theborder is so prevalent in Mexico.  One reason, perhaps, is thathistorically Mexican exports have tended to be raw, semifinished orfungible products -- metals, ores, cotton, hydrocarbons and thelike -- whose producers had no name~recognition by exportconsumers.  Another reason, probably, is the cost and complexity offinancing intermediate distribution.  The legal and practicalaspects of conducting business in the U.S. were no doubt a factoras well.     In recent years Mexican manufacturers have begun to overcomethere doubts and concerns, and are penetrating the U.S. exportmarket more effectively.  A typical new structure is the wholly-owned distribution subsidiary, which receives the product from itsMexican manufacturing parent at the Mexican plant or the border andhandles directly all subsequent warehousing and sales todistributors, dealers or consumers in the United States.  Anothernew structure is supervised distribution, under which the Mexicanmanufacturer sells to an unrelated U.S. importer at the plant orborder, but also maintains in the United States its own U.S.subsidiary to check on the importer's efforts and to keep theMexican manufacturer directly informed of the U.S. market.  UnderNAFTA, such structures of owned or supervised distribution willlikely become more customary and will bring more value-added backto Mexico.                Strategic Alliances     A more sophisticated prototype for Mexican investment structuresin the new North America is the strategic alliance.  This ingeniousarrangement is designed to coordinate the efforts of two or morecompanies in correlative markets.     Imagine, for example, a U.S. company that is in the top echelonof its industry in the United States, is fairly competitive but byno means dominant in Europe, and in Japan is technically able toperform but feels ostracized by business practices that favorJapanese companies.  Imagine, in the same industry, a Germancompany that is well recognized in Europe, somewhat competitive inthe United States, but similarly defensive in Japan.  Add aJapanese company that leads the industry in Japan but is a newcomerto Europe and the United States.  How can those three companiesgrow in each other's home markets?  One way is to bash aheadunilaterally, each the best it can.  Another way is throughaggressive attempts at hostile take-over.  A third is by strategicalliance.     Strategic alliance structures are infinitely variable, but inour example each of the three companies might acquire smallminority interests -- say, 10 percent or 20 percent -- in eachother.  At the same time they probably would cross-license certaintechnology.  They might also agree to cooperate in bids on projectsof certain types, especially where each can make a unique contribu-tion, and perhaps arrange to coordinate procurement and training.If they are manufacturers, they probably would add reciprocalsupply contracts.     Strategic alliances are not easy to plan or document.  Theyrequire careful legal thinking, especially in antitrust andintellectual property law.  If successful, however, they offer animaginative means for companies to grow, not at the expense or bythe destruction of each other, but by pooling complementarystrengths.     Strategic alliances between Mexican and U.S. enterprises havealready begun, and it seems likely that a NAFTA will encouragemore.  Such arrangements offer more market scope than simplewholly-owned subsidiaries and allow more effective management thanis afforded by "joint ventures" with close ownership percentages.For leading companies that seek coordinated expansion in both theMexican and the U.S. markets, strategic alliances may be thecutting edge of the NAFTA future.Ewell E. Murphy is a partner in the Houston office of Baker &Botts.  This article is adapted from a lecture Mr. Murphy deliveredat the Expanding Abroad Conference conducted in Mexico City in Julyby The University of Texas School of Law.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Legal Considerations for Mexican Businesses in the United Statesby Ewell E. Murphy, Jr., Esq.     If the North American Free Trade Agreement is achieved it willallow a Mexican business, if it is so minded, to go up, beyond theriver, and carry there all the goods and investment capital that itcan find.  And NAFTA will, in time, prohibit any toll, tribute orcustom upon the movement of those goods or capital.     For Mexican exporters the Hispanic segment of the new NAFTAmarket will be especially inviting.  The six states of the UnitedStates over which the flag of Mexico once waved have a combinedpopulation of some 55 million and an aggregate gross product ofnearly US$1 trillion -- equivalent to 60 percent of Mexico'spresent population and more than five times its gross domesticproduct. note 1  By race, second language, tradition, and proximitythese states are enthusiastically attuned to Mexican culture andproducts.  They offer the Mexican exporter his first and easiestsuccess in the new North America.     The market that NAFTA will create is, of course, much largerthan those former Mexican lands.  It will be all of North America,which one projection places at 370 million human beings with a com-bined gross domestic product of US$6 trillion, larger than thepresent European Community. note 2   Some Mexican companies al-ready, in advance of NAFTA, have made their mark in that largermarket.  Particularly notable are the Modelo breweries, whoseexports of Corona and other brands account for 11.7 percent of allimported beers sold in the United States, second only to Heineken;note 3 and Vitro, S.A., which in the acquisition of Anchor Glassaccomplished the first hostile Mexican takeover of a major U.S.corporation, and with joint ventures with Corning, Inc., Whirlpool,World Tableware International, and others, is well on its way tobecoming a full-fledged multinational corporation. note 4  Thoseattainments in export and investment are persuasive prototypes ofsuccess for Mexican industry in the new North America.     To achieve that success, however, Mexican business must heed theadvice of Thomas Wolfe, who reminded us that "you can't go homeagain."  The home we return to is never the same as the home weleft.  When Mexican business returns to its home beyond the river,it will enter a world that is radically different, not only fromthe world those six states knew under the Mexican flag, but alsofrom the present world below the Rio Grande.     Of all the differences the Rio Grande delineates, none is morestriking than the contrasting legal systems of Mexico and theUnited States.  Superficially that difference can be catalogued asthe distinction between the civil law and the common law, whichcreates the dissimilarities that separate, say, Italy from Britain;but the incongruities across the Rio Grande are much more profound.Mexico not only inherited the civil law from Spain, but wasnurtured in a Castilian colonialism that regarded juridical andeconomic order as something ordained from above, a commandment fromthe ruler to the ruled.  The United States not only learned thecommon law from England, but was molded by the rugged individualismof the frontier into the world's most uncompromising advocate ofdemocratic initiative and free-market capitalism.     Consequently, law occupies different dimensions of life above,than it does below, the Rio Grande.  In Mexico, law is essentiallya vertical force that moves downward from government to people.When Mexicans have problems with each other they may resort to law,but usually they resolve their conflicts by other means.  They viewlegal duties, fundamentally, not as obligations between individualsbut as exactions of the government.  If the government does noteffectively enforce a particular law, the peoples' response, in thefamous Mexican phrase, is acatar pero no obedecer (respecting butnot complying). note 5     In sharp contrast, above the Rio Grande law occupies both thehorizontal and the vertical dimensions of life, and vertically itmoves up as well as down.  When people have problems with eachother their first impulse is civil suit.  ("I'll take you tocourt!").  If that remedy seems insufficient, they invoke thegovernment against each other by means of criminal prosecution.("I'll get the law on you!").  If neither recourse suffices, theyinsist that their elected legislators create a new legal remedy.("There ought to be a law!").  Most significantly, in the UnitedStates the factual application of any law is subject to the concur-rence of randomly chosen representatives of the local citizenry:horizontally by civil juries and vertically by the grand juries andtrial juries of criminal prosecution. note 6                Cultural Shocks     Those legal differences between Mexico and the United Statescreate many unpleasant surprises for a Mexican business firstentering the market beyond the river.  In particular, there arethree abrupt cultural shocks:  litigiousness, states' rights, andcompelled competition.Litigiousness       The first shock, litigiousness, is the most devastating.  Thischaracteristic of U.S. society has grown, in two centuries, from aquaint rambunctiousness to an enormous problem.  With 90 percent ofall civil jury cases in the world tried in the United States,Americans have been spending US$30 billion a year just suing eachother; between 1975 and 1985, U.S. liability awards in general rose401 percent, and the number of product liability cases before U.S.federal courts increased by 1,000 percent. note 7  The resultingburden on industry is staggering.  The liability insurance costs ofU.S. manufacturers has increased 500 percent over ten years,constituting, for example, 15 percent of the price of U.S.-mademachine tools and nearly 70 percent of the price of U.S.-madetetanus vaccine, and demolishing entire product lines, such asCessna's single-engine airplanes. note 8     In Mexico things are different; civil actions do not go tojuries, liability awards are typically for modest sums, and majorpublic issues are resolved, not by lawsuits, but by politicalpressure and economic clout.  Consequently, Mexican entrepreneursare unprepared for the hair-trigger litigation and crippling juryawards they may encounter in the United States.     Anticipating and defending against Yankee litigiousness is aprincipal objective of the investment structure -- the interrelatedframework of corporations and contracts -- by which a Mexicanenterprise achieves a business presence in the U.S. market.  Essen-tially the structure's strategy is to wall off the main Mexicanenterprise from involvement in the United States.  In an exportstructure, for example, the manufacturing source of the product andits facilities for distribution within Mexico function in -- andonly in -- Mexico.  Distribution in the United States is restrictedto a separate subsidiary corporation whose objective is to limitthe liability of the manufacturing parent to the resources theparent invests in that subsidiary.  The parent and the subsidiaryare related only by share ownership and by contracts consistentwith their roles.  In such a structure, for example, the parentcontracts to supply the subsidiary, in Mexico, with products; thesubsidiary exports the products from Mexico, imports them into theUnited States, warehouses them as needed in the United States, andresells them to subdistributors, dealers or consumers.  Foradditional insulation a special-purpose Mexican export subsidiarymay be placed between the manufacturing parent in Mexico and thedistribution subsidiary in the United States.     Among the basic risks to consider in planning such an exportstructure are the jurisdictional laws of the states in which thedistribution subsidiary will resell.  An example is the Texas Long-Arm Statute, note 9 which subjects to suit in Texas any corporationthat (1) "contracts by mail or otherwise with a Texas resident andeither party is to perform the contract in whole or in part in[Texas]," (2) "commits a tort in whole or in part in [Texas]," or(3) "recruits Texas residents, directly or through an intermediarylocated in [Texas], for employment inside or outside [Texas]."     As construed by the Texas Supreme Court, the Texas Long ArmStatute is even more grasping than its terms, and will reach as faras the U.S. Constitution permits.  By that rule, a Mexicancorporation can be sued in Texas if three conditions are met.First, the corporation purposefully did some act or consummatedsome transaction in Texas.  Second, either (a) the cause of actionarose from or was connected with that act or transaction or (b) thecorporation's contacts with Texas were continuing and systematic.Third, the exercise of jurisdiction does not offend traditionalnotions of fair play and substantial justice. note 10  Under thatreasoning, recent decisions reflect considerable willingness tosustain Texas jurisdiction over corporations that make sales intoTexas, regardless of whether they conduct actual sales activitieswithin the state. note 11     In the sober aftermath of the Bhopal disaster we realize, ofcourse, that some liabilities will pierce the most meticulouslycrafted corporate and contractual veils.  The most ruthlesspenetrator is product liability.  There the principal guidelinesare two decisions of the United States Supreme Court.  World-WideVolkswagen Corp. v. Woodson note 12 permits product liabilityjurisdiction to be asserted over any foreign exporter that deliversits products into the "stream of commerce" with awareness that theywill be purchased by consumers in the forum state.  Asahi MetalIndustry Co., Ltd. v. Superior Court of California note 13 shieldsfrom that rule certain component manufacturers who sell only toprimary manufacturers abroad.  For direct exporters to the UnitedStates, however, the only reliable precaution is product liabilityinsurance covering the Mexican manufacturing parent and its entirecorporate group.     If a Mexican corporation can jurisdictionally be reached forsuit in Texas, it can be sued in Texas on claims for wrongful deathor personal injury arising anywhere in the world.  That was thestartling result of the 1990 decision of the Texas Supreme Court inDow Chemical Co. v. Castro Alfaro, note 14 which held that, forpurposes of such claims, the doctrine of forum non conveniens,under which courts may decline jurisdiction of foreign causesbecause of injustice or inconvenience of trial, has been abolishedby statute in Texas.  That decision has made Texas a forum of greatattraction for foreign plaintiffs, and is a strong additionalreason for cautious structuring of Mexican business operations thatcross the Rio Grande.     There are two helpful resources for contractually defining thelegal boundaries between a Mexican manufacturing parent and itsU.S. distribution subsidiary and between the subsidiary and itspurchasers.  The first is the United Nations Convention on Con-tracts for the International Sale of Goods, to which Mexico and theUnited States have both adhered.  The second is Incoterms, theInternational Chamber of Commerce's standard published definitionsof basic trade terms.  A structure whose legal basis is theConvention and whose points of sale are expressed in Incoterms canbe established by internationally comprehensible contracts that areexplicit but succinct.     Although disputes with U.S. purchasers cannot be avoided, theycan be diverted to modes of confrontation less problematical thanlitigation.  This is another area in which there is a helpfultreaty relationship between Mexico and the United States.  Bothnations adhere to the United Nations Arbitration Convention, andare thus reciprocally obligated to enforce agreements to arbitrateand to recognize arbitration awards.  This permits the distributionsubsidiary to ensure, by carefully drawn arbitration clauses, thatdisputes arising under its sales contracts will be resolved byarbitration at acceptable venues under acceptable law.States' Rights     The second shock the Mexican exporter encounters beyond theriver is that of states' rights of U.S. federalism.     To the jaundiced eyes of U.S. lawyers, the Interstate CommerceClause and a permissive federal judiciary have well nighemasculated the Tenth Amendment, making the United States, forbusiness purposes, virtually a unitary nation.  But to the Mexicanentrepreneur the opposite seems true.  He planned to introduce hisproduct into one foreign nation, but to his astonishment he findsthat he confronts fifty-one of them:  fifty corporation laws; fiftycertificate of authority statutes; fifty state tax systems; fiftystate legislatures, judiciaries and executives; and, to make iteven more forbidding, a fifty-first umbrella of federal taxes, lawsand government over-arching all the rest.     Mexico, by contrast, is a highly centralized nation.  Itsconstitution is labeled "federal" but there the federalism ends.It has one corporation law, one law for the establishment offoreign enterprise, central control of most taxes, and a traditionof national domination of the nominally separate states.  Smallwonder that Mexicans are stunned by the balkanized and discordantsystem of state authority they encounter north of the Rio Grande.     The Mexican entrepreneur can deal most effectively with U.S.states' rights by visualizing the United States as fifty separatemarkets, planning carefully in advance, in terms of compliance withkey state requirements, which of the fifty his product will enter.Aside from product-specific regulations, those key staterequirements are, essentially, certificate of authority laws,franchise taxes, and taxes generally.     The Texas Certificate of Authority law, note 15 for example,allows an uncertificated Mexican corporation to maintain local bankaccounts; to sell in Texas through "independent contractors;" tocreate, secure and collect debts; to transact business ininterstate commerce; and to conduct "isolated transactions;" butrequires the corporation to obtain a Certificate of Authority to"transact business" in Texas otherwise.  Cases have held that noCertificate of Authority is required to sell into Texas byinterstate shipment on the basis of purchase orders obtained inTexas but accepted outside. note 16  Consignment sales in Texas byout-of-state consignors are similarly exempt. note 17     Previously, the Texas franchise tax system was almost thatindulgent.  The statute note 18 simply said that franchise tax mustbe paid by any foreign corporation that has a Texas Certificate ofAuthority or "does business" in Texas, and administrative decisionsheld that interstate commerce sales into Texas did not constitutedoing business provided they were not obtained by consignment orregular solicitation within the state. note 19  Recently, however,administrative rules note 20 of the Comptroller General began tolimit those immunities.  Those rules said that "[p]erformance of acontract in Texas" or "[h]aving employees, independent contractors,agents or other representatives in Texas" who "provide or inducesales of the foreign corporation's goods or services" was "doingbusiness" for franchise tax purposes.     Most sweeping of all was the rule of "constitutional nexus,"which became effective in 1986.  It asserted that "A corporation isdoing business in Texas, for purposes of [franchise tax], when ithas constitutional nexus with Texas for the purpose of franchisetaxation."     Finally, effective January 1, 1992 those encroaching rules werereplaced with an amendment of the statute itself, which nowprovides that Texas franchise tax extends "to the limits of theUnited States Constitution and federal law adopted under it." note21     For the movement of goods, those Constitutional limits weredrawn by the U.S. Supreme Court's "original package" cases (Brownv. Maryland note 22 and Low v. Austin note 23) as refined byMichelin Tire Corp. v. Wages, note 24 and Japan Line, Ltd. v.County of Los Angeles. note 25  Those decisions exempt from statetaxation a vehicle or instrumentality of foreign commerce, butallow a state to impose a nondiscriminatory tax on any goods --imported or domestic -- that have come to rest in a warehousewithin the state.  In Texas the chief tax thus enabled is an annuallevy by counties and local tax authorities on the value of propertywithin the jurisdiction. note 26     Another principal source of state and local revenues in Texas isa sales tax note 27 analogous to, but simpler than, MexicanImpuesto de Valor Agregado (IVA).Compelled Competition     The third shock of U.S. law to Mexican business is the ghost ofAdam Smith.  A fundamental stage direction of the U.S. legal dramais the rule that its commercial actors must behave like freely-competing characters from The Wealth of Nations.     That rule is enforced chiefly by the federal antitrust laws,which apply to export movements into the U.S. market as well as toactivities within it.  Exports to the United States are covered,directly or indirectly, by the basic provisions of the Sherman Actregarding combinations, note 28 the Federal Trade Commission Actregarding unfair competition, note 29 and the Clayton Act regardingacquisitions. note 30  Exporters to the United States areexplicitly addressed in the Wilson Tariff Act regarding price-fixing in imported goods, note 31 and the Robinson-Patmanamendments to the Clayton Act regarding price discrimination andexclusive dealing. note 32  Once Mexican products have reached theUnited States they are subject, like all domestic products, togeneral antitrust rules affecting exclusive distributorships, tyingclauses, resale price maintenance, and territorial and customerrestrictions.     Similarly, when Mexican business engages in a merger,acquisition or joint venture in the United States, it is subject tothe rules of U.S. antitrust laws against unlawful combinations.For substantial transactions, that includes the premergernotification rules of the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act, note 33 whichrequire participants in the proposed transaction to give advancenotice to the Federal Trade Commission and the U.S. Department ofJustice, allowing those agencies a specified period to determinewhether, in their view, the transaction would violate antitrust lawand if so to seek an injunction against it.     Antitrust Guide for International Operations, a statement ofenforcement policy issued by the Department of Justice in 1988, isa helpful guide to the transnational application of U.S. antitrustlaws.  In April 1992, however, the Department announced a partialreversion to pre-1988 policy, in that combinations abroad thatlimit the access of U.S. exports to foreign markets will beprosecuted regardless of their effect on U.S. consumers. note 34     The ghost of Adam Smith is also invoked, in the name of "fairtrade," to justify two U.S. penalties on inbound goods, althoughmost observers classify those penalties as market distortionsthemselves.     One is antidumping, a form of protectionism pioneered by theUnited States note 35 and under which the U.S. has imposed morepenalties than any country in the world. note 36  By it, the UnitedStates levies on the Mexican product an additional import dutyequal to the amount by which its value in the foreign marketexceeds its U.S. market price. note 37  The technicalities of thatdetermination are complicated, and the administrative proceduresfor assessing and collecting the resulting duties are elaborate.The only saving grace is that, to impose antidumping duties,"material injury" to a U.S. industry must be shown.     Another fair trade protectionism is countervailing duties. note38  Here the law assesses penalty duties, not to offset lowerprices, but to compensate for government subsidies from which theproduct benefited in its country of origin.  The United States hasthe dubious distinction of having imposed more countervailingduties than the rest of the world combined note 39 and, in fact, tobe the only nation to have used them extensively. note 40Fortunately for Mexican exporters, a 1985 agreement between Mexicoand the United States note 41 placed Mexican products temporarilywithin the protected category in which U.S. countervailing dutiesmay not be assessed unless the claimant proves material injury toa U.S. industry.  Mexico's access to that category was confirmed in1986 by Mexico's decision to join the GATT and accept its SubsidiesCode. note 42     Any one of those three weapons -- antitrust, antidumping, orcountervailing duties -- is sufficient to bankrupt a business thatdepends on the market distortions it forbids.  Against that riskthe only practical strategy of the Mexican entrepreneur is toanalyze -- candidly, carefully and in advance -- the extent towhich a project will involve such distortions.  If the project islikely to be successfully challenged under antitrust law, it isbetter never initiated.  If the project is vulnerable toantidumping or countervailing duties, those duties and the ensuingcost of fighting a challenge must be factored into the budget.                Familiar Foes     Not all of the legal problems of the U.S. market are culturalshocks to the Mexican entrepreneur.  There are four familiar ones.Federal Income Tax     One is federal income taxation.  On this subject the legalsystems of Mexico and the United States are conceptually similarand converging in corporate rates, with income in top corporatebrackets now being taxed at 35 percent in Mexico and 34 percent inthe United States.     For Mexican investors, the most significant recent change in theU.S. fiscal system was the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which not onlyreduced U.S. rates dramatically but, by adding a "dividendequivalent tax," note 43 reversed the structural rule-of-thumb forMexican investment in the United States.  Previously, because theUnited States had a 30 percent tax on dividends paid abroad but nocorresponding tax on the remittance of branch profits, the bestcorporate structure for investors (like Mexicans) unprotected by ageneral tax treaty with the United States was usually the U.S.branch of a corporation incorporated outside the United States.Given the dividend equivalent tax of the 1986 Act, for investorswithout treaty protection there is now a 30 percent tax not only ondividends paid abroad but also on annually remittable branchprofits.  Consequently, the typical tax structure for Mexicaninvestment in the United States has become a subsidiary corporationincorporated in the United States.     The liveliest current tax issue between Mexico and the UnitedStates is their negotiation of a general income tax treaty.Presently their only tax treaty relationships cover shipping andaircraft earnings note 44 and the exchange of information. note 45As compared with competitors from nations that have full taxtreaties with the United States, that leaves Mexican investorsdisadvantaged by the tax of 30 percent on dividends, interest,royalties and rent paid abroad, which for treaty-protectedrecipients is reduced to rates as low as 15 percent or zero.Trademarks     The second element of the U.S. legal landscape familiar to theMexican entrepreneur is trademarks.  Unfortunately they are sofamiliar that sometimes they are ignored.  A surprising number ofMexican investment projects have been disadvantaged by failure toestablish, in advance, proprietary name-identification of theirproducts in the United States.Customs     For Mexican exporters, the third familiar element of U.S. law isthat traditional hobgoblin of transnational traders, la aduana.  Asa checkpoint and duty-exacter, U.S. Customs functions much astariff-collectors do in other countries.  To cope with it, theexporter's best technique is to shadow-box his entries in advancewith an experienced customs broker, making mock-ups of intendedshipping documents and thus avoiding unpleasant surprises.  Besidesimport duties, U.S. Customs also enforces a myriad of federal laws,from country-of-origin markings to the massive remedies of Section337 note 46 against "unfair practices" in trade.  If achieved, aNorth American Free Trade Agreement will eventually eliminate U.S.import duties, and perhaps some Customs-enforced penalties, onMexican products.Foreign Investment Restrictions     The fourth foe for Mexican business in the United States isrestrictions on foreign investment.  Here the paradox is that inrecent years, while Mexican foreign investment rules were movingfrom protectionism to permissiveness, U.S. foreign investment ruleswere changing in the opposite direction.     Mexico's present foreign investment restrictions began with thepiecemeal ownership restrictions of a 1944 executive decree ofPresident Avila Camacho.  They crested in President Echeverria'sprotectionist 1973 Investment Law and were significantly liberal-ized by the 1989 Regulations of President Salinas.  If rumors canbe trusted, that liberalization may soon be institutionalized byformal amendment of the 1973 Law.     The United States, by contrast, has traditionally welcomedforeign investment.  There are specific statutes that favor U.S.suppliers for government procurement and restrict foreignmanagement or ownership in such sensitive areas as banking, trans-portation, communication, energy and fisheries, but until recentlythe only really pervasive U.S. foreign investment statutes wereaimed not at restriction but merely at disclosure.  Those statuteswere the International Investment Survey Act of 1976 note 47 andperiodic "benchmark" legislation, under which significant foreignacquisitions and related transactions must be reportedconfidentially to the Department of Commerce, and the AgriculturalForeign Investment Disclosure Act of 1978, note 48 which requiresdetailed public disclosure to the Department of Agriculture offoreign acquisitions of farm land.     More recently, however, fear of foreign takeovers has eroded thepermissiveness of the United States toward foreign investment.Scrutiny of the economic position of foreign investors prompted the1980 Foreign Investment in Real Property Tax Act, note 49 and the1986 dividend equivalent tax, note 50 each of which eliminatedfederal income tax advantages for foreign investors.  In 1988 camethe Exon-Florio provision, note 51 which authorizes the Presidentto suspend or prohibit any merger, acquisition or takeover by aforeign person if, in the President's judgment, that foreign person"might take action that threatens to impair the national security."The relevant procedures are now enshrined in Treasury regulationsnote 52 that provide a voluntary notice and 30-day review period --in effect, an advisory ruling mechanism -- for concerned foreigninvestors.  The President's nullification power has been sparinglyused, but it is largely discretionary and constitutes a hurdleMexican investors must not ignore.     The same restrictive trend is seen in the Foreign BankSupervision Enhancement Act of 1991, note 53 which subjects anyU.S. branch or office of a foreign bank to prior approval by theFederal Reserve Board as well as the Comptroller of the Currencyand any state regulatory body, and reduces to five percent thelevel of foreign investment in a U.S. bank that is subject toFederal Reserve approval.                Structural Guidelines     Mindful of the cultural shocks and familiar foes of the U.S.market, what guidelines does a Mexican business follow instructuring an investment beyond the river?Limiting Liability     The investing corporation shields its Mexican assets against thelitigiousness of the U.S. market, as best it can, by creating afirewall of corporate and contractual insulation between the parentgroup in Mexico and the subsidiary that manufactures, distributesor otherwise operates in the United States.  Then it adds thefurther safeguard of product liability insurance adequate to thecostly jury verdicts of the United States.Tax Planning     The second guideline is tax planning.  When a Mexican businesscrosses the Rio Grande it anticipates all the taxes it will face oneach side of the border and minimizes them by correlating thosetaxes as aggregates and offsetting them against each other, as muchas possible, by foreign tax credits.  The impending negotiation ofa general Mexico-U.S. income tax treaty is encouraging, but untilsuch a treaty is firmly in place its possibility only increases thevariables.  Meticulous advance tax planning is essential to thesuccess of any Mexican investment in the United States.State Strategy     Legally, the United States is divided into fifty parts, thestates; and the market of each must be won by a strategy ofseparate compliance with its distinctive laws.  The U.S. market isconquered state by state.Discerning Differences     The last guideline is that of discerning differences.  TheMexican investor must be continually alert to the unique demands ofthe U.S. legal environment.  Some of those demands -- antitrust,for example -- have little analogue in Mexico; they must be learnedand respected as new creatures.  Others, such as trademarks andcustoms duties, must not be ignored just because their names andfunctions are similiar to those of Mexico.     Applying those four guidelines, the typical Mexican investmentin the United States will be structured as a separate, locallyincorporated subsidiary.  Its contractual relations with itsMexican parent will be designed to insulate the parent fromcommercial presence in the United States and to coordinate theirrespective profit centers in a manner to credit and reduce taxes.The subsidiary will confirm its trademark registrations and customsclassifications prudently in advance and will plan its U.S. marketexpansion state by state.  Proposed acquisitions will be checkedagainst foreign investment restrictions, cleared under Hart-Scott-Rodino and Exon-Florio if relevant, and reported to the Departmentof Commerce and the Department of Agriculture as applicable.  Afterthat, full speed ahead.                Notes1      Arizona, California, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas and Utah had a       combined population of 54,852,000 in 1990 and a combined Gross       State Product of US$957.6 billion in 1986.  Mexico had a       population of 87,870,000 in 1990 and a Gross National Product       of US$173.4 billion in 1988.  U.S. Department of Commerce,       Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1991.2      Nation's Business, September 1991, p. 60.3      Beverage Market Annual Industry Survey (1991).4      El Financiero International, April 6, 1992, p. 16 and El       Financiero International (International Edition), August 19,       1991, p. 3.5      Quoted in Guillermo F. Margadant S., Introduccion a la Historia       del Derecho Mexicano (Naucalpan, Editorial Esfinge, S.A. de       C.V., Third Edition, 1990), p. 77.6      "Los anglosajones concebian la justicia como una expresion de       la voluntad popular en cada caso, manifestado por el jurado       popular, y el concepto espa$ol de justicia era la aplicacion de       una regla preestablecida en vista del bien com#n."  Angela       Moyano Pahissa, La Perdida de Texas (Editorial Planeta       Mexicana, S.A. de C.V., 1991), p. 62.7      Address by L.A. Iacocca to the American Bar Association, San       Francisco, California, at 9 (August 10, 1987).8      The Economist, April 30, 1988, p. 66 and December 2, 1989, p.       84.9      Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code, Secs. 17.041-.045.  See       also Texas Rules of Civil Procedure, No. 110.10     See Schlobohm v. Schapiro, 784 S.W.2d 355 (Tex. 1990).11     Design Information Systems v. Feith Systems & Software, Inc.,       801 S.W.2d 569 (App. 2 Dist. 1990) (suit in Texas by the       purchaser in Texas of software shipped to Texas by a defendant       who had other customers in Texas but had no contact with       plaintiff except that he received his order by telephone and       wrote three letters to Texas in response to plaintiff's       inquiries); Retail Technologies, Inc. v. Palm City T.V., Inc.,       791 S.W.2d 345 (App. 13 Dist. 1990) (suit in Texas by the       purchaser in Texas of a computer system from a nonresident       corporation which did nothing but ship the system to Texas and       send to Texas the sales warranties the purchaser claimed were       breached); Micromedia v. Automated Broadcast Controls, 799 F.2d       230 (C.A. 5, 1986) (suit in Texas by the purchaser in Texas of       radio equipment supplied by a nonresident corporation that       shipped the equipment into Texas and made by telephone calls to       Texas the sales warranties the plaintiff claimed were       breached).12     444 U.S. 286 (1980).  In Texas the "stream of commerce"       reasoning was recently followed in the following product       liability suits against foreign corporate defendants: Irving v.       Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp., 864 F.2d 383 (C.A. 5, 1989,       cert. den. 110 S.C. 83) (suit against a Yugoslav distributor of       asbestos which did nothing in Texas but send the asbestos to a       freight forwarder for shipment to Texas, share the cost of       quality control testing in Texas, receive charges for cleaning       shipment bags in Texas, accept payments for the asbestos and       store it, apparently, outside of Texas); Keen v. Ashot       Ashkelon, Ltd., 748 S.W.2d 91 (Tex, 1988) (suit against an       Israeli trailer manufacturer that sold and shipped to the       United States a component that (apparently, outside of Texas)       was assembled into a trailer that injured (apparently, in       Texas) the plaintiff).13     480 U.S. 102 (1987).14     786 S.W.2d 674 (Tex. 1990).15     Texas Business Corporation Act, Art. 8.01A.16     Waggener Paint Co. v. Paint Distrib., Inc., 228 F.2d 111 (C.A.       5, 1956); North v. Mergenthaler Linotype Co., 77 S.W.2d 580       (Tex. Civ. App. 1935); Southern Discount Co. v. Rose, 296 S.W.       482 (Tex. Com. App. 1927); and see Kimball-Krough Pump Co. v.       Judd, 88 S.W.2d 579 (Tex. Com. App. 1935).17     Truhe Box Co. v. Jandrew, 346 S.W.2d 430 (Tex. Civ. App. 1961);       Southwest Gen. Elec. Co. v. Nunn Elec. Co., 283 S.W. 781 (Tex.       Com. App. 1926); and Falls Rubber Co. v. La Fon, 256 S.W. 577       (Tex. Com. App. 1923).18     Now Texas Tax Code, Sec. 171.001(a).19     Op. Tex. Atty. Gen. No. M-642 (1970); Tex. Comp. Adm. Dec. No.       10,561 (1980); and Tex. Comp. Adm. Dec. No. 10,178 (1981).20     Texas Franchise Tax Rules, former Sec. 3.406.21     Texas Franchise Tax Rules, Sec. 171.001(c).22     25 U.S. 419 (1827).23     80 U.S. 29 (1871).24     423 U.S. 276 (1976).25     441 U.S. 434 (1979).26     Texas Tax Code, Title 1.27     Texas Tax Code, Chapter 151.28     15 U.S.C. Sec. 1.29     15 U.S.C. Sec. 44.30     15 U.S.C. Sec. 12.31     15 U.S.C. Sec. 8.32     15 U.S.C. Sec. 13(a).33     15 U.S.C. Sec. 18 (a), implemented by 16 C.F.R. Secs. 801-803.34     The New York Times, April 4, 1992, p. 23.35     See John Jackson, The World Trading System (Cambridge, The       M.I.T. Press, 1989) (hereinafter "Jackson"), p. 225.36     James Bovard, The Fair Trade Fraud (New York, St. Martin's       Press, 1991) (hereinafter "Bovard"), p. 107.37     19 U.S.C. Sec. 1673-1673g.38     19 U.S.C. Secs. 1303, 1671-1671h.39     Bovard, p. 169.40     Jackson, p. 251.41     2 International Trade Reporter (Bureau of National Affairs) No.       17 at 565, 590-92 (1985).42     See 19 U.S.C. Secs. 1303, 1671(b); Jackson, p. 260; and       Business America, October 13, 1986, p. 9.43     I.R.C. Sec. 884.44     Agreement for relief from double taxation on earnings from       operation of ships and aircraft; effective August 7, 1985.45     Agreement for the exchange of information with respect to       taxes; effective January 18, 1990.46     19 U.S.C. Sec. 1337.47     22 U.S.C. Secs. 3101-3108.48     7 U.S.C. Secs. 3501-3508.49     I.R.C. Sec. 897.50     Supra, note 40.51     50 U.S.C. App. Sec. 2158, lapsed but now reinstated by Public       Law 102-99, 105 Stat. 487.52     31 C.F.R. Part 800.53     Pub.L. 102-242, Title II, Subtitle A, Dec. 19, 1991, 105 Stat.       2286-2305.  See The Economist, May 23, 1992, p. 86.Ewell E. Murphy is a partner in the Houston office of Baker &Botts.  This article is adapted from a lecture Mr. Murphy deliveredat the Expanding Abroad Conference conducted in Mexico City in Julyby The University of Texas School of Law.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992NAFTA May Bring New Opportunitiesby Douglas Karmin     One of the main goals of the North American Free Trade Agreement(NAFTA) is to expand trade among the member nations.  NAFTA isintended to reduce the tariffs on goods and services traded amongthe three members (Canada, Mexico, and the United States).  Thefinancial services sector has received a great deal of attentionduring the NAFTA negotiations in part because it has historicallybeen one of the most protected and regulated industries in NorthAmerica.  This articles examines how the NAFTA would liberalize thefinancial services sector in Mexico and the potential impact thiswould have on U.S. banks, insurance companies, and securitiesfirms.  Throughout the article, the potential beneficiaries ofMexico's liberalization will be referred to as firms and investorsin Canada and the United States.  In the agreement, this is definedas firms established in either country, even if they are owned bynon-North American investors.     This article focuses solely on the expansion of Americanfinancial services into Mexico.  The reason for this is that Canadaalready liberalized its financial services market under the 1988Canadian Free Trade Agreement (CFTA).  This article also does notaddress the contentious issues involved in liberalizing the UnitedStates' financial services.  Canada and Mexico want to be exemptfrom the Glass-Steagall and McFadden Acts which restrict a bank'sability to own stock in other financial institutions and to conductinterstate banking.  These restrictions are largely independentfrom the issues involved in liberalizing Mexico's industries, andtherefore will not be analyzed here.     Before examining the potential changes the NAFTA would bring toU.S. financial services in Mexico, a distinction should be madebetween business growth and employment.  Financial servicesindustries are known for employing relatively small numbers ofworkers for a given amount of capital invested.  The U.S.International Trade Commission reported that, with the exception ofmarketing and sales positions, employment figures are declining inmany of the financial services. note 1  This is due in part to thehigh degree of automation that is used in these industries.  Whenexpanded opportunities in Mexico for U.S. financial serviceindustries are discussed here, it should be kept in mind that thecorresponding increases in U.S. employment would not be nearly aslarge as those in the manufacturing or other sectors.                U.S. Investment and Operations in Mexico     International trade in services usually requires the exporter toinvest in the foreign nation since the services are usuallyprovided directly to foreign customers.  Therefore, the investmentclimate in a foreign country is crucial to foreign serviceproviders who want to enter the market.  And the investment climatein Mexico was not very attractive during the 1980s because Mexico'slarge foreign debt, poor infrastructure and communications system,and high rate of inflation served as deterrents to foreign invest-ment.     The recent reforms under President Salinas as well as theanticipation of a NAFTA have give a boost to investors' confidence.The Journal of Commerce reported in June 1992 that U.S. investorsheld approximately US$27 billion of the US$130 billion capitaliza-tion in the Mexican equity market. note 2  Financial services,while still heavily protected and regulated, have been a part ofthis increase in foreign investment.  By the end of 1991, therewere 190 foreign financial institutions either represented byindividual banks or sharing banking offices in Mexico. note 3     In acquiescing to the U.S. and Canadian demands to liberalizeits financial sector under the NAFTA, Mexico is also pursuing itsown economic interests.  Foreign competition in banking, insurance,and securities will provide some of the resources needed for Mexicoto expand economically.  Foreign firms might also force Mexicanfinancial services to become more efficient in order to compete.But at the same time, Mexico is very concerned that foreign firms,due to their higher level of efficiency and capital reserves, willdrive Mexican firms out of business.  This could jeopardizeMexico's financial sovereignty, particularly in the banking sector.Mexico's Commerce Secretary and chief trade representative, JaimeSerra Puche, summed up his nations' concerns when addressing theMexican Senate: "The negotiation of financial services has beenguided by two central objectives.  First, to maintain predominantMexican control of the financial system.  Second, to design anopening that reinforces the economy's competitiveness." note 4                Banking     The Mexican banking industry has undergone many structuralchanges in the last decade.  In 1982, responding to the foreigndebt crisis, President Lopez Portillo nationalized Mexico'seighteen banks.  But under the leadership of President Salinas,Mexico has successfully reversed that action.  All eighteen bankshad ben sold to Mexican investors by July 1992.  Foreign investorswere ineligible to participate in the sealed bid auctions.     Part of the reason for the privatization movement was theinefficiency of Mexico's state-run banks.  Lack of foreigncompetition also hampered the industry's progress since Citibank isthe only foreign bank allowed to have commercial operations inMexico.  Citibank established operations in Mexico in 1929, beforemost of the regulations barring foreign banks were created. note 5Past Restrictions     In December 1989, Mexico issued new banking regulations thatpermitted foreign investors to own 34 percent of the equity inMexican banks, but foreign involvement was restricted to nonvotingparticipation. note 6  A second wave of banking reforms wasimplemented in July 1990.     Under this new system, 51 percent of Mexican bank equity waslabeled as "A" shares and auctioned off to Mexican financialinstitutions like the state development banks and the developmenttrust funds.  The remaining "B" shares were auctioned off toinstitutional investors and Mexican companies as well as thefinancial institutions eligible for the "A" shares.  "A" and "B"shareholders could in turn sell some of their shares to virtuallyany investor, including foreigners, as long as these "C" shareswere limited to 30 percent of the bank's total equity. note 7     Another restriction limited individual investors and singlecompanies, both foreign and Mexican, to owning only five percent ofany bank.  This limit could be raised to ten percent with specialauthorization. note 8     The "C" shares that were permitted under the 1990 reform gaveforeign investors for the first time a voting stake in bankoperations.  Still, foreign investors did not flood the Mexicanmarket, in part because they were not interested in operating sucha small fraction of the controlling interest in Mexican banks.     An even greater obstacle to foreign investment, this oneconcerning foreign banks operating in Mexico, was the regulationthat prohibited foreign bank subsidiaries from offering services toMexican citizens.  They were only permitted to provide "offshore"banking services. note 9Proposed Liberalization Under NAFTA     In late June 1992, it was reported that Mexico, the UnitedStates, and Canada had reached a compromise on the financialservices sector of the NAFTA that would dramatically liberalizeMexico's banking industry.  The agreement would allow U.S. andCanadian investors to own 100 percent of Mexican banks, subject tothe restriction that no more than eight percent of the entireMexican banking industry is owned by foreigners within the firstyear after a NAFTA is signed.  This eight-percent limit would beraised one percent per year, each year for seven years, at whichtime the limit would be completely removed. note 10  For the firstfour years after the limit is removed, Mexico would reserve theright to freeze U.S. and Canadian investment if it reached 25percent of the Mexican banking industry.  This 25-percent freezecould only last three years. note 11  Any further restrictionsbeyond this transition period would require the approval of U.S.and Canadian officials.     The compromise limits individual investors to only 1.5 percentof the market during the transition period.  After the transitionperiod has ended, individual investors would still be limited tofour percent of the market share if the four percent was achievedby acquiring Mexican banks. note 12  This stipulation was designedto protect Mexico's largest banks from foreign takeover.Individual investors from Canada and the United States could expandbeyond this four percent limit, but only through internalgrowth. note 13     The NAFTA also addresses the issue of what kinds of bankingservices U.S. firms could provide.  Under the agreement, U.S. andCanadian subsidiaries in Mexico would receive national treatmentand therefore be allowed to provide all the services that Mexicanbanks provide.  U.S. and Canadian banks operating outside Mexicowould still be restricted to providing "offshore" services only.Prospects for U.S. Industry after Liberalization     A fall in Mexican interest rates, coupled with the boost ineconomic confidence that the NAFTA should provide, is expected tospur borrowing in Mexico.  This possibility has led many tospeculate that the financial services agreement under the NAFTAcould give a strong boost to the U.S. banking industry.  But theinternational position of U.S. banks must be taken into accountwhen analyzing the potential impact of the NAFTA.  A 1991 U.S.International Trade Commission (ITC) report concluded:     If U.S. banks are allowed to offer a full range of financial     services and products directly in the Mexican market, there     could be a moderately positive impact on U.S. banking services     exports to Mexico in the long term.  However, U.S. banks are     currently consolidating their international operations in     response to large outstanding loans and higher capital     requirements which will weaken their ability to enter the     Mexican market. note 14     Analysts have also cautioned that the relative size of theMexican market, even with rapid growth, is such that the short-runimpact on the revenues of U.S. banks is likely to be small.  Arecent study by Gary Hufbauer and Jeffrey Schott shows that in 1989sixteen of Mexico's banks collectively had assets worthapproximately US$58 billion, one-fourth the size of Citicorp'sassets for the same year. note 15  In the long-run, however,proponents of the NAFTA argue that the prospects for U.S. bankslook more promising.  Not only is Mexico's economy likely to growunder the NAFTA and thus provide greater demand for bankingservices, but it is possible that U.S. banking operations in Mexicocould be used as a way of expanding services throughout LatinAmerica.     In regards to the type of banking operations most likely to beundertaken, the ITC speculated in its report that commercialbanking would be the focus of U.S. investment rather than retailbanking. note 16  This is because retail banks must reachindividual consumers and therefore require larger capitalinvestments.                Insurance     Despite the fact that there are forty-three Mexican insurancecompanies, this sector is widely considered the weakest of Mexico'sfinancial services. note 17  And unlike banking, the Mexicaninsurance industry has a fairly large foreign presence.  Twelve ofthe world's twenty-five largest insurance firms, including AmericanCIGNA and AIG, provide reinsurance and consulting services inMexico. note 18  These foreign firms make up approximately 15percent of the Mexican market share.Past Restrictions     Similar to the banking industry, Mexico took steps even beforethe NAFTA negotiations to liberalize its restrictions on foreigninvolvement in the insurance industry.  Most significantly, in 1990Mexico lifted its ban on new foreign investment in the insurancesector and raised the limit of foreign ownership from 15 percent to49 percent of Mexican insurance companies. note 20     Despite these changes in regulations on ownership, there stillexist many insurance services that are reserved solely for Mexicanfirms.  For example, only national firms are allowed to sellpolicies to individuals living in Mexico at the time when thecontract is signed.  National firms also have a legal monopoly onauto insurance for cars that are owned by Mexican citizens or haveMexican license plates.  Another examples is the insurance ofimported and exported goods, which is restricted to Mexican firmsif a Mexican resident is liable for the risk.  Credit insurance andcivil liability policies have similar restrictions. note 21Proposed Liberalization under NAFTA     The financial services agreement reached in June 1992 would callfor major changes in Mexico's insurance industry.  U.S. andCanadian insurance companies that are already in Mexico would seetheir limitations on ownership in Mexican companies raised from 49percent to 100 percent by 1996. note 22  The authors conclude thatthis is indicative of an industry that is maintaining highprofitability in a protected market despite poor efficiency.Liberalization of the insurance sector would therefore seem like agreat opportunity for the much more efficient U.S. companies toexpand their operations.     Still, the Mexican insurance market has the same relativelysmall size (when compared to the U.S. market) as the Mexicanbanking market.  Insurance premiums represent only one percent ofGDP in Mexico, compared to 9.1 percent in the UnitedStates. note 26  It is unclear whether the small size of theMexican market is due to lack of demand or supply or both, but ifit is lack of supply, then it is likely that U.S. insurancecompanies could enjoy profitable growth opportunities in Mexico.                Securities     The securities and brokerage industry is considered by many tobe Mexico's strongest financial service sector.  Mexico has twenty-five brokerage houses that provide its investment services.  Thesebrokerage houses have four main areas of operation, with by far thelargest one being securities agents and traders on the secondarymarket.  Two other areas are brokering and mutual fundadministration.  There also exists investment banking divisions insome of the brokerage houses. note 27  But the size of thesebrokerage firms should not be overstated.  The Hufbauer and Schottstudy examined seventeen of these firms in 1989 and found that theyhad a collective net worth of approximately US$1 billion.  Bycomparison, in that same year Merrill Lynch alone had a net worthover US$3 billion. note 28Past Restrictions     The brokerage houses have probably the strictest regulations onforeign ownership among the financial services.  Foreign investorsin brokerage houses must receive permission from Mexico, and thetotal amount of foreign ownership in any one firm is limited to 30percent.  In addition, no individual foreign investor may hold morethan ten percent of a Mexican brokerage house. note 29Proposed Liberalization under NAFTA     The financial services compromise would allow U.S. and Canadiansecurities firms to control 10 percent of the Mexican market assoon as the NAFTA goes into effect.  This limit would be raised totwenty percent during the first six years of the agreement.  If,after this six-year transition period, the U.S. and Canadian marketshare reaches 30 percent, Mexico can put a freeze on furtherforeign investment during a second transition period.  This 30-percent freeze could only be started during years seven through tenof the NAFTA and could last at most, three years once Mexicodecides to implement it. note 30     Individual foreign-owned securities firms would be restricted tofour percent of the market during both stages of the transitionperiod, which would be a maximum of thirteen years if Mexicoinvoked the three-year freeze in the tenth  year of the agreement.At the end of both transition periods, the limit on individualmarket share would be lifted, as would the aggregate limit of 30percent. note 31Prospects for U.S. Industry after Liberalization     Since the securities industry in Mexico is the most regulated ofthe financial services, some argue that the U.S. securitiesindustry has the most to gain from the NAFTA.  U.S. securitiesfirms have competed successfully in other unregulated markets duein part to their relative size, sophistication, and reputation.The industry was quite pleased with the compromise of late June.In addition to the liberalized Mexican market that this compromisewould create, industry representatives are also fairly optimisticabout the prospects of expanding operations beyond Mexico and intoLatin America, though such an expansions would not be as easy asspreading throughout the European Community.     There are, however, a couple of reasons why a liberalization ofMexico's securities regulations might not have a major impact onU.S. firms.  First, the relative poverty of the average Mexicancitizen and the small level of capital funds of Mexican companiesmay limit the demand for services from U.S. securities firms.Industry representatives hope that the NAFTA will boost Mexicanwealth in the long run and thus improve the opportunities for theseU.S. firms.  Second, some financial services that fall under therubric of the securities industry do not require foreign directinvestment.  For example, most of the transborder business thatU.S. investment banks conduct with Mexico entails Mexican clientscoming to the United States for services.  Under thesecircumstances, liberalizing Mexican market access is not going tosignificantly improve the business opportunities of U.S. investmentbanks.  There are, however, other types of securities services(e.g., financial advisors, brokerage firms) which are moredependent on foreign direct investment and therefore would stand togain from Mexican liberalization.                Conclusion     Despite the transition periods that Mexico has insisted uponbefore completely liberalizing its financial service sectors, therecent NAFTA negotiations appear to be a major victory for U.S.financial service firms.  For the first time Mexico is permittingmajority ownership by foreign companies in these sectors, as wellas allowing U.S. and Canadian subsidiaries to provide services thatpreviously had been restricted to Mexican firms.     On the whole, U.S. banks, insurance companies, and securitiesfirms are expected to compete very effectively in a liberalizedMexican market.  The combination of experience, resource size,reputation, and technical expertise gives U.S. financial servicefirms a distinct advantage over their North American competitors.However, U.S. firms could face stiff competition from Japanese andEuropean firms that are already established in North America andtherefore eligible for preferential treatment from Mexico.  Sincemost major Japanese and European financial service firms areestablished in North America, this sector could become the mostopen and competitive market addressed in the agreement.     It appears that the main obstacle to the expansion of U.S.financial services in a liberalized Mexican market is the size andincome level of Mexico's businesses and citizens.  This obstaclecould be diminished by accelerated Mexican growth once the NAFTA isimplemented.  As is the case with many industries, the UnitedStates might export more financial services to Mexico as it expandseconomically.                Notes1      U.S. International Trade Commission.  The Likely Impact on the       United States of a Free Trade Agreement with Mexico.  USITC       Publication 2353.  February 1991.  Chapter 4, p. 45.  For       additional information, see U.S. Library of Congress.       Congressional Research Service.  Banks and Savings       Institutions: Employment Trends, by Linda Levine [Washington].       September 25, 1991.  (Report No. 91-703 E).2      Hall, Cheryl.  Mexican Stock Exchange Moves Into Limelight.       Journal of Commerce, June 25, 1992, p. 2A.3      Cancelada, Greg.  Bank Sales Pave the Way for Trading.  Journal       of Commerce, November 7, 1991, p. 5A.4      Serra Puche Says Extra-Long Tariff Period is Possible.  U.S.-       Mexico Free Trade Reporter, April 20, 1992, p. S-4.5      Bradsher, Keith.  In Trade Plan, Mexico Agrees To Open Up       Finance Services.  The New York Times, July 14, 1992, p. 1A.6      U.S. International Trade Commission.  Review of Trade and       Investment Liberalization Measures by Mexico and Prospects for       Future United States-Mexican Relations.  USITC Publication       2275.  April 1990.  Chapter 5, p. 10.7      Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, and Jeffrey J. Schott.  North American       Free Trade.  Washington, D.C., Institute for International       Economics, 1992, p. 310.8      Ibid., p. 311.9      Ibid., p. 312.10     Maggs, John.  U.S.-Mexico Reach Pact On Financial Services.       Journal of Commerce, July 1, 1992, p. 1A.11     Phaseouts of Market-Share Limits Is First Major NAFTA Break-       through.  U.S.-Mexico Free Trade Reporter, June 29, 1992, p. 1.12     Ibid.13     Ibid.14     Supra note 1, Chapter 4, p. 41.15     Hufbauer and Schott, pp. 308-309, 313.16     Supra note 1, Chapter 4, p. 42.17     Hufbauer and Schott, p. 314-315.18     Ibid., p. 317.19     Mexico Modifies Stance in NAFTA Financial Services Talks, But       Impasse Remains.  Inside U.S. Trade, June 19, 1992.  P. 13.20     Supra note 6, Chapter 5, p. 11.21     Hufbauer and Schott, p. 317.22     Dykewicz, Paul.  American Insurers Gain Expanded Market Access.       Journal of Commerce, August 13, 1992, p. 5A.23     Supra note 11, p. 1.24     Ibid.25     Hufbauer and Schott, pp. 315-316.26     Ibid.Douglas Karmin is an Economic Analyst in the Economics Division ofthe U.S. Congressional Research Service.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO TRADE AND LAW REPORTER via NewsNetAugust 1, 1992Ringing Up Credit Cards Sales     In July 1992, there were 9.6 million credit card accounts inMexico.  The credit card market is a rapidly expanding part of thefinancial services sector in Mexico and is expected to continue itsgrowth in the near future.  Two banks, Banamex and Bancomer, alongwith a consortium of thirteen banks called CARNET, controlvirtually the entire market.  American Express plays an importantrole in the service card market.                Laws and Oversight     The credit card industry falls under the Ley de Instituciones deCredito (Credit Institutions Law) of 1990.  The industry isregulated by the Bank of Mexico and the Comision Nacional de Bancos(the National Banking Commission).  Only diversified banks mayissue credit cards.  This excludes credit unions and specializedbanks such as Mexico's agricultural and development banks.                Card Issuers     Through July 1992, Banamex, Mexico's largest bank, was theleading issuer of credit cards, with approximately four millionaccounts out of a total of 9.6 million in Mexico.  The consortiumCARNET, whose largest member is Banca Serfin, was second with threemillion accounts.  Bancomer was the third largest issuer with 2.6million accounts.     As in the U.S., American Express issues service, not creditcards, and usually requires its cardholders to pay off their entirebalance each month; thus American Express is exempted from therestriction on card issuance by non-banks.  As of August 1992,American Express had approximately 400,000 cardholders in Mexico.Diner's Club and several department stores issue their own cards,but they represent a small part if the market.     Bancomer issues Visa cards and CARNET and Banamex issue bothVisa cards and Mastercards.  Banks pay the U.S.-based Visa andMastercard organizations a licensing fee to issue cards in Mexico.                Card Billings and Market Strategies     A total of US$12.3 billion was charged on bank credit cards in1991.  During the first seven months of 1992, US$8.6 billion wascharged.  In spite of Banamex's lead in charge accounts, each ofthe group's share of annual credit card charges is roughly thesame.  Through July 1992, Banamex and Bancomer each controlledslightly over a third of Mexico's credit card charges and CARNETjust under a third.     In addition to bank credit card billings, American Expressbilled about US$1.0 billion in the first seven months of the yearand projects its billings will reach US$1.7 billion for the entireyear.  American Express's Mexican customers charge an average ofUS$5,000 a year on the standard green card, double the amount oftheir U.S. counterparts.     Banamex aims at the mass market, trying to get its cards intothe hands of as many people as possible.  Bancomer, by offeringmore services and by charging more for its cards, aims for aclientele that has greater economic resources.  CARNET, because itis a consortium of banks, does not have a set strategy; rather,each bank sets its own market goals.  American Express gears itscard toward the highest income groups.  According to the head ofthe Mexican subsidiary, American Express aims solely at the upscalecard market.  In the beginning of 1992, in fact, American Expresscanceled 40,000 accounts, about ten percent of outstanding accountsat the time, because of credit problems and because thesecardholders no longer met American Express's income requirements.                Credit Card Loan Portfolios     Credit card loans have become an increasingly importantcomponent of banks' loan portfolios.  Banamex's credit cardportfolio grew in real terms between December 1989 and December1991 from about US$1.0 billion to US$2.0 billion.  (Real growth iscalculated by factoring out inflation from the peso, thenconverting totals into US$ using the peso/dollar exchange rateprevailing in December 1991.)  At the same time, these loans grewfrom eight percent to eleven percent of the bank's total outstand-ing loans.  Bancomer's credit card loan portfolio more than doubledin real terms between December 1989 and December 1991, from US$850million to US$2.0 billion.  During this period, credit card loansgrew from 7.6 percent to 11.3 percent of its total outstanding loanportfolio.  Bancomer reports that its credit card loans throughDecember 1991 constituted the most profitable segment of its loanportfolio.  Figures were unavailable for CARNET.                Revenue Sources     Credit card issuers make money from three primary sources:  i)the annual fee they charge customers for the card; ii) the amountthey charge merchants to process a transaction; and iii) theinterest charged to customers who do not pay off their monthlybalances.  Among banks, card fees range from 45,000 pesos (US$15)for Bancomer's standard card to 200,000 pesos (US$75) forBancomer's high-income gold card.     Banks charge merchants a fee of up to six percent of the grossamount of each sale charged to a credit card issued by the bank andoffer discounts to merchants that do a high-volume of credit cardsales.  The day after the transaction, the banks pay the merchantthe entire value of the sale minus the bank's commission.  Thebanks do not gain from a float -- i.e., from holding money in aninterest-bearing account and paying the merchants later.  In fact,banks suffer a "negative float" -- that is, banks pay the merchantsbefore the banks have received payment from the cardholders for theitems charged and must absorb the cost of money until they are paidby the cardholders.  Much of this funding cost is offset by thecommission the banks charge the merchants.     For banks though, the most lucrative feature of issuing creditcards is the interest they charge cardholders on unpaid balances.Banks would lose money on their card operations if a significantnumber of people did not use the revolving credit feature of thecards.  In September 1992, banks charged a monthly rate of 3.25percent interest (39 percent annual rate) on outstanding balances.The rate charged on unpaid credit card balances is set monthly bythe Bank of Mexico, and is based on the banks' average cost ofraising funds, called the CPP, plus a profit spread for the banks.In September 1992, the interest rate charged on unpaid balances of39 percent provided banks a net annualized gain of almost 19percent over the CPP rate of 20.16 percent.  A balance is outstand-ing if unpaid 20 days after the billing date.     Industry-wide, approximately 70 percent of monthly credit cardbalances are left unpaid.  One indication of why so much is leftunpaid each month comes from a northern Mexico newspaper (El Norte)survey which in July 1992 found that 68 percent of cardholders wereoblivious to the interest they were paying on their balances.     In contrast to banks, American Express derives its credit cardrevenues primarily from the fees it charges for its cards and fromwhat it charges merchants.  The standard green card costs US$66 andthe higher-income gold card costs US$165.     American Express's charges to merchants depend on the paymentschedule the merchant select and the Mexican short-term treasurybill interest rate.  For example, in September 1992, a supermarketwould pay American Express a 3.1 percent commission if it wanted tobe paid for purchases made on the American Express card withinseven days and 2.5 percent if it chose the 21-day payment option.American Express does not offer next-day payment to merchants, butits fees are generally lower than those of other card companies.American Express also requires its cardholders to pay off theirbalances within 11 days of billing, thus reducing the time thecompany must extend credit to its customers.     American Express does offer credit to its cardholders forpurchases over two million pesos (US$654), but as of September 1992it charged an annual interest rate of 72.6 percent for thisfeature.  Only 12 percent of purchases on the American Express cardare made this way.  As a separate matter, as of early September1992 American Express charged a punitive annual interest rate of125.4 percent for all delinquent payments.                Loan Defaults     Credit card companies lose money primarily through defaults.Industry contacts indicate that industry-wide, that part of thebanks' credit card loan portfolios that is past due ornon-performing is about seven percent of outstanding loans.     In March 1991, the Ministry of Finance adopted new rules for theestablishment of loan loss reserves by Mexican commercial banks.The rules established five categories, corresponding to the degreeof probability that the loan would be repaid; the riskier the loan,the higher the reserve.  Under this system, for example, Bancomerin 1991 placed loan loss reserves of 41.5 percent against its totalpast due loan portfolio.  Specific figures for reserves for pastdue credit card loans were unavailable.  Banks may write off a loanonly with approval from the National Banking Commission afterdemonstrating that they have made sufficient attempts to collectthe loan.                Applying for and Holding a Credit Card     Cards available in Mexico range from those only for use withinMexico to those internationally-acceptable, with correspondingcredit limits and income requirements.Applying for a Card     All banks and American Express require proof of local address,the last two salary statements, and a photo identification.Banamex requires, in addition, a letter of employment and threeyears of employment history.  Bancomer also requires family andpersonal references.     The companies usually do an in-house credit check and, whennecessary, submit the application to Cicsa, Mexico's only creditbureau.  American Express does most of its credit verificationitself.  All issuers reported that each person's credit history isverified, usually through phone calls, before they approveapplications.     American Express rejects approximately 50 percent of itsapplicants, mostly for lack of adequate income.  Bancomer rejectsonly five percent of its applicants, usually for incomplete orfalse data.  Neither Banamex nor CARNET would divulge thisinformation.Cards and Cost     Table I provides a sample of the least and most expensive cardsavailable and the minimum salary requirements to qualify for one.American Express's cards are the most expensive, followed byBancomer's cards.  American Express also has the highest salaryrequirement.Services and Bill Paying     Credit card providers in Mexico offer services similar to thoseavailable from providers in the U.S.  These include access toautomatic tellers for cash advances, automatic travel insurance,and card replacement.  Visa, Mastercard, and American Expresscardholders are connected to the international networks of thosefirms.  In addition, Mexican holders of credit cards issued bybanks may use their accounts as savings accounts.  Banks pay amarket interest rate on positive balances.     Most bank credit card bills are paid in the offices of the banksthat issued the card.  American Express bills are paid in AmericanExpress offices.  Some customers pay their accounts by mail butbecause of the unreliability of this method, most choose to pay inperson.  Banamex is beginning a phone payment system in which acustomer can transfer funds from a bank account to pay the bill.                Market Growth     The credit card market has grown significantly over the past fewyears.  From 1990 to 1991 alone, total charges on bank credit cardsgrew over 30 percent in nominal terms.  Charges on the AmericanExpress card were up 27 percent in nominal terms over the sameperiod.     Card companies expect the growth to continue through 1992 and1993, although not as quickly as in the past two years.  Because ofthe privatization of the Mexican banks, competition within theindustry is becoming more intense.  Still, CARNET and Banamex planfor nominal growth of 10 to 20 percent a year in both billings andcard issuance through 1993.  American Express expects 20 percentnominal annual growth in its card and billing portfolio through1993.     This growth is possible both because there are people who meetthe income criteria for cards but do not yet have a credit card andbecause increasing incomes for some Mexicans could soon qualifythem for a credit card.  American Express reports that the numberof Mexicans who meet its income criteria is between  1.3  and  1.7million.   Banamex would not provide an estimate of a targetmarket, but asserted that the free trade agreement with the U.S.and Canada and increasing economic modernization in Mexico willraise personal incomes making more people eligible for creditcards.American Express-Banamex Joint Venture     In March 1992, American Express and Banamex announced ajoint-venture called Banamsa to issue American Express gold cards.American Express expects to issue 300,000 of these co-branded cardsby 1995, in addition to the 400,000 American Express cards alreadyissued in Mexico.  American Express's primary aims in this ventureare to gain access to Banamex's six million customers and to itsnetwork of roughly 725 branches.  This will make it easier forcustomers to pay bills and for merchants to receive payment.  Inaddition, American Express hopes to extend the market for itscorporate card through Banamex's relationship with businesses.Banamex expects to gain access to American Express's expertise inthe travel industry and to its international financial experience.                NAFTA     Under NAFTA, foreign non-bank financial services companies willbe permitted to set up limited-scope financial institutions inMexico, including those to provide credit card services.  The totalassets of these companies are limited to three percent of the totalassets of all commercial banks in Mexico plus the total assets ofall limited-scope financial institutions in Mexico.  A change inMexican law would be required for non-banks to be able to issuecredit cards in Mexico.  It is expected that this change will occuras part of the implementing legislation for NAFTA.Table I:  Annual Fee and Minimum Salary Requirements for MexicanCredit Cards(U.S. dollars)                                               Minimum                                               MonthlyCompany              Card Type         Cost     SalaryBancomer             Classic Nat'l     $15      $  392                     Gold Int'l         65       2,124Banamex              Classic Nat'l      16         392                     Plus Int'l         49       2,288CARNET               National           15         392                     Gold Int'l         33       3,922American Express     Green              66       2,500                     Gold              165       5,000This article is based on a report filed by the U.S. Embassy inMexico City.Back to Headline List WT03-B06-3IA087-000634-B040-241http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it141.html 205.156.212.5 19970122030210 text/html 6580HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:00:12 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:37 GMTContent-length: 6394Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it141.html Sample Issue Copyright MAINICHI PRESS RELEASE SERVICE via NewsNet September 17, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Toshiba:Established A China Joint Venture to Manufacture (490 words) Toshiba:Uses the Internet to Strengthen Worldwide (298 words) CopyrightMAINICHI PRESS RELEASE SERVICE                via NewsNetSeptember 17, 1996Toshiba:Established A China Joint Venture to Manufacturefrom MAINICHI PRESS RELEASE SERVICE/ENGLISH SERVICE, September 17, 1996September,1996TOKYO -- Toshiba Corporation today announced that it has entered intoagreements with Chinese partners and Nichimen Corp. to establish ajoint venture company to manufacture and market color television sets(CTVs) in Dalian, China.Investment in the new facility acounts to approximately US$ 98.1million. The establishment will assure Toshiba of a solid manufacturingand marketing base for color television sets to address the stronggrowth of demand anticipated in China, and to supply other fast-growingAsian countries.Dalian Toshiba Television Co., Ltd. (DTV), the color TV plant, willhave an initial capitalization of US$49.1 million, 52 percent owned byToshiba Corp., 13percent by Toshiba (China) Co., Ltd., 5 percent byNichimen Corp. and 30 percent by Dalian Daxian Group Corp. Theprocedures to establish the IV were completed in last July. DTV'sfacilities, including a product design and development center, will belocated on a plot next to Toshiba's Dalian facility for manufacturingelectronic components, Toshiba Dalian Co., Ltd. (TDL).Construction will start in October 1996 and manufacturing is scheduledto begin in October I 997. The plant will have a production capacity of1 million units a year, and a product line-up of 21-inch to 29-inchCTV. Output will be sold in China and also exported, malnly to otherAsian countries.Market Gro'wth ExpectedThe worldwide CTV market reached 109.6 million units last year, and isexpected to enjoy steady growth to 112 million units this year.Particularly strong growth is expected in the Chinese market, with highgrowth rates pushing demand to 15 million units in 1995 and 20 millionin 2000. It is expected to match the U.S. marketinsize by 2000.Toshiba's Facilities WorldwideToshiba is establishing a global network of CTV manufacturhig andmarketing facilities based in key markets including Japan, North andLatin America, Europe and Asia. In fiscal year 1995, the company'sfacilities worldwide sold approximately 6.1 million units.Toshiba is establishing the new facility in Dalian: (1) to assure amanufacturing and marketing operation supporting production of productsto meet demand from the Chinese market; (2) and because TDL alreadyproduces key CTV components in Dalian, including TV chassis and tuners,which provides a basis to create mutual effect for Toshiba Group byextending overall manufacturing operation and procurement in the region.Toshiba develops and produces a wide range of products in order to meetdiverse demands in different markets. The company is currentlyenhancing all aspects of its global manufacturing operation structure,from procurement to assembly, with consideration for such factors asmarket size, costs and labor availability, etc. The establishment ofthe new company fits into this worldwide strategy, and also allowsToshiba to promote Sino-Japanese cooperation through business. 1-1-1, Shibaura, Minato-ku, Tokyo 105, Japan  Telephone : (03)3457-2105(direct)  Facsimile: (03)3456-4776Copyright 1996 The Mainichi Newspapers Company LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightMAINICHI PRESS RELEASE SERVICE                via NewsNetSeptember 17, 1996Toshiba:Uses the Internet to Strengthen Worldwidefrom MAINICHI PRESS RELEASE SERVICE/ENGLISH SERVICE, September 17, 1996September,1996Tokyo--Toshiba Corporation today announced that it will use theInternet to bring a new dimension to its worldwide procurement ofcomponents and materials. The company is listing descriptions andspecifications of items it wants to purchase, and inviting suppliersto e-mail details of price, availability and other information.This new approach is part of Toshiba's reinforcement of globalpurchasing. The company wants to procure from companies competitive inprice, delivery, quality and service, thus assuring its owncompetitiveness across its wide range of business, from semiconductorsto power plant. Procurement from outside Japan amounted to 341.6billion yen last fiscal year, and is expected to rise to 500 billionyen by fiscal 1998, ending March 1999.Use of the Internet will support Toshiba in finding and contacting newsuppliers, procuring from the most competitive sources, establishingclear, speedy and effective communications, and developing andmaintaining mutually beneficial relations with suppliers.Commenting on the on-line system, Mr. Hideo Shimizu, General Managerof the Procurement Division, was very positive: "1 see the Internet ashaving a very positive influence on our procurement. It gives us apowerful means for finding and working closely with potentialsuppliers, and 1 think it will also assure fairness, openness and ouraccessibility to suppliers."In other moves to strengthen worldwide procurement, Toshiba is alsoenlarging its network of International Procurement Offices. Two newoffices will open this coming October, in Vienna, Austria and Dallas,Texas, bringing to 11 the number of offices located in strategiclocations around the world.Toshiba International Procurement Home Page Address http://www.Toshiba.co.jp/procure/ 1-1-1, Shibaura, Minato-ku, Tokyo 105, Japan  Telephone: (03)3457-2105(direct)  Facsimile: (03)3456-4776  Telex:J22587Copyright 1996 The Mainichi Newspapers Company LimitedBack to Headline List WT03-B06-4IA087-000634-B041-41http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it174.html 205.156.212.5 19970122030434 text/html 236220HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:00:32 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:17 GMTContent-length: 236032Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it174.html Sample Issue Copyright MALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNet November 16, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES All-out collaboration: Australia and Malaysia edge towards a more integrated partnership (1656 words) No basis to rumours: Executive director Khaw Chay Tee sets the record straight (719 words) Bug-busting its way to the top: Fumakilla Malaysia Bhd isn't content with being just the market leader i (1446 words) Choices in education: The stage is being set for greater interaction with Australian edu (1160 words) Contractual benefits: Students gain in several ways from the twinning of the Sepang Institute (662 words) Crest and trenergy to tie up? (196 words) Crystal clear directions: Construction company Crystal Realty is quite sure it is ready to take on (892 words) Stocks to watch: Damansara Realty Bhd (90 words) Detecting deceit: Some of the ways employees can cheat a company (1688 words) Fast and comfortable: Nissan's competitively priced Cefiro offers power and safety (1408 words) Fired by hypermarkets: Metrojaya brings style and ambience to its Cosmart hypermarkets (1058 words) A new way to fly: Heli Asia is a platform for helicopter manufacturing sub-contracting (1085 words) Shopping in a green world: Britain's first environmentally friendly supermarket opens its doors (847 words) Getting a grip: The proposed listing of Multi-Purpose Capital Holdings may just give the (1732 words) Editorial: Heed Auditor-General's report (376 words) Expanding horizons: With Samsung Malaysia's expansion programme in its Seremban complex in i (1216 words) The uptrend remains intact: The Composite Index gets a boost from Tenaga (581 words) Landbank edge: With a landbank worth RM1 billion, Johor Land Bhd will be busy in south (1022 words) In the corporate lane: Datuk Lee Kim Sai says he now lives a healthier and more peaceful (1759 words) A marriage of convenience: A rattan furniture company successfully marries form and function to giv (1002 words) A milestone for reinsurer: MNRB plans to go into underwriting risks for aircraft and satellites (1291 words) Pricier than the norm: But given its profitability, analysts think that's a fair IPO price for (1153 words) Stocks to watch: Perusahaan Otomobil Nasional Bhd (54 words) The profits of peace: Malaysian investors get a head start in southern Philippines (1329 words) The perks of the trade: Samsung workers enjoy living standards better than most (682 words) Stocks to watch: Posim Bhd (61 words) Roads to roam: The Western Australian Education Centre shows you several ways of gettin (646 words) Seeking only the best: High calibre multiple partners help IMC maintain high standards (781 words) Stage set for the next century: The 1997 Budget lays a foundation for a technologically sophisticated (2220 words) Shifting prices: Multinationals and tax authorities face off on the issue of transfer (1354 words) Stocks to watch: Tenaga Nasional Bhd (103 words) New shareholders for Tenco? (333 words) Theory in practice: As Malaysian and Australian ministers speak of high tides and pebbles (760 words) Ahead of the times: Singapore Airlines upgrades fleet and service to stay ahead of the pack (1835 words) More tools of investment: New measures to turn Malaysia into a complete capital market (1045 words) Way out of Ampang snarl: Prolintas starts work on twin-deck highway above Klang River (1372 words) Satellite parts from Zasna (198 words) CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996All-out collaboration: Australia and Malaysia edge towards a moreintegrated partnershipfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 59MALAYSIA AND Australia are strengthening their ties in the fields ofbusiness, education, science, the arts and sports. That was the messageAustralian Foreign Affairs Minister Alexander Downer delivered in hisrecent visit to Malaysia.  The minister also said that the tide of economic, technological andsocial change which is transforming Australia has created furtheropportunities for cooperation and partnership between the two countries.  In a written reply to questions from Malaysian Business, Downer spellsout the framework for trade and economic relations between the twocountries, and what possibly lies in the future.  How do you see future growth in trade between Australia and Malaysia?  Clearly, we would like our trade with Malaysia to increase stronglyevery year. Over the past five years, total two-way trade has grown atjust on 19 per cent - a trend I would like to see continue.  However, as we form more integrated partnerships with Malaysia andMalaysians, it is likely that we will invest and establish more commercialoperations in each other's markets. This may mean that there will be ashift in the way business is undertaken in future. There might be astronger growth in the bilateral investment statistics at first, hopefullyleading to a steady and balanced growth in trade statistics. Greaterinvestment should in turn engender healthier trade flows too.  Would you be able to specify the amount of foreign direct investmentflowing from Australia into Malaysia?  It is very difficult to specify the exact amount of Australianinvestment going into Malaysia. Official figures do not take into accountfunds sourced outside the investing country, re-investment of profits,appreciation of assets and a number of other factors. So the figures aregenerally underestimates - sometimes by a long shot. Nevertheless,Australian official data puts the level of Australian direct investment inMalaysia at around A$2.1 billion (RM4.24 billion), as at June 1994.  However, I think this is an underestimate of the true stock ofAustralian investment in Malaysia. Malaysia and Australia are both longstanding investors in each other's economies, and the total stock ofinvestment in each direction probably amounts to several billion dollars.  Over the last few years, the pace of Malaysian investment in Australiahas also accelerated significantly. Some of your bigger and moresuccessful groups are here. Apart from the earlier, and successful,Malaysian investors such as IGB Bhd and Malaysia Mining Corporation, weare now seeing newer players like the Berjaya Group entering the market infields such as medical services and technology.  What are the major Malaysian sectors in which Australian companies areinvolved?  Australian companies are involved in commercial operations and projectsright across the Malaysian economy. Australian investment has largely beenconcentrated in the textile and textile products, non-metallic mineralproducts, rubber, electrical and electronic and fabricated productsindustries. Already some 200 Australian companies have offices inMalaysia.  Significant new Australian investments are expected to be approved inthe food processing, building products and paper manufacturing industries.The information technology, computing and multimedia fields are also veryexciting.  Given Malaysia's current push for technology intensive industries, theremust be plenty of opportunities for Australians. Please comment.  This is one of the most exciting areas. We really want to help buildpartnerships in technology, and Malaysia's focus on `Smart Partnerships'in the technology sector will put the onus on businesses to be creative,innovative and highly cooperative in their approach, and to include apractical focus on training and human resource development.  How does Malaysia compare with other countries in the Asia Pacificregion in terms of investment incentives?  I am really no expert on the comparative investment incentive schemesaround the East Asian region. It is obviously a very competitiveenvironment. But my overall assessment is that more important thanspecific incentives schemes for this or that industry or specific taxbreaks, is the need to get the overall economic and investment environmentright.  That means setting a long term strategic vision and sticking with it,getting the long term macro economic settings right and of course,underlying all of this, stable and clear sighted political leadership. Inthis environment, businesses can invest long term, build their assets andexpand their markets. I think that Malaysia has achieved its standing as avery attractive investment destination because it has got thesefundamentals right. Vision 2020 sets a clear goal. Macro economic settingshave been carefully set and prudently managed and the country ispolitically stable.  So I think it is the fundamentals which are the source of success. Ofcourse, there are a number of other East and Southeast Asian countrieswhich have also advanced by attending carefully to these fundamentals -but I think Malaysia stands out in the first rank of these.  What investment opportunities are there in Australia for Malaysianbusinesses?  As I said before, we would like to encourage more Malaysian businessesto invest in the productive, export and job-generating sectors of theAustralian economy - and I think we see good signs that this is alreadystarting to happen.  Traditionally, we have had a good flow of investment into propertydevelopment and into mining. But now we are seeing interest in investmentin shipbuilding, medical services and technology, solar heating, buildingproducts and aircraft engineering and technology.  We want to see more of this kind of investment. Australian firms arevery innovative - having developed or adapted technologies to make themsuitable for Australian conditions. Now many of them are looking to go offshore. They want to expand their markets. Foreign equity participation canprovide the finance and market openings to make this happen. And inreturn, there will be technology transfer benefits for the foreign partnerand its affiliates.  Are there going to be any changes in Government policy which will eithermake it easier or more difficult for Malaysians to invest in Australia?  My view is that government works best when it supports people andbusiness rather than tying them down in regulation and bureaucracy. Thebest contribution the government can make is to lay down sound macro andmicro economic policies which create conditions for business to thrive. Inthat context, the government's agenda is to free up the Australian economyand create a strong climate, conducive to investor confidence.  We want to make it easier for both local and foreign companies to investin this country's future. On the macroeconomic front, our first priorityhas been to get the budget in order. We have cut A$3.9 billion (RM7.87billion) from the underlying public sector deficit in this financial yearand we will cut A$7.2 billion (RM14.54 billion) by 1997-1998, bringing thebudget into underlying surplus in 1998-1999. This will reduce pressure onthe markets, reduce the cost of finance and encourage private investment.  How would you describe Malaysia-Australia relations, particularlyeconomic ties?  The bilateral relationship is very good and getting better -particularly in the economic and commercial field and at the politicallevel which is very important. The priority this government has put intothe relationship is attested to by the energy with which we have sought toestablish relationships with our Malaysian counterparts. The bilateralrelationship is underpinned by very strong people-to-people links -alumni, business people - and it is my job to ensure we do not take theselinkages for granted, that we build on them pro-actively to advance ourshared interests.  The Australian government greatly appreciated Datuk Seri Dr MahathirMohamad's first meeting with the Australian Prime Minister John Howard.This was a tremendous basis upon which to establish relations between thetwo governments.  We have had an impressive flow of ministerial visits in both directions.I have been to Malaysia myself twice since this government came to officeand many of my colleagues have also visited Malaysia. Deputy PrimeMinister and Trade Minister, Tim Fischer has met with  Datuk Seri RafidahAziz on five occasions since March this year. So we are achieving a goodclose working relationship in areas of central importance. We want tobuild friendship and trust.  Are there any areas in which you hope to expand further?  Definitely. We would clearly like to see more expansion of people-to-people ties at all levels from science and technology collaboration tosport, in small business development and in new areas of existingcooperation such as in education and training.  My perception is that business and commercial opportunities in thisregion usually follow the informal paths, the networks of friendshipestablished directly between people. So we need to build on those.  Now, more than ever before, the growth of cheaper internationaltelecommunications, the Internet, expanded frequency and lower cost of airtravel are making the formation and maintenance of these kinds of networksall the more easy.  There have been reports that Australia's new government is rather coolon the issue of integration with Asia as compared with the previousgovernment. Please comment.  The government is strongly committed to building relations with Asia asour highest foreign priority. For that reason, I and my ministerialcolleague the Minister of Trade, Tim Fischer, have travelled extensivelyand frequently in Asia since we took office. The Prime Minister, Howard,made his first major bilateral visits to Indonesia and Japan. The focus ofour diplomatic activity, our commitment and our travel continues to bewithin our region. To put it simply, Australia's commitment to the regionis unshakeable. There can be no questioning of our commitment or interestin building our Asian relationships. Our relationships with Asia embodyour key national interests as a country both now and in the future. We arecommitted to the active pursuit of those interests. Pix: Downer: Australians want to help build partnerships in technology.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996No basis to rumours: Executive director Khaw Chay Tee sets the recordstraightfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 10DATUK LIM Thian Kiat, or better known as T K Lim, has a reputation forbeing reclusive and press-shy. Thus, it came as no surprise when thetaipan of Multi-Purpose Holdings, Kamunting, Magnum and a host of otherlisted companies turned down a request for a Malaysian Business interview.  However, he directed his lieutenant, MPHB executive director and lawyerKhaw Chay Tee, to reply to a set of questions on his behalf. Below, wereprint the replies:  It was reported some time back that you will be teaming up with HongLeong in a Philippine lottery venture. What is the status of this venture?Have you mended fences with Quek Leng Chan of Hong Leong?  There is no proposal for the Kamunting-Multi-Purpose Group to team upwith the  Hong Leong Group in any Philippine lottery venture. As for ourrelationship with the Hong Leong Group, it has always been and is acordial and friendly one.  It was rumoured that Multi-Purpose Capital (M Capital) will be making areverse takeover of a second board company. Or is this an attempt to listMulti-Purpose Bank?  There is no proposal for M Capital to undertake a reverse takeover ofany listed company.  There are also currently no firm plans to list Multi-Purpose Bank as themanagement is concentrating its efforts on achieving Tier-1 status for thebank under the two-tier regulatory system as soon as possible.  Are you planning any more gaming ventures in China?  The Kamunting-Multi-Purpose Group has no plans for any more gamingventures in China.  It is felt that Bandar Raya Development's prospects are bleak as itslandbank is being depleted. Will you be buying up more land?  Bandar Raya Developments has over the last few years recorded averageprofit growth exceeding 25 per cent per annum and the management of BandarRaya is confident of being in the position to maintain this trend. Itcurrently has an existing landbank exceeding 1,100 acres, the bulk ofwhich is located strategically in the Klang Valley and Johor, which ismore than sufficient to sustain Bandar Raya's requirements for the nextfew years. Bandar Raya has, of course, identified existing as well as whatit believes will be new growth areas for property development and shall bereplenishing its landbank when the opportunity arises.  There is speculation that MPHB will divest its stake in SarawakEnterprise Corporation Bhd. Is this true?  MPHB has no intention of doing so as we believe Sarawak Enterprise aswell as the state of Sarawak hold tremendous potential.  Four years ago, you told Malaysian Business you would be concentratingon property and gaming, leisure and finance. Now, with the addition ofSarawak Enterprise, you are also into power generation and various otherSarawak-linked activities. What are the divisions that you will beconcentrating on from now on?  Since 1991, the MPHB Group has had three core businesses, namelyfinancial services, property and gaming. The group has over the last fouryears developed and grown this into the profitable and stable businesseswhich you see today. The MPHB Group was therefore in the position, at theend of 1995, to take on the challenge of an additional core business inthe form of electricity generation, transmission and distribution throughSarawak Enterprise. The group intends to devote a similar amount of timeand effort to its new core business as it does to its existing corebusinesses.  Kamunting Corporation Bhd's (KCB) Kepong toll concession has been thesubject of controversy. How stable would earnings be if the concession iswithdrawn?  Kamunting does not view its toll concession as controversial. The Kepongtoll concession was legally extended by the government for an additionalseven years, that is, from 8 Jan 1996 to 7 Jan 2003. The legality of theextension has been publicly reconfirmed on a number of occasions by boththe Minister for Works as well as by the Deputy Minister for Works. AsKamunting has at all times complied with and fulfilled its obligationsunder the Kepong toll concession, there are really no grounds for anycontroversy. Pix: Khaw: No controversy over Kepong toll concession.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Bug-busting its way to the top: Fumakilla Malaysia Bhd isn't content withbeing just the market leader ifrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 24IT MAY SOUND odd, but Fumakilla Malaysia Bhd is one company which is happyabout what is a bane of most households - blood-thirsty mosquitoes andbothersome insects. And little wonder, for the revenue of this soon-to-be-listed company is derived from our strong aversion to the buzz and bites,disease and destruction of these pesky winged creatures.  Fumakilla manufactures mosquito coils, insecticide vapourising mats andinsecticide aerosol sprays. But the manufacture and sale of mosquitocoils, which make up 80 per cent of Fumakilla's sales turnover is clearlyits speciality. The remaining 20 per cent of sales comes from Fumakilla'svape mats (10 per cent) and aerosol sprays (10 per cent).  The company's mosquito coils enjoy a market share of 65 per cent inMalaysia, and its total sales have grown from RM28 million in 1990 to RM78million in 1995. The Fumakilla plant at the Prai Industrial Park, Penang,churns out over 800,000 cartons of 1,000 coils and 100,000 cartons of1,000 units of vape mats and aerosol sprays a year.  Fumakilla's president and executive chairman, Datuk Fumihiko Konishi,says Fumakilla intends to increase the Prai plant's production capacity to1.6 million cartons a year in five years' time.  Konishi elaborates, `It does not involve expanding the premises of theplant or establishing a new one. It is an attempt to reduce the workforceby using technology.' This automation programme, says Konishi, is agradual one which is going to take five years and a significant amount ofinvestment. Upon completion, it will reduce Fumakilla's staff by half.  Currently, 25 per cent of Fumakilla's workforce are Bangladeshis. Thecompany aims to reduce their numbers by not renewing their permits. Thereason? `To reduce cost - we seem to spend more because we have to providethem with accommodation and transportation plus an annual paid trip backhome as well as uniforms and recreational facilities,' says Konishi.`Also, if for some reason Bangladeshis have to return to their country,then our company will be paralysed.  `Besides, the acute labour shortage in Malaysia will persist. Populationgrowth cannot catch up with the growth of the industries of this country.The only way is to introduce automation.' Automation will utilise the samespace as the existing premises. Says Konishi, `Our 7.2 acres will not beincreased. And if we fully automate, then we should be able to double ourcapacity.'  Konishi isn't content with Fumakilla being the market leader inMalaysia. He has set his eyes on making the company one of SoutheastAsia's insecticide giants. `In 10 years time, I will be talking not aboutFumakilla's Malaysian market share but about its Asean market share. Thetotal population of the Asean market will reach 500 million by the year2000. It represents an enormous market,' says a confident Kohishi.  According to the Fumakilla president, the stage has been set for thepenetration of this regional market. Over 20 per cent of the 800 millionmosquito coils churned out by Fumakilla's Prai plant is exported, mostlyto Asean-member countries. He explains,' `The exports go to Thailand,where we have captured a 15 per cent market share. I forecast this toincrease to 20 per cent by 1997. Other export destinations are South Koreawhere Fumakilla has a 20 per cent market share, and Hong Kong andSingapore, with smaller market shares.'  Outside Malaysia, Vietnam is Fumakilla's biggest market, having captured30 per cent of its market. So much so that Fumakilla set up amanufacturing facility in the Dong Nai province of Vietnam at a cost ofRM8 million. Production began in December 1995 with a capacity of 200,000cartons of mosquito coils per year. The capacity is to be doubled by theend of the year, and this will involve an investment of about RM2.1million.  The next step, says Konishi, is to set up a manufacturing facility inMyanmar next year. `Although we have begun to supply our mosquito coils toMyanmar from our Penang plant this year, there has been a seriouslogistical problem - their ports are congested. Hence, a better way topenetrate the Myanmar market is to manufacture the coils in the country.Furthermore, there is an abundant and cheap supply of labour there,' saysKonishi.  Konishi says Fumakilla's mosquito coils, marketed under the brand namesFumakilla, Goldfish and Jumbo, have an edge over competitors because theyhave a higher content of an active ingredient called d-allethrin. Bothinsecticide mats and coils when heated release the d-allethrin chemicalwhich destroys insects such as mosquitoes. Claims Konishi, `Our product is50 per cent more effective than the other brands.' He explains why. `Weuse 0.3 per cent of this ingredient in every coil while the commonpractice among players in the industry is to use only 0.2 per cent.'  Since d-allethrin costs RM500 per kilogramme, a higher concentration ofthe ingredient drives costs up. As a result, Fumakilla's mosquito coilsare priced 20 per cent higher than other brands in the market. But thisdoes not worry the company. `We reckon our customers will be loyal, andthis is also why we project our sales to grow,' says Konishi. He expectsFumakilla's market for mosquito coils in Malaysia to increase annually byfour per cent or less in the future.  Konishi also says Fumakilla takes its research and developmentseriously. Its analytical and biological laboratory which focuses onresearch into insecticide is the only one of its kind in Asia outsideJapan.  `In terms of product development, our laboratory comes up with productsthat are more effective than our competitors. We have so far invested RM5million in our R&D facility. In 10 years, we hope to invest at least fiveper cent of our sales turnover into R&D,' says Konishi.  Surprisingly, Fumakilla in Malaysia was not set up to manufacturemosquito coils, but to import insecticide mats. Established in 1976, thecompany started by supplying vape mats made by Fumakilla Japan Ltd - theinventors of the electronic insecticide device.  Konishi, a trained chemist from Japan, did not begin his career withFumakilla. He spent four years with a Singaporean trading company, leavinghis post as head of its chemical department in 1973 to venture into Penangto establish Texchem (M) Trading Sdn Bhd (now known as Texchem ResourcesBhd). Among other things, Texchem trades in chemical products. Konishialso set up a manufacturing company, Texchem (M) Sdn Bhd, which beganproduction of industrial chemicals in 1976.  That same year, Konishi decided to get into the insecticide businesswith Tokyo Stock Exchange-listed Fumakilla Ltd whose majorityshareholders, the Oshimo family, were family friends. With the assistanceof the Oshimos, Fumihiko incorporated Fumakilla (M) Sdn Bhd in Malaysia onDec 29, 1976 to manufacture vape mats. It was converted into a publiccompany on April 1983.  However, Konishi says he had a hard time convincing the public to buy aninsecticide which did not produce smoke. `It takes a long time beforepeople will be comfortable using vape mats which do not produce any smokebut which are just as effective as mosquito coils. Even in Japan, wheremosquito coils and insecticide mats originated, it took 30 years for thesale of the mats to rival that of coils,' he says.  Konishi feels the mosquito coil market is not about to shrink. `Even inthe year 2005, which will be 30 years after the introduction of vape matshere, I don't think the usage of vape mats would be equivalent to the useof mosquito coils. This is because of factors such as our lifestyle andthe structure of houses and rooms,' says Konishi.  Fumakilla's listing exercise on the second board of the Kuala LumpurStock Exchange involves an offer for sale of six million shares at RM3.20each. Fumakilla has a paid-up capital of RM39.99 million and isforecasting a pre-tax profit of RM10.943 million on a turnover of RM87.38million for the year ending Dec 31, 1996. This will give Fumakilla a grossearnings per share of around 27 sen.  Thus, at its offer price of RM3.20, its shares are being offered at aprospective gross price earnings (PE) multiple of 11.8 times. According toanalysts, the consumer products sectoral PE multiple is 21.6 times. Basedon this PE, Fumakilla would probably trade at above RM5.80. Pix: Konishi: Automation is central to Fumakilla's expansion plans.Pix: Fumakilla products include mosquito coils, insecticide vapourisingmats and insecticide aerosol sprays.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Choices in education: The stage is being set for greater interaction withAustralian edufrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 62IN THE FIELD of higher education, Australia rates among one of the premierdestinations for Malaysian students wanting to study overseas. Last year,of the 60,980 local students who went abroad for their tertiary education,21 per cent chose Australia.  Australian ties to Malaysia in the field of education date back to the1950s when `The Lucky Country' was a key participant in the Colombo Planwhich provided education to developing nations of the BritishCommonwealth.  More than half of the average 12,000 Malaysian students admitted intoAustralian institutions annually study business-and-economics-relatedsubjects, while almost a quarter study science and technology-relatedsubjects, including engineering.  They study at the more than 300 schools, Technical and Further Education(Tafe) colleges, specialist colleges and universities spread overAustralia's vast continent.  But things may change in the near future, and the number of Malaysianstudents abroad may fall.  The reason? About RM2.5 billion leaves Malaysia annually as a result ofMalaysians studying abroad, contributing to the country's large servicesdeficit. Government authorities are keen to see Malaysia becoming aregional centre of excellence in education by the year 2020. To help theMalaysian higher education sector expand, legislation has been tabled toallow private universities to be established, including the setting up ofbranch campuses of foreign universities.  Interviewed by Malaysian Business, Senator Amanda Vanstone, Australia'sMinister for Employment, Education Training and Youth Affairs, says such amove is welcomed by Australia as it is in line with Australia's plans forits education sector.  Malaysia and Australia, she says, are at the start of a new phase of athree-stage relationship in education. Says Vanstone, `The first phasestarted with the Colombo Plan which saw a small but growing number ofMalaysian and other Commonwealth students going to Australia for theirstudies. The second phase was one where there was a big push, withindustry and other private sector interests driving large numbers ofMalaysian students to come to Australia. We think both these phases havebeen beneficial to us and, we hope, for Malaysia as well.  `We are now starting on the third phase, where rather than a one wayflow of students from Malaysia to us, we want to step up the interactionquite dramatically with things like twinning arrangements, where theinstitutions, the academics and researchers will work much more closelytogether. This two-way flow of students is a much more dynamic andexciting relationship than the other two and we wish to emphasise that weare very keen on building this third phase and pushing it as far as wecan.'  Vanstone says it won't be long before the number of Australians comingto Malaysia to study increases, but `perhaps not for full degrees in thebeginning ... just doing semesters up here with twinned institutions'.  In all likelihood, there will be a drop in the number of Malaysianswanting to study in Australia. `Things change,' says Vanstone. `I was hereabout eight years ago but now, I hardly recognise Kuala Lumpur. The worldis never going to stop changing and we have to learn to move with it. Weare grateful for the opportunities we have had in having a lot ofMalaysian students. Now, we want to work with you on the next phase ofwhat you want and what we want.'  In a related development, the Australian government recently announcedits intention of making some substantial savings from the higher educationsector. Vanstone says that as a result of this, Australian universitieswill face only a very small reduction in their operating grant. Thereduction is against a growth estimate, adding that the universities willhave more operating grants next year than they had this year, but it willbe a little less than expected. `The big savings we are making does notcome from cutting grants to universities but from increasing thecontributions from Australian university students,' she says.  Australia has a system of contribution called the Higher EducationContribution scheme (HECS), introduced by the previous Labour government.Under this scheme, students can go to university irrespective of thewealth of their family but the moment they begin to earn wages, they haveto make contributions. However, Vanstone says the present governmentintends to make this system of contribution more equitable.  She explains, `The previous HECS system was one where irrespective ofwhether you were a teacher, a doctor or a veterinary science student, thecontribution you were required to make was the same. We think that isunfair and we are shifting to three levels of contribution where doctors,veterinary science graduates and lawyers will be in the highest level;engineering, general science and commerce students in the middle level andnursing and art students as well as teachers in the lowest level.'  In relation to the cut in operating grants for universities, Vanstonesays that universities will be allowed to `drop load', that is, to dropstudent numbers in the post-graduate course work area. `We want toincrease the numbers in the undergraduate area. We plan to fund 5,000 morestudents nationally for undergraduate courses but they are at universitiesthat will be allowed to drop post-graduate course work-loads such as MBAs.This means that the total government funding per student will remainpretty much the same,' Vanstone says.  Recently however, Australia's reputation as a welcoming country took ahard knock, no thanks to Australian independent Member of Parliament,Pauline Hanson. In her maiden speech in Parliament, Hanson blamed Asiansand Aborigines for economic and social problems in the country and linkedAsian citizens to crime and drug problems. As a result, prospectivestudents are uneasy over their future in Australia. Vanstone took theopportunity to address the issue, describing Hanson as a renegade and`maverick' member of parliament and also describing as unfortunate, theattention given Hanson by the media.  She says, `It is important to note that when the (Australian) PrimeMinister first heard Hanson's remarks, his instructions were that shecould not stand for Parliament as a Liberal, that those remarks wereinconsistent with Liberal philosophy and hence it was simply not possiblefor her to stand under the Liberal banner. She, therefore, stood forparliament as an Independent and has expressed views which are repugnantto the government, that are not the government's views.  `They are certainly not my views. Australia has been a very welcomingcountry and it still is. Our door is always open. We feel we have gotenormous benefits from the international students who have come. We lookforward to that continuing and increasing and at the same time, working ona two-way development with Malaysia and increasing the strength of ourrelationship,' she says. Pix: Vanstone: Keen to see a two-way flow of students.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Contractual benefits: Students gain in several ways from the twinning ofthe Sepang Institutefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 68THERE IS ONE simple reason why the Sepang Institute Of Technology (SIT)chooses to have a twinning programme with the University Of Adelaide (UOA)- the high standard and reputation of Australia's third oldest universitywhich ranks among that country's top six.  SIT chief executive officer Dr Paul Chan says UOA became the obviouschoice as a twinning partner because it is considered as the Oxbridge ofAustralia and is highly regarded internationally. `This university hasNoble prize winners (3) and very brilliant staff, Rhodes Scholars amongthem. It is not a very huge university but it definitely has won manyawards - recently, Professor Allen Kerr was the winner of the inauguralAustralia Prize and Professor Paul Davis was awarded the Templeton Prize,previously won by Alexander Solzhenistsyn and Mother Teresa.  `Students there are well rounded and the entrance requirement isbefitting that of a good university. It is also very proud of itstradition. The alumni of UOA comprise some of the top people in Singaporeand Malaysia,' says Chan.  UOA first came to Malaysia in 1994 when SIT was run by the Hong LeongGroup. Director of the SIT-UOA twinning programme and visiting professorDr Thomas Kurucsev says, `When the Lion Group bought over the Institute,we became their twinning partner. Our first intake was early this year,and 250 students are enrolled in the twinning programme. We hope toincrease the number of students to between 400 and 450 for the secondyear. In three to four years, we want to have at least 650 to 700 studentsin the twinning pro-gramme.'  Kurucsev adds, `SIT's scholastic year for the Australian programme issynchronised with UOA and students sit for the examinations at the sametime as undergraduates in Adelaide.'  UOA offers SIT students various engineering courses leading to a honoursdegree. The other courses offered at SIT are Bachelor of Economics,Bachelor of Commerce, Bachelor of Computer Science and Bachelor of Science(Maths and Computer Science). The engineering courses run for four years,which means students will have to be at SIT for two years before going toUOA for another two years. The same applies for the other four-yearcourses. For the three year courses, students are required to be at SITfor one year and another two at UOA.  SIT is the only college in Malaysia with the largest number ofacademicians holding PhDs (20) and masters degrees (20), many fromprestigious universities like Harvard, Oxford, London, Toronto, Illinois,Australian National and Adelaide.  Kurucsev says SIT-UOA has a strict quality control on courses and thisis achieved several ways, including having a full-time academic directorfor the project. SIT has provided a considerable budget which allowsAustralian lecturers to come at regular intervals for each subject. Theduration for each subject is between a week and 10 days.  Apparently, by coming over to Malaysia, the Australians get anopportunity to give tutorials where they can meet and talk to studentsabout their courses. `For each semester, there should be two visits persubject. There should be 20 visits per semester from lecturers from UOAand that is an absolute minimum,' says Kurucsev.  According to him, under the agreement, SIT is not allowed to haveanother twinning programme with any other Australian university and thesame applies to UOA which cannot have a similar programme with anotherlocal institute.  Established in 1874, UOA has over 13,000 students, including more than1,000 international students. The first official ranking of AustralianUniversities by the Australian government's Committee for QualityAssurance in Higher Education in 1995 has confirmed again that UOA is oneof the universities in the top band of institutions in Australia. Pix: The University of Adelaide offers SIT students a variety ofengineering courses. (2 pix)Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Crest and trenergy to tie up?from NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 4SOMETHING seems to be brewing between second boarders Crest Petroleum SdnBhd and Trenergy (M) Bhd.  Earwitness understands that Crest (formerly T H Loy) is negotiating toacquire a stake in Trenergy for an undisclosed sum. It is, however, notlikely to be a controlling stake.  Industry sources say a tie-up between both companies will not come as asurprise as both are involved in the oil and gas industry.  Recently, Trenergy director Chee Peck Kiat was reported to have disposedof his 20 per cent stake in the company. It was not known who the buyerwas.  Crest, which has a paid-up capital of RM75.78 million, is a member ofthe Renong Group. It jointly owns substantial oil reserves, estimated at110 million barrels, in Sumatra, Indonesia with Petramina and Petronusa.  Trenergy is headed by Salehuddin Hashim, believed to be a close friendof Renong chieftain Tan Sri Halim Saad.  The sources also do not discount the possibility of Crest and Trenergycollaborating in a technical tie-up. Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Crystal clear directions: Construction company Crystal Realty is quite sureit is ready to take onfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 30KUCHING-BASED construction firm Crystal Realty Group Bhd may becomparatively young but within seven years it has garnered enough jobs toput it well within the top league in its field in rapidly growing Sarawak.  Formed by two Foochow brothers, Ting Kie Hung, 36, and Ting Bing Cheong,34, `CR', as the company is known, started in 1989. Among its first jobswas the RM2.4 million sub-contract to build the Sarawak United People'sParty (SUPP) headquarters in Jalan Tan Sri Ong Kee Hui, Kuching.  The project was completed well on schedule. Recalls Bing Cheong, a civiland structural engineer by training, `I literally worked and lived at thework-site for the duration of the contract period.' He says that for ayear, the oversized container office was his office and living quarters.  That project was perhaps the most important break the brothers receivedafter branching off on their own - they had previously worked for theirfather Ting Ong Hua who owned Sibu-based Soon Hup Construction Company -to enter the Kuching market. `We've been kept very busy ever since,' saysBing Cheong, the group's managing director.  CR's executive director Huon Chek Khing, 29, shows a list of completedprojects todate valued at about RM133 million and another list of projectsin progress valued at about RM360 million. `We specialise in buildingconstruction, more so now in high-rise buildings,' he says. `The high-risebuildings under construction include the Tun Jugah Centre, Wisma Bersatul,Wisma Crystal and Rumah Dayak - all in Kuching.'  Huon adds that while general and building construction remains thegroup's core business, CR has diversified into property development,property management, mechanical and engineering services, building-relatedmaterials manufacturing, trading and specialised foundation jobs.  `We're the first Sarawak-based construction group to venture into borefoundation works. Examples are the Custodev's Twin Tower Block in RockRoad, the Tun Jugah Centre in Padungan and the MBf building in JalanSatok. But that's not all CR is into. It is also the first Kuching-basedcompany to manufacture non-baked bricks, besides reinforced pre-castconcrete or ready-mix concrete, under Crystal Concrete Sdn Bhd.  `Our aim is to be a self-sufficient construction firm by becominginvolved in manufacturing, trading and marketing. All of them complementour core business. In other words, we want to grow and expand.'  This interview took place at what Bing Cheong describes as CR'stemporary office on the third floor of Crystal Cineplex Complex in TamanSatria Jaya, Kuching, pending the completion next year of CR's RM20million 13-storey corporate headquarters at Jalan Rambutan/Jalan Nanas.  The group's logo `CR' is in two colours - `C' which is red is usuallyassociated with prosperity in the Chinese culture, while `R' is blue,symbolising the sky that is unlimited, like its slogan `Together, WeBuild'. A corporate image is strictly maintained - everyone from boss downto the office boy wears a blue uniform at work. The group also allocatesfunds for staff training.  Not only is the company young but the people managing and working in itare mostly in their early thirties. With so many projects on hand, theworkforce has increased as well. `Our total staff today is 280, including50  engineers and managers,' says Bing Cheong.  CR feels it has marshalled enough experience, expertise and know-how toattempt bigger things, especially major infra-structural works. It isundaunted by the competition from the `big boys'.  With a growing turnover (refer to chart), CR will definitely play a bigrole in Sarawak's construction sector in the years to come. According toBing Cheong, turnover for 1996 is estimated at about RM75 million, nearlydouble that of 1995, which itself is twice that of the previous year.  `We've got a lot of opportunities here with the Bakun HEP, foreigninvestments, mega projects, etc, that will entail a total developmentexpenditure of some RM75 billion within the next 10 years. There is aprovision of RM1.8 billion alone for infra-structural development forSarawak under the Seventh Malaysia Plan. So I think we can share a bit ofthe cake,' says Bing Cheong.  The managing director believes that CR has been in the marketsufficiently long enough to prove its capacity and capability. Its edgeover many others, he claims, lies in having the latest technology inconstruction `like the bore piling' and RM25 million worth of constructionequipment ranging from excavators to  cranes and bore piling machines.  In a competitive environment, every company has to have some kind of anedge. And the way to achieve that is to synergise people and resources andkeep costs down. Diversifying from its present core business into thevarious related activities is part of the long-term strategy.  Bing Cheong says CR is studying the possibility of getting listed on theKuala Lumpur Stock Exchange's second board. Like many other Sarawakcontractors, CR sees listing as perhaps the best way to raise thenecessary capital and take advantage of opportunities from the billion-ringgit projects in Sarawak in the next 10 years. Pix: Ting Bing Cheong: CR is ready for major infrastructural works.Pix: CR activities include ready-mixed concrete operations and productionof non-baked clay bricks.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Stocks to watch: Damansara Realty Bhdfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 75D BHD is technically oversold as defined by the RSI which is near the 30oversold zone. There were two occasions, in January and November 1995,where D Bhd rebounded strongly after registering a RSI reading of below30. At the current level of RM1.44, the downside is limited to RM1.40 withstronger support at RM1.25. Technically it should recover to RM1.85. Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Detecting deceit: Some of the ways employees can cheat a companyfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 77MUCH OF OUR work derives from negative events such as stock differences,indications of fraud or theft, or the leaking of business information. Thetip-off usually comes from someone inside or outside the company, butoften the management hesitates to act on it.  Denying the problem is no solution. No matter how unpleasant, thequestion as to whether something is wrong or not must be answered as theuncertainty in the long run can be extremely undermining. An investigationbrings clarity, certainty and an end to anxiety and problems.  Outlined below are some cases where the management has heeded thesignals that demanded action.THE HARD WORKER  Doubts and suspicions are difficult to work with. That is why a clientwanted us to carry out an investigation into rumours that an employee waschanging car tyres free of charge.  The rumours did not seem plausible because the employee had been withthe firm for 10 years and, moreover, was a hard worker. But still,certainty is always better, especially if an innocent person is beingfalsely accused.  The employee was a one-man business inside the firm. He was responsiblefor the guarantee work. If there were problems with the tyres delivered,he assessed the complaint, wrote out the guarantee ticket, fetched newtyres from the stores and fitted them. No one checked his work. He was ahard worker who would even work during break times to help a client.  In reality, he made good use of the fact that everyone else was in thecanteen so that he could arrange his little deals with the clients, whodid not arrive at break time by chance. Our investigation revealed that hehad a number of other little deals which had nothing to do with the firmbut which he conducted during working hours.  The firm is now an employee the poorer but financially the richer.  A proper separation of functions plus extra attention to clients whoalways ask for the same employee, especially at the beginning or end ofthe working day or at break times, is a good step towards fraudprevention.A CONTRACT OF EMPLOYMENT WITH BITE  A client had strong suspicions that an employee of his dental laboratorywas carrying out work for a competitor on his own account.  Our investigation confirmed that he had indeed a lot of contact with thecompetition and was carrying out work for the other laboratory, and thathe also carried out work for his employer's customers which he did not putthrough the books.  We also discovered that a second employee was involved with him. The twoof them had built up a strong private working relationship with eachother.  Both employees had been with the laboratory for about 20 years, but theyhad never signed a contract of employment so there were no written rulesabout contact with competitors nor anything else. However, we were able toprove that in carrying out work on their own account for the competitorand others the two had used the materials, time and apparatus belonging totheir employer.  Our client has now introduced a contract of employment which makes clearwhat is required and what is not allowed and the consequences of breachingthat contract.AGGRESSIVE ADVERTISEMENT CANVASSING  This `tip' is published at the request of a lawyer in the Dutch city ofMaastricht. Not only this Maastricht lawyer but also various colleaguesinside and outside the Maastricht County Court District are frequentlyapproached by telephone canvassers who, in an extremely cheeky, cunningand aggressive manner, try to obtain orders for the placing ofadvertisements.  Often it goes like this.  The subject is telephoned by a canvasser with the claim that some timeago an agreement was made by telephone that an advertisement would beplaced, that the proof is ready and will be faxed to the subject, and thatthis must be signed as approved and returned.  Subsequently, a discussion ensues when the subject disputes the supposedtelephone agreement and the canvasser persists with his stand and saysthat costs have already accrued for the proof which must be paid for inany case.  Cases are known where the telephone argument ends with the canvassersaying, `We will talk to each other again in front of the judge,' afterwhich nothing more is heard. It has also happened that in the absence ofthe lawyer, the secretary or office manager is approached (in theforegoing manner) and that under pressure or through misunderstanding,advertisements have been placed for which an order was never given.  Our comment: Businesses too are approached in this way. It happensespecially during holiday periods when it is hoped that whoever is fillingin will think that a colleague has ordered the advertisement. Somecanvassers use a well known courier service to deliver the confirmationand return with the signature. And if their account is not paid, then somewill even call in collection agencies.  We would advise our readers that those of you who do business in theNetherlands, if subjected to this kind of approach, could contact theStichting Eerlijk Zakendoen (Honest Business Foundation) who, in co-operation with the Chambers of Commerce, are undertaking action againstthese canvassers. The address of the foundation is Werkhovenstraat 94,9546 VJ The Hague. Tel: 070 3299591, Fax: 070 3299751.DONE DIFFERENTLY  It was strange that the head of the administration department had neededto speak to the same driver twice about his failure to hand over the moneyfor paid invoices. Each time he had a different excuse: his house wasbeing rebuilt and in the chaos he had lost the money; he thought that hehad paid the money over and wondered if someone in the administrationdepartment had made a mistake.  Because the driver still enjoyed the management's full confidence it wasthought that he had not done anything dishonest, and when spoken to he hadeventually paid the money over.  When he failed for the third time to hand over a sum of money, thedirectors decided that they had had enough. Perhaps external investigatorswould tackle it differently.  When our investigators were interviewing the driver they quicklyrealised that he was not very particular about telling the truth. He toldthem that on the morning in question he had not been at work because hehad had to do a vocational test at the labour office. He told ourinvestigators the room number where he had done the test and gave them thename and description of the examiner.  What he did not expect was that they would check what he had told them.The room number he had given did not exist and the examiner he had namedwas on holiday. When confronted with this he admitted that he had not beento the labour office, he simply wanted a free morning. And what about themoney that he had kept back? If no one had asked about it he would havekept it.  At the end of the interview he said, `You go about things differentlythan they do here!'TWO BIRDS WITH ONE STONE  Two employees left a client company at the same time. Both of them wereexperts in their speciality. Although both of them said that they were notabout to undertake competitive employment, the directors had their doubts.We were asked to carry out an investigation as to whether or not the twowere in breach of the conditions of their former contract of employment.  During preliminary inquiries, it became apparent that the two wereindeed employed in the same sector as their previous employer. It wasdecided to contact them to ascertain how far their activities hadadvanced. The first man contacted suggested a meeting in a motel.  As usual, our investigators arrived long before the appointed time. Theysaw the man they had come to meet enter accompanied by a second man. Theytook their places at a table close to where our investigators were sittingand conversed in voices which were easy to overhear. From what they weresaying, one of the men appeared to trust no one.  When the appointed interview time arrived, our investigators introducedthemselves. The second man who had arrived introduced himself as the otherdeparted employee. Our investigators had intended to arrange interviewswith the men one at a time but a second interview was now unnecessary. Theconversation provided sufficient information for our investigators to besatisfied that both men were in breach of their former contract ofemployment.  OWN BOSS? YES, BUT ON OWN ACCOUNT TOO!  A client was tired of the frequent absences of one of his employees. Sheclaimed to be sick but he was told that she had advertised in a localnewspaper that she gave beauty treatments at home.  Our investigation revealed that during her periods of absence she hadundertaken various training courses in beauty care. In fact, she hadpassed examinations with flying colours. Subsequently, our femaleinvestigators made appointments with her and had facial treatments.  She is now free to devote all her time and energy to making a success ofher beauty salon - but on her own account and not at her employer'sexpense and not at the inconvenience of her colleagues who so frequentlyhad to do her work.A LITTLE HUMOUR GOES A LONG WAY  In an previous article, we wrote about a managing director who, in orderto prevent further misuse of the alcoholic contents of the directors'refrigerator, had stuck a note on the door that said: `God seeseverything'.  One of our readers thought it a good idea and did the same. Some dayslater he found a note stuck underneath his that read: `But He doesn't goon about it'.  The message had got across. As one of the directors said to us, `If theyknow that I know, it makes a difference. A little bit of prevention.' Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Fast and comfortable: Nissan's competitively priced Cefiro offers powerand safetyfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 86AS GIMMICKS GO, not many would venture so far as the engineers at Nissan.They fitted their latest 24-valve DOHC V6 engine to power the jetpropellor of a two-seater light aircraft to prove a point.  The point of the exercise - to prove that should anyone be so inclined,the new Nissan Cefiro 3-litre, for which the engine was developed, canfly. In a test drive conducted by Malaysian Business, fly it literally did- the car, as did the E-Racer light aircraft whose successful flight onemight assume will give Nissan ideas far above their `station.'  That may be for the future. For now, all that `fit-to-fly' technicalexcellence is neatly packaged under the hood of Nissan's first foray intothe 3000cc class, which up till now has been the sole preserve of well-established European makes in this country. The first Cefiro which wasintroduced in 1988 was a hit in its home shores. But while sales werebrisk enough, it received rather lukewarm response elsewhere. Almost adecade on, changes were made, designed to make various dimensions of thenew hybrid higher, wider and longer. In the words of Tan Hoe Pin, deputymanaging director of Edaran Tan Chong Motor Sdn Bhd, Nissan's goal was toimprove on the basic concept of the car particularly in terms of itsperformance, styling, technology as well as active and passive safetystandards. The result is the creation of a sports sedan that is wide-bodied with a high degree of luxury and comfort.  The heartbeat of the new Cefiro V6 is its 3.0 Litre 24-Valve DoubleOverhead Camshaft (DOHC) Engine Concentrated Control System (ECCS) enginewhich is a proven high performance power plant that generates plenty ofpower and brisk responsiveness. Despite that, it is subjected to lessvibration and, Nissan claims, is therefore less noisy. Engine roar wasdetectable but not to the point of distraction. Ride comfort is extremelysmooth and fuel consumption is miserly for a 3-litre. (On a full tank, MBclocked up 254km on the odometer before the fuel indicator began to nudgethe `fuel warning' level).  Its extremely compact engine given the code VQ30DE with its all-aluminium block is packed with performance enhancing technologies. Forthis Nissan redesigned its original V6 engine that is 20 per cent lighter,uses 10 per cent fewer parts and takes 40 per cent less time to puttogether. The twin intake/exhaust valve configuration and narrow valveangle combine to produce more powerful combustion, resulting in higheroutput.  Extensive friction-reducing technologies (molybdenum-coated pistons anda microfinished crankshaft) and the use of lightweight engine componentscontribute to excellent throttle response and fuel economy. The new engineis in fact 29kg lighter, yet has 1000 cc more displacement. There is alsoimproved cooling with each engine block and cylinder head having separatecooling, allowing for the use of small sized water pumps.  Where the previous 2-litre Cefiro engine was a twin-cam six cylinderproducing 130 brake horsepower (bhp), this new engine winds up to 193bhppeaking at 6,400 rpm with 26kg metres of torque at 4,000 rpm. Its powerand reliability was put to the test on the E-Racer aircraft. Shod with theCefiro engine, it took off and flew at a speed of 299 mph with a payloadof 800lbs.  Translated to actual driving performance, what does it all mean? Sheerpower one must say. During the test drive down the Kuala Lumpur-SerembanHighway towards the Kajang exit, it was a chore keeping the frisky beastfrom bolting in defiance of the road traffic ordinance. Power appearedreadily on tap, an ever so gentle tap on the accelerator and the enginepurrs along uncomplainingly pushing the speedometer dial round the dialface. It was only when the coast was clear (we shall not reveal the timeand place in deference of the law) that we dared push the new Cefiro toits limits and tasted the engine's true potential.  All the time one was on the road, there was a great feeling of comfortand safety. With good reason too as the new Cefiro has been designed witha comprehensive range of active and passive safety features, the mostdistinctive of which are the four-channel Anti-lock Brake System (ABS) andthe Supplemental Restraint System (SRS) for the driver. To enhancestructural integrity and help create a safer vehicle, the new Cefirofeatures extra door padding, additional ribs in the front side member,reinforced front and side pillars and extra bracing in the door sill.  Additionally, front side structural members are designed to crushprogressively to help minimise intrusion into the passenger cabin. Alldoor panels are also reinforced with internal side door beams for addedresistance to side impact. Emergency Locking Retractor (ELR) seatbeltswith vertically adjustable anchors for the front seats help maximisesafety for passengers.  The cabin interior gives the Cefiro an air of efficient functionality.Indeed smoothly unfussy. All the key controls are within easy reach. Thecentral dividing panel housing the controls of the sound system and air-conditioning is well laid out. The air-conditioning level is digitallycontrolled with the occupants needing simply to key in the requiredtemperature level and adjusting the position of the air vents at the pushof a button.  A twin sprung cup holder rests on the central divider forward of a deepcushion-covered tray to stash away an assortment of knick knacks away fromprying eyes. The passenger side sun flap has a thoughtful touch - - whenpulled towards the occupant, a rectangular flap can be flicked open toreveal a decent-sized vanity mirror with two tiny light bulbs on eitherside.  Nissan calls the new Cefiro a luxury sedan. In the ride comfortdepartment, this tag is well-deserved. Its rear multi-link beam suspensiontakes care of all the bumps and ruts any neglected road long overdue for aVIP visitor can offer. The rear wheels are mounted on a torsion beam tomaximise tyre grip, eliminating scuff changes and variation in vehicleattitude when taking corners which tends to induce fatigue all round.  In straight-line driving, the suspension minimises body sway andmaintains a steady stance for directional stability. The ride is quiet andcomfortable with little vibration and noise. When negotiating corners, theload is optimally distributed over the four tyres to increase stability.  There is a little idiosyncratic touch too - all the car doors lockautomatically within a few seconds of the driver side door being closedwithout it being locked itself! The sound system takes some getting usedto as a number of stations appear to be transmitting programmes from somehuge cavern, complete with echo.  One surprisingly contentious issue which surfaced when the car was firstintroduced to the motoring journalism fraternity was Edaran TCM's pricingstrategy. A few seasoned campaigners who found that at RM138,000, (on-the-road with metallic paint) they could now afford 3-litre luxury on theirpay package, insisted something was amiss. `Where's the luxury andexclusivity if humble `ol me can afford one?' opined a highly distressedand venerable editor of a equally venerable automobile monthly. Hiscolleague chipped in to support albeit with self-deprecating candour,`It's too affordable. I'll buy it and that is sure to kill any designs ofturning the car into a really serious status symbol.'  The last word must go to Tan. He says, `The new Cefiro is not cheap.Just competitively priced. We received 100 bookings even before thelaunch.'Specifications: Nissan Cefiro V6 3.0L AutomaticOverall length (mm)4,770Overall width (mm) 1,770Overall height (mm)1,415Wheelbase (mm)2,700Kerb Weight (kg)   1,420Min turning radius (m)  5.3Fuel tank capacity (litres)  70Mechanical featuresEngine model  VQ30DE with catalytic converterType6-cyl, V-formation, DOHC, water-cooledBore and stroke (mm)    93.0*73.3Displacement (cc)  2,988Max power (ps/rpm) 193/6,400Max torque (kgm/rpm)    26.0/4,000Fuel system   Electronic Concentrated Engine Control SystemSteering Rack and pinion, power assisted and driver-    side Air BagSuspension Front   Independent McPherson struts with coil    springs and stabiliser barSuspension Rear    Multi-link beamBrakes   Power-assisted 4-wheel discs with ABSPrice (on-the-road)RM137,000 (solid colour)/RM138,000 (metallic) Pix: Cefiro's new engine generates plenty of power.Pix: The Nissan Cefiro V6 3.0L gives a smooth ride.Pix: Pix without caption.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Fired by hypermarkets: Metrojaya brings style and ambience to its Cosmarthypermarketsfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 49LATER THIS MONTH, leading retailer Metrojaya Bhd will open the doors ofits newest venture, a 85,000 sq ft hypermarket in the Pandan Capitolshopping mall in Pandan Indah, Kuala Lumpur. It hopes to draw not onlyhordes of the 100,000 residents of the township but also shoppers fromfurther afield such as Ampang and Cheras.  Metrojaya reckons that purchases at this hypermarket would add anotherRM65 million annually to company coffers - a boost which the public-listedcompany could do with. For the past three financial years (1994 to 1996)group turnover has grown only marginally from RM221 million to RM238million. The main reason, according to Lee Cheng Toh, general manager ofMetrojaya Departmental Stores, is that Metrojaya has not set up any majordepartmental store (except for the smaller specialty stores) since itslast one at Menara Bakti in Petaling Jaya's Section 14 back in 1992. `Inan over-retail market, much incremental growth cannot be expected fromexisting stores. It has to be fired by new big stores,' she says.  However, with its hypermarket venture, turnover is set to perk up. Afterall early birds Carrefour and Giant have demonstrated that hypermarkets -a vast, no frills, self-service, warehouse kind of shopping environmentwhere the draw is cheaper prices - are making a big hit with shopperslooking for bargains all year round.  Now other retailers want to get into the act. Take Metrojaya, which hastraditionally positioned its departmental stores and specialty shops (withthe exception of Reject Shop) in the higher end of the market, now optingto sprinkle its `Metro Magic' nearer the other end too. As Lee admits,`The main core of the market is still the mass market, the below middleincome group. While Metrojaya has done exceedingly well in its mid-to-upper market niche, we are missing out on this large segment.'  To carve out a share of the mass market, Cosmart Sdn Bhd, a wholly-ownedsubsidiary of Metrojaya, was incorporated to start a chain of Cosmarthypermarkets offering general merchandise and supermarket goods (fromfoodstuffs to electrical to clothing) at very competitive rates. Besidesits maiden outlet at Pandan Indah, Cosmart will operate a secondhypermarket in the Bukit Jambul Complex up north in Penang by April 1997.Down south, in Seremban, another Cosmart hypermarket is slated to be theanchor tenant of a new shopping complex to be jointly developed bysubsidiaries of Metrojaya and PhileoLand Bhd. It should be operational bythe end of 1998.  But even before this Seremban outlet, Cosmart is scouting hard foranother site within the Klang Valley or in Johor Bahru, unperturbed thatthe sites might become a hot bed of competition. Says Chai Chin Cheok,assistant general manager of Cosmart, `As a retailer, we cannot be afraidof competition.'  However, competition is dogging its heels. One of the country's biggestretailers, Parkson Corporation Sdn Bhd, which reportedly raked in over RM1billion in sales this year, will launch its first hypermarket (the XtraSupercentre chain) at the UE Shopping Mall in Cheras in December, rightafter Metrojaya's Pandan Indah's opening. On a straight-line projection,the two hypermarkets will be about 5 km apart. Furthermore, Parkson isalso expected to have five hypermarkets in major towns such as Johor Bahruand Ipoh, and in Penang by the end of next year.  Giant TMC Bhd, one of the early birds in the hypermarket scene with itsvery successful Giant Cash & Carry in Subang Jaya, has announced that itwill sink in at least RM50 million to set up three more hypermarkets inCheras (again), Ipoh and Johor Bahru within the next three years and hasbought, or is in the process of buying, the land for the marts. Lastmonth, it opened its second Giant hypermarket in Ulu Klang. It is alsoeyeing Penang and Kota Bahru as possible hypermarket locations in itsfuture expansion plans.  Being neither the first nor the last to set up hypermarkets, what edgehas Metrojaya got over the rest of the pack?  Ambience, for one, says Lee. `In terms of design and physical setup, wehave  tried to be more interesting, more organised, more colourful, tohave more signages so that customers will be able to locate theirpurchases easily from day one, and to essentially turn the normally drablook of hypermarkets into a more pleasing shopping ambience. For instance,in our clothing section, we don't just have rows of blouses and rows ofskirts, but we also have coordinated displays of tops and bottoms.'  Another is merchandising. Cosmart hypermarkets do not follow the rule ofthumb about stocking the shelves with whatever is cheap. `Metrojaya'sbuying culture that quality is better than price is also being adopted inCosmart. Our buyers are trained not to compromise too much on quality justfor price's sake,' says Lee. `Hence, we are not out to declare that we arethe cheapest, but that we are competitively priced and we give value formoney.'  Chai is quick to assert that this does not mean Cosmart is not strivingfor low prices. `In sourcing for our goods, we cut out a lot of themiddlemen. For instance, with vegetables we go direct to the farmers.'  Cosmart will have to cough up RM15 million in terms of set-up andinventory costs for the Pandan Indah outlet and RM20 million each for thePenang and Seremban hypermarkets. With an authorised and paid-up capitalof only RM3 million and RM1 million respectively (though these will beincreased to RM10 million and RM5 million), the funding will come fromparent Metrojaya. Metrojaya recently got the greenlight for a one-for-twobonus issue and a three-for-one rights issue at RM3 a share. The rightsexercise will raise RM252 million next year, part of which will go tofinance the Cosmart operations.  Metrojaya plans to have six Cosmart hypermarkets in the country by theyear 2000. By then Cosmart should be contributing as much as 30 per centto group turnover, same as Metrojaya's specialty stores, with theremainder coming from the departmental store operations. Pix: A touch of class to Cosmart's clothes section.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996A new way to fly: Heli Asia is a platform for helicopter manufacturingsub-contractingfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 53HELICOPTER manufacturers sub-contracting parts of the aircraft inMalaysia.  Alexander Shephard, managing director of a UK-based aviation magazinepublisher, the Shephard Press, says this trend is already apparent inseveral Asian countries such as China, South Korea, Taiwan and Singapore.  Shephard, who is also chairman of Shephard Conference, says for example,there was a joint venture with a 39 per cent work share package betweenChina and Singapore companies in the manufacturing of the European Union'sEurocopter 120. Besides this, the South Korean Daewoo Group iscollaborating with a Russian  company in the production of the MK-30helicopter, while an Australian company, Hawk Pacific, is venturing intothe manufacturing of components for the McDonnell Douglas Corp's Explorer.  Shephard says, `Of late, the American helicopter manufacturers havebecome more aware that they will not be able to sell their aircraftswithout an offset programme such as in the manufacturing of components.'He believes there is a growing demand for helicopter services among thelocal companies and organisations such as in oil and gas exploration, thepolice force and even an air ambulance service.  `Just think of the hassles of going through a traffic jam. With theavailability of helicopter landing platforms in most of the high-risebuildings in Kuala Lumpur, I do not think it impossible that morecompanies will resort to using such aircrafts as a means oftransportation,' he adds. Shephard was in Kuala Lumpur for the inauguralHeli Asia Conference and Exhibition held from Nov 5-7 at the Shangri-LaHotel. The event, organised by Shephard Conference, was held to provide aninsight into the helicopter industry as well as business opportunities inproducing the aircraft components, and to address the civil and defencehelicopter operations within the expanding Asian market.  Among the topics discussed at the conference were the areas of supporthelicopters, naval helicopters, tactical doctrine, battlefield survival,training, attack helicopters and operational experience. `Heli Asia is theregion's first event devoted entirely to the helicopter industry,'Shephard says.  The three-day conference and exhibition, covering both civil andmilitary rotary-wing aviation, attracted some 4,000 trade visitors. Atotal of 120 exhibitors from over 26 countries participated. The UnitedStates had the biggest representation with well-known helicoptermanufacturers like Boeing Helicopters, Sikorsky and Bell Helicopter Asia.Other exhibitors included Eurocopter SA, Westland Helicopter, Teledyne Incand Turbomeca of France.  Franco-German helicopter manufacturer, Eurocopter, a subsidiary of Aero-spatiale of France, announced that they had sealed a deal for the purchaseof their newest lightweight helicopter, the EC135, to the Tengku Mahkotaof Pahang, Tengku Abdullah Sultan Ahmad Shah. Tengku Abdullah will be thefirst Asian to take delivery of the EC135 when it arrives here early nextyear. Launched in 1994, the EC135, the lightest in the light-twin engineclass, is a seven/eight-seater which can be utilised as an emergencyevacuation vehicle.  Asked why the organiser chose Kuala Lumpur as the first venue for theevent, Shephard explains it is mainly due to the growing number ofhelicopter users among Malaysian companies and organisations. Malaysia isan ideal location for bringing people in. `It is a big opportunity for theWestern world to influence decision makers in Asia,' Stephenson says,adding that it will serve as the key venue for these regions as well asopen the door to this huge and largely untapped market. Promotions on HeliAsia were held during the Langkawi International Maritime and Aerospace(Lima) '95 exhibition.  Shephard says Heli Asia has presented opportunities for new partnershipsand joint ventures in these areas as Asia is now a source of financing fornew technology projects. `We believe Heli Asia is a success,' he says.  Shephard confirms that Kuala Lumpur will re-host the second Heli Asia in1998 in light of the favourable response to the inaugural event andbecause of its strategic location. He adds that there is the possibilityof more static and flying demonstrations in 1998 at the Sultan Abdul AzizShah International Airport in Subang when it is turned into an aviationexhibition centre after the KL  International Airport in Sepang becomesoperational.  `We will eventually turn the event into the largest rotary-wingexhibition in the region in years to come,' Shephard adds.  Malaysia Airlines chairman Tan Sri Tajudin Ramli feels that helicopters,commonly used for military and security operations, are making theirpresence felt in commercial aviation. He says helicopters are known to bethe most effective form of transport and workhorse for the offshore oilindustry, transporting medical supplies to the remote interior, search andrescue, and in recent years, extracting timber from remote jungles.  `Tourism will especially be boosted with more helicopter charteroperations to the many resort islands and tourist spots. That's why weneed more heliports in cities,' Tajudin says.  During the exhibition, US helicopter giant Sikorsky Aircraft Corporationconcluded two Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Malaysian HelicopterServices Bhd (MHS) and Airod Sdn Bhd to pave the way for the setting up ofAsia's second service centre for the S-76C helicopters after Tokyo. TheMOUs were part of the offset programme following Malaysia's order for twoUS-made Sikorsky S-70A Black Hawk helicopters for VIP transport.  Sikorsky's managing director (Malaysia) John J Carson says his companyhas signed a service centre agreement to allow both parties to evaluate itbefore a final decision on the matter can be reached. MHS operates six S-76Cs and four Eurocopter Super Pumas for offshore operations. Of the BlackHawks, Carson says both are expected to be delivered by March 1998. Onehelicopter will fly with four additional fuel tanks giving it extendedrange.  The Black Hawks boast high-tech avionics, including the HoneywellElectronic Flight Information System, and is based on the basic UH-60ABlack Hawk airframe.  Another US giant, Boeing Helicopters, is negotiating with the Malaysiangovernment to sell six CH-47 Chinooks, heavy-lift helicopters, to theRMAF. Boeing representative Jack Satterfield says the talks are in thepreliminary stages. The CH-47 Chinook is currently in service with mostair forces in the world, including Singapore and Thailand. Kawasaki HeavyIndustries assembles the Chinook under licence locally where Japan is thelargest operator of the helicopter outside the United States. Pix: Shephard: Second Heli Asia also to be in Kuala Lumpur.Pix: The Eurocopter EC135, one of which was sold to Tengku Abdullah.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Shopping in a green world: Britain's first environmentally friendlysupermarket opens its doorsfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 51IT HAD TO come: a chain of supermarkets with an environmental conscience.Out of This World is heralded by its originators as `a one-stop shoppingethical experience that enables people to shop in the high street andinvest in a better world at the same time'.  `Rather than the customer having to go to several outlets in search ofenvironmentally friendly products, we provide everything under the sameroof,' says Andy Houghton, manager of the branch in Bristol, west ofEngland.  `It has been estimated that around five per cent of the population areethically aware but only one per cent actually do anything about it,' headds. Houghton's branch is the second to open out of a chain of 200 shopsplanned.  Described by a leading newspaper as `the most radical experiment inBritish retailing for 1ystem centuries', Out of This World is the brainchildof Richard Adams, someone with impeccable credentials for starting such aventure.  In 1972, Adams set up an agricultural imports company, working withhorticultural groups in developing countries that lead to the founding ofTeacraft, the craft-marketing arm of the major UK relief and developmentcharity, the TEAR fund.  Furthermore, in 1979, Adams established the independent company,Traidcraft, that become a public company in 1984 offering the first`alternative' public share issue in the United Kingdom. Todate, Traidcrafthas marketed over STG30 million of craft, food and clothing products fromthe Third World, and its linked charity, Traidcraft Exchange, has engagedin large-scale community business development projects in severaldeveloping countries.  `For 25 years I've been involved in many organisations which help peopleto shop or invest for a better world. Out of This World is doing justthat, right on the local high street,' says Adams.  Out of This World is the official trading name for the Creative ConsumerCooperative. Anyone can join. Membership costs STG5 for life,automatically making customers into shareholders who, consequently, can beextremely influential on all aspects of the shops.  Shareholders become eligible for in-store promotions and they receiveregular updates on the progress of the society and eventually a dividendon purchases. As Adams says, `This is a business with a difference - ownedand run by a community of people seeking to increase their commitment to amore sustainable lifestyle and a safer world.'  It would be hard to imagine a more environmentally correct chain ofshops than Out of This World. The whole nature of the shops is as `green'as could be: the coolants in the freezer cabinets have been replaced bythe non-hazardous refrigerant, CARE 50, that neither depletes the ozonelayer nor contributes to global warming.  The counter tops are made out of recycled plastic bottles and theshelving is processed from pine thinnings from managed plantations. Italmost goes without saying that the paints, finishes and stains are allsolvent-free and that the labelling and promotions use recycled card andboard.  Bristol manager Houghton adds, `We cover the globe. We have about 80suppliers who source hundreds of products from Asia, Africa, South Americaand countries across the developing world.'  A long-term aim is to have computer data instantly available on everyproduct, specifying its `green' credentials and its provenance. At themoment, only 10 per cent of the stock is on the system. But as Houghtondeclares, `We're got to be transparent. It is crucial we justifyeverything we do and stock.'  There is a strong emphasis on organic produce including vegetables,dairy products, herbs, spices, cereals, wines, beer, bread, fruit andmeat. The choice of products is extremely wide, and apart from thepredictable pulses, there are Indian, Mexican, Japanese and kosherfoodstuffs as well as numerous types of oils, including walnut, almond,grapeseed, sesame, olive and hazelnut.  The honey section is equally extensive, including clear types from Chileand delicious Tabora honey from Tanzania produced by a bee-keepers'cooperative. Everything on sale has been screened for additives - even thetomato ketchup.  An attractive aspect of the stores is that in addition to the mainstock, each shop will also have a selection of products and crafts sourcedlocally. For instance, the Bristol branch sells handicraft baskets madefrom willows grown in the Somerset levels. `We buy locally whenever wecan,' says Houghton.  This admirable policy saves Out of This World from being another chainof identical-looking shops and gives each store a regional character allof its own. Also available are books, including cookery, yoga andchildren's titles, cosmetics and aromatherapy items and clothes made ofcotton.  New customers are often cautious. `Yes, it can look a bit exotic,'admits Houghton. `But there are plenty of satisfied customers who saythings like, "I haven't tasted bacon like this since I was a child".' -LPS Feature Pix: Counter measures: The heavily recycled interior of one of theenvironment-conscious Out of This World shops.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Getting a grip: The proposed listing of Multi-Purpose Capital Holdings mayjust give thefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 6MYRIAD AND multifarious. That perhaps best describes the sprawlingKamunting-Multi-Purpose Group today - the growing empire of tycoon DatukLim Thian Kiat.  At age 36, the reclusive tycoon controls at least six listed companies -Kamunting Corporation Bhd, Multi-Purpose Holdings Bhd (MPHB), MagnumCorporation Bhd, Bandar Raya Developments Bhd, Leisure Management Bhd andMalaysian Plantations Bhd. Most of them seem to be interlinked viacomplicated crossholdings. Lim also holds the second largest stake inSarawak Enterprise Corporation Bhd (formerly Dunlop Estates Bhd).  The sheer number of listed companies in his stable means that Lim hashis fingers in a great many pies. For example, gaming is carried out viaMagnum and Leisure Management, finance and banking via Multi-PurposeHoldings, property development via Bandar Raya Developments, stockbrokingvia Malaysian Plantations which owns JB Securities, and toll collectionvia Kamunting Corporation Bhd which holds the Jalan Kuching tollconcession. He is also involved in electricity via Sarawak EnterpriseCorporation.  Although the last couple of years may have been relatively quiet for theKamunting-MPHB Group, the board has nevertheless kept busy. Significantevents include the acquisition of stockbroker JB Securities, relinguishingcontrol of Dunlop Estates (now Sarawak Enterprise Corporation), thecompletion of its multi-million ringgit headquarters in Kuala Lumpur andthe controversy which erupted over its Kepong toll concession. There hasalso been the much talked about proposed listing of Multi-Purpose CapitalHoldings Bhd (M Capital). MPHB minority shareholders are hoping for awindfall in the form of a restricted offer for sale.  Unfortunately, with MPHB being involved in such a complex and diverseweb of activities, it causes difficulties for analysts and investors aliketo get a grip on the Lim colossus.  Says an analyst, `We don't follow MPHB because it's too complex. And wedon't know his direction. Investors and shareholders like to know what isin store.' The tycoon's low profile is of no help either.  This is particularly true of Lim's flagship company, MPHB. Currently,very few analysts track the counter, citing complexity and opacity.However, an analyst from a major retail stockbroking house says it'sprobably about time to start studying the counter, `Maybe in a month'stime.' The relatively stagnant share price is also a deterrent. MPHB hasbeen drifting in the region of between RM3.30 and RM4.30 the past year.Says a stockbroker tongue-in-cheek, `That's because it's a main boardcompany.'  But it cannot be denied that MPHB is one of the heavyweights of theKuala Lumpur Stock Exchange (KLSE). As at Nov 2, its market capitalisationwas RM3.214 billion, ranking it at number 41. Even heavier was Magnum atRM6.555 billion, placing it at 16th place.  The torpor in the trading of MPHB shares can also be attributed to thelack of fresh major corporate developments. Says an analyst, `There's onlyone million-dollar question at MPHB - when will M Capital be listed?' MCapital is the holding company for the group's commercial banking arm,Multi-Purpose Bank Bhd (formerly known as Malaysian-French Bank Bhd).  M Capital holds 70 per cent in the bank while the remainder is held byBanque Indosuez of Paris. The group's finance company, Multi-PurposeFinance Bhd, its general insurance company Multi-Purpose Insurance Bhd,and Multi-Purpose Credit Holdings Sdn Bhd all also come under the umbrellaof M Capital.  But there has been some speculation that Multi-Purpose Bank itself maybe listed separately. However, MPHB executive director Khaw Chay Teedismisses such talk. `There are currently no firm plans to list Multi-Purpose Bank. The management is concentrating its efforts on achievingTier-1 Status for the bank under the two-tier regulatory system, as soonas possible.'  Even so, some analysts speculate that Lim is still desirous of floatinghis financial arm. If this is so, then he is probably undaunted by thefact that the proposed listing of M Capital had already been turned downonce before. In 1994, the proposed flotation of M Capital was thrown outby the Securities Commission.  The reason? Non-compliance with the chain-listing requirements. Therules state that the subsidiary to be listed must not contribute to morethan 35 per cent of its parent's pre-tax profit. Also, the proposedlisting could have hit another snag - Magnum Corp and Leisure Management,both of whom are gaming-based, hold shares in Multi-Purpose Finance.  Now, though, it's a different story. The group undertook a restructuringexercise which delineated its activities into clear-cut areas like financeand gaming. With the restructuring, analysts estimate that M Capitalcontributes about 25 per cent to MPHB's group profits. Thus, the chain-listing issue does not arise anymore.  The gaming-finance conflict has also been resolved by putting Magnum andM Capital at arms' length. Recently, MPHB made a voluntary general offerfor all the shares in subsidiary M Capital that it does not own. This willrelieve Magnum of its stake in M Capital and enable the former to complywith a Bank Negara directive to divest its entire interests in Multi-Purpose Finance.  MPHB currently holds 168 million shares, or 76.36 per cent, in MCapital. The rest belongs to Magnum, Leisure Management and Kamunting. Theoffer price for the shares would be RM2.60 per share, thus involving atotal cash payout of RM135.2 million.  Whether this price consideration for the minority shareholders ofMagnum, Leisure Management and Kamunting truly reflects the fair value ofM Capital cannot be ascertained. Says a research head, `With the recentreorganisation of the group, M Capital's likelihood of getting listed isbright.'  Indeed, market rumours continue to be rife as to which second boardcounter will be the target of a reverse takeover by M Capital. Even Red-Box was at one time the hot favourite. But Khaw dispels the reversetakeover talk (see sidebar).  But the fact remains that Multi-Purpose Bank is the jewel in M Capital.The bank had shareholders' funds of RM315.5 million in 1995. It needs toincrease this to RM500 million to make it to Tier-1. At end-1995, itstotal assets stood at RM8.5 billion, total deposits at RM3.9 billion andtotal loans at RM3.2 billion.  With the reengineering, there was also a clearer direction for the MPHBGroup. However, most analysts are still vague about what that is. Asksone, `Do they have a focus?'  Explains Khaw, `Since 1991, the MPHB Group has had three corebusinesses, namely financial services, property and gaming. The group wastherefore in a position, at the end of 1995, to take on the challenge ofan additional core business in the form of electricity generation,transmission and distribution through Sarawak Enterprise.'  For the year ended Dec 31, 1995, MPHB achieved a pre-tax profit ofRM525.85 million, a 17 per cent increase over the previous year's profitof RM449.87 million. Turnover increased from RM2.6 billion to RM2.87billion. Of this amount, the banking and financial services divisionchalked up profits of RM116.7 million. The property division recordedprofits of RM150.31 million while the gaming division proved to be thecash cow with profits of RM384.04 million.  However, profits and turnover are expected to take a drastic dive inFY1996 because of the transformation of former subsidiaries, SarawakEnterprise Corporation and Magnum Corporation, into associate companiesvia the restructuring exercise.  At end-1994, MPHB had three listed subsidiaries - 51.04 per cent ofMagnum, 51 per cent of Sarawak Enterprise and 36.9 per cent of BandarRaya. But the stakes in Sarawak Enterprise and Magnum have since beentrimmed to less than 30 per cent.  For the half-year ended June 30, 1996, MPHB's profit dropped by 31 percent to RM157.84 million from RM227.43 million the previous correspondingperiod. The lower profit was recorded on the back of a much-reduced groupturnover of RM415.882 million against RM1.305 billion in the first half of1995.  Apart from lower contributions from Magnum and Sarawak Enterprise,analysts expect MPHB to suffer a massive hit of about RM47 million ininterest charges on its RM600 million revolving credit facility. Announcedin January 1996, this loan is to finance its purchase of 262.86 millionMagnum shares on the basis of nine Magnum shares for every 10 Dunlop (nowSarawak Enterprise) shares held as at Dec 27, 1995. It is believed thisexercise will demarcate Magnum and Sarawak Enterprise into wholly separateentities with MPHB as the holding company.  However, analysts say the high interest charges will be dissipated withthe proposed rights issue of a five-year, three per cent irredeemableconvertible unsecured loan stocks (ICULs) on the basis of one ICUL for oneshare. There will also be a special Bumiputera issue of 15.022 millionshares at RM3.80 each.  Taking into account the new Bumiputera issue and the full conversion ofwarrants and employee share options, MPHB's paid-up capital would balloonfrom an estimated RM751.1 million to over RM1 billion. However, thedilution in earnings per share, given the inflated share capital, shouldbe neutralised by contributions from new associate Sarawak Enterprise.  Reckons an analyst, `The diversification into electricity generationwill power earnings in the medium term. Its investment in SarawakEnterprise will enable the group to become a power generator anddistributor in Sarawak.'  For the year ending Dec 31, 1996, analysts forecast a pre-tax profit ofRM350 million on a turnover of RM943.3 million, a sharp drop compared with1995's profits of RM525.85 million and turnover of RM2.87 billion.  This would put FY1996 net earnings per share (EPS) at 21.1 sen. Given acurrent market price of around RM4.40, the shares are trading atprospective price earnings (PE) multiple of 21 times.  For FY1997, analysts estimate improved pre-tax profits of RM420 millionon a turnover base of RM1.132 billion. Based on a net EPS of 25.4 sen, theshares will trade at a prospective PE multiple of 17.3 times. Pix: Datuk Lim Thian Kiat, or more popularly known as T K Lim, keeps avery low profile.Pix: MPHB's property arm and core business - Bandar Raya DevelopmentsBhd.Pix: One of the companies in MPHB's financial arm - Multi-Purpose FinanceBhd.Pix: MPHB's gaming division and cash cow - Magnum Corporation Bhd.Pix: MPHB's newest core business - power generation and distribution viaSarawak Enterprise Corporation.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Editorial: Heed Auditor-General's reportfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 1IF THE Auditor-General feels frustrated at times, he has good reason to.Every year, he highlights irregular accounting practices, mismanagement offunds and dereliction of duty in state agencies. And every year theseagencies continue to ignore his advice and recommendations.  But each time the Auditor-General's report is released, there is theusual excitement and publicity in the media followed by comments fromvarious quarters. Initially, there will a chorus call to rectify thesituation. But after sometime, the excitement fizzles out.  Take the example of Penang's state secretariat which failed to submitrecords on revenue for 18 out of 42 housing schemes. `This failure hasbeen highlighted several times in the past, but to date, it has not beenrectified,' laments Datuk Mohd Khalil Mohd Noor in his 1994 report.  We can understand his frustration. But the nagging question remains -why are some government servants, politicians included, so defiant?  Is it a case of a shortage of staff, plain ignorance or simply, alackadaisical attitude?  Widespread discrepancies in the accounts of government agencies are notsomething to be taken lightly. It can give rise to all kinds ofallegations, including corrupt practices. Menteri besars and chiefministers should ensure that all government agencies attempt to put thingsright as soon as possible.  Earlier this month, it was announced that a government committee will beestablished to see if action needs to be taken against two states forirregular accounting practices. It is a laudable move.  But more needs to be done. For a start, every state should set up aspecial panel to address shortcomings highlighted in the Auditor-General'sreport.  Each of these panels should be compelled to give a detailed report tothe finance minister as to what course of action has been taken to addressthe discrepancies. Disciplinary action should be taken against stateswhich remain defiant.  Civil servants are entrusted with public funds. That trust must not bebetrayed. It boils down to a question of accountability to the rakyat.After all, is it not the taxpayers who pay their salaries and bonuses? Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Expanding horizons: With Samsung Malaysia's expansion programme in itsSeremban complex in ifrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 18WHEN making glass, pure sand is a prerequisite. Says Samsung Malaysiapresident and managing director Kim Jin Ki, `We used to use Australiansand to make glass (monitors and funnels at Samsung Corning Malaysia SdnBhd). Now we use Johor sand, which is cheaper to transport.'  Of course, using Johor sand as a core ingredient is not merely a meansto trim costs. The gesture can also be interpreted as a measure of SamsungMalaysia's commitment towards localising operations. Says Kim, `Our localcomponent ratio, including the sand, is 81 per cent. Some components arestill made in Korea.'  Nevertheless, Samsung Malaysia's search for local componentmanufacturers is still going strong. Says Kim, `Our target next year is tohave between 81-85 per cent local content.'  Samsung Malaysia's desire for local content is not confined toproduction alone. The workforce is also being Malaysianised. Currently,this Korean chaebol employs more than 7,500 staff in its ten Malaysiancompanies (refer to table and pie chart). Departments are now mostlyheaded by Malaysians with the aim of employing locals for top positions.There are about a hundred Korean expatriates, including Kim himself.  Says Kim, `Our target is to bring this down to 50 or 60 Koreans in twoor three years, or fewer than one per cent Korean.' Technicians andengineers are continually sent to Samsung facilities in Korea fortraining. From 1991 to 1996, 782 employees were sent to Korea for sixmonths' training, says Kim.  Despite Samsung Malaysia's attempts to promote localisation, a wholly-Malaysian workforce is not an attainable goal if locals simply don't wantto join them. Given the country's zero unemployment situation, it's veryhard to find workers, says Kim. To fill vacancies, Samsung Malaysia hasresorted to hiring foreigners. Says Kim, `They get the same pay as locals.Actually, we pay them more because we cover their transportation andlodging costs.' (Refer to boxed story.) Right now, there are 900Indonesians working at Samsung, `with the permission of the stategovernment'.  If localisation is a priority in Samsung Malaysia's manufacturingactivities, the reverse is true of the company's sales. Like othermultinationals, Samsung Malaysia's markets span the globe. Says Kim, `Ofthe manufacturing activities, 99.5 per cent of the products manufacturedin the four factories are exported.'  Penetrating international markets is necessary for Samsung Malaysia,since it is impossible for the local market to provide much depth. Forinstance, Samsung Malaysia expects 1996 total sales from three of its fourfactories - Samsung Electron Devices (M) Sdn Bhd, Samsung Corning (M) SdnBhd and Samsung Electronics Display (M) Sdn Bhd, which are housed at theSamsung Electronics Seremban Complex - to touch RM2.3 billion. The verynext year, sales are projected at RM3.3 billion, or a walloping 50 percent jump. Currently, picture tubes make up 50 per cent of sales whilemonitors contribute another 30-35 per cent.  Such massive growth is due to Samsung Malaysia's expansion programme atthe Seremban Complex. Says Kim, `We are now in the final stage of theexpansion programme, so we will have more capacity next year. This year,we produced seven million picture tubes. Next year, it will be 11million.' Likewise, Samsung Malaysia is increasing the production of its14-inch and 15-inch monitors. Currently, it produces 20 million electronguns, of which 99 per cent are exported.  A substantial percentage of Samsung Malaysia's output ends up in othercompanies' products. For example, a Samsung Malaysia electron gun might beincorporated in rival brands' TV sets.  Says Kim, `We have around 20 per cent of the picture tube market. Inmost TVs, one out of five picture tubes are supplied by Samsung. ManyJapanese companies in Malaysia and Singapore are using our picture tubes.'The story is similar in the personal computer industry where PC makers arelikely to use Samsung monitors.  Says Kim, `Our main clients for monitors are American buyers. Legally wecannot reveal who is buying our products but they're private brands. Thetop PC makers are using Samsung monitors; all the top, from number one tonumber 10. Almost all PC makers take our monitors and we have more than 25per cent of the market share.'  Since monitors make up a huge chunk of Samsung Malaysia's sales, willthe American inventory overhang in personal computers and the projectedslowdown in the American demand for PCs affect the 1997 sales projectionof RM3.3 billion? No, says Kim, adding, `There won't be much impact.Samsung monitors are rated the highest in the world. Quality-wise, cost-wise, we are very competitive, and we have a very good location.'  The `location' is the Seremban Complex, which encompasses 52 hectares onthe outskirts of Seremban, in the burgeoning township of Taman TuankuJaafar. Says Kim, `So far, Samsung Malaysia has invested almost RM2billion in this complex.  But Samsung's investment won't halt here. More money will be pumped intothe Seremban Complex in future, says Kim. For instance, an internalbroadcasting system is being set up at the complex. `This is the first ofits kind in Malaysia and the first system to be implemented in Samsungoutside of Korea,' says Kim.  Costing US$ 2 million (RM5 million), the broadcasting system will serveas an inhouse communications tool as well as an avenue for entertainment.Broadcasts will cover company policies, education and training, safetyprocedures, production status reports, notices and documentary programmeslike National Geographic. About 175 TV monitors will be set up around theSeremban Complex. Again, there's a localisation factor. Says Kim, `Thebroadcasting system will be run by local Samsung employees currentlyundergoing training in Korea.'SAMSUNG COMPANIES IN MALAYSIA: ESTIMATED TURNOVER (1996)Samsung Companies Estimated   Turnover (1996)Samsung Corporation and Samsung Malaysia   RM585 millionSamsung Engineering and Samsung Construction& EngineeringRM450 millionSamsung Electronics' Seremban Complex(Encompassing Samsung Electron Devices,Samsung Corning, and Samsung Electronics Display)    RM2.26 billionSamsung Electronics Malaysia Sdn Bhd(Port Klang)RM195 millionSamsung Electro-Mechanics   RM190 millionSamsung Electronics Corporation(KL Representative Office)  RM137.5 millionTotal   RM3.81 billionSAMSUNG COMPANIES IN MALAYSIACompany    Core BusinessSalesSamsung Corporation (KL Branch)Sourcing and supplying materials for projects eg cablesSamsung (Malaysia) Sdn BhdGeneral tradingSamsung Electro-Mechanics Dealing in electronic parts(Representative Office)Samsung Electronics CorporationSells Samsung's consumer(KL Representative Office)electronics productsConstruction and EngineeringSamsung Construction and Engineering Currently involved in the(M) Sdn Bhd construction of the KLCC Twin  TowersSamsung Engineering (M) Sdn BhdPrincipally involved in turnkey  engineering projectsManufacturingSamsung Electronics Malaysia Sdn Bhd(Port Klang)Manufactures microwave ovensSamsung Electron Devices (M) Sdn Bhd Manufactures colour picture  tubes for TVs, colour display  tubes for monitors and electron  gunsSamsung Corning (M) Sdn BhdManufactures glass panels and  funnels for monitorsSamsung Electronics Display (M)Sdn Bhd   Manufactures 14-inch and 15-inch  colour monitors and printed  circuit boards (PCBs) Pix: Kim: Local component ratio is 81 per cent.Pix: Most of the products manufactured in the four Samsung factories areexported.Pix: Samsung Malaysia is increasing the production of its 14-inch and 15-inch monitors.Pix: An aeriel view of Samsung Electronic's Seremban Complex, where aninternal broadcasting system will be set up.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996The uptrend remains intact: The Composite Index gets a boost from Tenagafrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 73THE KUALA LUMPUR Stock Exchange's Composite Index peaked at 1,180.79points on Budget day on Oct 25. There was nothing negative about theBudget except that there was no reduction in corporate tax. The longerterm impact is positive as it liberalises the market by widening the scopeof financial services that stockbroking firms can offer. So the sell-offafter the Budget was due to the usual market phenomenon of `sell on fact'as profit taking quickly moved in, causing the KLSE CI to drift to a low1,156.92.  But the KLSE CI refused to dip any lower than 1,156.92. Suddenly itrebounded vibrantly upwards, retesting the 1,180 resistance. It was TenagaNasional Bhd that came to the rescue. There was a re-rating on Tenaga. Itsshare price took a sharp upturn from a low RM8.55 to close at RM11 on Nov6. As Tenaga constitutes some nine per cent of the market, the KLSE CIcould be said to have been driven by the counter.  It appears that the near term performance of the Malaysian stockmarketis not affected by the US presidential election on Nov 5. There were somemarket talks that our market might drift downwards after the US election.As at Nov 6 the KLSE CI just ignored the US election as it continued tonudge higher, retesting 1,180. The underlying strength of the KLSE CI isdue to Tenaga. Technically, Tenaga could go as high as RM11.70. Roughly, a10 sen move in Tenaga translates to one index point on the KLSE CI. Tenagaat RM11 will contribute another seven index points if the upside target ofRM11.70 materialises.  Technically, the longer term uptrend remains intact as long as thesupport at 1,158 is not breached. But the near-term outlook points to apossible technical pullback to around the 1,160 area before resuming itsupward push to 1,194. The KLSE CI should maintain its current uptrend forthe rest of 1996. The first quarter of 1997 may be technically negativefor the market.  On the weekly equivolume chart the CI is exhibiting signs of profittaking. The equivolume chart combines volume with price to create anequivolume box. The height of the box is the price range and the width,the volume. The theory holds that the price  range should expand as volumeincreases, whilst failure to expand on high volume is a sign of profittaking.  A squarish box appeared on the Budget week high of 1,180.79. One wouldexpect the price range to expand as the market drifted higher. Instead theprice range narrowed, suggesting some selling pressure. The followingweek, the market drifted lower to 1,156.92 but closed at a high. The pricerange was longer suggesting that buyers were willing to chase the marketupwards or, simply stated, the market was facilitating trades with thebuyers. This longer price range from the low of 1,156.92 also suggestsstrong buying support, and technically the support at 1,158 makes somesense as it is within this area.  In summary the CI is expected to be riding on the current uptrendtowards the end of 1996 as long as the 1,158 support remains intact. If itbreaks the 1,194 resistance, then the next target will be 1,213. An upkickabove 1,213 will move the market to 1,248. Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Landbank edge: With a landbank worth RM1 billion, Johor Land Bhd will bebusy in southfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 29NEXT TIME a new township sprouts up in south Johor, chances are that JohorLand Berhad (JLB) has had a hand in building it. Besides developing low-and medium-cost housing (RM80,000 to RM100,000 range) in south Johor'ssatellite towns such as Tampoi, Tebrau, Larkin and Senai, the propertydevelopment arm of Johor Corporation (JCorp) is snapping up more landoutside Johor Baru and building fast.  The nation-wide demand for houses will certainly keep JLB busy for along time. Says JLB managing director A F M (Abul Fareed Mohd) ShafiqulHafiz, `Malaysia has not met 50 to 60 per cent of its housing needs,compared to almost 95 per cent in Singapore. There is a huge gap. Even inbad times, you need to eat, you need a roof to live under'.  JLB, Shafiqul says, builds and sells houses at what he terms `efficientprice' (lower price achieved through savings in labour and materialcosts). Having completed 17,000 residential and commercial units worthRM629 million, JLB has plans for more. They include bungalows and terracehouses, properties that are not really cheap but demand for which isoutstripping supply. Shafiqul says `JLB isn't building only luxury homes,but quality ones.'  Over the next five years, the JLB Group (comprising three wholly-ownedsubsidiaries and an associate company) will build over 7,000 units worthRM600 million. The units range from commercial property, low/medium costflats to terrace houses and bungalows.  JLB's strength is its almost unlimited access to land in south Johor,one of the most economically vibrant regions in the country. Being part ofthe Singapore-Johor-Riau-Indonesia growth triangle, the region draws a lotof foreign investments.  Considering JCorp's large holdings - about 80,000 hectares in southJohor and Pahang - none of the developers in Johor can match JLB'slandbank. Bandaraya Developments Bhd, United Malayan Land Bhd and KuokBrothers Sdn Bhd come close but they are still not in the same league asJLB.  With a landbank worth over RM1 billion, excluding the recently acquiredUlu Tiram land, JLB has plenty to work on. Prime among its recentacquisitions is Ulu Tiram's 1,323 acres of oil palm land purchased fromKulim Bhd.  Despite such massive building activity in south Johor, analysts seelittle possibility of a glut. Though rental rates and condominium pricesare on the downside, Johor Baru's real estate agents say that landedproperty, particularly those stretching from Senai airport to the PasirGudang industrial area commands a strong market. For example, a one-acrebungalow in Advanced Development Sdn Bhd's Green Plains project in UluTiram which was selling at about RM400,000 each is now worth RM1 million,says a broker.  According to an analyst based in Kuala Lumpur, prices are picking up inJohor Baru. `The recent credit restriction in Singapore which put asqueeze on property speculation in the island may have attributed to someof that. And there is improved accessibility - even before the second link(in Gelang Patah) is completed they are proposing a third link at PasirGudang,' he says.  JLB has also planned several residential projects in Muar, Batu Pahatand Malacca. Its target are new home owners, those upgrading their homes(for example, from single-storey terrace to double-storey or bungalow) andinvestors.  Singaporean investors are keen to buy property in Malaysia despite theRM100,000 levy for foreigners. According to news reports, a terrace housecosts as much as S$1.7 million (RM3.1 million) in Singapore, about 10times more expensive than a terrace house in Petaling Jaya's Bandar Utama.In addition, the recent capital gains revision in Singapore in May makesJohor's property market much more attractive.  Local demand for land is not lacking either as Johor is Malaysia'sfastest growing area outside the Klang Valley and Penang. The analystpredicts more local demand because the income level in Johor is four tofive times higher than the national average. Johor Baru's population isalso forecast to grow from the present 500,000 to 700,000 by the year2010. Johor's neighbour Malacca is also in need of more houses.  JLB will get a further boost with its proposed listing on the main boardof the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange by the end of this year. Proceeds willbe used to finance the purchase of property developer Advanced DevelopmentSdn Bhd from JCorp member Kulim Bhd, thus bringing the property companiesunder one roof. Plantation-based Kulim Bhd owns 6,000 acres in Ulu Tiramand now holds a 68 per cent stake in JLB. After the proposed listing,Kulim Bhd's stake in JLB will be reduced to 51 per cent.  Shafiqul sees scope for improvement in the property sector. He says,`The local industry is nowhere near those you see overseas. I would liketo see more labour saved, for one.'  In its efforts to reduce labour cost, JLB uses pre-cast concretesupplied by its plants in Tampoi and Pasir Gudang. It also uses pre-castwall panelling in its buildings instead of bricks. The lighter concreteblocks require only one worker to handle them instead of several menneeded in the conventional method.  JLB's wholly-owned subsidiary Johor Land Manufacturing Sdn Bhd makesabout 30,000 pieces of metal door frames a year. Compared withconventional wooden ones, metal door frames are handier and cheaper byabout 20 to 25 per cent. `They save costs and conserve timber,' saysShafiqul.  Another subsidiary, Pembinaan Prefabricated Sdn Bhd (PPSB), makes claytiles which are more durable than concrete tiles and are developers'preferred roofing material.  All these are a far cry from the early 70s when JCorp built woodenquarters for army personnel in Johor Baru. The wooden houses are still inpretty good shape today. The secret of the company's success? Shafiqulsays, `We have more buffer compared to other developers.' That buffer maywell see Johor Land beyond another 20 years. Pix: Shafiqul: JLB has more buffer.Pix: JLB's upmarket banglows in Taman Dahlia, Pasir Gudang.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996In the corporate lane: Datuk Lee Kim Sai says he now lives a healthier andmore peacefulfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 34SHOULD ANYONE marvel at the ease with which former Health Minister DatukLee Kim Sai made the transition from politics to that of corporatecitizen, just turn the clock back to pre-independence Malaya of the 1950s.  It's still early dawn and Kuala Lumpur's main market (now an upmarketbazaar called Central Market) is a hive of activity. Amongst brazenbutchers and fiesty fishmongers trading  curses, a bleary-eyed 10-year-oldschoolboy carefully picks up the day's fresh produce for the family'swholesale business. That done, he heads for the yeow char koey (deep friedcrullers - a popular breakfast staple among the Chinese) stand. He takeson a whole basketfull which he will sell off to foodstall operators allover Jinjang - the neighbourhood where he grew up - but this time forpersonal profit.  This pre-pubescent dabbling in business, while taking much effort andenergy, did not interfere with the boy's education. The young Leeperformed well at school and contributed towards the family finances withhis earnings. A teaching career in adulthood, followed by 30 yearsdedicated to politics resulted in the business world being put on thebackburner. So when he decided not to defend his position as MCA deputypresident (a post he held since 1985) in the party's 1996 elections andtherefore gave up the cut and thrust of political life, where would hehead for next but business?  Lee did not leave things to providence when he said goodbye topolitics.`I planned to retire when I did. I am not one to overstay mywelcome,' he says. So within two weeks of leaving politics, Lee begancorporate life when he walked into the chairman's lair of UniwideCorporation Sdn Bhd. Easy enough, as the company was set up by his eldestson, Ronnie. `He had this office done up in time so that the moment I leftpolitics, I could walk in to my new job,' says Lee.  Ronnie's Uniwide Corporation has interests in tower cranes and heavymachinery. Lee also sits on the board of what he jokingly calls two-ringgit companies. But one which certainly does not come under thiscategory is KLSE-listed Metro Kajang Holdings Bhd (Metro Kajang). `Theyhave been good to me' says Lee.  A source of great satisfaction for Lee was that he became Metro Kajang'schairman prior to its listing. He is especially pleased that the listingwas carried out successfully. The offer was natural as the company hadextensive property development projects in Kajang in the Hulu Langatconstituency of which he was once its member of parliament. He religiouslyfollows the stock price movement of this main board counter on theBeriteks screen of the 18-inch colour television placed strategically inhis office.  His position as chairman means he now owns equity in the company. On themorning of the interview, Metro Kajang shares were trading at RM6.40 each.Within the next 48 hours they rocketed past RM7.00. When asked what hisshares of Metro Kajang was worth now, Lee flashes a brilliant smile andsays, `They have been good to me.'  Indeed, by giving up politics, Lee's personal fortunes have changed forthe better. He remembers how as minister, he was offered a bungalow lot inone property development project near the city but he had to turn it downbecause he could not afford its then prevailing market price. He says,`Menteri tak ada duit (a minister has no money). His role is to serve therakyat. It's a sacrifice.'  Does he feel being used at all, that his services are as much needed nowas they were when he was a member of parliament and a minister, withhandsome financial rewards to boot? Lee says his worth to the companies heis involved in is based on his intimate knowledge of the ways of thegovernment. `The experience gained in the various ministries is invaluablein that I know intimately the procedures involved in property development,for instance. The knowledge, when applied properly, is a potent advantagein business,' he says.  What is it about the business world that he likes? `It's the certainty,the delivery of something tangible and the subsequent quantifiable rewardfor a job well done,' Lee says. Not that he did not enjoy his long sojournin politics. `If one enters politics wholly for altruistic reasons, thenone must accept all that political rough and tumble, the ups and downs.For me, I enjoyed my time in politics. The work was hard but I derived agreat deal of satisfaction from being able to do a service to the nation,'he says.  There is an air of peace of mind and tranquility about Lee that istranslated into an excellent state of health. Standing at 5ft 9in tall andweighing in at a healthy 150lbs, Lee cuts a dashing figure in a dark bluesuit and smooth silk tie. The secret of his health? `I am now able tosleep right. I dream pleasant dreams. It's all so very relaxing,' he says.Back in those political days, Lee's sleeping habits were dictated by partymeetings. Some dragged on interminably and there was many a night when hewould crawl into bed only in the wee hours of the morning.  Then there were other people's problems for him to attend to. When hewas MP for Hulu Langat, he would be on edge every time it rained as hisconsituency was flood prone. `There was a constant stream of peopleknocking on my door with all manner of complaints. As their MP, I was theobvious conduit. MPs of course should not complain as that is part of ourjob specifications,' he says with the obvious clarity of one who is nolonger encumbered with such burden.  Lee also believes in eating right. He takes heed of the advice of an oldChinese sage who said one should eat but only up to the point of becomingalmost sated. `I only eat up to 70 per cent of capacity. I have also cutdown on sugar and salt in my diet. As a result, I feel better. I think Ilook better too,' he says with an impish grin.  If there is one thing that can drive Lee to the greatest heights ofpassion,  it has to be golf. The merest mention of the `g' word during theinterview was all the cue needed to set the 16-handicapper off. `Myhandicap suffered when I was in politics. One could not be seen spendingtoo much time on the links when there are other important party andconstituency matters to be addressed. As minister, the workload onlyincreased,' he says.  Of his own prowess at the game, Lee believes he is improving. His driveoff the tee may not fly as powerfully as it used to but what he lacks forbrute strength is more than made up by accuracy. A golfing colleagueadmires Lee's ability to split the fairway consistently, setting himselfup for a relatively easy second shot to reach the green with his trustysix iron. His short game has improved and two putts into the pin for parare often a mere formality.  Being in business allows Lee to spend even more time on the golf course.He sits on the board of Rawang Lakes Sdn Bhd, a subsidiary of Asia PacificLand Bhd (AP Land), as chairman. This was at the invitation of AP Landchairman Tan Sri Low Yow Chuan, also an avid golfer. The pair would oftenteam up in a four-ball round of golf at the drop of a hat. `On the coursewe never talk business. We are serious golfers. But back at the 19th, werelax, gossip, talk shop and discuss aspects of our work.'  Lim, above all, is an educationist at heart. With a Chinese education,he felt he would be handicapped in politics without a facility for Englishand Bahasa Malaysia. So he took on extra classes to equip himself in thesetwo languages. He was highly regarded in the Chinese community for thisfluency in what was then regarded as `foreign' tongues. A former pupil, DrLaw Heng Neng, now the general manager of Nanyang Siang Pau, remembers anincident at school.  `Our female Bahasa Malaysia teacher was having a tough time trying toexplain a particularly abstract concept to our class one day. She tried toexplain what mesyuwarah (consensus) meant to us 15-year-olds without muchsuccess.  `Nearing the end of her tether, she marched out of the class and headedfor the staffroom. She returned with Lee in tow. Without much effort, Leecame up with a one-word translation in Mandarin and everyone broke into anapplause,' he says. To this day, Lee firmly believes in the power ofeducation as a tool for anyone to rise above their station.  Lee has indeed had an illustrious political career. In government he hasheld three Cabinet posts. He became labour minister in 1986, housing andlocal government minster three years later and health minister in 1990.  He has never lost in  general elections stretching back to the firsttime he contested the Rawang state seat in 1974. In 1993, Lee made theannouncement that he would not defend his Hulu Langat parliamentary seatin the 1995 elections. His political fate was earlier sealed when he ledthe group which mounted a challenge against Datuk Seri Dr Ling Liong Sikfor the party presidency in 1990. Lee pulled out at the 11th hour butcontinued to be at loggerheads with Ling.  Lee's place in the annals of MCA politics is assured. That even thosewho once crossed swords with him refuse to condemn him in public at leastis a measure of how much Lee's contribution towards building the partymeans to them and the community at large. He may have made the inevitableenemy or two throughout his political career and the grudge they harbourmay well remain festering.  `But I don't let that worry me. I can look back at my career with aclear conscience. I am happy,' says Lee with sanguine finality. Pix: Lee: I can look back at my career with a clear conscience.Pix: Lee: I planned to retire when I did. I am not one to overstay mywelcome.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996A marriage of convenience: A rattan furniture company successfully marriesform and function to givfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 33POH MAY Holdings Bhd first exported rattan furniture in the midst of arecession. `Collection and sales were poor. I hadn't reached a criticalstage yet but I was looking for markets,' recalls managing directorGeoffrey Lee. `But exports was a different game. We knocked on doors, wentfrom embassy to embassy, taking product shots and filling out formalapplications for our products. It was very hard.'  As it turned out, the pay-offs were handsome. Today, 80 per cent of thePenang-based group's furniture are exported to England, Ireland, theUnited States and Europe. In these markets, rattan is upmarket, trendy andvery popular. Nearly 60 per cent of Poh May's furniture is rattan-based.  While small in comparison with the likes of Federal Furniture, Land andGeneral and other listed timber-based furniture makers, business for PohMay has snowballed in recent times. From five workers during the mid-80s,Poh May's six subsidiary companies today employ a total of 800 in two mainfactories and six showrooms.  The two factories are at Parit Buntar, Perak and Klang. More showroomsare in the pipeline. Lee says, `We emphasize innovation and design ratherthan the traditional furniture. It's more interesting.'  To expand and compete internationally, Poh May is seeking a listing onthe second board of the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange (KLSE). Poh May'slisting involves a new issue of 4.51 million shares at RM2.90 each. Ofthis, 3.27 million shares will be for the Malaysian public. The remaining1.24 million shares will be reserved for subscription by approvedBumiputera investors. Says Lee,`If everything goes well, we should list byearly next year.'  Poh May forecasts a group pre-tax profit of RM7.48 million for itsFY1996 on a group turnover of RM58 million. For FY1997 it forecasts aprofit and turnover of RM13.47 million and RM84.9 million, respectively.(Refer to Table 1.)  Poh May is the first local furniture company to apply wood-bending, atechnique by which straight pieces of hardwood are curved in a mechanisedsteamer process. The result - elegant and aesthetically pleasing pieces offurniture. In fact, the Bendwood furniture is the only one of its kind inMalaysia, although some makers in Taiwan and Europe have the know-how.  Says Lee,`You can bend cane and metal, but you can't bend wood, least ofall hardwood. But we came out with the technology and the skills. No onein Southeast Asia has been able to copy that yet,' he smiles.  The company is adept at combining rattan with wrought iron and metal inproducing new furniture products. Any combination is possible, so long asthe end-product looks good enough. He says, `One new range of furniture islaunched every year to keep up with market demand.'  Lee, a winner of entrepreneurial awards here and abroad, keeps a closeeye on local talent. Among Poh May's newer products to use indigenoustechnology is the Igloo, a refrigeration unit which uses a locallypatented microchip cooling system instead of a generator or compressor,thus saving energy and reducing noise level. This is incorporated intofurniture for use in the office or bedside. (Refer Table 2 for Poh Maysubsidiaries and their main activities.)  `For a feel of the market, we travel all over to see what other parts ofthe world have to offer. We go to Europe and to the United States wherethe biggest furniture market is. There we learn something, come back andtry it out. But we don't copy. We get an idea and develop it further,'says Lee.  The search for cheaper materials is also important. Poh May plans to setup a timber-based factory in Cao Danang, an economic processing zone insouthern Vietnam, to take advantage of cheap timber and wood sources.  The overall demand for rattan and wood furniture remains buoyant.Malaysia's exports of rattan and wood furniture are expected to increaseto RM3 billion by the year 2000. It is expected to rise to RM2 billion bynext year.  Lee explains, `Everyone knows the housing industry is booming, people'sincomes are rising... the furniture market is still good. It's a case ofhow good you are. I emphasize design and innovation, so rather than talkabout a chair, we talk about a piece of furniture.'  Lee explains his early move into furniture. `When I was in Form 3, myfather retired from trucking and ventured into cane furniture in a verysmall way. He set up a joint venture, a small shop to do cane furniture.We were poor so I helped out after school. After finishing Form 5, Istudied  one more year in Penang at a private institute for my higheraccounting. Then I worked for a year as an accounts clerk. I was about 21when I went into this business.  `At that time I called it Lee Trading. We started in a small way withlittle capital. I did very basic cane furniture to supply the Penangmarket. Slowly we grew. Our furniture was sent down to Kuala Lumpur andthe East Coast.'  Then came tough times during the 1985-1986 recession. Lee decided tolook outside Malaysia. It made sense as Lee felt that the local market wasnot big enough for his company to expand and enjoy economies of scale inproduction.  But this does not mean he will concentrate on exports alone. `I wouldsay that the local market has very good potential for growth. I am veryoptimistic about the local furniture market. Of course, I cannot deny thatour costs in Malaysia have increased compared to a couple of years back,but in Europe they are having bigger problems. The margins for us here arehigher.' Pix: Lee: Prefers contemporary design over traditional.Pix: The warm patina of this rattan cabinet belies the Igloo's chillyinterior.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996A milestone for reinsurer: MNRB plans to go into underwriting risks foraircraft and satellitesfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 14AS THE COUNTRY'S sole reinsurer, Malaysian National Reinsurance Bhd (MNRB)enjoys a certain degree of monopoly.  But unlike other monopolies such as Tenaga Nasional Bhd or TelekomMalaysia, MNRB has had to strive hard to carve this monopoly into ameaningful revenue earner. This is because basically, the profits ofreinsurance companies depend on the performance of the insurance companiesceding part of their premiums to the former. In MNRB's case, itsbottomline is therefore affected by the fate of local insurance companies.  Until 1984, the local insurance industry was far from orderly andconsidered a demerit market by foreign reinsurance companies. `Manyinsurance companies indulged in unhealthy competition with each other forbusiness. There was no control ... of course we had the insurance laws anda lot of people just looked at the law and got away or tried to get awaywith it. As a result, the Malaysian market was severely affected byunderwritng losses and uncontrollable cost,' says MNRB's managing directorAnuar Mohd Hassan.  Following the disorder that reigned in the industry, market playersthrough the General Insurance Association of Malaysia (GIAM) came out witha series of inter-company agreements. MNRB, which was closely linked toGIAM, also played a key role in ensuring the agreement was adhered to forthe viability of the industry.  Says Anuar, `With all the efforts by parties concerned, includinginsurance companies themselves who wanted to be regulated, the marketimproved. Malaysia was no longer considered a demerit market but insteadone where many reinsurers worldwide wanted to be involved with. Thecompanies started producing underwriting profits and this had a directimpact on profits of MNRB.'  In a way therefore, the listing of MNRB on the main board of the KualaLumpur Stock Exchange (KLSE) heralds another step in the long road torecovery of the Malaysian insurance industry. Incorporated in 1972, MNRBis offering 19.06 million shares to the public at RM4.30 per share. Afterlisting, its share capital will increase to RM189.7 million. Thanks toMalaysia not being subjected to catastrophic perils, the company haschalked up handsome pre-tax profits the past few years. (See table)  For the financial year ended March 31, 1996, MNRB recorded a pre-taxprofit of RM61.52 million while the forecast for 1997 is RM77.92 million.The net tangible asset backing per share is RM1.69 while the earnings pershare based on its forecast net profit of RM54.5 million for 1997 is 29sen. Given the initial public offer price of RM4.30 per share, MNRB sharesare being offered at a prospective price earnings multiple of 14.8 timesFY97 earnings. Given the average sectoral price earnings multiple of 24times, MNRB's shares should trade at around RM7.  MNRB's revenue comprises premium income and investment income. For thepast five years, premiums contributed about 90 per cent of income with theremaining 10 per cent coming from investment income. Over 80 per cent ofthe premium income of MNRB is derived from the voluntary cessions of theentire Malaysian general insurance market while the balance comes fromfacultative and treaty reinsurance.  The voluntary cessions, structured and implemented on Jan 1, 1973, is aform of proportional treaty reinsurance between MNRB and local insurancecompanies. The agreement entered with local insurance companies require ashare of their business to be ceded to MNRB. In return, MNRB coversdamages in proportion to the premium ceded. Part of the voluntary cessionsis retroceded to the ceding companies with the objective of helpingprevent premium outflow and to help local insurance companies build uppremium volume from a well spread portfolio of risks.  The amount of business ceded to MNRB ranges from 10 per cent to 15 percent. The voluntary cessions agreement provides MNRB with a steady streamof income, causing several analysts to be optimistic of the steadyearnings the company will get in the future.  However, an analyst ponders on what is to become of the voluntarycessions agreement with the liberalisation of world trade and servicesthrough the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and World TradeOrganisation (WTO) in the next few years.  To this, MNRB senior general manager Mustaffa Ahmad explains that hedoes not expect MNRB or the agreements with the local insurance companiesto be a subject of contention under GATT and WTO. `As long as it is not acompulsory arrangement, there should not be any questions. The agreementwas agreed by all parties,' he says.  Anuar explains that the voluntary cessions agreement was last reviewedlast year and the percentage ceded was supposed to be further reduced inJanuary this year. `However, with the declining trend of the nationalretention ratio, the board of MNRB together with the industry agreed thatthere should be no change in the level of voluntary cessions for thisyear, he says.  According to the 1994 Director-General of Insurance Report, the nationalretention ratio was 72.3 per cent while the government wants to see theretention ratio move up to 85 per cent. Anuar says no date has been fixedfor the next review of the voluntary cessions agreement.  `There is no specific date for the agreement. It has to be agreed uponby all parties which are the industry, MNRB and Bank Negara. I do notexpect it to be done every year,' he says.  Another concern among analysts is the rather flat net profits showed bythe company since 1995. This, according to a company official, is becauseMNRB has been very prudent in forecasting its claims ratio. `In addition,the more risk we write, the more we have to set aside as unexpired premiumreserve,' he says.  With a guaranteed stream of steady income, what is the future of MNRBwith more foreign reinsurance companies given the nod to set up operationshere? At present there are seven other reinsurance companies in Malaysia.Six of them are incorporated outside Malaysia. The other is the MalaysianRe International Insurance (MIIL) which is incorporated in Labuan. MNRBhas a 20 per cent equity interest in MIIL. Anuar says MNRB is looking atwriting more offshore business with foreign companies. `We not happy tosit here and wait for offers to come here through intermediaries,'stresses Anuar. `We want to be involved in Asean countries where manyreinsurers are interested due to the phenomenal economic boom. We are alsolooking at North Africa and the Middle-East countries.  `There is a great desire from some countries in that region to havebusiness dealings in Malaysia, not only because our country is on theworld map but because they have heard of MNRB's reputation of assistingand improving local insurance companies. It is also due to the financialstrength of MNRB and its desire to work with another Muslim company.Besides that, we are also looking at India,' he says.  On the local front, Anuar says MNRB will take over the management of theaviation pool which will have the capacity to underwrite a certain portionof risks involving aircraft. `We cannot underwrite 100 per cent of MASplanes but the pool will at least be able to underwrite the smalleraircraft. A substantial amount of premiums involving such large risks isgoing out of the country at the moment,' he says.  From planes, MNRB plans to move into underwriting risks for satellites.Anuar says MNRB is discussing with an experienced foreign reinsurance firmon the matter. Pix: Anuar: MNRB wants to be involved in Asean countries.Pix: Mustafa: It's not a compulsory arrangement.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Pricier than the norm: But given its profitability, analysts think that'sa fair IPO price forfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 12EVERMASTER GROUP Bhd's flotation exercise has drawn keen interest amongstmarket players. Reason: the shares are being offered at RM7, the secondhighest ever for a second board listing after Penas Corporation Bhd.  Clearly, the company has taken the cue from the Securities Commission(SC) urging companies to move from a merit-based environment to one offull disclosure. This means it is the company and not the authorities whodetermine the initial public offer (IPO) price.  Comments an analyst,`Beginning 1996, the SC left it up to the merchantbankers to decide on the IPO of a company. In this case, CommerceInternational Merchant Bankers Bhd has set the scale based on the marketsentiments. At present, second board sentiments are generally positive sothe pricing of Evermaster shares probably reflects this scenario.Sometimes, we see shares hitting a opening price of more than RM7 uponlisting.'  Is the RM7 justified?  According to estimates, Evermaster's net earnings per share (EPS) pre-listing is 76.3 sen which will rise to a post-listing 80.2 sen FY1996earnings. The forecast figures for 1997 include a RM102 million turnoverand a RM14.5 million pre-tax profit.  Based on the 1996 post-listing EPS, the shares are being offered at ahistorical price earnings (PE) multiple of 8.8 times. This is around theaverage net PE most IPOs are priced at.  Managing director Tsai Ching Chi maintains the RM7 is based on thecompany's historical and forecast earnings. Is it expected to fetch a hugepremium on opening day like other second board counters? `We do not knowwhat the premium will be, but we hope it will be similar to others in theindustry,' he says.  Says one analyst, `It would  seem that given the company'sprofitability, the RM7 IPO price is not high at all. In fact, theshareholders could have opted for a higher paid-up capital of say RM30million, instead of its RM20 million, which would have given a lower EPSand thus lower IPO price. After all, you can still go for a listing on thesecond board on a paid-up capital of up to RM40 million.'  Tsai says the prospectus will be issued by mid- November and the listingis scheduled by the end of the year. Pursuant to the listing, the mainshareholders of Sabah-based Evermaster are making an offer for sale offive million shares at RM7 each. Of these, two million are for bumiputerainvestors, 851,000 shares for Evermaster eligible employees and theremaining 2.149 million for the public.  Although Evermaster is in the timber business, it does not own anytimber concessions. But the company maintains this is not a reason forconcern. Its log supplies are sourced under various agreements withconcessionaires and direct purchases from suppliers in the open market. Iteven has long term supply agreements with third parties with concessionperiods ranging from eight to 10 years.  Evermaster was set up in 1986 as a company trading primarily in timberlogs by three founder members - managing director Tsai and executivedirectors Lim Piak How and Yek Lik Hua. Following the listing, Tsai, Limand Yek will each hold a 15.3 per cent stake while chairman HamzahZainudin will own 20 per cent.  Prior to 1986, Tsai, who is a Taiwanese with permanant residence statusin Sabah, was involved in timber and forestry for more than 30 years. Inthe course of work, he met up with his current partners, both Sabahans.Lim was a surveyor with vast experience in timber extraction, while Yek'sforte is in marketing and shipping timber. `Each of us has vast experiencein specialised areas and it was only logical that we teamed up and usedour expertise in our own operations,' says Tsai.  Evermaster Wood Products Sdn Bhd was established two years later in 1988to take advantage of the government's incentives. Evermaster Wood producessawn timber and veneer as value added products and has 780 employees.  Through its two subsidiaries, Evermaster Wood and Evermaster Sdn Bhd(trading in timber logs), Evermaster derives 95 per cent of its turnoverfrom overseas markets, mainly Japan, South Korea and China. Majorcustomers for plywood include the China National Trading Corporation Ltd,Momura Trading Co Ltd, Mitsubishi Corporation Co Ltd and NortheastMaterials Ltd. Sawn timber is exported to Nisho Iwai International (S)Ltd, Takahide Corporation and Anrobis Trading Pte Ltd.  The remaining five per cent of the group's turnover comes from supplyingits products in Sabah itself. Evermaster products are marketed under thebrand label `Green Frog'. Why this name? Tsai explains, `Most of ourproducts are exported to the Asia-Pacific region, particularly to Chinaand Taiwan where people prefer the names of animals as brand names.  `Although Evermaster deals with timber we want people to know that weare not destroying the environment. So we came up with the Green Frog,which signifies life and preservation,' he smiles.  The Evermaster Group operates from its timber complex covering 53 acresin Keningau, Sabah. The facility has four production lines each for veneerand plywood, operating on two 10-hour shifts a day. There is oneproduction line for sawn timber operating on one shift of 10 hours a day.  According to Tsai, the total investment in fixed assets for the twosubsidiaries to date stands at RM50 million. The total production capacityfor plywood is 78,000 cubic metres per year and 18,000 cubic metres peryear for sawn timber.  Tsai is emphatic that the demand for timber products will continue togrow, particularly in Asia-Pacific countries with high growth rates. `Thedominant players in the Asia-Pacific region are China and Japan. If theseeconomies continue to grow, we believe Evermaster's prospects will be verygood,' he says.  Evermaster is pegged as one of the top 10 exporters in terms of exportearnings from Sabah, Tsai claims. He does say, however, that nocomparative studies have been conducted.  What plans does Evermaster have? `We plan to expand into downstreamactivities such as finger-jointed wood, laminated boards, profiles andblackboards as well as kiln drying,' says Tsai. The group is set to investRM16 million to construct a new plant adjacent to its existing plant inKeningau to manufacture new downstream products. Work on the new factorywill begin in January next year.  Other areas being considered for expansion include manufacturing offurniture to add value to existing products. Evermaster will also ventureinto other markets in Europe and United States.  The group has been registering a steady increase in turnover and profitsover the last five years (see table). Pix: Tsai: Downstream activities are in the pipeline.Pix: Sabah-based Evermaster is into timber and timber products for exportand local use. (2 pix)Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Stocks to watch: Perusahaan Otomobil Nasional Bhdfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 76PROTON is riding on an uptrend and it has the potential of reaching theupside target of RM17. It is currently hovering around the RM15 support. Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996The profits of peace: Malaysian investors get a head start in southernPhilippinesfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 71THE PHILIPPINE economy is heading for better times. Exports have grown,domestic consumption is rising and inflation is down to nine per cent. Anadded bonus is the signing of the peace treaty on Sept 2 that ended 24years of war in southern Philippines.  Though the Philippines is still far from catching up with the economiesof the Asian `dragons', analysts say with political stability and skilledmanpower, the country could outpace its present six to seven per centgrowth in the next few years.  In keeping with global trend, the Philippines is shifting away fromtraditional family-dominated monopolies to a free market system,emphasising the development of basic infrastructure.  Last year, private sector investments amounted to 335.3 billion pesos.Priority is given to build, operate, transfer (BOT) projects.  The free market shift is also aiding the tourism industry, traditionallythe Philippines' major foreign exchange earner. Intense competition amongfour airlines - Air Philippines, Grand Pacific, Cebu Pacific Airlines andthe national flag carrier Philippines Airlines - is bringing down airfares.  Services contributed to 43 per cent of the gross domestic product lastyear and the government is opening the banking sector to foreigncompetition. Under the foreign bank liberalisation law, foreign investorscan buy a controlling stake of up to 60 per cent in a local bank. TheCentral Bank's previous ceiling on foreign ownership was 40 per cent.  A recent report by the Central Bank governor shows that foreign banks'share of the total resources of the Philippine commercial banking systemincreased from 6.95 per cent last year to 8.17 per cent as of March 1996.With the Central Bank issuing new licences, there are now 42 bankscompared to 24 in 1991.  Malaysian corporations are among those to take advantage of theinvestment opportunities in the Philippines. Four Malaysian joint venturesare involved in the BOT projects planned for 1996-2000. Renong Bhd isdeveloping the Manila Cavite Expressway worth 6.5 billion pesos (RM650million); Philippine Malaysia Water Consortium is undertaking the SouthMetro Manila Water Supply project worth 312 million pesos; MalaysianPhilippines Utilities Sdn Bhd is building the Balara Water TreatmentPlant; and Johan Holdings Bhd is involved in a BOT project valued at 4.16billion pesos.  According to the Board of Investments, Malaysian-led projects rankfourth among all BOI-approved investments in the Philippines. Regionally,they form the biggest investor group. Last year the BOI-regulatedinvestments from Malaysia was 1.59 billion pesos. The Malaysian companieswent into manufacturing, construction, property development and theservices sectors in the early 90s and are now expanding, mostly intoresource-rich but underdeveloped Mindanao island in southern Philippines.  Even before the peace pact between the Philippine government and theMoro National Liberation Front last September, Malaysian, Indonesian andHong Kong investors have ventured to Mindanao. They invested in thebanking, telecommunications, steel, tourism, liquified petroleum gas(LPG), water supply, property, palm oil/rubber, coconut processing,banking and property sectors.  Most of these companies gained a foothold in the Philippines during the1992-1993 period when President Fidel Ramos' government sped up marketreforms initiated by his predecessor Corazon Aquino. The early birdsinclude Westmont Group's Westmont Bank, Berjaya Group, Hong Leong Group,Waterfront International, Kuok Group, Johan Holdings, Petronas, HumeIndustries, Rashid Hussein Bhd, TA Securities Bhd, Auto Industries Sdn Bhdand the Lion Group.  Proton recently completed a plant in Pengasinan in Luzon which willstart producing cars after the Apec (Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation)meeting in Subic this month. Metroplex Bhd and Genting Bhd are developinghotels and a casino in Subic. Westmont Bank, reputed to be among the top10 commercial banks, is the result of a takeover and rescue bid byWestmont group in 1994. Arab-Malaysian Banking Corp, Bank Bumiputra,Malayan Banking and Bank Islam are among the latest investors in Mindanao.  Undoubtedly, the inflow of foreign investments is fuelling thePhilippines' economic recovery. But the real challenge now is to ensurethat the benefits of the recovery trickle down to ordinary Filipinos. AnAsian diplomat based in Manila says, `Normally with economic growth thereis decline in unemployment, but you don't see that so clearly. Theimplication is that economic recovery is benefiting only certain sectors.'  The jobless rate is nine per cent and between 30 and 35 per cent ofFilipinos are underemployed, notes the diplomat. (The underemployed arethose holding part-time jobs). In addition an estimated four millionFilipinos are working overseas, 90 per cent of whom are classified as`vulnerable'. The vulnerable groups include domestic servants andunskilled workers who are the hardest to monitor and encounter the mostproblems. In recent years, the robust economy has helped to reduceunemployment but more needs to be done.  Says Philippines' ambassdor to Malaysia Jose S Brilliantes, `Even ifthey are not coming home in droves, there is a perceptible improvementnow'. Undersecretary of the Board of Investment Melito Sison Salazar Jrnotes, `In general job migration is an outward rather than an inward flow.Though employment opportunities have improved somewhat, this is offset bythe rising cost of living that still drives many Filipinos to seek betterpaying jobs overseas.'  The immigration laws have been tightened and the government is nowsponsoring re-orientation programmes and investment schemes to assistworkers returning to the Philippines.  As capital-hungry Filipino businesses look to tie up with foreignpartners, there is great potential for technology transfer and thedevelopment of human resources. Wages have increased but they are stilllower than other countries in the region. Wages in the manufacturingsector increase by about 9.5 per cent annually. However, income at the topis among the most respectable. A study by Hong Kong's Political andEconomic Risk Consultancy Ltd shows that the salaries of professionals inmanagerial and production positions in the Philippines are among the topin the region.  Brilliantes says labour is no longer cheap in the Philippines. `One ofthe comparative advantages in investing in the Philippines is not in lowwages but in its human resources, the availability of a large pool ofhighly trainable, skilled, English-speaking manpower,' he says.PHILIPPINES FACTFILEArea: 299,404 sq km (7,107 islands)Population: 68.6 millionPer capita GDP:US$ 1,165 (1996, forecast)GDP: US$ 82 billionReal GDP (percentage change): 6.2 - 7 %Current account balance: US$ 5.4 billionInflation: 8-9 % (official estimates)Major exports: Electrical, electronic, telecommunication and transportequipment, coconut products, garmentsMajor imports: Electronics components, fuels, industrial machinery,transport and telecom equipmentExport destinations: The United States (34.5 %), European Union (17.7%),Japan (15.7%), Asia excluding Japan (26%)Imports (1995):The United States (17.7 %), European Union (11.1 %), Japan(21.9 %), Asia excluding Japan (29 %)Exchange rate:RM1: 10 Philippine pesos  No foreign individual or corporation may own land, public or private inthe Philippines. Land ownership is limited to companies that are at least60 per cent Filipino. However, foreign investors may lease private landfor up to 50 years renewable once for a period of 25 years.Right to repatriate profits 100 per cent.USEFUL ADDRESSES AND CONTACT NUMBERS:Embassy of Malaysia,107, Tordesvillas Street,Salced Village,Makati, PO Box 1967,Makati Central Post Office,Makati, Metro Manila,The Philippines.Tel: 007-632-8174581Board of Investments,Industry and Investments Building,385 Sen Gil J Puyat Avenue,1200 Makati, Metro Manila,The Philippines.Tel: 007 632 868403Fax: 007 632 851166Embassy of the Republic of Philippines,1, Changkat Kia Peng,50450 Kuala Lumpur.Tel: 03-2484233/ 2484654Fax: 03-2483576The fourth Apec meeting onNov 24-25 is to be held in Subic, Philippines. Pix: Ramos and Moro National Liberation Front chairman Nur Misuari at thehistoric meeting in Malabang on Aug 19 that led to the signing of thepeace pact.Pix: Brilliantes: The Philippines has a large pool of skilled, English-speaking manpower.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996The perks of the trade: Samsung workers enjoy living standards better thanmostfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 23LIKE their brethren across the nation, Seremban factory workers have beeninfected by the malady of quitting their employers for higher-payingoffers elsewhere.  Lately, a number of engineers and technicians from certain Seremban-based plants have been lured to Samsung Seremban, drawn by higher pay andbetter perks. Although the brain-drain has not reached a critical levelyet, the outflow of talent from a particular electronics company has itsmanagement so worried, that a top executive requested Samsung Malaysiapresident and managing director Kim Jin Ki not to pay such high salaries.  Does Samsung pay the most among Seremban industrial facilities? `We areamong the highest,' says Kim. `But whether we are the highest I do notknow.'  `They pay the best rates. Not that much more, about four to five hundredmore per month,' affirms a senior engineer with the rival electronicsmanufacturer. `But they also work you the hardest.'  At the Samsung Electronics Seremban Complex, 12-hour shifts are thenorm. Where executive engineers are concerned, overtime can only beclaimed after working 20 hours. And, adds the senior engineer, `They likeyou to take overtime.'  However, the long hours are cushioned by a cornucopia of employeebenefits. Workers are entitled to 26 free meals a month, and can choosefrom five to seven different menus at the company cafeterias. ReflectingSamsung's heritage, Korean food - albeit tailored to Malaysian tastebuds -is available. Judging by the long line at the counter, the Korean dishesgo down well with Samsung workers.  Free meals are complemented by lodging - gratis also - at the company'scustom-built dormitories. Costing RM17.5 million, the dormitories consistof four blocks, with another two to be completed in May 1997. Also on thecards are a swimming pool, gymnasium (offering free recreational classes)and football field.  Says K K Lee, self-styled resort director at Samsung Dormitory, `As faras I know, this is the first (dormitory) of its kind. A test case whereresidences are within the industrial area.'  The concept seems to have found favour with Samsung employees.Currently, the occupancy rate is 90 per cent, which works out to some2,000 residents, including 500 Indonesians. Expectedly, males and femalesare segregated in their own blocks. Each block has 96 rooms, with fouroccupants per room. Facilities are basic, with each room featuring spartandouble-decker bunk beds and wardrobes. Just like a college dormitory,there are common areas - TV rooms, reading rooms, prayer rooms and laundryrooms - as well as communal shower areas. The pantry features mouldedplastic seats and tables, just like in fast-food restaurants.  Thanks to his military background, K K Lee runs the place `barracks-style', assisted by his wardens. There are strict rules - a curfew of 12midnight is strictly enforced for employees `who are not out of station'and smoking is prohibited.  Despite the regimentation, says K K Lee, `There's a waiting list to getin.' This is hardly surprising, since staying in the dormitory wouldenable a worker to shave his monthly living expenses considerably. Rentalsin Seremban and surrounding areas have been escalating steadily, with asingle-storey terrace house going for RM250 on the average.  The question is - has Samsung's employee benefits programme actuallyboosted its ability to retain staff? Employee turnover is pretty low, saysKim, about three per cent monthly compared to the national monthly averageof six per cent.  But staff retention comes at a hefty cost. On a microlevel, says Lee, Samsung spends RM100-odd per month on each dormitoryresident. Multiply that figure by 2,000 residents and Samsung's monthlydormitory bill is a steep RM200,000. But that's not all. Each month, saysKim, the expense of maintaining the employee benefit programme is `at aone-to-one ratio' with Samsung's wage bill. Pix: The Samsung Domitory has 96 rooms, with each room featuring spartandouble-decker bunk beds and wardrobes. (2 pix)Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Stocks to watch: Posim Bhdfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 76POSIM has been drifting downwards from its high of RM20 to the currentlevel of RM14.50 which is close to the support area of RM14. It shouldstage a technical rebound to RM16.50. Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Roads to roam: The Western Australian Education Centre shows you severalways of gettinfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 64AUSTRALIA has plenty to offer - excellent weather, a cost of living whichmost consider reasonable, is culturally diverse and has an educationsystem considered among the best Down Under.  And Perth is the Australian city most students, Malaysians or others,head for in furtherance of their education. Over 10,000 internationalstudents are currently enrolled in Perth's various educationalinstitutions, many of whom are from Malaysia.  A substantial number of them have sought the services of the WesternAustralian Education Centre in Kuala Lumpur for assistance in gettingplaces at the many Perth institutions of higher learning. There are fouruniversities in the Perth region - Curtin University of Technology, EdithCowan University, Murdoch University and the University of WesternAustralia.  All are large government-funded universities which provide a wide rangeof degree courses from bachelor to doctorate level. And all are ofinternational standing and repute, with their degrees enjoyinginternational recognition.  Overseas students have the option of pursuing their secondary educationby enrolling in a number of government- or private-sector colleges. Theyoffer courses from Year 7 to Year 12 (final year). Entry to university isbased on the results of the Tertiary Entrance Examination which are theYear 12 examinations under the Western Australian Education system.  But for those who find the method of entry to university rigid, there isan alternative secondary system provided by Canning College, TuartCollege, Beaufort College, Edwards College and St Marks InternationalCollege. These colleges offer the Western Australian UniversitiesFoundation Programme in association with the four government universities.This programme has been designed for international students and is analternative to Year 12. All universities accept the results of theFoundation Programme for University entrance.  In the vocational area there are a number of government and privatecolleges which offer courses for international students. The governmentprovider is Tafe (Technical and Further Education) which is the largesteducational provider in Western Australia with over 100,000 students. Tafeoffers a wide range of courses at vocational and technical level in mostareas of study. Students who complete a Tafe diploma in some of theseareas (notably business and engineering) are eligible for entry to mostWestern Australian universities with advanced standing.  The private providers in the vocational field include Alexander College,Edwards College, Australian Institute of University Studies (AIUS), PerthInstitute of Business and Technology (PIBT), and Perth Commercial College.These colleges tend to focus on courses in business, computing, masscommunications, travel and tourism, hospitality studies and secretarialstudies.  Admission requirements are flexible and some also have a three semestercalender year which means there are three intakes a year for the variousprogrammes. The system also allows students to complete a programme ofstudy in a shorter period of time.  Alexander College, Edwards College, AIUS and PIBT also have arrangementswith the Western Australian universities whereby the former offer coursesequivalent to the first (and in some courses second and third) year of thedegree programmes in business/commerce, computing and mass communications.  Upon successful completion of these programmes, students are able toenrol directly into the second year (and where applicable later years) ofthe relevant degree programmes of the universities. These courses providean excellent alternative for students who are marginally unable to gaindirect entry to the university course of their choice.  For students and parents keen to learn more about the programmes offeredby the various Perth institutions of higher learning, they can visit theWestern Australian Education Centre in Kuala Lumpur.  The centre is located at 4th floor, UBN Tower, 10, Jalan P Ramlee, 50250Kuala Lumpur. They can make an appointment or even seek information fromcentre officials by telephone at 03-2321248/9. Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Seeking only the best: High calibre multiple partners help IMC maintainhigh standardsfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 66WHEN THE International Medical College (IMC) chose the University ofMelbourne Medical School as its 20th partner medical school, it knew ithad made the right decision.  The reason is simple - the University Of Melbourne Medical School is theoldest medical school in Australia. It is also widely dubbed as theOxbridge of Down Under for its high standard. The Dean of IMC, ProfessorJohn S Beck says, `This is a very good choice and we are immensely proudto have this university as our partner medical school.'  The University of Melbourne Medical School only became IMC's partnermedical school last year, three years after it started.  The reason behind the slight delay in getting an Australian universityas one of its medical partners was because IMC was not familiar with thestandard of Australian universities as well as their curriculum.  Beck says, `Once we had examined the curriculum and spoken to theirstudents, we concluded that their standard was high and just as good asours. So we went into a partnership with them. The University of Melbournehas offered six places to students of IMC.'  The IMC is looking for more Australian partners. `The IMC is alsobuilding ties with other universities in Australia We are very careful inselecting partner medical schools as we only want the best because here atIMC, our standards are equally high,' adds Beck.  Beck says one of the reasons why IMC is looking favourably atuniversities Down Under is because Australia has become a natural focusfor sudents in this region. `People here always perceive Australia asbeing nearer to home than any other country. Europe and North America areconsidered as being too far away.'  The University of Melbourne Medical School was the first medical schoolestablished in Australia - that was in 1862, 11 years after the universityformally opened.  The school attracts many of the best students in Australia and overseas.  Over the last 10 years it has attracted more research funding than anyother medical school in Australia. Its ability to attract a leading shareof Australia's largest pool of government and privately-funded health andmedical research opportunities continues to draw research talent of thehighest calibre.  The teaching hospital network offers outstanding experience for studentsin their clinical years. Associated with the medical school are five majorgeneral teaching hospitals: the Royal Melbourne Hospital, WesternHospital, St Vincent's Hospital, Geelong Hospital, Austin and RepatriationMedical Centre.  Major specialist teaching hospitals are the Royal Children's Hospital,Royal Women's Hospital, Mercy Hospital for Women, the Royal Victorian Eyeand Ear Hospital, the Peter MacCallum Cancer Institute, North-WestHospital and Fairfeild Hospital for Infectious disease.  Students who join the IMC can complete their MBBS (Bachelor of Medicineand Bachelor of Surgery) in six years - 2ystem at the college and 3ystem years in Melbourne. The tuition fee in Melbourne is A$24,000 per annum.  The IMC curriculum consists of two parts - Part 1 comprises 2ystem years oftraining supervised by the Faculty of the International Medical College inbasic biomedical science and an integrated clinical systems-centredcourse.  The Advanced Diploma in Medical Sciences will be awarded by the collegeto students who have successfully completed their programme of study atthe IMC.  The IMC approach introduces clinical experience from the start of thecurriculum and this helps the student to appreciate the real importance ofthe basic science since its application is clearly presented. First yearstudents will receive clinical exposure at the Seremban General Hospital,Port Dickson Hospital and various community health clinics in Seremban.  The college accepts Malaysian and international students who havecompleted their Australian Matriculation examinations.  Todate, the college has some 100 students who have completed variousAustralian matriculation programmes such as the South AustralianMatriculation, Victoria Certificate Of Education, the New South WalesFoundation and Queensland Matriculation. IMC also accepts students withMonash University Foundation Year qualifications.  The other 19 partner medical schools of the IMC are University ofAuckland in New Zealand, University College Cork, University CollegeDublin, University Galway, the Royal College of Surgeons and TrinityCollege in Ireland, University Of Alberta, University Of Calgary,Daihousie University, McGill University, Memorial University OfNewfoundland, University Of Western Ontario, and Thomas Jefferson MedicalCollege In North America, University Of Aberdeen, University Of Dundee,University Of Glasgow, University Of Liverpool, University Of NewcastleUpon-Tyne and Queen's University In the United Kingdom. Pix: The University of Melbourne where six IMC students have been offeredplaces.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Stage set for the next century: The 1997 Budget lays a foundation for atechnologically sophisticatedfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 40IN A 90 MINUTE speech at the Dewan Rakyat on Oct 25, Finance MinisterDatuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim described his Budget as laying the foundation toestablish a `firm bridge' to take Malaysia into the 21st century. What isin store for 1997?  Notwithstanding a drop in the electronics industry, the Malaysianeconomy is expected to surge ahead at an estimated GDP growth rate of 8.2per cent for this year. This represents the ninth consecutive year ofrobust growth of more than eight per cent per annum for the country.Consequently, the per capita income has correspondingly increased fromRM10,058 in 1995 to RM11,118 for this year.  What has confounded sceptics is the fact that the strong economic growthhas been accompanied by low inflation, a proud achievement for the countryindeed. For 1996, for instance, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) is expectedto rise a mere 0.2 per cent to 3.6 per cent from 3.4 per cent last year,helping to allay fears of an economy overheating.  Besides stable prices, the other commendable feature of the economicgrowth this year is the healthy rise in national savings from 36.5 percent in 1995 to 38.8 per cent for 1996. This places the savings rate inMalaysia higher than Japan and all the other newly industrialisingeconomies (NIEs), with the exception of Singapore.  At the same time, the capital market is further boosted by a recordlisting of 61 companies from January to September this year, turning theKuala Lumpur Stock Exchange into the third largest bourse in the AsiaPacific region.  In the manufacturing sector, domestic-oriented industries grew at ahealthy rate of 15.2 per cent for the first seven months this year ascompared to 12.8 per cent over the same period a year ago. Except for theelectronics sector, all other export-oriented industries, especiallytextiles, wood and rubber products, posted significant growth.  In its rush to catch up with the other NIEs, Malaysia has recently beenfacing a current account deficit compounded by a persistent anddeteriorating service account. With a breakneck pace of growth in recentyears, the country is also experiencing full employment and capacityutilisation with a resultant increase in inflationary pressures both interms of wages and costs.  Recognising the need to further strengthen the structure of the economyas well as address the weaknesses associated with a long period of growth,the 1997 Budget, with a total expenditure of RM59.98 billion, has beendrawn up to ensure sustained growth in the medium and long term by:  * Achieving sustainable growth through enhanced productivity;  * Strengthening the balance of payments position with improvements inthe services sector and higher domestic production; and  * Strengthening the agenda for social development.  Presently, more than half (55 per cent) of the growth in output derivesfrom capital investment making the ratio of investment to GNP a high of45.1 per cent. While this is laudable, the whole approach to developmentwould have to undergo a major shift from being capital driven toproductivity driven if Malaysia were to enjoy a higher level ofsustainable growth. The emphasis on productivity growth is clearlyemboldened in the Seventh Malaysia Plan as shown in the table.  In this regard, appropriate measures have been announced in the Budgetto steer the economy in the right direction. To encourage manufacturingand agricultural firms to modernise operations, expand capacity anddiversify output, a reinvestment allowance of 100 per cent of statutoryincome is granted for productivity boosting investments.  Underscoring its commitment to upgrade the high level of technology, theBudget has allocated RM721 million for the Technology Development Plan andresearch programmes like the IRPA (Intensification of Research in PriorityAreas). To encourage more research and development work, privatecompanies, especially the small and medium industries (SMIs), are allowedto use the IRPA's allocation. Firms are also allowed double deduction forR&D expenditures. Tax deduction for the acquisition of intangible assetslike patents, designs and trade marks would help the country in scaling upthe technology ladder rapidly.  Besides enhancing the value chain of the manufacturing process, the newIndustry Inter-Linkage Programme (ILP) also helps to promote cooperationand transfer of skills and technology from multinational corporations tolocal industries. In addition, SMIs participating in the ILP and producingquality intermediate goods, are given tax exemption for up to 10 years.  The Budget also has generous incentives to help promote a strategicshift to knowledge-based and technology intensitive industries. This movewill undoubtedly help to improve efficiency and productivity in all areas.Of particular mention is the slew of incentives to give the Multi-MediaSuper Corridor (MSC) a further boost. Among such incentives are:  * Pioneer status for 10 years for Investment Tax Allowance of 100 percent for a new company;  * Exemption of taxes on all multi-media equipment;  * Allowing the recruitment of expatriates according to needs; and  * Special guidelines for transactions and loans in foreign currency.  The Budget has also not forgotten the human resource developmentnecessary to make the upgrading of technology a success. A whoppingallocation of RM13.2 billion or more than 20 per cent of the Budget hasbeen provided to upgrade and expand local educational and traininginstitutions and to promote a large pool of technicians and engineers.  A 50 per cent income tax exemption is also allowed for foreign lecturersand foreign educational institutions set up in Malaysia, a much neededboost to the country's effort to establish itself as a regional centre foreducation. Besides earning foreign exchange, this move can also help tosave the RM2.5 billion spent annually by Malaysian students overseas.  Underlying the commitment to upgrade its industries and human resources,the Finance Minister has also announced that no more new foreign workerswill be allowed into the country. In this regard, a Guideline on WageReform has also been introduced. The guideline proposes a productivity-linked wage system to increase competitiveness, productivity andindustrial harmony. This is especially pertinent given that the wagegrowth of eight per cent for the first seven months of this year has faroutstripped productivity growth of just 3.9 per cent.  To ensure sustainable growth, the Budget also recognises the need tomaintain a low level of inflation. To this end, RM1.7 billion has beenprovided to develop agriculture, fisheries and livestock as well asincrease the effectiveness of the marketing and distribution systems. Moreimport duties will be abolished or reduced on several items includingpaper products, printed paper and cosmetics.  In tandem with the government's efforts to check inflation, a cabinetcommittee has been formed to promote the savings habit among Malaysianswith a long term target for savings rate at 40 per cent. This wouldsubstantially reduce the present savings-investment gap as Malaysia needsmore funds to finance its many development plans.  The recent implementation of major infrastructural projects hascontributed to a current account deficit, given the substantial imports ofboth capital and intermediate goods. This is compounded by a chronicservice account deficit as illustrated in the charts.  The service deficit seems to be the main culprit in the current accountproblem. While the merchandise account can be improved relatively sooner,the service account will take a little while longer as Malaysiarestructures its economy. Hence, to ensure a smooth transition of theeconomy, a string of measures have been announced to give a strong boostto its financial and other service sectors.  To develop a dynamic banking and financial sector, some of the measuresannounced in the Budget include:  * Allowing foreign share-holding of local brokerages to be raised from30 to 49 per cent;  * More fund management companies will be approved with a concessionarytax rate of 10 per cent, down from 30 per cent, to be allowed for bothforeign as well as local fund managers;  * The government will issue zero coupon bonds to provide benchmark yieldcurve to boost the private debt securities market. Major institutions likethe EPF, Bank Simpanan Nasional and the Social Security Organisation willbe allowed to invest in such instruments;  * The banking sector will be further liberalised with Tier-1 commercialbanks allowed to undertake securities and lending business and engage inequity derivatives.  Besides the financial sector, the budget also grants incentives topromote other service sectors. For instance, the export of professionalservices has also been encouraged by its exemption from the services taxand the shipping sector is granted an additional Shipping Fund of RM200million.  To attract more international companies to use Malaysia as anInternational Procurement Centre (IPC) and thus add more value to theeconomy, both the import duties and limits on foreign equity holdings inIPCs are to be lifted.  To promote Labuan as an international offshore financial centre, agenerous tax exemption is granted on 65 per cent of income fromprofessional services by Labuan-based firms. Expatriates in Labuan have topay tax only on 50 per cent of income.  Recognising the tourism sector as a substantial foreign exchange earner,the Budget allocated RM294.5 million for the construction and upgrading ofhotels, convention centres and other recreational projects to attract 9.5million foreign visitors in 1997. A five year Pioneer Status for tourismrelated infrastructure projects is also granted.  Besides earning foreign exchange, the tourism sector could also helpprevent the outflow of the ringgit as more Malaysians start visiting thenewly built and upgraded tourist attractions in the country.  One of the main causes of the current account deficit was thesubstantial imports of capital and intermediate goods which resulted in ahigh import content of domestic manufacturing activities. Hence, theimport duty on spare parts and consumables used in manufacturing as wellas on components used in the assembly industry will help to curb importsand increase domestic production of intermediate goods. To boostentreneurship, RM1 billion is allocated for such programmes as on vendordevelopment and the Incubator Premises and Factory Nurturing Schemes.  Unprecendentedly, the Budget also gives a strong emphasis on the socialsector, reinforcing the government's determination to balance economic andsocial development.  The strategy to narrow the gap between the urban and the rural communityis high on Anwar's social agenda. His budget made a generous allocation ofRM7.05 billion for the development of rural areas. A sum of RM2.4 billionis also set aside to further reduce poverty.  Anwar also announced the setting up to a RM1 billion National HousingCompany to solve the housing problem of the low-income earners amid risingproperty prices.  As part of the government's effort to promote the social agenda, welfareinstitutions are given assistance to the tune of RM280.7 million. Otherslike the non-governmental organisations, AIDS Foundation and the CancerSociety are also not forgotten.  A sum of RM3.4 billion is budgeted for more hospitals and to enhance thequality of health services. With the hospital services tax substantiallyreduced, it will not only translate into savings for patients but alsohelp promote Malaysia as a regional medical centre.  Given that the economy has already reached full employment and capacityutilisation, Malaysia simply has no choice but to effect a clear shift tohigher technology and productivity to optimise the use of the nation'scapital and human resources. All these bold efforts must at the same timebe delicately balanced with a need to maintain price stability to preventinflation from rearing its ugly head.  Hence, the generous incentives in the Budget for the information andindustrial technology sectors would certainly help to lay a properfoundation for a knowledge-based and technologically sophisticatedeconomy.  The Multimedia Supercorridor would, in time to come, help spin off andspawn a whole network of IT related companies which would lift Malaysiaconfidently into the information age. Together with incentives given toprogrammes like the Inter-Industry Linkage Programme, the VendorDevelopment and the Incubator Scheme, the day is not far off when Malaysiawill reach a critical mass in its R&D, thus helping it to become amanufacturing power house.  By focusing on the services sector, the Budget attacks the root cause ofthe current account deficit problem. The host of incentives given todevelop the service sectors, such as the financial and tourism sectors,would help the country to earn foreign exchange while steming the outflowof the local currency, thus alleviating the service account deficit in thelong term. Through its offensive to develop its capital markets andliberalise its banking industry further, Malaysia would one day pose achallenge to the financial centres in the region.balance the material progress of the nation with the well being ofsociety, as reflected by the generous allocation for social development.In doing so, it gives full recognition to the important role of the familyand the individual in the development of the nation.  Describing the balance of payments deficit as `birth pangs' of a neweconomic era, Anwar said that this is to be expected for a countryundergoing transformation as it enters the 21st century. The Budget willhelp to lay a strong foundation for sustaining long term growth. Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Shifting prices: Multinationals and tax authorities face off on the issueof transferfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 47MALAYSIA IS IN need of more transparent tax legislation on transferpricing as more Malaysian companies globalise their business activities,states Price Waterhouse executive director SM Thanneermalai.  He defines a transfer price as the price charged by a multinationalcompany (MNC) in a cross-border transaction for the supply or acquisitionof goods, services or intangibles and the provision of finance. Pricescharged in associated company transactions are not normally subjected tofull market forces and may otherwise diverge from prices that would becharged in similar but independent transactions.  Transfer pricing is possible through three methods. One way is for theparent company to impose high prices for goods shipped to its subsidiaryin Malaysia. Alternatively, the parent company can direct its Malaysiansubsidiary to sell goods at lower prices to subsidiaries in thirdcountries. A third method would be for the parent company to chargeexorbitant royalties where the joint venture involves technicalassistance, technology transfer or management expertise, he elaborates.  Transfer pricing has been identified as a major problem for taxauthorities because of its effect on profit-shifting between countries asthe level set bears directly on the amount of tax that may be raised ineach country. Malaysian companies expanding abroad thus have to understandthe transfer pricing laws of the foreign countries they are investing into avoid being hit by transfer pricing adjustments by foreign taxauthorities.  Thanneermalai cites for example the case of a foreign tax authoritytaking the view that excessive royalties have been repatriated back toMalaysia. In such a circumstance, the Malaysian company would certainlyapproach local tax authorities for a corresponding reduction of the taxesoverpaid earlier. `In such a scenario, you can see that even if Malaysiawants to keep away from the arena of transfer pricing, the actions of theother foreign tax authorities will not allow this to happen,' he stresses.  Generally, other countries such as the United States have attackedtransfer pricing to raise tax revenues when faced with large deficits. TheUS Internal Revenue Services implemented stiffer statutory transferpricing rules in 1986. Japan's National Tax Agency amended its 1986 ruleson transfer pricing in 1991, he adds.  Malaysia's international trade has increased significantly in recentyears, with exports for 1995 worth RM185 billion compared with RM45billion in 1987. Last year's imports amounted to RM194 billion comparedwith only RM31 billion in 1987. With the increase in trade levels, thereis a greater likelihood of transfer pricing abuses.  On a macro level, Malaysia's growing current account deficit under`other services' hit RM4 billion in 1995. According to Thanneermalai, thiscould be a factor prompting the government to examine whether transferpricing has contributed to this deficit. However, to date, no publishedstudy has been made on the matter.  At present, Malaysian tax authorities do not carry out specific transferpricing audits. Nevertheless, in tax investigations involving companieswith substantial cross border transactions, the issues around transferpricing become the main points of contention between the Malaysian taxauthorities and taxpayers, he points out. `By implication therefore,Malaysian tax authorities are looking at transfer pricing issues such asthe payment for royalties, services, technical fee and merchandiseinvolving inter-company transactions across Malaysia's borders,' saysThanneermalai.  Although currently there are no specific statutory rules on transferpricing, two sections of the Malaysian Income Tax Act 1965 (the Act) canbe invoked when there are transfer pricing abuses: Section 141, whichdeals with transactions with non-resident connected persons and Section140, which is the general anti-avoidance provision.  Section 141(1) of the Act applies to a transaction which produces to aresident  `either no income or a smaller income than that which might beexpected to arise owing to the close connection between the resident andnon-resident and to the substantial control exercised by the non-residentover the resident person.' In such a case, the Director-General of IncomeTax (DG) has the power to tax the non-resident in the name of the residenton `the income which might be expected to arise from the business of theresident as if the resident was an agent of the non-resident'.  Section 141(2) of the Act states that if the profits cannot be readilyascertained, the DG may assess the non-resident `on a fair and reasonablepercentage of the turnover of the business done by the non-residentthrough or with the resident'.  The second section of the Act provides the DG with wider powers. Section140(1)(a) of the Act empowers the DG to `disregard or vary the transactionand make such adjustments as he thinks fit where he has reason to believethat any transaction has the direct or indirect effect of altering theincidence of tax which is payable'.  Section 140(6) of the Act allows the DG to deem certain transactions tofall within Section 140(1) of the Act. These are transactions betweenaffiliated companies which `have not been made on terms which might fairlybe expected to have been made by an independent person engaged in the sameor similar activities dealing with one another at arm's length'. However,there are no statutory rules, case laws or administrative rules inMalaysia on the definition of the term `arm's length'. The lack ofdefinitions and guidelines of the above term has occasionally createdproblems for taxpayers, states Panneermalai.  Neighbouring countries which include Indonesia, China, Korea, Japan andthe Philippines have already implemented rules and regulations on transferpricing. In fact, Singapore is in the midst of collecting data, a stepbefore introducing rules on transfer pricing, he indicates. Most of thecountries that have adopted transfer pricing rules acknowledge theguidelines provided by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation andDevelopment (OECD). Malaysian tax authorities are agreeable to most OECDguidelines although Malaysia is not an OECD member. `Generally, OECDtransaction-based methods such as the comparable uncontrolled pricemethod, the resale price method and the cost-plus method are acceptable toMalaysian tax authorities. However, the tax authorities are not in favourof the profit method unless there is no alternative,' he elaborates.  Another major setback faced by MNCs in Malaysia is a provision in theIncome Tax statute which gives income tax authorities the right to collecttax dating back to 12 years. In case of fraud, there are no timelimitations. This is where companies face major problems as they areunable to retrieve documentation over that length of time due to improperdocumentation and storage of the information,' he says.  `Since we have sufficient legislation to combat any transfer pricingabuses, Malaysian tax authorities should issue guidelines to determinewhether related party transactions are of arm's-length nature,' hestresses. Having reasonable and transparent guidelines would definitelyincrease the flow of foreign investments into Malaysia. MNCs will knowwhat the rules are and be able to avoid any future transfer pricingfiascos.  Two senior partners of Price Waterhouse, Terry Symons and Michael JHappell recently gave a talk on global issues of transfer pricing.Transfer pricing is the current `hot topic' for revenue authorities world-wide as they get more aggressive in the fight for a share of the MNCs'world tax revenues, according to Symons. He cites the example of GlaxoWellcome where the United Kingdom revenue authorities imposed a whoppingSTG200 million (RM804 million) in transfer pricing adjustments.  Recent tax authority transfer pricing adjustments have had a seriousimpact on MNCs world-wide, leaving them open to extra taxation (seetable). In fact, Japan's National Tax Agency (NTA) statistics for the yearended June 1996 indicate 44 cases with an income adjustment of US$ 450million earned US$ 275 million in tax and penalties for NTA. NTAstatistics for the nine years since the introduction of transfer pricinglegislation recorded 130 cases involving income adjustments of US$ 1.8billion, earning NTA a whopping US$ 1.1 billion in tax and penalties. Pix: (From left) Happell, Thanneermalai and Symons: Global issues oftransfer pricing.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Stocks to watch: Tenaga Nasional Bhdfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 75TNB recovered strongly from the recent low of RM8.55 to the current levelof RM10.90. As it constitutes some nine per cent of the KLSE CI, Tenagahas set the pace for a run-up of the overall market. Technically, it hasformed a double bottom at RM8.55 and the first upside target is at RM11.70which is close to the current level. Tenaga is expected to consolidatebetween RM11.70 and RM10 for the near term. Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996New shareholders for Tenco?from NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 4TENCO BHD may see new faces on its board soon. Earwitness learns that  asubstantial block of Tenco shares could have changed hands recently ataround RM12 to RM13 apiece. This could probably account for the recentsharp surge in Tenco's share price from RM12 to RM16 as at press time.  The new shareholder is believed to be a property developer with strongconnections in northern Peninsular Malaysia. If all goes well, theproperty developer may be looking into the possibility of pumping somesizeable property projects into Tenco.  Tenco, which was listed on the KLSE second board in Nov 1993, has apaid-up capital of RM18 million. It is an investment holding company withfour wholly-owned subsidiaries mainly engaged in the manufacture and saleof industrial adhesives, industrial chemicals, consumer and aerosolproducts. It also sells industrial gases, industrial equipment andbuilding products.  The range of building products marketed by Tenco includes floormats,fibreglass wool and boards, polyethylene sheets and tubes.  The major shareholders of Tenco as at Aug 16, 1996 comprise Wilken SdnBhd (29%), Tan Yik Chin (6.4%), Tan Aik Teck (4.7%) and Tan Lee Ling(4.4%). Tan Yik Chin is deemed interested in Wilken by virtue of hisshareholding in the company.  In  May 1995, Tenco announced that the Securities Commission has giventhe greenlight to lift the moratorium  of 6.89 million shares held by TanYik Chin, Tan Aik Teck, Tan Lay Lee, Tan Lee Leng @ Tan Lee Fee andWilken. With the lifting of the moratorium, the major shareholders were tohave collectively provided a pretax profit guarantee of RM3.42 million forboth the financial years ended Mar 31, 1995 and 1996.  Since Tenco's pretax profit for the two financial years amounted toabout RM4.45 million each, it looks like the major shareholders have metthe profit forecast. Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Theory in practice: As Malaysian and Australian ministers speak of hightides and pebblesfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 57THERE IS NO doubt trade ties between Malaysia and Australia mean a lot toboth countries. Barring the occasional hiccup, the relationship betweenboth countries has generally been warm and cordial.  Earlier this month, two Malaysian ministers flew to Sydney for aMalaysia-Australia business dialogue organised by the Asian Strategy andLeadership Institute. The event, themed `A New Era In Australia-MalaysiaPartnership', drew leading businessmen from both Malaysia (about 40) andAustralia (50).  In his keynote address, Entrepreneur Development Minister Datuk MustapaMohamed drew attention to some Malaysian industries to be considered byAustralian companies about to venture abroad. Among them were theproduction of intermediate and capital goods, construction and buildingmaterials, information technology and computer software.  In closing the dialogue, Education Minister Datuk Seri Najib Tun Razakurged Australian business leaders to help develop Malaysia's MultimediaSuper Corridor (MSC), telling them that they `should not miss this hightide in our relations'.  Such high-level salesmanship does not come from Malaysia alone.  When Australian Foreign Minister Alexander Downer was in Kuala Lumpurlast month to address the Malaysia-Australia University Alumni convention,themed `Malaysia-Australia Relations Beyond 2000', he sent a similarmessage. `We have moved beyond the time when governments alone wereresponsible for promoting national achievements. The building of links atthe people-to-people level is, after all, the lifeblood of anyrelationship,' he said.  Downer said that the tide of economic, technological and social changethat was sweeping and transforming Australia has created opportunities forco-operation and partnership between Malaysians and Australians,particularly in the fields of finance, information technology, marketing,medicine and education. `Further liberalisation of Malaysia's servicessector should, over time, create even more opportunities in these fields,'he added.  The day before Downer gave his speech, Prime Minister Datuk Seri DrMahathir Mohamad said Australia could play a major role in helpingMalaysia become an international centre of excellence in higher education.`It is our hope that Australia, which has several established universitiesand institutions, will encourage them to open branches in Malaysia or twinwith local institutions,' he said.  These speeches highlight the opportunities available in Malaysia andAustralia which will bolster already healthy trade relations, as suggestedby the statistics. According to Malaysia's Economic Report 1996/97, totaltrade with Australia expanded by 9.4 per cent to RM4.8 billion in thefirst seven months of this year, with Malaysia continuing to record adeficit.  Exports to Australia increased by 3.9 per cent to RM1.7 billion whileimports expanded by 12.6 per cent to RM3.1 billion. In the correspondingperiod in 1995, Malaysia's trade deficit with Australia was RM1.2 billion.  Malaysia's investments in Australia stood at A$1 billion last year,making it the second largest Asean investor after Singapore. About 60 percent of Malaysian money in Australia was in the property sector, followedby mineral exploration and development.  Downer tells Malaysian Business, `Based on our figures, over 61 per centof Australia's trade is with countries of East Asia, while 2.6 per cent ofour total world trade was with Malaysia in 1995-1996. This is up from 2.4per cent the previous financial year. Malaysia is now our 11th largesttrading partner overall.' (Also see next story)  Elaborating, he says, `Trade has grown strongly particularly in the moreelaborately transformed manufactures, in both directions. They now make up26 per cent of Australia's exports to Malaysia.  `We anticipate further growth in our trade with Malaysia and we wouldlike that percentage share to grow. Nevertheless, we recognize thatMalaysia is a very competitive market place. Australian products andservices have to be both high  in quality and competitively priced. As thePrime Minister John Howard says, we are well aware that merely living inthe Asian region does not ensure us an easy road. He noted there are manypebbles washing up on the economic shores of Asia. We must work hard tomake ours the most attractive pebbles. We cannot be complacent.  In an interview published in May, the Australian High Commissioner toMalaysia, William Farmer, was quoted as saying Malaysia was Australia'ssecond largest market in Asean for services, especially in education andtourism. Australian investments as at June 30, 1994 stood at A$2.5billion.  Farmer said new Australian investments focused more on capital andtechnology-intensive activities. Australian investors were also movinginto the transport and distribution sectors, as well as software andmanagement systems. Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Ahead of the times: Singapore Airlines upgrades fleet and service to stayahead of the packfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 80IF ONE HAD TO name the world's most successful airline marketing campaign,chances are Singapore Airlines (SIA) would constantly come to mind. Theclever imagery of the Singapore Girl - attractive and unflappable, smilingat every situation in every corner of the world - has been a winner forthe airline. So has the reputation for excellence that SIA has created foritself over the years.  But it takes more than just advertising and a good reputation to keep anairline right up front these days. The modern fleet of the last decade maytoday translate into planes that are behind the times in seating,electronics and passenger gadgetry.  Today's airline management not only has to look ahead at who they haveto beat, but constantly look over their shoulders to see who is catchingup fast. It's a juggling act, but one at which SIA's management ismasterful, doubly to be admired because the small island state really doesnot have an overload of tourist attractions.  And for a population as small as that of Singapore's to have an airlinethat is one of the world's leaders is an achievement indeed. Itillustrates the value of lateral thinking and bold, forward planning withwhich the name Singapore Airlines has become synonymous.  Right from the outset, the management has set out to be an industrypacesetter. In those days this airline had Asia's youngest fleet, andconcentrated on being the first in Asia to bring their passengers suchamenities as inflight faxes and telephones.  And when it came to designing an airport that was just as innovative,only the best was good enough for Singapore also. Changi was the worldleader, making headlines everywhere when it opened. The second stage ofChangi has been completed, and this is just as good as the first, with theonly justifiable complaint being that there are just not enough movingwalkways to cover the vast distances involved.  Nevertheless, when it comes to style and efficiency, I would back Changiagainst any large airport in the world. Although SIA does not actually ownChangi airport, the smart, modern facilities there are closely associatedwith the airline in the passenger's mindset. The bottom line is that, overthe years, SIA has built an enviable reputation, made bumper profits, hashad the cashflow (and where this was not enough, the confidence of bankersand the investment public) to purchase the latest new aircraft, resultingin a very large number of brand-loyal SIA frequent flyers.  Safety and service are other very important aspects when choosing anairline, and it is a comfort to any air traveller to know that the airlinethey choose has a reliable record. In this regard it's hard to findanother Asian airline as decorated as SIA when nominations come from bothairline industry magazines and passenger and travel organisations. Flightoperations and pilot training have been recognised by the US-basedProfessional Pilot magazine with its 1994 Airline of the Year award. TheUK travel trade newspaper, Travel Weekly, gave SIA the Best Airline inAsia award in its 1994 Travel Industry Globe Awards.  Not only that, in the last eight years, SIA has been nominated seventimes by the prestigious Conde Nast Traveller Magazine Readers' Choiceaward for Best Airline - the last award being in 1995.  Last year proved to be a good year for SIA when, for the sixth yearrunning, it was awarded the Pacific Asia Travel Association (PATA) TravelAward for Best Airline. It also won the top airline of business travellersaward for the second successive year in an Asia Money 1995 Business TravelPoll.  Continued efforts to maintain SIA's service excellence both on theground and inflight has consistently earned it international travel andpassenger awards. One of the most telling awards of its diligence in thisregard is the `20 Years of Excellence in International Service' award fromAir Transport World in 1994.  Not content to rest on its laurels, SIA is presently upgrading itsfleet. The Airbus A340-300E, launched worldwide this April, was madepossible when SIA took delivery of two A340's, acknowledged as having thequietest cabin in the sky. Another 15 A340's are on order as part of theairline's commitment to operate one of the youngest and most modern fleetsof any major international airline.  SIA's managing director Dr Cheon Choon Kong explains, `We rate theaircraft highly in terms of economy, modernity and comfort. It is a starperformer in all categories. Inspired by this, we have decided to name ourA340-300E the "Celestar." We believe this aircraft will truly be a "starof the skies."'  The Celestar A340 will offer passengers more non-stop services andpoint-to-point connections. Its long range and medium-density routesinclude Jakarta, Bangkok, Melbourne and Sydney. Non-stop services to Paristhat began this month will demonstrate the long-range capability of thisnew Airbus Industrie star.  SIA has made the Celestar its own with some custom additions. Its state-of-the-art inflight entertainment system, KrisWorld, is found in everyclass. Passenger response has been enthusiastic, and it's easy tounderstand why. There is a choice of 22 video channels in the KrisWorldsystem, along with 12 audio channels, 10 Nintendo games and real-time textnews which is updated on an hourly basis, bringing general news, financialand sports headlines.  There is also destination information on 176 cities on SIA's routenetwork together with a personal in-seat telephone and fax service thatallow passengers to place calls or transmit faxes from anywhere in the skyto virtually anywhere on the ground.  Reading in an upright or reclined position is easy with the individualmulti-positioning reading lights. Seat pitch for First Class passengershas been extended to a generous 74in, offering a real sense of space.  Raffles Class and Economy Class passengers also have adjustableheadrests with foldable `ears' for further support. Electric leg-rests anddeflatable lumbar supports are offered in Raffles Class, while footrestsgive Economy Class passengers improved comfort.  The airline's Megatop 747s have been refitted, refining the alreadyluxurious `sleeper' seats in First Class and allowing them to attain agreater recline and increased height of the leg-rest to almost horizontal.  Raffles Class passengers enjoy an improved seat pitch of 47in in theMegatop; the backrest drops back an extra 2in, while the forward-mountedlegrest can be operated by remote control.  Keeping in touch with passengers' requirements is part of the secretbehind SIA's success. The Silver Kris lounge at Changi is renowned as thelargest and most luxuriously appointed airport lounge on the globe. Here,the seating capacity for 550 offers an unbeatable range of business andpersonal amenities for SIA's First and Raffles Class passengers. OtherSilver Kris lounges are gradually being upgraded worldwide to match theone at Changi.  Apart from the inflight KrisWorld advantages of phone calls from theseat, there are many little touches that keep SIA customers coming back.Ground staff are always on hand to bid farewell to First Class passengerseither at the boarding gate or in the cabin, and on journeys longer thanfour hours, local newspapers are offered on arrival at their destinations.  For SIA's frequent flyers, a Priority Passenger Service (PPS) guaranteesmembers access to at least an Economy seat on any flight, provided aminimum of 24 hours' notice is given. Recently, enhancements to PPSinclude extra benefits and a second tier of membership - PPS Solitaire -for loyal members.  Cuisine has also been a strong point on SIA which offers Asian dishesand European cuisine, halal on Middle Eastern routes and by request onothers. It's a formula that works well. Wine lists give the passengers achoice of excellent German, French and Australian wines. Cocktails,aperitifs, spirits, liqueurs and beers are supplemented by tea, herbalteas, decaffeinated tea or coffee, and a choice of liqueur coffees such asHighland Coffee (with Scotch whisky and whipped cream), Cafe Royale (withXO brandy) and Cafe Mandarin (with Cointreau, essence of squeezed orangepeel and a topping of whipped cream).  Other SIA initiatives to take the hassle out of travelling include areturn check-in. This allows passengers travelling to regionaldestinations and returning within 48 hours to be issued with boardingpasses for both the outbound and inbound sectors.  Other check-in improvements include a fax check-in, and for passengerstravelling out of Singapore, there is a check-in facility at SIA'sdowntown ticket offices. An automated combined ticket and boarding passused on the Singapore-Kuala Lumpur shuttle service has further reducedcheck-in time.  Another key to a good airline is to have a schedule that takes thepassenger, especially the business traveller, to the destination he wants,with a frequency that will suit his itinerary. For this, SIA has built avery impressive network covering 73 cities in 41 countries. In addition,SIA's regional subsidiary, SilkAir, serves 20 Asian destinations in eightcountries.  SIA acknowledges that until the end of this century, the Asia-Pacificregion will be the fastest expanding area for civil aviation. China isemerging as a big-growth potential market and SIA currently flies toBeijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou and Hangzhou, and will progressively add morecities as the need arises.  Indo-China is also ripe for both tourist and business travel expansion,and SilkAir and SIA service Ho Chi Minh City and Hanoi daily, withVietianne and Pnomh Phenh covered by three services weekly.  Japan, however, remains SIA's most important market with Tokyo, Osaka,Nagoya, Fukuoka, Sendai and Hiroshima accounting for a total of 58 flightsweekly.  The problem that SIA has is that the other regional carriers all seem tomake a fetish of aiming to overtake SIA in quality. The naming of MalaysiaAirlines as the region's best First Class service last year sent shockwaves through SIA's corridors. Hasty conferences explored how such a thingcould happen, and efforts were redoubled to win back this position.  If SIA has a fault, it may be that some passengers feel that they arebeing taken a little for granted. Automated telephone answering that makespassengers talk to machines rather than to human operators irritate many,and the cutting out of inflight amenity packs in Business Class has alsodrawn criticism from passengers I have spoken to.  But these are minor problems, and it's my bet that they will be quicklyand effectively addressed. SIA has always been a quick learner and isunlikely to let any glitches arise that will lose it passengers. Theairline has always believed in increasing services rather thandiscounting, and has consequently enjoyed the loyalty of the premiumfrequent flyer clientele. We cannot imagine any situation which will causethis to change. Pix: The A340-300e Celestar.Pix: Krisworld, a celestar offering for all passengers.Pix: Inflight service for Raffles class passenger.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996More tools of investment: New measures to turn Malaysia into a completecapital marketfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 45ONE SIGNIFICANT feature of the 1997 Budget is the government's bid tofurther broaden and deepen the financial services sector in the country.  Like never before, measures have been spelt out to make Malaysia asophisticated and complete financial market. At present, investors havelimited options. Most will put their money in the equities or futuresmarket, while the risk averse investor will probably leave it in fixeddeposits to earn interest.  But thanks to Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Datuk SeriAnwar Ibrahim, his latest Budget has paved the way for the setting up of astring of investments tools. For starters, Anwar proposed the introductionof the over-the-counter (OTC) market and a series of bonds to provide abenchmark yield curve.  The OTC market which is similar to the NASDAQ in the United States, isgenerally for the quotation of shares of high-profile technology companieswhich do not meet the requirements for listing on the Kuala Lumpur StockExchange's main or second board.  To further promote the financial services sector, the minister alsoallowed foreign broking firms to take equity of up to 49 per cent indomestic brokerages.  Local brokers can also undertake fund management and underwritingactivities, issue call warrants, manage listing of companies and undertakeelectronic share transactions.  Several economists interviewed by Malaysian Business feel that besidesadding more investment tools, these measures will set the basis forMalaysia to be a complete capital market. MBf Securities economist DrGhazali Atan says the measures will bring about more flexibility to thecapital market and more options for fund managers to spread the risk oftheir portfolios.  `The OTC market will basically be the KLSE's third board while thebenchmark for bonds enhances the creation of a liquid bond market. At thesame time it will also provide an index for bonds. At present, we have theequities and derivatives markets. With the bond and OTC markets, therewill be more tools for investors and those who need to raise finance,' headds.  Subsequent to the Budget announcement, the government announced thatKhazanah Holding, its investment arm, will issue a series of bonds toserve as a benchmark.  Arab-Malaysian Securities economist Mustafa Mohd Nor echoes the views ofGhazali and says the measures will induce the creation of moresophisticated tools of investment. `Without the proposed instruments,Malaysia is not complete as a regional financial services centre. We haveto start somewhere to build up more capital market instruments,' he says.  The importance the government places in expanding the capital marketdoes not come as a surprise considering that there was a significantincrease in funds raised by both the public and private sector from themarket during the first eight months of the year. According to the 1996/97Economic Report, total funds raised by the public and private sectorsthrough the capital market increased significantly by 64.2 per cent toRM20.4 billion compared to RM12.4 billion mobilised the correspondingperiod last year.  Net funds mobilised through the private debt securities market duringthe period was RM10.1 billion, a significant increase compared to RM4.9billion recorded in the corresponding period of 1995. (See table.)  With the Budget paving the way for the development of a complete capitalmarket, the question which lingers on our minds is how and when will thesenew instruments take off?  Consider the fact that the Kuala Lumpur Options & Financal FuturesExchange (KLOFFE) has yet to significantly take off since commencingoperations on Dec 15, last year. Mustafa feels time will tell whether ornot the new instruments for investments and raising capital will take off.  `Even the present equities market took off only in the early 1990s.KLOFFE may be slow but given time, it should take off. The main thing isthat we have a base to create more capital market instruments. The openingup of local broking firms to foreign brokerages is a supporting factor todevelop the local capital market,' Mustafa says.  Ghazali says the new tools will also likely to see private investorsdepending less on banks as a mean for raising funds. `Companies will beless bound towards banks. The OTC market will enable companies which needfunds to issue shares. These companies need not depend on banks solely forfinance,' he adds.  Besides banks and financial institutions, merchant banks and fundmanagement companies also feel another competition coming their wayfollowing measures introduced in the Budget. Anwar had announced theexpansion of the scope of the local brokerages.  Currently, brokerages are only involved in the trading of shares. Butthe Budget has proposed to allow them to manage the listing of companies,undertake fund management and underwriting activities. The listings of newcompanies and underwriting activities are now carried out by merchantbanks.  Ghazali says the proposed measures are good as they would providemerchant banks with competition. However, he dismissed any notion thatmerchant banks will be adversely hit. He says with the OTC and privatecompanies allowed to issue bonds, the scope of the capital market will beenlarged. `Basically the cake will be bigger and there are more players toshare it' he says.  Moreover, an investment analyst feels merchant banks will not bethreatened as they (merchant banks) are established and provide supportingservices for companies seeking a listing like financing and underwriting.`In the short-term, there is not much the brokerages can do. Firstly, itis difficult to set up a corporate finance department while many of themerchant banks have their steady base of clients. Also, many of the biglocal brokerages come under banks or already have an interest in amerchant bank,' he says.  Citing the examples of Arab-Malaysian Securities or Rashid HussainSecurities, the analyst points out that these brokerages already have aninterest in merchant banking activities.  `Thus it serves no purpose for them to create unnecessary competition.It merely provides an opportunity for the smaller brokerages without anyinterest in merchant banks. But this will take time,' he says. Pix: Ghazali: More opportunities for fund managers.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Way out of Ampang snarl: Prolintas starts work on twin-deck highway aboveKlang Riverfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 38`THERE ARE just too many people in Kuala Lumpur. New offices, new cars.Who knows how many more in two or three years' time,' the cabbie muses.`More buildings will add more cars to the roads. If only more people usedthe bus and taxi ...'  Public transportation may be one way around Kuala Lumpur's traffic woes.But the latest attempt to ease the city of traffic congestion comes in theform of an elevated highway. Called the Kuala Lumpur Elevated Highway(KLEH) project, it does not come cheap at about RM100 million per km!  When completed in 1999, the KLEH will give city motorists extra motoringspace over the Klang River. It will be the main artery linking KualaLumpur's eastern corridor (Jalan Jelatek, Jalan Datuk Keramat, JalanAmpang, Jalan Ampang Hilir) to the city centre (Jalan Sultan Ismail).  Project Lintasan Kota Sdn Bhd (Prolintas) is the KLEH concessionaire.Its general manager Abdullah Hassan says that among the plus points,state-of-the-art KLEH is an environmentally sound option, emphasising theimportance of aesthetics. `I can't say whether or not the pillars will begrey, but basically it will take into account its surroundings,' he sayswith a chuckle.  Part of the reason why the KLEH will be the most expensive highway isthe land factor. Construction is atop prime land in the city, most ofwhich (except for some private land), belongs to the Drainage andIrrigation Department.  The interchanges, as well as the beginning and end of the highway, willbe built over main land mass, not river banks. It is understood that notall the required land has been acquired. Public relations officer NorhanimZakaria says, `We're still in the process of acquiring land for theproject.'  Another costly factor, according to KLEH project manager Mohd MazlanMohd Yusof, is technology. He says, `The bottom of the pillars aredesigned in cut-edged shape so that when the water level rises during hightide or flood, there is minimum resistance against the pillars, minimisingthe back water effect. Their width at 14m is almost double the width ofpillars used for the Light Rail Transit (LRT).' Other costs includerelocating squatters and the diversion of water pipes and power cableslining the length of the river.  But in the end, the investment could be well worth it. Abdullah says,`It will absorb traffic from Jalan Ampang, reduce bumper to bumperbottlenecks and cut down travelling time to the central business districtby more than half.' Work on the KLEH is also said to be less damaging tothe environment.  At present, 40,000 vehicles use Jalan Ampang daily. Studies show that ittakes 45 minutes to drive to or out of the city centre and even longerduring peak hours. Abdullah says,`If you build a flyover or expand theroad, two lanes have to be closed. The disruption to traffic andbusinesses would be enormous.'  One estimate by Percon, Permodalan Nasional Berhad's constructionsubsidiary, is that the traffic volume in Jalan Ampang alone will increaseto 55,000 vehicles by the year 2005. In less than five years, the city'spopulation will increase from 1.6 million to 2.2 million. The rush is onto complete the elevated highway.  Abdullah says piling work has already begun on the RM700 million build,operate and transfer (BOT) project starting at the 14-lane toll plaza inJalan Datuk Keramat. Phase 1 comprises twin decks with seven interchangesbeginning near Wisma Denmark, rising to Jalan Jelatek, then down to JalanAmpang. After Jalan Jelatek, the twin decks merge into one single widerdeck on a two-lane dual carriageway. Seven interchanges connect withexisting roads, the latter serving as secondary roads once the KLEH isready. The interchanges are at Jalan Sultan Ismail, KLCC, Jalan Tun Razak,Jalan Jelatek, Jalan Ulu Kelang, Jalan Kerja Air Lama and Jalan Ampang.  Phase 2 of KLEH comprises a single deck extension from Phase 1 in JalanJelatek to Jalan Ampang, completing the whole twin-deck highway. Abdullahsays, `Work on Phase 2 will commence when traffic reaches 93,600 vehiclesa day or by the year 2013, even if traffic has not reached that volume bythen.'  Six kilometres of the 7.4 km KLEH will be elevated - at its highestpoint reaching up to 12 metres. Noise barriers will be erected nearschools, hospitals and other sensitive areas. Mazlan says the company isconsidering see-through perspex buffers instead of using conventionalconcrete panelling. The speed limit? Up to 80km/h on the twin deck and65km/h where the decks merge into one.  A consortium of three companies comprising main contractor Percon, sub-contractors MMC Engineering Bhd and Leighton Holdings Bhd will constructthe elevated portion of KLEH.  Prolintas, the KLEH concession holder, has a paid-up capital of RM10million. It is 60 per cent owned by Permodalan Nasional Berhad with theremaining shares held by Percon (formerly known as Pernas Construction).  The maintenance job and toll concession has been awarded to Prolintasfor 33 years, starting from the time work commences. Abdullah expects thecompany to break even in about 10 years after KLEH opens. `By then, weshould be able to repay our commercial creditors,' he adds.  Another project source says that if about RM3 million in toll wascollected a month, the potential revenue could be RM36 million a year.  The first highway to be built above a river boasts a few advantages overconventional highways. Abdullah says, `It minimises disruption to traffic,businesses and activities at the main road. As it will be built mostly ongovernment property, it minimises social problems related to landacquisitions, especially in a heavily populated area as this.'  Some squatter settlements will be relocated for the highway but thenumbers are small compared with other projects. Norhanim says about 95affected squatter families in Federal Territory and another 56 in Selangorwill be relocated to longhouses in Kampung Air Lanjut, Setapak and KampungWira Damai and Gombak.  Says Abdullah, `The Klang river now flows along the central channel inthe middle. The highway's concrete pillars on both sides of the riverbanks only affect water flow during flood or high tide. After the pillarsare built, work concentrates on the top, hence disruption to life below isminimised. `The pillars' foundation will be layed by bored piling, ascrew-in technique which eliminates the hammering thunders of theconventional method.  Fears have been raised over the river's eco-system. Experts say thatwithout ultra violet rays, bacteria in the river would fester andultimately destroy its eco-system. But Mazlan assures that it is not aproblem. `The elevated twin decks will be separated 12m edge to edge toallow direct sunlight to the river below.'  Mazlan says, `I believe the end result will be pleasant. It isenvironmentally sound and we are building an alternative access out of KL.The project will straighten out meandering parts of the Klang River andincorporate a masterplan to beautify it.  `At present, there are bends in the river which are collection pointsfor rubbish and debris. Once these are straightened out, water flow willbecome smoother.' Below KLEH, the Drainage and Irrigation Department willbuild walkways with handrails for pedestrians and joggers.  After 25 years of building roads, bridges and highways, Percon hasestablished its name as an infrastructure builder. It has completed RM1billion worth of projects including the Istana Hotel in Kuala Lumpur, theSeremban-Kuala Lumpur highway improvement project, two packages of theNorth-South highway project, drainage and earthworks for Package 5 of theKLIA at Sepang, the KL-PJ highway and the Gambang-Kuala Lepar Highway(Kuala Lumpur to Kuantan). Its current projects include the Shah Alam-Petaling Jaya expressway and the Malaysian Embassy building in Bangkok.  The KLEH is a substantial investment for the future, for Percon andmotorists who use the highway. Abdullah says, `If this project proves tobe suitable, it will be a launching pad for us to export our expertiseoverseas.' Pix: Abdullah: The KLEH is a launching pad to export our expertise.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightMALAYSIAN BUSINESS via NewsNetNovember 16, 1996Satellite parts from Zasnafrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,16 Nov 1996, page 4ZASNA Technology Sdn Bhd, a company linked to Nepline Bhd executivechairman Dr Nik Mohd Zain Omar, will become the first Bumiputera companyto manufacture hardware and components for satellite receiver systems.  Industry sources tell Earwitness, Zasna will be teaming up with a Germancompany, Ge-tronic Seislinger Electronic. They also say that the joint-venture will initially export the products to Ge-tronic in Germany, whichwill in turn market the products worldwide.  Ge-tronic is a well-known company which supplies satellite receivermultiswitches and cable TV (CATV) amplifiers to original equipmentmanufacturer (OEM) customers such as Philips and Nokia.  The sources say the multi-million ringgit factory will be located inPengkalan Chepa, Kelantan. Nik has plans to eventually list Zasna on themain board of the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange (KLSE).  This is not Nik's first venture in Kelantan in his personal capacity. Heis also teaming up with several entrepreneurs to set up Kelantan's firstprivate hospital in Kota Bharu. Pix: Dr Nik: Plans to list Zasna.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List WT03-B06-5IA087-000634-B041-77http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it47.html 205.156.212.5 19970122030501 text/html 41282HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:03:00 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:17 GMTContent-length: 41095Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it47.html Sample Issue Copyright MARKET: ASIA PACIFIC via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FOOD COMPANIES WITH A HEART SHOULD LOOK TO SOUTH ASIA (594 words) JAPANESE CONTINUE TRADITION OF GIFT GIVING (234 words) ASIAN MEN MAY BE THE NEXT BIG SKIN-CARE MARKET (198 words) TIME PAYMENTS INCREASE BUYING POWER IN HO CHI MINH CITY (198 words) JAPANESE TAKE THEIR COLD REMEDIES SERIOUSLY (191 words) ROOM FOR GROWTH IN INSURANCE IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC REGION (405 words) ENGLISH LANGUAGE BECOMES A FLASH POINT IN NEW ZEALAND (650 words) GOING OVERSEAS? HERE'S AN EXCELLENT BUSINESS REFERENCE... (341 words) COMMUNIST CHINESE COMBINE HISTORY WITH CAPITALISM (605 words) TIANJIN IS AN UNDERDEVELOPED CITY WITH IMMENSE PROMISE (2564 words) CopyrightMARKET: ASIA PACIFIC via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FOOD COMPANIES WITH A HEART SHOULD LOOK TO SOUTH ASIADespite the increased supply of food and an upturn in socialconditions, malnutrition remains a serious problem in SouthAsia.It also presents an opportunity for firms and nonprofitorganizations that want to focus their charitable food-distribution efforts. The region includes Bhutan, Bangladesh,India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka-Qwith apopulationof 1.22 billion people.More than one-half the world's underweight children ofpreschoolage are South Asian. With the region's population growingfasterthan its economy, food availability remains relatively low,andhas not shown much improvement in recent years.Problems include a lack of education of mothers as well aspoordistribution systems. Officials say it is clear thateducatingwomen is one key to improving nutrition in the region. Thechartabove shows the number of girls who are enrolled in primaryschoolfor every 100 boys in the same age group.The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) estimates that inthe1980s, the share of underfed in the region fell 6 percent.SouthAsia's per capita food energy supply grew from about 2,070kilocalories daily in 1975 to almost 2,250 kilocalories in1990.But the region's 101 million underweight children are stillnearlydouble the number in Sub-Saharan Africa. Malnutrition stuntsthemental and physical growth of one-third of children in theregion,says the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF).A large proportion of this is caused by deficiencies ofVitamin A,iodine, and iron. Nearly one-half the children in the groupaged 6to 11 in Bangladesh and almost one-third in the tinyHimalayankingdom of Bhutan, are afflicted with goiter caused by iodinedeficiency, which retards brain development.United Nations officials are puzzled by the persistence ofhighlevels of malnutrition in the region."We in UNICEF believe there must be something wrong with thestrategies being used," says regional chief Urban Jonsson. Hepoints out that South Asian governments are the largestspenderson nutrition, but with little effect.There is, however, some good news from nongovernmental,community-based programs.SUCCESS STORIESIn Bangladesh, severe protein malnutrition dropped 14 percentbetween 1985 and 1994 in areas covered by locally runschemes.Similar initiatives in India, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lankahaveslashed nutritional deficiencies dramatically. About 20community-based projects have been singled out as successful by theUNICEFSouth Asia office, which suggests that governments can learnfromthese success stories.South Asia can also learn from Thailand, which UNICEF citesas thebest example of a nation that improved national nutritionpoliciesand strategies on the basis of the experience of communityprojects.Political commitment at all levels, a high level of literacy,especially among women, community organization andinvolvement,and the infrastructure that can deliver basic services wereamongthe key factors for the success of nutrition strategiesidentifiedat a regional meeting."Long term nutrition improvements in the region are stronglyassociated with female educational levels. Research inPakistanhas shown that the likelihood of having an underweight childinthe household where the mother has no education is threetimesthat of the household where the mother has primaryeducation,"says a paper presented at a regional meeting on NationalPlans ofAction for Nutrition.The trend of female enrollment at secondary level is upwards,from24 percent in 1975 to 35 percent in 1990, but the region'sprogress in educating females is still too slow to make adent inmalnutrition.Inter Press Service/Global Information NetworkBack to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: ASIA PACIFIC via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996JAPANESE CONTINUE TRADITION OF GIFT GIVINGThe high value of the yen is opening up the vast Japanesegiftsmarket to foreign suppliers. Japanese people give each otherYEN10trillion (US$96 billion) in gifts each year. While thecorporategifts market has shrunk in this tough business time, personalgiftgiving is thriving and was worth YEN7.7 trillion (US$74billion)in 1994.A report from the Hong Kong Trade Development Council saysthatJapanese consumers' tastes are increasingly diversified, andtheirsales of imported gift products should increase. The greatestpersonal gift givers are Japanese women in their 20s and 30s.Theytend to favor inexpensive, fashionable items such ashandkerchiefs, pouches, well-designed jewelry, andaccessories.Gift-giving is well ingrained in Japan's culture. Apart fromsetevents such as religious ceremonies or weddings, birthdays orthebirth of a baby, presents are given to neighbors, relatives,andacquaintances. Young people give gifts to friends andcoworkers toexpress feelings of gratitude, happiness, or sometimessadness.For the business gift, popular items used by companies forpromotions or incentives include electronics (calculators,watches) small electrical appliances, kitchenware, interioritemssuch as CD racks, travel bags, stationery, knitted goods,flashlights, pocket cameras, and lighters.P Robin BrombySOURCE: Japanese Gifts Market (US$40), Hong Kong TradeDevelopmentCouncil, 38th floor, Office Tower, Convention Plaza, 1HarbourRoad, Wanchai, Hong Kong; telephone 852+ 2 584 4333; fax 852+2824  0249.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: ASIA PACIFIC via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ASIAN MEN MAY BE THE NEXT BIG SKIN-CARE MARKETAs Asia's population ages, it is possible to cash in on anumberof new trends in skin care, according to reports in AsianRetailer. Postwar baby boomers in Asia are beginning to seesignsof wear and tear in the mirror. Couple this with greateraffluence, and the breakdown of social taboos that havepreventedmen from buying cosmetic products and new opportunitiesemerge.The magazine reports that high-class cosmetics houses areridinghigh on a boom in antiaging creams and potions, and alreadylower-priced versions of these lines are hitting the supermarkettoiletry departments. It says that the Watson pharmaceuticalstorechain of Hong Kong finds that antiaging merchandise isbecomingimportant in its product line.Among the skin-care buying customers is an increasing numberofmen. While few products are targeted directly to Asian men,thereare indications that men are buying women's products,especiallythose with little or no fragrance.Other items that are growing in demand are blood pressuremonitors, anti-cholesterol remedies, vitamins, and healthfoodsupplements.SOURCE: Asian Retailer (Vol. 4, No. 9), Crawford P.O. Box0526,Singapore 9119; telephone 65+ 222 1466; fax 65+ 222 8511.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: ASIA PACIFIC via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TIME PAYMENTS INCREASE BUYING POWER IN HO CHI MINH CITYSales of imported goods in Ho Chi Minh City have jumped withthereintroduction of time payments, but they are not foreveryone,according to Vietnam Investment Review. The fortnightlybusinessnewspaper, which is published in Vietnamese and English,reportsthat more than 100 shops in the commercial capital ofsouthernVietnam now offer credit on everything from a new Honda tothelatest personal computer equipment. Relatively strictconditionsapply: some stores provide credit to state employees only,whileat others the customer must have a certificate from his orheremployer guaranteeing repayments will be deducted from wages.With time payments, demand for computers has increased by 150percent as higher-income Vietnamese use the new paymentschemes.There is tough competition among about 100 computer stores inHoChi Minh City, and other marketing devices include specialoffersfor students and for new businesses.Not everyone is happy. Domestic manufacturers complain thatsalesof their generally less-expensive models are dropping asconsumersuse credit to afford more-expensive, usually imported, items.SOURCE: Vietnam Investment Review (October 16-22), 56 Quoc TuGiamStreet, Hanoi, Vietnam; telephone 84+ 4 232 642; fax 84+ 4259271.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: ASIA PACIFIC via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996JAPANESE TAKE THEIR COLD REMEDIES SERIOUSLYGetting to school and work every day is an obsession with theJapanese, no matter how ill they feel. That may be one reasonthatthe Japanese spend $5 per capita every year soothing thecommoncold, the most spent by any of the world's six largestmarkets forcough and cold remedies. Cold remedies represent 11 percentof theJapanese market for the entire sector.While the Japanese focus on colds, residents of the UnitedStatesspend about the same amount per capita ($5.50) for coughremedies,according to MarketLine International.MarketLine analysts say that the market for over-the-counter(OTC)remedies can be expected to grow as Japan joins otherdevelopedcountries in trying to cut back on healthcare expendituresandinstilling a sense of personal responsibility in consumers.While many U.S. and European companies are entering theJapaneseOTC market, Taisho Pharmaceutical company, which ispracticallyunknown outside the Japanese market, continues to hold astrongposition.SOURCE: Global Cough and Cold Remedies ($995). Published byMarketLine International, 16 Connaught Street, London W2 2AF,England; telephone 44+ 171 624 2200; fax 44+ 171 372 0130.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: ASIA PACIFIC via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ROOM FOR GROWTH IN INSURANCE IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC REGIONThe Pacific Rim, which in 1993 had insurance premiums ofabout$375.8 billion, has the greatest potential for insurancemarketgrowth of all regions in the world, according to a new reportoninsurance in emerging markets, published by DatamonitorInternational.China alone represents about one-quarter of the world'spopulationbut ranks 25th in terms of premium income. Its premium growthrateis about 30 percent a year and it currently has a per capitapremium income of just $3, compared with per capita premiumsofabout $473 in Taiwan. China is typical of the markets in theregion that combine high premium income growth with very lowinsurance penetration.The combination has started to tempt multinational insurerswhorealize that a rapidly growing, but immature market adds uptountapped opportunity.Other countries with high market potential, such as India andthePhilippines, have really not started to grow yet. India willshortly privatize its entire insurance industry, which shouldcreate competition-based growth that will start to releasethemarket's potential.Currently, Japan's insurance industry dwarfs its Pacific Rimneighbors. It is now the second-largest insurance industry intheworld. Insurance companies have successfully adapted westernmethods to suit the Japanese taste for investment. Even carinsurance often has a built-in investment element.Japan's insurance industry registered an increase of 1.4percentbetween 1992 and 1993, compared with South Korea's growth inthesame time period of 8.5 percent. Between 1991 and 1992, SouthKorea's insurance industry grew even faster at 18 percent.According to data from the Japan Institute of Life Insurance,annuity policies in Japan have grown as worries about theNationalPension Fund have grown. In 1994, 95 percent of Japanesehouseholds had life insurance. Annuity policies have beenespecially popular among the young who are worrying abouttheireventual retirement. Among all households, ownership ofannuitiesrose 7.6 percentage points between 1991 and 1994, while theyrosefrom 9 percent to 24.6 percent among people under age 30.New life insurance products for women have contributed to thegrowth in Japan and women may also be prime targets forinsurancein emerging markets as more women become contributors tohouseholdincomes.SOURCES: Insurance in Emerging Markets, $2,045, published byDatamonitor International, 106 Baker Street, London W1M 1LA,England; telephone 44+ 171 625 8548; fax 44+ 171 625 5080,and TheNikkei Weekly.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: ASIA PACIFIC via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ENGLISH LANGUAGE BECOMES A FLASH POINT IN NEW ZEALANDThere may be a market for teaching would-be New Zealandimmigrantsin English.New Zealand wants to be seen as part of Asia, but it isscaringaway Asian migrants with a compulsory English-language test,andimmigrants are risking a more-than-$13,000 bond if they don'tlearn English quickly enough.Asian New Zealanders are unhappy with Wellington'sintroduction in1995 of an English proficiency test for would-be immigrantswhichthey feel is targeted mainly at Asians.Asian migration to New Zealand has increased rapidly inrecentyears. Migrants from North and Southeast Asia comprised24,000 ofthe 50,000 residence visas granted in the past year.Foreigners who want to migrate to New Zealand must pay adepositthat will be lost if they fail to pass the English-languageproficiency exam within a year. They must also pay a $160 feefortheir residence visas.Learning English is not a completely academic exercisebecause howyou speak English may affect your acceptance in New Zealand.UmaShakti Ba, a student services development officer at AucklandUniversity says the way immigrants speak English largelydetermines how they are treated in New Zealand. "Your accentplaysa role in how people judge your English ability here. Howeverwelleducated you may be in English, if you have an accent it isseenas incorrect. If it is not the English they wish to hear, youwillbe judged as incompetent," she told Inter Press Service.  "Iseeit happen here every day."Government officials admit that the new language test maydampenimmigration from some Asian countries, but they say it willalsoaffect immigration from non-English-speaking Europeancountries.Soo Lee Lim, director of the Auckland Chinese Radio AM 1476,agrees that many New Zealanders are opposed to Asianmigration,but she says there is a stronger view that New Zealand shouldnotbe overpopulated. "On the whole, the Kiwis are broad-mindedpeople. That's my experience," added Lim who migrated fromHongKong five years ago.There is, however, a strong feeling within the Asiancommunitythat New Zealanders should be thankful to Asians andespecially toAsian money which helped pull New Zealand out of recession.Asianinvestments in New Zealand and the country's exports to Asiahaverisen dramatically since 1991. One-third of the country'stourists-Qa major foreign exchange earnerQ-come from Asia.Bruneiinvested more than $20 million, for example, in 1993.Businessexperts say they have never seen this kind of wealth comingintothe country before.But Lim says small business migrants from Asia find it hardtomake money here because most local products like fruits andmeatsare controlled by monopolies. "It's not easy for foreignerstobreak into this system," she said. "When we come here we havetostart from scratch."She says they would have made more money had they remained inHongKong. Most business migrants coming here are not from theveryrich segment, but from the upper middle class. Typically theyarein their 40s, and they are seeking a quiet life and a less-pressured school environment for their children.Migrants from Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Malaysia are mostlynewlyrich who tend to show their wealth by dressing well, drivingsleekcars, and buying big houses. "It attracts some jealousy fromthelocal people," Lim said.New Zealanders have been complaining that Asian businessimmigrants are not creating jobs for locals, preferring torunsmall family businesses. "After the past four years, I thinktheyare quite disappointed with us," says Lim, and businessmonopoliesand communication barriers don't help either."Given 10 to 20 years, after we are familiar with the systemandthe customs, I'm sure we'll be able to contribute to thiscountry," she adds.P Kalinga SeneviratneSOURCE: Inter Press Service/Global Information Network.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: ASIA PACIFIC via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GOING OVERSEAS?  HERE'S AN EXCELLENT BUSINESS REFERENCE...Whether you are hiring native employees, relocating employeestoanother country or trying to get yourself ready for a stintoverseas, a good cultural and business reference book isinvaluable.Craighead's International Business, Travel and RelocationGuide to78 Countries,1996-97 includes a general introduction to eachcountry, an economic and political overview, sections ondoingbusiness in the country, money, banking and taxes,communicationsand media, living in the country, health and safety,preparing fora trip, arriving and getting around, lodging, dining andnightlife, leisure activities, and suggested additionalreading.The three-volume set is useful because the country reports,thoughdesigned for the business person, also take intoconsideration thefamily. In the "doing business" chapter, for example, therearesections on work ethics, employment conditions, powerstructureand hierarchy, business networking and business services. Formostcountries, there is a commentary especially addressing theconcerns of business women.For personal consideration, such issues as taxes, housing,household help, importing pets, and driving conditions andowninga car are covered. The guide lists restaurants, cafes,museums,and other places that you might wish to take a colleague ifit isup to you to make the social arrangements.We were especially happy to see references that we do not seeelsewhere such as information on faith healers in thePhilippinesor the importance of remittances to the economy of thatcountry.Again in the report on the Philippines, readers are warnednot torent a house or apartment that doesn't already  have aworkingphone line installed. The reason is that installation of atelephone may take six weeks to six months or longer. Youwillalso learn that corporations often use messengers for localcommunications because telephone service is so unreliable.Craighead's International Business, Travel and RelocationGuide to78 Countries is available for $575 (3 volumes) from GaleResearchInc., 835 Penobscot, Detroit, MI 48226; telephone toll free800347-4253. It is published by Craighead Publications, Inc.,P.O.Box 1253, Darien, CT 06820-1253.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: ASIA PACIFIC via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996COMMUNIST CHINESE COMBINE HISTORY WITH CAPITALISMHoping to capitalize on a domestic audience of well over 1billionpeople, a group of old Chinese revolutionaries is planning athemepark to celebrate one of the seminal events of China'sCommunisthistory.Known as the "Long March Park of the Red Army" and located ona240-acre site in a southwestern Beijing suburb, the parkwouldcommemorate the trek 60 years ago in which the beleagueredCommunist forces sought to escape annihilation by thenationalistgovernment of General Chiang Kai-Shek.Theme parks are not new to China. Yunnan province in southernChina is home to a multimillion dollar park reflectingChinesesociety, particularly its varied ethnic minorities, while aChinese version of Disneyland, to be funded by overseasinvestors,is reportedly under discussion.In 1934, besieged Chinese communists led by Mao Zedung brokeablockade by the Kuomintang (KMT) nationalist party andembarked ona year-long, 6,000-mile escape that became known as the LongMarch. Many of the 80,000 men died as they traveled over theuncompromising terrain. It has gone down as a heroic saga inChinese Communist history.In order to draw crowds and better depict the historicalevent,organizers are seeking to use all the latest technologicalandspecial effects normally associated with Western-style themeparks.The park will include sound and lighting effects, a simulatedfiring range, a space observatory, movie theaters, ferriswheelsand merry-go-rounds, cable cars, and rides on army tanks andarmored personnel carriers, and it would even include China'sfirst bungee-jumping tower."We want to show the Long March events and recreate them to ascale for the general public," said Liu Chengan, a CommunistPartyofficial involved in the planning, adding that the park willhaveother attractions in order to draw the crowds.Tourist developmentsWith social freedom and money to travel, a growing number ofChina's 1.2 billion people are making pilgrimages torediscoverthe country's revolutionary past. To cash in on the travelrush,government officials are converting revolutionary bases intotourist meccas.In Hunan province, for example, restaurants and hotelsappearedto accommodate the tourist influx that accompanied thecelebrationof the 100th anniversary of the birth of the late PartychairmanMao Zedong. The main drawing card was Shaoshan, Zedong'shometown.In November, China Daily, the official English-languagenewspaper,reported another tourist development in the JinggangMountains onthe border of Hunan and Jianqxi provinces, where Mao andotherCommunist revolutionaries first launched their peasantuprisingagainst the Chinese nationalists.Although such initiatives would have shocked Chineseofficials 20years ago, no one in today's China is bothered by the idea ofCommunism's historic past being a selling point for today'sbusinessmen.Planners say that today's young people are so ill-informedaboutand uninterested in recent history that it would be a wasteoftime to try to teach them without the Western-stylepackaging.They say they must combine amusement with education.Getting funding for the $20 million Long March Park isprovingdifficult.  Planners are unlikely to seek foreign investmentbecause that would be embarrassing to the government, whichhasnot yet confirmed monetary commitment to the park. Plannershadhoped to break ground in 1995, but have not because of a lackoffunding.Organizers also have logistical problems to iron out. Localofficials project that as many as 10,000 visitors a day wouldcometo the park even with a $5 entrance fee. But they apparentlydon'tknow how they would move all those people around the hillyterrainand winding roads.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: ASIA PACIFIC via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TIANJIN IS AN UNDERDEVELOPED CITY WITH IMMENSE PROMISEA walk along the Haihe River in downtown Tianjin City is asurprisingly peaceful affair, especially for China. A fewmotorcycles and cars (mostly taxis) cruise the riversideroad, butoverall, the impression is of a sleepy town, not one ofChina'ssecond most important industrial center and container port.Tianjin is the least known of the three urban centersQ-theothersare Beijing and Shanghai-Qthat are under direct control ofthenational government. Located 90 miles southeast of Beijing,Tianjin is often overshadowed by its more important neighbor.Nevertheless, it has gained a reputation as one of China'sbest-run cities and has become a favorite of several major WesternandJapanese manufacturers. But Tainjin's development has beenmuchquieter than that of splashy Shanghai or powerful Beijing.This is a conservative city, but one whose foundation andstrategies for the future give it a substance unusual infree-flowing, fast-growing urban China.Tianjin has a population of more than 8.8 million. More thantwo-thirds (5.8 million in 1993) of the population lives in thecitycenter and its suburbs. The United Nations estimates thepopulation of the urban agglomeration at 10.4 million in1994,with a projected growth to 17 million by 2015. It ranks 14thamongthe world's largest urban agglomerations.The city center has a unique flavor, mixing a variety of 19thcentury European architecture styles, highlighting itshistory asa treaty port, similar to, yet very different from,Shanghai.Shanghai was only a small fishing village until the arrivalofWesterners. Tianjin has a long history as an importanttradingcenter in China, in no small part due to its location soclose toBeijing, yet with easy access to both inland and portnavigationroutes.The municipality encompasses 11,305 sq. km. and includes fiverural counties in addition to urban center and suburbs.  ItisChina's third-largest city and a major hub with some of thebesttransportation links in the country. It is also a pleasantcity,with more than one hundred parks, both large and small.Per capita living space is small at 6.9 sq. m. The cityendured ahighly destructive earthquake in 1976 (in Tangshan) thatclosed itfor a couple of years and forced the reconstruction of asubstantial amount of its housing. All households haverunningwater, but hot water availability is small. Use of householdgasis high, 89 percent in 1993, compared with 86 percent inBeijing.The municipality's economy is one of China's largest, with aGrossDomestic Product (GDP) of 53 billion yuan in 1993.  Theeconomy iscentered on automobiles, electronics, and chemicals. The cityhasone of China's largest automobile manufacturing industries,builtin conjunction with Japanese automakers, and has been on thecutting edge of telecommunications production under theleadershipof companies such as Motorola.Tianjin was one of the first cities to set up a ForeignInvestmentOffice and a Foreign Services Center. This city is expectedtoemerge as an "export center," although until the last fewyears,imports exceeded exports. Nevertheless, with the high-qualityleadership of its former mayor, Li Ruihuan, the city began todevelop its status as a forward-thinking, yet conservative,economic center.Growth has been consistent and not insubstantial, and Tianjinhasbecome a favorite of foreign investors. However, the citystillpossesses a surprisingly underdeveloped consumer market.Tianjin ConsumersTianjin's residents' quality of life lags somewhat behindthat ofresidents in China's other major coastal cities (Beijing,Shanghai, and Guangzhou). Per capita GDP in 1993 was 6,075yuan,70 percent of Beijing's and only one-half that of ShanghaiandGuangzhou. Overall, however, the standard of living is higherthanin the nation as a whole, with residents consuming 42 percentmorethan the national average.Consumption patternsExpenditures on all major categories of goods have increasedsubstantially since 1990. Expenditures on food increased 51percent from 1990 to 1993. Even more importantly, the desirefordiversity, edibility, and convenience has been growing amongTianjin's consumers.Food consumption represents over 54 percent of all livingexpenditures, a larger share than in the nation as a whole.Tianjin is a meat-eating city, with larger-han-averageconsumption of beef and lamb which, to a degree, reflects theeating traditions of the region. As a proportion of totalexpenditures, sugar consumption is less than in Shanghai andBeijing, but more is spent on other flavorings.Vegetable consumption has not increased substantially in thelastseveral years, but according to a 1991 consumer survey, thesupplyand variety of vegetables have increased.  Tianjin has beenanactive participant in the "vegetable basket" project,designed toprovide ample supplies of food, especially vegetables, forurbandwellers.The 1991 consumer survey also suggested that 61 percent ofTianjin's residents are concerned with nutritional values.Only 11percent, however, were interested in specialty products,brandnames, and delicacies. Current figures for these items are nodoubt significantly higher, as imports and processed foodshavebecome increasingly available. Now the supermarket sectionsofdepartment stores are filled with a variety of Chinese andWesternsnacks and sweets, and these store sections are jammed withcustomers.Western retailing in the city has lagged significantly behindforeign investment in the city.  The main shopping streets ofTianjin are narrow and filled with a variety of small shops,restaurants, ice cream stores, and only one major moderndepartment store. Although situated just a few blocks fromthequiet riverfront, these streets are busy. The ambiance ismoretraditional here than in Beijing, Shanghai, and Guangzhou.Withfew high-profile non-Chinese retailers, the retail districtreflects the traditional preference for localizing individualproduct lines along streets. Thus, off the main shoppingstreet,one can find the flower street, the wedding street, and mostimportantly, several centers for textiles.Tianjin remains an important textile center, and 18 percentoftotal retail purchases were for clothing in 1993.  Notsurprisingly, Tianjiners prefer conservative styles. Clothestendto be modern, tailored, yet comfortable. Fashion trends donotdrive clothing purchases in the way they do in Shanghai orGuangzhou, but quality is important.Consumers in Tianjin are often considered by marketresearchersand retailers as a subset of the Beijing market, in spite ofitsown long consumer tradition, dating back to its years as atreatyport.  It is large enough, and important enough, to beconsideredin its own right.A LIFESTYLE ENTERPRISEThe first, and still only, non-Chinese department store wasopenedby Isetan (a Japanese retailer) in 1993.  Isetan Tianjinadjustedits product lines and price points to accommodate the lowerincomes and preferences of local residents.Located next to the main train station across the river fromdowntown, yet within walking distance of the city center,thisstore has not been constricted by the narrow streets andlimitedretail space on the other side of the river.  It is thus abletocarry a wider range of goods in various price ranges. Isetanstillcaters primarily, though not exclusively, to high-middle-incomeearners. Nevertheless with its location, size, and diversity,thisstore has become what the company describes as a "lifestyleenterprise" for Tianjin.Ownership of major consumer durables compares favorably withbothBeijing and Shanghai. In 1993, for every 100 households,therewere 77 sewing machines, 89 refrigerators, and 43 stereorecorders. Ownership of other consumer goods, such as VCRs,stereosystems, and computer games was less, but still substantial,andconforms to the phases of distribution in household incomedefinedin the consumer survey. Household electrical appliances anddurable goods were the first phase, gold jewelry andcosmeticswere the second phase, and interior decorating materials andsmallhousehold appliances were the third phase.Consumerism may not have overwhelmed this city quite yet, butitscomponents are clearly expanding. Television ownership is atalmost 100 percent of households, and the shrinking of bookandmagazine readership reflects trends underway nationally.Accordingto one estimate, one favorite television program in Tianjin,airedduring the lunch hour, is watched by almost three-quarters oftheresidents.Similarly, in the last two to three years, expandingtelecommunications has become a central goal of the city,aided inno small part by investments of telecommunications giantssuch asMotorola and GE. In 1994, 18 percent of urban residents had atelephone, and more than one-quarter of households hadinstalledphones. During that year the number of lines more thandoubled to1.1 million. Cellular phones and pagers are becomingincreasinglyimportant.Nevertheless, the relatively slow growth of Tianjin's economyhasboth held down the proliferation of high-income earners andinhibited the consumer explosion seen in the last few yearsinShanghai, Beijing, and Guangzhou.However, several economic, political, and demographiccharacteristics favor the future of this northeast city andbodewell for the continued development of its consumer market.Location and TransportationTianjin is on the main Beijing-Shenyang and Beijing-Shanghairaillines and just two hours by train from the capital city.Travelbetween the two cities became even easier in the last threeyearswith the opening of the Beijing-Tianjin expressway.It is Tainjin's port, though, that is the centerpiece of thiscity's past and current economic development. The originalportwas on the Haihe River in Tianjin city. Heavy silting forcedit tobe moved 40 miles downstream to Tanggu on the Bo Hai Seaprior toWorld War II. This port, which lies within the municipality'sboundaries, was expanded in 1976 into a major container port.The Tanggu port had 68 cargo berths in 1993,  of which 37 are10,000-ton class deep-water channels. In addition, specialberthsfor coal, petroleum and ore are currently being built.Freightvolume has grown at a rate of more than 20 percent annuallyinrecent years.The basic passenger transportation infrastructure within thecityis only now speeding up.  A short (7.4 km) and simple (trainsrideon one track) system was built in 1982, and is currentlybeingexpanded.  The first phase of the upgrade began in 1995.Duringthe second phase, the system will be expanded by constructionofanother 4.16 km of subway and 5.17 km of elevated railway.Due tobe completed by 1999, this is only the first part of thecity'splan to build a railway network totalling 170 km.Economic DevelopmentSince 1993, the pace of change in the city has increased.Now itis part of what has been described as the "third wave" ofChinesedevelopment. The first wave included Guangzhou in southernChina,the second was Shanghai, and the third includes Beijing,Tianjin,and the provinces along the Bo Hai [Sea] Rim of northeastChina.In 1992, the state had announced that Tianjin was to bedevelopedas the socialist Hong Kong of North China. The planneddevelopmentincluded expanding an already existing New Economic andTechnicalEconomic Development Zone (TEDA) centered on the port inTanggu,expanding Tianjin's city center into a financial center, anddeveloping a free trade zone within Tianjin in the nextdecade.TEDA, located in Tanggu, forty miles from the center ofTianjin,was cited in a series of economic reports of China's specialeconomic zones as the best-managed zone in the country. Itencompasses 33 sq. kilometers and has a population ofslightlymore than 227,000. Transportation between the city center andTEDAimproved substantially with the extension of the Beijing-TianjinExpressway into the zone in 1993, but construction of adedicatedroad is still a year or so in the future. The zone, whichbeganwith only 12 joint venture enterprises, has grownsignificantly.By the end of September, 1994, more than 1,400 enterpriseshadlocated in the zone, with an output value of 100 millionyuan.The zone has become a favorite of foreign manufacturers, whofindits investment climate easier to manage than that of Beijing,Shanghai or Guangzhou.Names of companies that have invested in the New Tech Zonereadlike a who's who of international businessQcompanies such asOtisElevators, Motorola, Mobil Petroleum, Coca-Cola, IBM, andAT&T.TEDA has clearly benefited from the quality of itsadministrationand organization.TEDA administers all aspects of the zone from a single officewithemployees drawn from universities rather than the typicallymoreentrenched city authorities. Corruption, rampant in ShanghaiandGuangzhou, is rare here.Regulation of the zone has been designed to facilitateinvestment.Land costs have been held to less than one-half those ofShanghai.The power supply is consistent, and the government has set upitsown training facilities as well as made several otheraccommodations for zone investors.Binhai Free Trade Zone and the Tianjin Financial CenterThe Binhai free trade zone and the Tianjin financial centeraredesigned to reinforce the overall attractiveness to foreigninvestors of this city as well as to create a comprehensiveeconomic center. Binhai Economic Region consists of 2,270 sq.km.in the eastern part of Tianjin city. It has a population ofalmostone million residents, of which two-thirds are"nonagricultural."Significant investment has been made in this zone in aneffort toimprove its water and power supply, and several otherinfrastructure developments are currently underway.Similarly, plans are underway to create a financial center indowntown Tianjin.  This center, covering 85,000 sq. meters isbeing built with both domestic and foreign funds and isintendedto become the major cog in a network of foreign and domesticbanking.Prospects for the FutureTianjin's potential for growth is substantial.  In additionto itsstrong industrial base, city residents are well-educated, anditis home to one of China's premier universities. Its 11.7percentilliteracy rate in 1990 was second only to that of Beijing(11percent).  Labor mobility is comparatively high, and thelaborforce is well-educated.In addition, the leadership of Tianjin is sophisticated,concernedwith both fiscal stability and creating a positive andflexibleenvironment for investment.  Combined with a stronginfrastructure, both social and economic, this bodes well forthefuture.The potential of this city is not going unnoticed in China,particularly in Beijing. Lower real estate prices (less thanone-third that of Beijing) have driven some of Beijing's newlywealthyresidents to purchase homes in the municipality.Nevertheless, there is a shortage of high-quality office andliving space for foreign investors. However, Tianjin's real-estatemarket has not exploded, unlike the overheated markets ofBeijing,Shanghai, and Guangzhou, where overbuilding has distorted thelocal office-space market.With the city's solid foundation, excellent transportation,andhigh-quality infrastructure, the future looks bright forTianjin.However, development in this city will likely be withoutmassiveinvestment from the central government. Beijing has, instead,staked its future on the growth of Shanghai and the YangtseRiverDelta.Funding growth will have to come from creative planning bymunicipal authorities.  Many of these authorities have beendiscouraged because they expected that creating a highqualityeconomic environment would automatically generate growth.  AsTianjin's reputation grows, investment will likely increase.Butin the meantime, Tianjin will remain an important, althoughunderdeveloped, urban center.Back to Headline List WT03-B06-6IA087-000634-B041-104http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it48.html 205.156.212.5 19970122030529 text/html 52902HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:03:25 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:17 GMTContent-length: 52715Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it48.html Sample Issue Copyright MARKET: EUROPE via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES STUDY SHOWS WEALTH MAKES LITTLE DIFFERENCE IN ATTITUDES TOWARD RELIGION (732 words) CZECHS ARE EUROPE'S CHAMPION BEER DRINKERS (376 words) GERMANY CONTINUES AS A STRONG CAR MARKET (428 words) RESIDENTS OF PRAGUE MOVE FROM BUSES TO CARS (202 words) EUROPEANS BELIEVE IN EATING THEIR FRUITS AND VEGGIES (290 words) SIZZLE SLOWS IN THE BRITISH FAST-FOOD MARKET (349 words) DIRECT MARKETING SHOW FINALLY GETS A EUROPEAN CHARACTER (274 words) BUSINESS TRAVELERS HEAD OFF TO WESTERN EUROPE (100 words) DIRECTORY OF E. EUROPE AND CIS BUSINESSES HELPS FILL A VOID (271 words) INSURERS LIKE TO KEEP THEIR BRANDS' NAMES IN PUBLIC VIEW (265 words) EDUCATION LEVELS OF EUROPEAN PRINT MEDIA READERS ARE RISING (216 words) BRITISH WOMEN FACE BALANCING ACT (914 words) THE ROLE OF MARRIAGE SHIFTS (375 words) GERMANS SHOP FOR FRESHNESS (3099 words) CopyrightMARKET: EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996STUDY SHOWS WEALTH MAKES LITTLE DIFFERENCE IN ATTITUDES TOWARDRELIGIONWith the exception of the poorest groups, socioeconomic statusseems to make little difference in how Europeans view theimportance of God in their lives.A Eurobarometer study among a representative sample of thepopulation in the 12 countries that were members of the EuropeanUnion at the end of 1994 finds that among groups A through E1,about one-third of respondents say God is important to them. Anequal share say God is not important in their lives. The rest aresomewhere in between.As we have seen in earlier polls, God seems more important in thelives of women over age 55 who are less well educated and poorerthan the rest of the population.Among respondents whose education ended before they were age 16,48 percent say God is very important in their lives. Amongrespondents in the E3--the poorest--socioeconomic group, 56percent say God is very important in their lives. The younger theage group, the less likely they are to say that God is importantin their lives.Catholicism prevailsRoman Catholicism, various Protestant religions, and GreekOrthodox are still the main religions in Europe among those whosay they "belong" to a religion. Fundamental Muslims constituteless than 1 percent of the total population.In France, the United Kingdom, and Luxembourg one percent ofrespondents say they belong to the Muslim religion; in the othernine countries that were part of the European Union at the end of1994, fewer than one percent make that claim.One-half of those polled say they belong to the Roman Catholicreligion, with the highest shares in Portugal and Ireland (91percent), Luxembourg (89 percent), Italy (88 percent), Spain (79percent), Belgium (67 percent), and France (63 percent).Nineteen percent of respondents say they belong to a Protestantreligion, with the highest rates in Denmark (72 percent), and theUnited Kingdom (44 percent).The least religious countries are The Netherlands and the easternpart of Germany. Forty-eight percent of the Dutch say they belongto no religion, and 69 percent of those living in east Germanygive that response. There is an even split among Catholics andProtestants in the western part of Germany, with 40 percent sayingthey are Catholic and 43 percent saying they are Protestant.Thirteen percent do not claim a religion.Greece is the one country which claims a religion not shared bymany others. Ninety-eight percent of respondents say they areGreek Orthodox. Seven percent of respondents in the Netherlandsalso claim that religion.Does "belonging" meanbeing "religious"?In some countries, there is a strong correlation between belongingto a particular religion and "seeing oneself as religious."  Theseare probably the countries where religion has the most influenceover behavior.More than 80 percent of respondents in Greece, Italy, and Portugalsay they are religious, compared with 59 percent of respondents inthe 12 countries surveyed. The highest share of those who say theyare religious is in Greece (93 percent).In the Netherlands, where 48 percent of respondents claim noreligion, 50 percent of respondents say they see themselves are"religious."Atheism is highest in France, where 19 percent of respondents saythey are  atheists. Despite the fact that 63 percent of the Frenchsay they belong to the Roman Catholic Church, only 46 percent saythey are religious.Except for Ireland and Italy, where 12 and 7 percent ofrespondents, respectively, say they attend religious servicesseveral times a week, overall about 4 percent of Europeans saythey attend religious services several times a week.Twenty-two percent overall say they attend once a week, with 64percent of Irish and 35 percent of Italians saying they attendservices once a week. A recent poll by Gallup found that 42percent of U.S. respondents said they attended services in theprevious seven days.Thirteen percent of Europeans overall say they never attendreligious services, with the highest shares in France (21percent), Belgium (17 percent), and the UK (16 percent.) Fully 15percent of respondents in Germany, Luxembourg, and the Netherlandssay they never attend religious services.Despite the fact that 30 percent of eastern Germans say they areatheist and 33 percent say they are nonreligious, only 9 percentsay they never attend religious services.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CZECHS ARE EUROPE'S CHAMPION BEER DRINKERSIf they gave out gold medals for beer consumption, the Czechswould win.In 1994, Czech breweries produced 38.34 million hectoliters ofbeer. In the last quarter of 1995, production was running about 1to 1.5 percent behind production in 1994. The 1995 estimatedannual per capita domestic consumption was 160 liters per person,ahead of the Germans. In 1994, it was 161 liters per person.The president of the Czech Association of Breweries, AntoninKratochvile, believes that the reasons for the decline in salesthis year were a cooler summer, Slovak government barriers againstthe sale of Czech beer, as well as some decline in exports to theformer allies in East and Central Europe. He does not foreseemajor changes in the near future and thinks that in the next threeyears, domestic beer consumption should remain stable. This meansthat growth in beer production and profits will depend on exports.Kratochvile sees the most promising export potential to thecountries of East and Central Europe as well as to Russia.In 1995, the Czech beer exports did well in the German, UnitedKingdom, and U.S. markets; exports to Russia also grew.  The totalbeer exports reached 1.8 million hectoliters. Foreign producershave made little impact in the Czech market, capturing less thanone-tenth of one percent so far. This apparently has little do towith prices. The Austrian brewery, Zwettel, offers its beer at theprice of the Czech premium beer, but well-known global brands--such as HeinekenQ-are up to three times more expensive than localbeers.Kratochvile does not think that domestic newcomers in the categoryof larger breweries have a chance to succeed on the Czech market.Their numbers have decreased steadily from 104 breweries in 1970to 79 in 1980, and 71 currently. If foreign brewers want toparticipate in the Czech market, he believes they will best do soin mergers with medium-sized breweries or joint ventures.Besides the large Czech companies there are also 14"minibreweries," but their market share taken together isrelatively small. The ten largest breweries together claim a 49.4percent market share.SOURCE: Hospodarske Noviny, Prague, Oct. 18,. 1995; Ekonom,Prague, July-August 1995. (Both publications are in Czech.)Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GERMANY CONTINUES AS A STRONG CAR MARKETAmong the five largest markets in Europe, Germany was the only onewhere sales value of medium-sized passenger cars grew between 1989and 1994, according to a new report from MarketLine International.The other growth market worldwide was the United States, which isthe world's largest market for medium passenger cars.On the basis of a constant 1994 foreign exchange rate, the globalvalue of medium-sized passenger car sales declined from $194billion in 1989 to $173.9 billion in 1994, providing an indicationof how tough the auto market has become.The definition of medium-sized cars is different in Europe andJapan than in the United States. In the lower-medium group inEurope and Japan are models such as Rover 200, Renault 19, FordEscort, VW Golf, and Toyota Corolla.  Upper-medium cars includeFord Mondeo, Opel Vectra, Renault Laguna, Peugeot 405, and the BMW3 series.In the United States the lower-medium category includes PontiacGrand Am, Dodge Spirit, Ford Contour, and Honda Civic. In theupper-medium category are Honda Accord, Ford Taurus, NissanMaxima, and Toyota Camry.In 1994 nearly 10.4 million medium-sized cars were registered/soldglobally, up 2.8 percent over 1993. Medium-sized car registrationspeaked in 1989 at about 11.9 million. Globally, sales of mediumcars are split almost equally between lower-medium and upper-medium cars. The table at left shows the number ofregistrations/sales of new medium-sized passenger cars in 1994, bycountry.General Motors led the market in 1994 with a 19.5 percent share ofthe medium-sized passenger car market. Ford and Toyota took 11.8percent, and 11.7 percent respectively.  The leading eightcompanies account for 76.3 percent of all medium-sized carregistrations globally.In 1994, the United States had the largest number of dealersselling medium passenger cars (35,136) and hence the lowest numberof medium car registrations per dealer at 101. Spain has thefewest dealers selling this size car and the highest registrationsper dealer at 227. MarketLine says this indicates the highlyfocused distribution network in Spain.The medium-car market is forecast to rise 8.7 percent globallybetween 1994 and 2000, with Germany expected to overtake Japan asthe second-largest market globally. By 2000, first-timeregistrations in Germany are expected to rise to 2.1 millioncompared with 1.9 million for Japan. The prediction is based on aforecast of stronger economic growth in Germany during the period.SOURCE: Global Medium Passenger Cars, $995. MarketLineInternational, 16 Connaught Street, London W2 2AF, England;telephone 44+ 171 624 2200; fax 44+ 171 372 0130.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996RESIDENTS OF PRAGUE MOVE FROM BUSES TO CARSIn the first nine months of 1995, car sales in the Czech Republicgrew nearly 40 percent compared with the same time period in 1994.In those nine months, 77,985 new cars were sold. In addition,81,497 used cars were also sold. Both figures include new and usedcars imported from Western Europe.The most successful car manufacturer was SEAT (the Spanish VW-owned concern). Ford sold the most small trucks and vans. Thetable on page 5 shows the top-ten manufacturers in sales in thefirst nine months of 1995.The penetration of cars in the Czech Republic has grown from 241cars per 1,000 persons in 1991 to 287 per 1,000 in 1994. In Praguethe growth has been especially dramatic: from 283 per 1,000 in1991 to 418 per 1,000 in 1994.The number of people using public transport declined from 4.9million passengers in 1991 to 4.3 million passengers in 1994, adecrease of about 12 percent. In some other post-Communistmarkets, this drop has been even more dramatic: in Hungary, 25percent; Poland, 33 percent; and in the former East Germany, 55percent.SOURCE: Lidove Noviny, Oct. 17 and 21, 1995. (In Czech.)Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EUROPEANS BELIEVE IN EATING THEIR FRUITS AND VEGGIESEuropeans are getting the message that eating habits may havesomething to do with the risk of cancer. A survey by Eurobarometer(see source, pg. 2) underscores the importance of structuringmessages for foods in a way that is compatible with culturalcontext. For example, it is probably easier to promote high-fiberproducts as contributing to good health in Ireland, Denmark, theNetherlands, and Belgium than it is in other markets becausepeople there believe that high fiber has a good effect on cancer.When asked the question, "For each of the following, do you thinkthat eating more of it increases the risk of getting cancer,decreases it, or has no effect?," responses varied by country.The Portuguese, Spanish, French, and Belgians are most likely tobelieve that alcohol increases the risk of cancer, while theBritish, Dutch, Danes, and Irish believe that the consumption ofalcoholic drinks has no effect on the risk of cancer.Greeks, Italians, and Irish think red meat will increase the riskof cancer, while the French, Dutch, Danes, and British do notthink it will.Consumption of salt seems to be the most uniformly agreed-uponrisk factor, with about one-third of citizens of the EuropeanUnion seeing salt as increasing the risk of cancer. Twenty-eightpercent of people overall say sugar can increase the risk ofcancer, but 63 percent of the French and Dutch, 62 percent ofDanes, and 59 percent of the British believe it has no effect.Green vegetables are highly rated by respondents, with 45 percentoverall believing that consumption of them will decrease the riskof cancer. That view is most prevalent in Ireland, Denmark, andSpain. Fresh fruit gets similarly high marks.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SIZZLE SLOWS IN THE BRITISH FAST-FOOD MARKETIn 1995, the fast-food market in the United Kingdom increased by 4percent to GBP5.37 billion, representing about 16 percent of thetotal catering market. Market Strategies for Industry (MSI)forecasts the market to grow by 3 percent in real terms in 1996.Increase in consumer spending and continued penetration into newmarkets are the two main reasons behind the growth forecast.MSI projects that the UK market for prepared sandwiches will reachGBP1.92 billion when final turnovers are tallied for 1995. Thesandwich sector is expected to be one of the strongest for therest of the decade.  Hamburgers, however, are expected to losesome of their sizzle for the rest of the decade; that sector'sgrowth is projected to decline, after about 5 percent growthbetween 1994 and 1995.Pizza and pasta were expected to grow about 3 percent each during1995.  In the UK, these two sectors have been widely marketed withdiscounts, and MSI says the value of the pizza and pasta market isbeing restricted because of this marketing strategy.Fish and chips, the British tradition, was projected to grow only2 percent during 1995, apparently being put under pressure by theincreased choice in the fast-food market. This sector is expectedto peak in 1997 and then begin a slow decline.  The market forfried chicken, on the other hand, increased 5 percent to aboutGBP347 million in 1995, and is expected to grow at least 2 percentin 1996.Chinese and Indian takeaway foods are becoming slightly lesspopular, according to the MSI study, increasing in real terms byonly 1 and 2 percent, respectively, which MSI says reflects anactual decline in sales.  The market for these items is expectedto remain flat in the next year or two and to decline towards theend of the decade.SOURCE: Identifying Opportunities in the Fast Food Market, GBP236,published by Market Strategies for Industry, Viscount House,Riverside Business Park, River Lane, Saltney, Chester CH4 8QY,United Kingdom; telephone 44+ 1244 681 424; fax 44+ 1244 681 4Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DIRECT MARKETING SHOW FINALLY GETS A EUROPEAN CHARACTERDatabase marketing and the use of electronic media are the two hottopics in direct marketing today, not only in the United States,but in the rest of the world as well.International Direct Marketing Week, to be held January 24 to 26in Paris, will give you the European perspective on these issues.Speakers from Europe, including the managing director and themarketing director of Germany's Bertelsmann Online, which recentlyinvested in America Online, will comment on topics such as"integrating the electronic media into a commercial strategy" andhow to create business relationships via on-line.A session on the legalities of selling and creating othertransactions on-line will also assist companies that want to sellvia new technologies but also want to respect the laws of thecountries in which they sell.In the past, this conference and others on direct marketing haveoften featured many of the speakers you would hear if you attendeda similar event in the United States. A review of the program forthis year's French event shows virtually no American speakers.This means a better learning environment for those who are trulytrying to understand the European viewpoint. The event offers theadditional benefit of a large and active trade show, which willquickly bring you up-to-date on direct-marketing services-Qincluding listsQ-in Europe.For more information on International Direct Marketing Week (inFrench, it's called SIMD, which stands for Semaine Internationaledu Marketing Direct), contact CEP Exposium/SIMD, 1 rue du Park, F-92593 Levallois Perret Cedex, France; telephone 33+ 1 49 68 52 60;fax 33+ 1 47 37 75 09.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BUSINESS TRAVELERS HEAD OFF TO WESTERN EUROPEFully 89 percent of U.S. corporate travel managers surveyed byRunzheimer International say that Western Europe is a primarybusiness destination for their companies. Seventy-nine percentsaid Canada and 75 percent said Asia. Eastern Europe was mentionedby 57 percent.The average cost of an international trip is about $3,485,Runzheimer says, with airline tickets (obviously business class)accounting for about one-half of that amount.  Hotel rooms average$170 a night, and car rentals $56 per day.SOURCE: Runzheimer Reports on Travel Management, RunzheimerInternational, Runzheimer Park, Rochester, WI 53167-0009;telephone (414) 767 2224; fax (414) 767 2254.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DIRECTORY OF E. EUROPE AND CIS BUSINESSES HELPS FILL A VOIDSo you want to find wholesalers for sporting goods and toys in theBaltic countries and Eastern Europe? Other than contacting yourcompetitors to learn the names of their distributors, where canyou start?One possibility is a directory that covers a wide range of SICcodes. It's called Major Business Organizations of Eastern Europeand the Commonwealth of Independent States 1995/96, published inthe United Kingdom by Graham and Whiteside and distributed in theUnited States by Gale Research.Turning to the index based on business activities, by country, youwill find three wholesalers of sporting and recreational goods andtoys and hobby goods in Bulgaria, one in Russia, two in Hungary,three in Poland, and one each in Romania and Slovakia.Turning to the actual listing for a company, you find full contactinformation, bank references, the number of employees, activities,and the names of directors and senior managers. In many cases, themost-recent information on total sales is provided, along with thedate the business was established and the number of its employees,two indicators of stability. If you already know the name of acompany and need additional information to find out whether it isa legitimate business, the directory is also an excellent place tostart.Graham and Whiteside's company directories for many regions of theworld are also available on-line through the Company Intelligenceservices of Information Access Company as well as on CD-ROM.Major Business Organizations of Eastern Europe and theCommonwealth of Independent States, 1995-96 is $720. Contact GaleResearch, 835 Penobscot, Detroit MI 48226; telephone 1-800-347-4253.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996INSURERS LIKE TO KEEP THEIR BRANDS' NAMES IN PUBLIC VIEWOne of five insurance companies in the United Kingdom says that itwould not advertise if its competitors did not do so. Yet,companies recognize that advertising is their most importantpromotional tool in a market that is growing very little and ishighly competitive.These are some of the findings of new research on the ways thatfinancial companies in the United Kingdom spend their marketingdollars.In auto and homeowners' insurance, direct writers such asChurchill and Direct Line are battling to attract a larger shareof a finite market. They must advertise continuously to encouragenew customers to contact them. In the life and pensions market,150 companies are vying for the same customers and are sufferingfrom consumer distrust following scandals in the sales of personalpension policies.A survey of advertising managers in financial services byDatamonitor found that advertising is their most importantpromotional tool, but direct marketing use is expected to increaseby the year 2000. Financial services companies already account forabout 25 percent of the direct mail sent in the UK.Datamonitor analyst Brian Evans-Jones says that even if directmarketing increases, advertising would not die out. "Companiesstill need to attract new customers before they can hit them withmailshots. What we will see in the future is advertising anddirect marketing working in harmony: one attracting new customers,the other dealing with them afterwards."SOURCE: Advertising in Financial Services, GBP695, DatamonitorEurope, 106 Baker Street, London W1M 1LA, England; telephone 44+171 625 8548; fax 44+ 171 625 5080.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EDUCATION LEVELS OF EUROPEAN PRINT MEDIA READERS ARE RISINGResults of the sixth Pan-European Survey (PES6) of print mediareaders in 14 European countries are in and find that one-third ofprint readers now have post-graduate qualifications. The survey,carried out by Research Services, involves more than 7,000 face-to-face interviews in 14 countries.Other general findings of the survey, which monitors readershipfor a host of newspapers, newsmagazines, and in-flight magazinesacross Europe, are that English-language use is becoming moreprevalent, that educational levels are up among readers, and thatthe share of readers who work for multinational organizations ison the decline.Specifically, the European Union now has about 125 millionEnglish-speakers. Among PES6 survey respondents, 68 percent useEnglish and 40 percent use it regularly at work. The survey alsofound that 73 percent of respondents now have at least a collegedegree, compared with 68 percent in the last survey.Analysis of PES6 reported in the November issue of Media &Marketing Europe comments on the differences between the lastsurvey and this one, as well as some of the problems inherent inthe survey.For a copy of the November issue, send GBP5 to Media & MarketingEurope, Emap Media, Audit House, 260 Field End Road, Eastcote HA49LT, United Kingdom; telephone 44+ 181 868 4499.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BRITISH WOMEN FACE BALANCING ACTMore women are breaking through the "glass ceiling" in the UnitedKingdom. At the same time, three-quarters of women still cook theevening meal in their households. And overall, women suffer higherlevels of stress than 10 years ago.About 15 percent of women now experience "a lot" or a "great deal"of stress, with those aged 35 to 54 the most likely to be underduress, according to a government study, Social Focus on Women.The study also shows a pattern of growing financial independenceand spending power among British women, accompanied by increasedsocial status. Despite the positives, women in the UK arestruggling to balance their traditional family roles with growingopportunities in the outside world.An explosion of part-time employment has brought increased numbersof women into the labor force. In 1994, 12 million femaleresidents of the UK were working. The proportion of economicallyactive women rose from 37 percent in 1971 to 44 percent last year.The share of part-time work increased 19 percentage points overthe last decade, to 45 percent of the women who work. About 80percent of women with part-time work say they do not want a full-time job, mainly because of family commitments.About one-half of women believe that a mother should not workwhile her children are younger than school age, but about 30percent consider part-time jobs acceptable for women with pre-school children, and over 60 percent think they are acceptable forwomen with school-age children.Despite shifts in favor of women in the workplace, women stillhave traditional roles in the UK, notwithstanding opinion pollswhich show a widespread belief among both sexes that domestictasks should be shared.A 1991 opinion survey cited in the report indicated that both menand women think cooking the evening meal should be shared equally.But when asked who actually cooks, 20 percent said that mealpreparation was jointly shared. In 9 percent of households, theevening meal was prepared by the man. In 70 percent, the woman wasresponsible.With traditional male activities such as repairing householdequipment, 31 percent thought they should be shared equally. Inreality, 82 percent of these tasks were done by men.Women are waiting longer to get married and to have children,often because of increased career opportunities. The average agefor a first birth within a marriage rose from 24.8 years in 1971to 28 years in 1993.Having children can, however, still have a negative impact on awoman's career. Many women who have children have less opportunityfor advancement than women who do not take career breaks to bringup children.THE EARNINGS GAPMany women continue to earn less than men in comparable jobs. InApril 1994, for example, one-third of female employees earnedGBP190 (about $300) or less per week compared with 13 percent ofmale employees. Conversely, three-quarters of males earned overGBP230 per week, compared with only one-half of females.Even so, women now have more money of their own. Almost 75 percentcarried some form of "plastic money" in 1993, with one-thirdhaving a charge credit card.More are taking on long-term financial responsibilities as well.The proportion of women holding a mortgage in their own name morethan doubled between 1983 and 1994, to 17 percent, while the shareof men with their own mortgage went up only three percentagepoints, to 20 percent, during the same period.After food and housing, women are most likely to spend their moneyon household goods. Compared with men, women spend more onclothing and considerably less on motoring.In their leisure time, women are abandoning traditionalactivities. Dressmaking, knitting, and needlework, practiced by 48percent of women 10 years ago, have declined in favor ofparticipation in the audio-visual revolution. Listening torecords, tapes, and CDs has increased among women from 62 percentto 75 percent in 10 years.Virtually all womenQ-99 percentQ-watch television at least once amonth. Satellite television is watched most by women aged 25 to34. Soap operas, followed closely by drama series, are the mostpopular TV programs among women.Despite television's popularity, women still find time to read.The share of women who read regularly rose from 61 percent in 1983to 71 percent in 1994. However, women are less likely than men toread a national newspaper--54 percent compared with 66 percent.Instead, magazines enjoy tremendous popularity. Four of five ofthe most popular weekly magazines are for women.Women  also read men's magazines. About 200,000 read the pop musicmagazine, The Face, which is aimed mainly at young men, and 30,000women read Penthouse, which is aimed at the adult male.About two-thirds of women went to the cinema last year. Youngwomen are the most regular cinema goers, with 87 percent of thoseaged 15 to 24 attending once a year or more.Alcohol plays an increasing role in women's lives. The share ofheavy drinkers has gone up, with 11 percent drinking more than thegovernment-set "sensible" level of 14 units of alcohol per week.Young women aged 16 to 24 drink on average just over seven unitsper week--three times more than those aged 65 and over.Women spend, on average, more of their income on tobacco, and havebeen slower to quit smoking than men.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996THE ROLE OF MARRIAGE SHIFTSInequality among women in the United Kingdom has increased as aresult of greater access to jobs and wealth. The gap between richand poor women has been widened by a significant rise in numbersof "dual earner" couples, according to two studies on incomes andfamilies by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation.A growing number of working women now enjoy prosperity and socialstatus on a par with their male counterparts. On the other hand,there is an expanding pool of single and unemployed females unableto break into the job market. Women who maintain a household withchildren are most likely to be in the lowest income bracket, whiletwo-earner couples are over-represented in the top brackets.In 1981, male earnings accounted for nearly three-quarters oftotal household income. By 1991, this had fallen to two-thirds. Indual-earner families, the difference is even more marked, withwomen who worked full time in 1991 bringing in an average of 42percent of family income.THE ROLE OF MARRIAGE CHANGESThe growth in female employment, together with the greateravailability of contraception, has brought couples closertogether, according to the Rowntree Foundation. Yet paradoxically,there has been a substantial increase in divorce.There is now  a greater acceptance of premarital sex andcohabitation. Marriage is seen as a means of enshrining arelationship rather than as a legal nicety preceding andlegitimizing parenthood.Far from being the death knell of a traditional institution, thisshift in attitude indicates how much more is expected of marriage,the Foundation says."Marriage is increasingly regarded as an evolving institution," itconcludes. "[Its] modern role is to confer public recognition onthe relationship between two adults whose parenthood may beneither imminent nor assured."The Foundation cites a survey which found that people in theUnited Kingdom were more likely than in other European Unioncountries to regard the primary role of family as "providing loveand affection," rather than "bringing up and educating children."Marriage, however, is no longer a source of stability. Four out often marriages now end in divorce in the United Kingdom, and thenumber of marriages is at its lowest level in 150 years.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GERMANS SHOP FOR FRESHNESSThis is the second part of a two-part series on consumers inGermany. The first part appeared in the December issue ofMarket:Europe and included basic demographic data about the statesin Germany as well as economic, employment, and educationinformation. To obtain a copy of Part I, call W-Two Publicationsat (607) 277-0934.Germany's retail trade totaled DM 685 billion in 1992. Almost 90percent of this money was spent in stores, but some DM 78 billionwere not. One out of five retail businesses was not store-based;these businesses employed almost 10 percent of the 388,000 retailemployees.Mail-order firms, of which there were 10,000 with about 100,000employees, accounted for DM 40 billionQ-slightly more than one-half of this nonstore turnover. The rest flowed through kiosks and"nonstationary" sales locations.One of the latter channels is open-air markets, which still play asignificant role in the life of the ever-freshness-consciousGerman consumer, who goes shopping almost daily. In the largecities, these markets are assembled at the crack of dawn onparking lots or town squares, then moved to another location inthe early afternoon. They travel from borough to borough on aweekly schedule and typically offer a wide variety of produce,baked goods, meats, fish, eggs, cheeses, and the all-importantcold cuts, as well as flowers, some clothes, and perhaps basketsor jewelry.Another source of competition for Germany's grocery chains is anincreased number of food cooperatives. More than 2,000 are nowoperating in the country. Members use their group purchasing powerto buy directly from farmers. Members sometimes work in thebusiness or pay a membership fee, but they get the advantage oflower prices and fresher, often organically grown, food.The market for organic food in Germany is about $2.1 billion, lessthan 2 percent of the $176 billion that consumers spent in 1994for food. Co-ops have a 3 to 5 percent share of the organicmarket, according to data published by The Week in Germany.Germany continues to suffer under the severely restrictive shopclosing time law which, with few exceptions, prohibitsstorekeepers from keeping stores open on Saturday afternoons, allday Sundays, and past 6:30 p.m. during the week. Consumerdissatisfaction with this tired statute appears finally to havereached critical mass, however, and changes are discussed evermore forthrightly in the media and some political circles.For the time being, the trade unions--the main proponents ofkeeping the law as is--still have the upper hand, but their reignis eroding. Methods used to dodge the regulations includegreengrocers who forget to close on time and bakers who on Sundayssell only to club members. (As we went to press, the governmenthad just introduced a legislative initiative that would permitstores to stay open till 8 p.m. on weekdays as well as on Saturdayafternoons.)Gas stations, which are for the most part exempt from the lawbecause they cater to the traveling public, long ago turned intominimarkets, with the result that, just to pay for gas, onefrequently has to stand in line behind grocery shoppers."Airports and train stations have turned into shopping centerswith travel opportunities," writes Stern, Germany's biggest massmarket magazine. In a representative poll, the magazine found that30 percent of the population want the shop closing time lawstricken entirely, and another 30 percent were in favor ofliberalization. Almost two-thirds were against keeping on thebooks the law that prohibits bakers from making fresh rolls onSundays.Bakeries may serve as the perfect example of the unreasonablenessof the trade unions' position. Whereas they oppose aliberalization of the closing time law ostensibly in part tosafeguard the existence of small and medium-sized enterprises,three small bakeries go out of business every day. Apparently thelaw does little to help them fight the regional superbakeries'success. The big bakeries are also in favor of liberalization inorder to be able to compete with competitors from neighboringcountries who operate under less-restrictive conditions.Germans are, by the way, European champions in bread consumption.Statistically, each German eats 81 kg (178 pounds) bread per year.Whole grain and rye breads are still predominant, but varieties ofwhite bread have above-average growth rates.The recent flat retail sales climate (see Market:Europe June 1995)shows few signs of improvement. In the first half of 1995, innominal terms, retail trade remained stable; in real terms, itdeclined by 2 percent.The retail woes have begun to affect store rents. Except for thevery best addresses, rents for retail space in the downtown areasof big cities have eroded up to 5 percent, and for the first timein years, interesting spaces are relatively freely available.The average store rental in fine downtown locations is about DM120 per square meter for small locales and DM 83 for large ones.But there are regional differences and, in general, one can expectsubstantially lower rents in eastern and southern towns.Commercial rentals are, of course, most expensive in the biggestcities. For a small store expect to pay DM 220 per square meter inBremen and Stuttgart, DM 300+ in Dortmund and Essen, and up to DM400 in the best locations in (West) Berlin, Hamburg, Koln, andMunchen. Larger storefronts rent for between DM 60 and DM 120 persquare meter less than smaller storefronts.THE GREEN CONNECTIONWhatever you sell, the green angle is important in Germany, itseems. Ikea, for example, advertises cups made from recycledglass. A company called memo, "the supply house for theenvironmentally conscious," provocatively asks in one of its printads whether the reader is an armchair culprit and offers officesupplies and furnishings "that are good for humans and nature."Tengelmann-Qa supermarket chain which in 1984 banned turtle soupand frog's legs from its shelves and now boycotts products fromNorway because of that country's record regarding whales-Qpioneered the ban on detergents containing phosphates (nownationally accepted) and declines to stock PVC beveragecontainers, chlorine-bleached paper products, and one-way pens andtableware, among other environmentally questionable products.Pioneer Tengelmann is by no means alone. "The traditionalshopkeeper's credo, according to which trade just offers the goodsand the customer alone decides [what to buy], is losingimportance," wrote Die Zeit, Germany's most respected liberalweekly. "Merchants want to pursue actively their role asgatekeeper between producer and consumer."Hertie, one of the biggest department store chains in the countryand another forerunner of green thinking, removed many nongreenproducts from its salesfloor and introduced more environmentallyconscientious packaging. In cooperation with BUND, a respectedenvironmental organization which tested more than 300 cleaners forthis project, the retail giant introduced a collection of 38especially environment-friendly household cleaners. Mail-ordergiant Otto sells "affordable and environmentally friendly" washingmachines and television sets; competitor Neckermann offers an eco-fridgeQin conjunction with Greenpeace.The polling institute Emnid found that 69 percent of shoppers paidattention to environmental issues. One in five households told theFederal Office for the Environment that it made substantialchanges to address environmental realities. The Office found that80 percent of the population think of themselves asenvironmentally conscious, and that about two-thirds are willingto act that wayQ-unless buying green hits the pocketbook too hard.One in two consumers was not willing to pay more for greenproducts; most of the rest tolerated a premium of no more than 10percent.Ten years after the beginning of the eco-boom, it is no longerthat easy to differentiate a product simply by its greenness. Onthe one hand, the driving forces, the consumers, are a bit wearyin face of conflicting claims and an inflation of eco-this andeco-that, and on the other, German advertising law, whichprohibits comparisons, can make it difficult to position a productin context. Furthermore, customers expect concrete, understandablebenefits, not fuzzy promises. To that end it is also importantthat ecology-mindedness not be confined to a single product;rather, the entire company must be credibly engaged.Consumer Credit and Payment MethodsSeven of eight Germans do not have a credit card. One reason forthis low penetration may be that credit cards' usefulness islimited because they are not nearly as widely accepted as they arein some other countries. Germans also are a bit wary of the veryconcept of disposable credit.Every-day monetary transactions are made almost exclusively incash, and Germans pay bills usually by transfers among financialinstitutions. For the payment of recurrent bills, most Germanshave placed orders for automatic deduction from their girotransfer accounts. Besides regular banks, Postbank AG, one of thethree institutions that emerged from the breakup and privatizationof the government's monolithic Deutsche Bundespost, is a majorplayer in the giro transfer market.Meanwhile, the number of bankruptcies continues its three-yearclimb. The Federal Statistics Office reported 11,542 insolvenciesin the first five months of 1995, up 15.9 percent from a yearearlier. About one quarter of the total of 2,305 May 1995bankruptcies were filed in the new Lander; the 1,725 cases in thewest meant an increase of 9.9 percent as compared with May 1994.Similarly, the number of individuals with overdue debts has risenby 1 million in the last three years to well over 8 million.Delinquent debtors do not come exclusively from the sociallyweaker stratum of society, but more and more doctors andpharmacists are unable to meet their obligations, too.TRAVELAre recession, high unemployment, and ever-higher paycheckdeductions finally taking a bite out of German travel habits? Itis too early to tell. Whereas a steadily growing percentage (39percent in 1992, 40 percent in 1993, and 41 percent in 1994) ofwest Germans remain at home, their eastern cousins pick up theslack and ever-more-frequently use their still relatively newfreedom to see the world.In 1994, 54 percent of Germans vacationed for five days or more(1993, 55 percent), and 45 percent (46 percent in 1993) were awayfrom home for two weeks or more, found a B*A*T Freizeit-Forschungsinstitut study. East Germans travel for an average of12.9 days, and west Germans for an average 16.4 days.One in four vacationers remained in Germany. Fifty-eight percentof these national tourists were aged 65 and older, and 27 percentof them were aged 14 to 29.As always in the last 20 or so years, Spain (11 percent), Italy (8percent), and Austria (8 percent) were the top-three internationaldestinations for German vacationers, together drawing more Germantravelers than all national tourist destinations together.The trend to one-person households benefits the tourist businessas, according to the B*A*T study, money that otherwise would bespent on children, flows into travel. Fifty-six percent oftraveling families, 69 percent of vacationing couples, and 82percent of singles with Wanderlust could afford an internationaltrip in 1994.When asked about their dream destinations, almost one in twoGermans named the Caribbean. Other tropical island paradises suchas the South Sea, Bali, Java, the Maldives, and Hawaii receivedfrequent mentions. Australia (+12 percentage points in 1994 ascompared with 1991), the Dominican Republic (+9), and South Africa(+6) are the newest trendy destinations, whereas Florida, Egypt,and Russia led the pack of destinations rapidly losing attraction.No doubt the attacks on tourists in each of these markets havehelped to dull their luster for Germans.In the first half of 1995, overnight stays in German hotels,motels, and guesthouses with nine or more beds were up 4 percentas compared with the first six months of 1994. The new Lander andeast Berlin registered a hefty growth rate of 16 percent, whereasthe west saw only a 2 percent increase.The number of overnights of national guests grew 3 percent to123.1 million, and the number of overnights of foreignersrebounded 5 percent to 14.7 million.Italians (+110,000 overnights/+16 percent), Japanese (+67,000/+13percent), and citizens of Great Britain and Northern Ireland(+61,000/+5 percent) led all other nationals with respect togrowth rates. With +38,000/+3 percent, U.S. citizens were in sixthposition. Overnights by visitors from The Netherlands, however,who constitute the single-largest group of visitors to Germany bycountry of origin, declined by 6,500, or 0.3 percent.Media and AdvertisingNewspapers are Germany' most important advertising medium; theyattracted 31 percent (slightly more than DM 10 billion) of alladvertising spending in 1994. The 420 daily newspapers publishingin the fourth quarter of 1994 sold over 30 million copies perissue, two-thirds of them to subscribers. The 32 weeklies soldmore than 2 million copies each week, but saw their advertisingrevenue shrink to DM 416 million (minus 7.7 percent) as comparedwith 1993. Advertising spending on supplements decreased 4.8percent to just under DM 270 million.Magazines, which garnered 3.3 billion advertising deutschmarks in1994 (+2.8 percent compared with a weak 1993), numbered just over700 and sold a cumulative 123 million copies per issue in thefourth quarter of 1994; the 963 journals sold 17.3 million copiesper issue and earned DM 2.2 billion (+1.0 percent) throughadvertising. (All figures take into account only titles that areaccredited with IVW, an industry watchdog that verifies printmedia distribution and, since 1994, radio and TV advertising spotbroadcasts.)Television is the second-largest advertising medium, commanding 17percent of the entire advertising pie. Its 1994 advertising incomewas DM 5.6 billion, an increase of 16.6 percent compared with 1993and four times as much as 10 years ago. Almost 90 percent of theseadvertising deutschmarks (up from 70 percent in 1992 and 14percent in 1988) flowed in the coffers of private TV stations.Presently home-shopping programs are limited by law to a maximumof one hour per channel per day, but the industry hopes that the1996 broadcast treaty will eliminate this barrier. Home OrderTelevision (H.O.T.), a joint venture of a television channel and amail order company, began a pilot project in October, and QVC andthe Swedish Kinnevik are reportedly poised to beam their programsinto German homes.In 1994, Germans registered 32.3 million television sets and 36.2million radios. The fee attached to this household-based mandatoryregistration finances the "public-legal" media, which until 10years ago were the only players on German airwaves.Of the 37.4 million reception points (households, workplaces, andlodgings), 23.2 million (62.0 percent) were wired for cable in1994, and 14.6 million (39.2 percent of total) were actuallyhooked up to cable reception. Cable penetration was highest in thethree city Lander (Berlin, Hamburg, Bremen), where it was 55percent and higher. Other western states averaged around 40percent of cable hookup, while eastern Lander fell between 12 and25 percent of reception points actually being hooked up.(Anecdotally, it seems that everyone not hooked up has a satellitedish on the balcony.)One television channel's study showed that people in east and westdiffered markedly in their TV-viewing habits. People aged 14 andolder in the east spent 212 minutes daily in front of thetelevision set compared with 183 minutes in the west. Thisimbalance reverses itself as late in the day as 10:30 p.m., whenwest Germans become more likely to watch than east Germans. WestGermans find information, variety and entertainment shows, anddomestic police dramas more interesting than do their easterncousins, whereas the latter are especially fond of game shows,infotainment, and U.S.-made police dramas.With DM 1.1 billion (+12.9 percent) in 1994, radio earns threepercent of the advertising deutschmark. 1994 was the first yearthat private radio stations pulled in more advertising money thanthe 'public-legal' stations, whose advertising income shrank 10.4percent from a year earlier to DM 492 million (43 percent of totaladvertising spending on radio). Private radio's income jumped 41percent to DM 643 million.Advertisers spent DM 276 million in the 3,718 movie houses in1994, up 5.9 percent compared with 1993. Even though 1993 was abanner year with movie ticket sales surpassing all expectations(+23.2 percent over 1992), the number of tickets sold in 1994 wasup again to 132.8 million (+1.8 percent). Multiplex theaters arerelatively new in Germany and they are doing well at drawingadvertising. Even though there were only 13 such centers inGermany in 1994 (another 15 to 20 are in the concrete planningphase), they had a 13 percent share of movie house advertisingexpenditures.The age distribution of the movie-going public is as follows: 24percent are aged 14 to 19, 47 percent are aged 20 to 29, 16percent aged 30 to 39, and 13 percent aged 40 or older. There areslightly more female than male moviegoers in the age groups 14 to19 and 40 and older. The group aged 14 to 19 represents 6.9percent of the population but constitutes 15.2 percent ofmoviegoers. They are the only age group that is overrepresented.Total investment into direct-mail advertising was estimated at DM11.2 billion for 1994; postage alone accumulated to DM 4.5billion. In that year Deutsche Post AG, the private successor ofthe erstwhile Deutsche Bundespost, which also included what becameDeutsche Telekom AG and the aforementioned Postbank AG, delivered4.6 billion pieces of "infomail" (mass advertising addressed tospecific patrons) and 1.9 billion pieces of "mail drop shipments"(unaddressed material delivered to every household on the route).ClosingFive years after unification people still have to come to gripswith the costs. For westerners these costs are real andimmediately reflected in their monetary and job security concerns;for easterners costs include widespread unemployment and alingering second-class citizen status.Enthusiasm for unification has been steadily waning in polls;perhaps it is being replaced by acceptance of and arrangement withreality, however.The rugged German economy seems to weather the giant sucking soundof the eastern vacuum, and polls consistently show that thepresent federal government enjoys broad popular support. To thisreporter such voter confidence would seem to indicate that,despite all the pains and hardships unification has brought, theGerman people in the final analysis say, "We can live with thisQsomehow." The continued strength of the deutschmark seems toindicate that indeed they can.Back to Headline List WT03-B06-7IA087-000634-B041-122http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it30.html 205.156.212.5 19970122030624 text/html 42163HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:03:54 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:19 GMTContent-length: 41976Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it30.html Sample Issue Copyright MARKET: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES NEW MEASURE FOR INDENTIFYING LATIN AMERICAN CONSUMER SEGMENTS (739 words) FREQUENT FLIER PROGRAM TAKES FLIGHT (297 words) WINES LOSE OUT IN THE ALCOHOLIC DRINK MARKET (522 words) OPINION POLL HIGHLIGHTS CONCERNS OF LATIN AMERICANS (468 words) DON'T OVERLOOK MEXICO'S FOOD MARKET (281 words) WHERE BRAZILIANS GO, CAN JAPAN BE FAR BEHIND? (181 words) NO PAN-REGIONAL TREND IN LATIN AMERICAN CINEMAS (422 words) AFFORDABLE PRICES, QUICK SERVICE DRIVE FAST-FOOD SALES IN CENTRAL AMERICA (592 words) JAMAICA: CARIBBEAN POWERHOUSE IN THE MAKING (2565 words) CopyrightMARKET: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW MEASURE FOR INDENTIFYING LATIN AMERICAN CONSUMER SEGMENTSIdentifying appropriate consumer segments for specific productsand services is not always an easy thing to do in Latin America.In these emerging markets, consumers' tastes and purchasing powercan differ widely from country to country, and even from city tocity within a country.Enter the Socioeconomic Allocator  (SEA), a measure of consumersocioeconomic status developed by The Gallup Organization, Miami,Florida. SEA measures variables of occupation, education, type ofbuilding material of the home, and ownership of an automobile andselected durable goods.Gallup's study identifies eight distinct consumer segments withinthe Latin American population. These segments fall into the threecategories of upper class--emerging professional elite andtraditional elite; middle class--progressive upper middle, self-made middle, skilled middle, and self-skilled middle; and workingclass--industrial working class and struggling working class.Following are descriptions of one segment each of the upper, themiddle, and the working class.*UPPER: Of the two upper socioeconomic segments identified byGallup's SEA, the emerging professional elite accounts for 14percent of the total sample population.This group is highly educated--51 percent has graduated fromuniversity or technical college. They are employed in top-levelexecutive and professional occupations. Surprisingly, this segmentis very young--65 percent are under 40 years old, and single--45percent.These consumers are most likely to own the durable goods thatrepresent the good life. Over 90 percent own a VCR, colortelevision set, automobile, washing machine, and vacuum cleaner.Eighty-nine percent own a credit card.When it comes to new products or services, this is the market totarget. Thirty-two percent of the members of this segment owncellular phones.Entertainment is another big spending category for this group--over 60 percent list dining, dancing, and going to the moviesamong their interests; 48 percent are interested in buyingrecords. Although sports do not rank high on their list ofactivities, 26 percent express interest in swimming, 18 percent intennis, and 17 percent in boxing.*MIDDLE: The self-made middle class (11 percent of the totalpopulation) has the most buying power. Higher education is not akey factor in the success of this group. None of the members ofthis segment has any schooling beyond the secondary level; themajority completed only primary school.Instead, the members of this group built their way to successthrough entrepre-neurial skills, as is evident in their relativelyolder age--40 percent are over age 40.Of the four middle-class segments, this group has the highestlevel of ownership of credit cards--46 percent--and automobiles--81 percent. Household appliances such as a vacuum cleaner andwashing machine are more common among this segment, and thepresence of air conditioning is more likely.Sixty-one percent of these consumers express interest inactivities with their children. This translates into a market forchildren's toys and clothes. This group also likes to shop forsmall electronic appliances.For entertainment, nearly 60 percent like dining, 48 percent likegoing to the movies, and 45 percent like driving. When it comes tosports, 51 percent prefer soccer, but 23 percent named swimmingand 21 percent boxing.Religious activities are also important  to this group, asreported by 46 percent.It's important to note that although the progressive upper-middle-class and the skilled-middle-class segments do not currently havethe purchasing power of the self-made middle class, they doreflect the growing trend in Latin America of greater emphasis onextended education.*WORKING: The industrial working class represents the betterconsumer market of the two working-class segments. Half of thissegment is between the ages of 20 and 39, and one- third are age40 and older. Fifty-seven percent are married.Extended education is not the norm for this group. Only 16 percenthas more than a secondary education.  Twenty-four percent has asecondary school education, and 29 percent only a primaryeducation.While 92 percent own color TV sets, listening to the radio is aspopular as watching television. Nearly half enjoy going to themovies, but going shopping, especially for clothes and jewelry,are favorite pastimes with well over half of this group, as aredecorating and cleaning the house.Religious activities figure prominently in the lives of thissegment. Eighteen percent also mention interest in keeping apersonal diary, the highest share of all eight segments.P Paula KephartBack to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FREQUENT FLIER PROGRAM TAKES FLIGHTWith the wave of privatization of government-owned companiessweeping Latin America during the 1990s, many Latin Americanairlines were launched into open markets. In order to compete moreeffectively--especially with large United States' airlines--and toattract frequent travelers, several airlines joined together tocreate LatinPass, a frequent-flyer program. By banding together,these airlines can offer travelers service and frequent fliermiles to more Latin American gateways and flights between theUnited States, Canada, and Latin America than any one U.S. airlinecan offer.LatinPass started in January 1995 with 14 South and CentralAmerican airlines and U.S. Air as participating members. Thecompany's processing center in Miami, Florida, handles enrollmentfor all LatinPass frequent fliers living outside Latin America. Toavoid duplication of miles, LatinPass keeps a database of thefrequent-flier programs for each of the participating airlinesLatinPass has invited Caribbean airlines to join, and  BWIA ofTrinidad, APA of the Dominican Republic, and Air Aruba arecurrently negotiating agreements with the program. Eventually,LatinPass hopes to expand to include all Latin American airlinesthat fly into the United States and to expand participation toEuropean and Asian airlines flying into Latin America as well.Hertz and Avis car rentals, Diners Club International charge card,and Radisson Hotels currently participate in LatinPass. Avis andRadisson offer miles at any of their Latin American, Caribbean,North American, and European outlets.Mariott Resorts International is expected to join in the nearfuture. AT&T is also negotiating membership with plans to offermiles for points in their True Rewards program as well as todevelop a co-branded calling card.For further information contact Rosa Maria Plasencia, Manager,LatinPass, 1600 N.W. Le Jeune Rd., Suite 200, Miami, Florida33126; telephone (305) 870-7500; fax (305) 870-7576.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996WINES LOSE OUT IN THE ALCOHOLIC DRINK MARKETThe market for alcoholic drinks in Latin America increased 11percent over the 1990s, but beer is clearly the alcoholicbeverage of choice in the region. In 1994, beer accounted for 80percent of the sales volume of alcoholic drinks for the majorLatin American markets, according to Euromonitor International.Wines and spirits accounted for the other 20 percent.Beer sales are generally driven by demographics. Men aged 18 to 24are traditionally the big beer market, and that age group is stillgrowing in Latin America; but young Latin American women aredrinking beer as well. In addition, the region's young adults tendto use beer as much as a thirst quencher as an alcoholic beverage.Other factors influencing beer sales are the region's risingdisposable incomes, increased advertising, and beer's low pricecompared with other alcoholic drinks. While the alcoholic drinksmarket will continue to grow through the rest of the decade, beersales will gain even more of the market share--83 percent byEuromonitor's estimates.Per-capita consumption of beer varies by country. Venezuela, forexample, averaged 78 liters per capita in 1994, the highest in theregion despite its relatively small population size. Mexico'slarge population, on the other hand, consumed only 36 liters percapita that same year.When it comes to volume, Brazil and Mexico are the leaders, withsales of 5,994 million liters and 4,207 million liters,respectively, in 1994. These two countries will continue todominate the market in sales volume through the rest of thedecade--not surprising, given their large populations. As forranking in the global beer market, two Latin American countriesare among the top ten--Mexico ranks 7th and Venezuela 8th.Colombia ranks 14th.There are some niche markets within the overall beer market. Darkbeer, for example, is a popular seasonal drink, with the greatestamount of sales and consumption occurring during the wintermonths.Not only is Latin America a key market for beer consumption, it isalso a key beer producer. Of the twenty largest beer brewers inthe world, six are located in Latin America and account for over11 percent of the total world beer production.Even as beer consumption is increasing, the market for otheralcoholic beverages--wines and spirits--is declining. Even inChile, where wine has long been a traditional alcoholic drink,beer sales surpassed wine sales in 1994. Only Argentineanscontinue to drink more wine than beer--42 liters to 31 liters percapita. However, when Latin Americans do order wine, they arelikely to order a better-quality wine. Both these trends--lesswine consumption but of better-quality wine--will continue throughthe rest of the decade.While these trends point to a healthy market for beer sales, don'tbe surprised to see a counter trend emerge encouraging lessconsumption of alcoholic beverages as awareness and concern aboutalcoholism develops.Alcoholic Drinks in Latin America costs $1,790 or GBP895. To ordercontact Euromonitor International, 60-61 Britton Street, LondonEC1M 5NA, England; telephone 44+ 171 251 1105; fax 44+ 171 251-0985; U.S./Latin American inquiries,  telephone (312) 922-1157;fax (312) 922-1157.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996OPINION POLL HIGHLIGHTS CONCERNS OF LATIN AMERICANSIn June of 1995 the Latinobarometer completed its survey of eightLatin American countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico,Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela.More than 9,000 respondents aged 18 years and older were asked toidentify the main problems their countries face socially,economically, and politically. A range of economic problems wereidentified by respondents--inflation, low salaries, and poverty.Their responses offer marketers a better picture of the overridingworries and concerns influencing consumer attitudes and purchasingbehaviors.In Mexico and Venezuela, 27 percent and 31 percent, respectively,named inflation as the biggest concern for their country. Twentypercent of Uruguayans and 18 percent of Chileans were concernedabout low salaries.Not surprisingly, poverty is viewed as a major problem in severalcountries, and was mentioned by 16 percent of respondents inParaguay, 13 percent each in Peru and in Chile, and 12 percent inBrazil.Despite economic concerns, a significant share of respondents inChile and Brazil also put health concerns on the list: 11 percentin Chile and 19 percent in Brazil.The 1990s has been a time of major changes in Latin America ascountries shift from closed economies, often tightly controlled bythe military, to open, market-oriented economies with manyformerly government-owned businesses now privatized. Yet, theLatinobarometer survey shows that, in the minds of the people,things change slowly. Most Latin Americans still see theirgovernments, rather than the budding corporate structure, aswielding the most power. And in some countries, the military isstill seen as more powerful than business.For example, more than one-half of all respondents in Mexico andPeru named the government as more powerful than either bigbusiness or the military. This is not surprising in view of therecent events in those countries, where economic policies anddecisions made by the governments have had an immediate anddramatic effect on the business environment. In Venezuela andBrazil responses were more evenly distributed among the threechoices. In Paraguay, 61 percent of respondents said the militaryheld the most power.Respondents in Argentina saw things in their country completelydifferently. Only 14 percent saw the military as having more powerthan either the government or big corporations, but 61 percentsaid big business was the most powerful.Although this was the first Latinobarometer survey in LatinAmerica, it follows the long tradition of the Eurobarometer inEurope. For more information on Latinobarometer, see Market:LatinAmerica February 1996 or contact Hector Casanueva or Marta Lagos,MORI Chile, Galvarino Gallardo 1791, Santiago, Chile; telephone56+ 2 235 0574; fax 56+ 2 236 2101.SOURCE: L'Opiniometre, No 59, October 1995, published by Promos,bd de Magenta, 75010 Paris, France; telephone 33+ 1 40 35 50; fax33+ 1 40 36 91 96.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DON'T OVERLOOK MEXICO'S FOOD MARKETDespite Mexico's economic problems over the past year, caused bythe devaluation of its peso in late December 1994, the countryoffers an unparalleled opportunity for food marketers, reportsPROMAR International, a strategic marketing and businessconsultancy. Demand for processed food, which was just beginningto grow before the peso devaluation, will return, PROMARInternational predicts. This, along with Mexico's growingpopulation, will make market conditions ideal for processed-foodmanufacturers. But in order to be successful, manufacturers mustbe willing to enter the market now, and stay in it for the longterm.Although Mexico's current food chain--production, distribution,and consumption--is highly fragmented, government economicpolicies and market and industry influences will help tostreamline it and make it more efficient.Demographic factors will also force the system to become moreefficient. More women entering the work force will put a premiumon time and convenience just when disposable income is rising.Furthermore, the extensive U.S. influence through television andadvertising, as well as the presence of U.S. and multinationalcompanies operating in the country, will educate the consumer tomore choices in brands, services, and values.The costs of entering the market now may seem formidable,  butthey are likely to rise over the next few years. PROMAR suggeststhat food manufacturers may want to form partnerships withdomestic companies or simply buy a domestic operation.For more information on the opportunities and challenges offeredby this market, order The Food Market in Mexico: Development AfterDevaluation (cost GBP7,500). Contact Zoe Hamilton, Head ofBusiness Development, PROMAR International, Northcroft House, WestEnd, Newbury, Berkshire RG14 1HD, United Kingdom; telephone 44+1635 46112; fax 44+ 1635 43945.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996WHERE BRAZILIANS GO, CAN JAPAN BE FAR BEHIND?Ties between Brazil and Japan are likely to strengthen in the nextcentury, predicts  Ricardo Sergio de Oliveira, director of theinternational division of Banco do Brasil. In an interview withthe Japanese newspaper Nikkei Weekly, Oliveira says the newcentury is likely to see a proliferation of business, industrial,and cultural alliances between the two countries.Brazil's wealth of natural resources and Japan's technology canwork together to the benefit of both countries. Recently, Japan'sExport-Import Bank provided a loan to finance Japanese exports toBrazil. In addition, many Japanese companies are making use ofBanco do Brasil's services at its outlets in Tokyo and Hamamatsu.Although the bank provides loan and deposit services for the150,000 Brazilians of Japanese nationality living and working inJapan, nearly one-half of its banking activities come fromJapanese businesses.Brazil's connections with other Asian countries such as Hong Kong,Singapore, and China are developing as well. Oliveira sees this asan extension of the growth and development Brazil will experienceover the next century.SOURCE: The Nikkei Weekly, September 18, 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NO PAN-REGIONAL TREND IN LATIN AMERICAN CINEMASThe global rise of VCR ownership and video movies, and ofsatellite and cable television over the past few decades put adent in movie audiences. With the introduction of multi-plexes,which offered better-quality sound and pictures, and providedbright, modern surroundings, movie attendance started to pick upagain. The early 1990s actually saw a surge in movie attendance inmany parts of the world, especially in some emerging markets inthe Asia-Pacifc region, while in most of the developed countries,movie attendance continued on a downward slide.Movie attendance in the seven major markets of Latin America ismixed, but it has not returned to the level of the mid-1980s.Film Distribution International: Rights and Markets, a resourcebook published by Baskerville Communications Corporation, tracksthe trends in the cinema industry as well as in video movierentals, and the penetration of cable, satellite, and pay-TV. Thebook provides information on over 50 countries throughout theworld, including the seven major consumer markets in LatinAmerica: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, andVenezuela.In Brazil, for example, movie attendance in 1985 was 91 millionbut slid slightly to 90 million in 1990. It then climbed to 95million in 1991 only to drop precipitously in 1992 to 73 million.In 1994, movie attendance was once again on the rise in Brazil,reaching 78.5 million by that year's end.Argentina experienced a similar curve in cinema attendance,although the levels of attendance in the 1990s were less than halfthose of the 1980s. From 52 million in 1985, movie attendance in1990 dropped to 25 million. Attendance bottomed out in 1991 at14.7 million, then began a slow climb.  Although numbers for 1994are not available, by year end 1993, cinema attendance wasdefinitely on the rise, with 22 million movie-goers recorded forthat year.On the other hand, cinema attendance in Mexico, Chile, andColombia has been steadily declining.Despite the unpredictable trends in cinema attendance in LatinAmerica, advertising in cinemas has steadily increased (althoughcinema advertising represents only a small portion of overalladvertising in the region). In Argentina, revenues from cinemaadvertising were almost five times as much in 1994 as in 1991. Inmost of these seven countries, however, the increase in revenuesfor cinema advertising is not as high.SOURCE: Film Distribution International: Rights and Markets (cost$397 plus shipping and handling), Baskerville CommunicationsCorporation, P.O. Box 303, Shrub Oak, NY; telephone (914) 962-6297; fax (914) 962-1338.Back to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996AFFORDABLE PRICES, QUICK SERVICE DRIVE FAST-FOOD SALES IN CENTRALAMERICAPeople in Central America are interested in convenience andwilling to pay for it. Over the past five years, the number offast food outlets in Honduras, Guatemala, and Costa Rica hasincreased significantly. In El Salvador, new marketing formatssuch as convenience stores are a big success. For example, afteradding convenience stores to their gas stations in El Salvador,Esso Automarkets saw total sales increase 96 percent, with fastfood becoming a best-selling item.A research study conducted by Panorama Internacional in CentralAmerica indicates that over a period of five years the number offast-food outlets in Honduras tripled while the number inGuatemala doubled. According to this study, Central Americans likepizza, hamburgers, and fried chicken much in the same way thatAmericans do. And the success of fast food in this region is dueto the same factors that make it successful up northQfast serviceand a variety of food alternatives at affordable prices.Both multinational and local companies compete in CentralAmerica's fast-food market. Pizza Hut, McDonald's, and Burger Kingare the dominant multinational companies. Together they accountfor 78 percent of the fast-food outlets in Costa Rica and for 21percent of fast-food outlets in Guatemala. In Honduras,  Pizza Hutand Burger King account for 36 percent of the fast-food outlets.Other multinational fast food companies competing in Guatemala,Costa Rica, and Honduras include Wendy's, Taco Bell, Domino'sPizza, Kentucky Fried Chicken, Subway, and Wimpy's.As for local companies, there are at least 12 large companies inthose three countries, of which Pollos Campero and Bigos are themost important competitors in terms of number of outlets. PollosCampero is present in Guatemala and Honduras, with 38 and 6outlets, respectively, and Bigos is an Honduras-based company with11 outlets.Fast-food competition is greatest in Guatemala and least in CostaRica, where there are only seven companies with a total of 63fast-food outlets. Honduras has nine companies with 83 outlets,and Guatemala's 173 outlets are owned by just 15 companies, 8 ofwhich are local companies.According to Panorama Internacional, multinational companiestarget the middle-to-high-income consumer, while local companiesfocus more on the mass market.Menus offered by local fast-food companies revolve around localtastes and preferences, while multinational companies tend tostick to their menus offered worldwide. However, some of the more-successful multinationals in Central America have found thatmodifying their menus to incorporate local dishes pays off. Forexample, gallo pinto, a typical breakfast dish in Costa Rica, is apopular addition to some fast-food menus.In addition, some multinationals have adapted marketing strategiesto the local needs of each country's consumers. For example, PizzaHut offers the Executive Discount Card, a membership program whichgives employees from participating member companies significantdiscounts on meals eaten at Pizza Hut restaurants. Since it iscommon practice in many Latin American countries for employers tosubsidize their employees' mid-day meal, this discount plan meetsthe needs of employers and employees.There is no doubt that the fast-food market in Central America isgrowing. Those interested in this market will want to assess thelevel of competition and the competitors, both multinational anddomestic companies, in each country. In addition, the ability tobe flexible and  to adapt the product to the local tastes of eachcountry, and to design marketing strategies geared to the needs ofthe local market, will go a long way to ensure success in thisfast-growing fast-food market.P Sandra CuellarBack to Headline List CopyrightMARKET: LATIN AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996JAMAICA: CARIBBEAN POWERHOUSE IN THE MAKINGJamaica is poised to become a key business market in theCaribbean. This achievement has come about over the past few yearsas a result of the government's commitment to making Jamaica intoa market economy with a strong private sector.Policies are now in place to spur economic growth and attract bothdomestic businesses and foreign investors. Among these policiesare changes in taxes and customs tariffs. Since the election ofprime minister Percival J. Patterson in 1993, many government-owned businesses have been privatized, including NCB Bank and AirJamaica, the national airline. Other privatizations have occuredin airline services, telecommunications, hotels, and sugar andbanana companies. Privatization of the state-owned petroleumcorporation, PETROJAM, and railway, Jamaica Railway Corporation,is in process.These changes and the government's commitment solidify largerchanges that have evolved in Jamaica over the past few decades.Once an agriculture-based economy that relied on exports of sugarand bananas, Jamaica's economic base has shifted twice--first tomining and then to services.In the late 1950s and early 1960s, mining of bauxite and aluminafor export replaced agriculture as the major economic activity. Inmore recent years, the service sector, including tourism,  hastaken the economic lead, boasting the largest growth.The service sector now accounts for 55 percent of the grossdomestic product (GDP), while the goods-producing sectors--agriculture, mining, manufacturing, and construction--contributeonly 45 percent of GDP. Between 1990 and 1994, banking andcommunications services nearly doubled, and tourism increasedsteadily, earning Jamaica the title of top Caribbean destination,according to International Travel Trade Gazette.Jamaica's official language is English. The country gainedindependence from the United Kingdom in 1962, although itsgovernment structured itself as a parliamentary democracy in thetradition of the United Kingdom. But intense political partyrivalries within the country since then have overshadowedJamaica's government.Jamaica still faces some problems.  The robust growth experiencedthroughout the 1980s slowed in the 1990s to just one percentannually. The country's dependence on imports and the slow growthof exports are major problems.Inflation and currency depreciation also pose problems forJamaica, although inflation has seen a steady decline in recentyears. In 1994 inflation was about 27 percent, down from 30percent in 1993. By the first quarter of 1995, inflation was 3.4percent, down from 8.1 percent for the same period in 1994. As ofOctober 195, the Jamaican dollar exchanged at about J$37 to US$1.Jamaica also has a heavy foreign-debt burden.Crime is on the rise and, to some extent, has dampened touristinterest in the country.RELIANCE ON IMPORTSHistorically, Jamaica's economic structure was organized toproduce industrial raw materials for export while consumer goodswere imported. In recent years, Jamaica has tried to correct thisimbalance but, as yet, the range of goods produced locally islimited, and imports continue to grow. Exports of goods andservices averaged only 59 percent of GDP in 1994, while imports ofgoods and services were 64 percent of GDP during that same year.Apparel is one export that has seen significant growth in Jamaica.Since 1989 apparel exports to the United States increased 60percent, according to LA/C Business Bulletin.Alumina, bauxite, sugar, and bananas accounted for over 60 percentof total exports of approximately $1.2 billion in 1994. Jamaica isthe world's third-largest producer of bauxite, which remains thecountry's largest export. In 1994, bauxite production reached itshighest level since 1980. Production for 1995 will be considerablyless, however, due to a strike over wages early in the year thatinterrupted production at nearly three-fourths of the country'sbauxite refineries.Sugar and sugar products, bananas, citrus, coffee, cocoa, spices,and rum have long been Jamaica's major traditional agriculturalexports, but, except for coffee and rum,  their total productionhas declined.Jamaica relies heavily on imports of both consumer goods andproduction resources. Total imports exceeded $2.1 billion  in1994, of which 63 percent were raw materials and intermediategoods for further processing. The rest are consumer goods, meaningJamaica is a good market for all kinds of consumer goods. Most ofJamaica's imports come from the United States, followed byTrinidad and Tobago, the United Kingdom, and Canada.Emigration helps slow growthJamaica's population of 2.4 million has grown slowly over the lastfew years, at about 1 percent annually. Slow population growth isdue to declining fertility and to emigration.The total fertility rate (TFR) in 1995 was 2.4 children. Theaverage TFR for the Caribbean region is 2.9. (Total fertility rateis the average number of children born to a woman during herlifetime.) Yet, despite a low fertility rate, Jamaica's populationis young. Thirty-three percent is under the age of 15. Incountries with a large proportion of youth it is unusual to have asignificant share of the population in the older age group. Yet,in Jamaica, eight percent of the population is over age 65.The reason for this unusual juxtaposition of young and oldpopulation is the high level of emigration from Jamaica. Anestimated 20,000 young and middle-aged adults leave Jamaica eachyear to pursue education or employment in other countries, oftennot returning to Jamaica until retirement.In addition, Jamaica attracts a number of retirees from othercountries who choose to spend their golden years in the Caribbean.Jamaica's group aged 65 and older, which includes both Jamaicanand foreign retirees, is made up in part of consumers withcomfortable incomes, well-developed consumer tastes, and specificneeds to which marketers can cater.HOUSEHOLD REMITTANCES ARE IMPORTANTJamaica is quite rural. Although urbanization is increasing atabout 1.4 percent a year, only 53 percent of the populationcurrently lives in urban centers. Somewhat surprisingly, the 1982census data showed greater numbers of females than males in urbancenters.Average household size in Jamaica is about 3.8, down from 4.2persons in the 1982 census.GDP per capita, a rough estimate of household purchasing power,was about $1,565 in 1994, although this number is distorted by thecontinued depreciation of the Jamaican currency. Actual GDP percapita has grown by only about $50 since 1989. However, the truelevel of disposable income is higher since, in many households,income is supplemented by remittances sent from family membersliving overseas. In fact, remittances sent home to Jamaica havesurged, according to the Economic and Social Survey of Jamaica1994. Private transfers, the largest share of which isremittances, reached $214 per head in 1994.The Jamaican Survey of Living Conditions 1993 shows an averageannual per capita household expenditure of about J$23,408 (US$716at 1993 rate of exchange), a decline in real terms compared with1990.Levels of consumption vary considerably among income groups. Thetop 10 percent of income earners spent 12 times more onconsumption than did the bottom 10 percent. Sixty-six percent ofall households spent less than J$8000 (or US$245) per month in1993.Consumption expenditures also vary by region. Per capitaexpenditure in the Kingston metropolitan area, where 33 percent ofthe population lives, exceeded the country average by 31 percentin 1993. Per capita consumption was lowest in the rural areas,where 47 percent of the population live.Spending on food accounts for 54 percent of total consumerexpenditures. Clothing and footwear account for nearly 12 percenteach, and fuel, household supplies, and transportation forapproximately 6 percent each. However, household food consumptionis augmented by home production, from gardens or farms. In fact,home production accounts for 5 percent of overall foodexpenditures. Home production accounts for a larger share ofconsumption in rural areas, the food-producing areas. Root crops,tubers, fruits, vegetables, and poultry are dietary staples.Although in some Caribbean and Latin American countries it iscommon to have well-to-do households side by side with very poorhouseholds, this is not the case in Jamaica. The wealthy and thenot-so-wealthy live in distinct neighborhoods, although in someareas one drives through the poorer neighborhoods to reach anaffluent neighborhood. Around the Kingston metropolitan area, forexample, many wealthy people live in the hills, middle incomepeople live in the lower areas, and poor people live in theflatlands.CONSUMER MARKETUnited States culture has a strong influence on Jamaica's culture.Jamaica is just an hour's flying time from the United States, andeconomic relations between the two countries are centuries old.The flow of people between the United States and Jamaica furtheraccounts for this strong influence.Tourists from the United States account for about 60 percent ofthe nearly 1 million annual stopover visitors to Jamaica. Also,tens of thousands of Jamaicans have migrated to the United Statesover the years, and emigres from Jamaica to the United Statestypically move back and forth. Jamaican students return afteryears of living in the United States, and so do many retiredworkers. U.S. goods are also dispersed by hundreds of travelersreturning to Jamaica with large boxes and suitcases brimming witharticles to be sold through informal distribution channels.U.S. media have perhaps the strongest influence of all. TheStatistical Yearbook 1994, published by UNESCO, reports about 330thousand television sets licensed or in use in Jamaica during1992, most tuned to U.S. stations despite the availability ofseveral hours of local programming. Satellite dishes areeverywhere--on rooftops and dotting the landscape, especially inthe more affluent neighborhoods.Radio is even more prevalent with over 1 million radio sets in thecountry. Three newspapers are published daily and numerous foreignmagazines and newspapers are also available.All of these media carry advertising for businesses and consumergoods. Advertising agencies, both local and foreign-owned, aboundin Jamaica. The 1994/95 telephone directory for Greater Kingstonlists 67 advertising agencies and counselors, includinginternationally known McCann-Erickson.Consumer goods, whether imported or domestically produced, aresold in modern supermarkets and malls, boutiques, and hotel giftshops. Goods are marketed through billboards, radio and talkshows, and sponsorships of beauty contests and sports events. U.S.fast-food chains have franchise outlets in Jamaica, includingKentucky Fried Chicken, McDonald's, Burger King, Pizza Hut,Domino's, and Popeye's.As in the United States, the use of credit and debit cards isgrowing rapidly.Telephone penetration is increasing, and in 1994 there were nearly400,000 lines. Use of cellular phones is also increasing rapidlywith the number of cellular phone customers approaching 25,000 in1995. Fiber optic equipment is speeding communications betweencities and rural areas and facilitating internationalcommunication, making it ever easier and more economical to dobusiness in Jamaica.LABOR FORCEThe labor force currently exceeds 1 million workers, about 44percent of the total population and 68 percent of persons aged 14and over (the working age in Jamaica). Female labor forceparticipation rates are high. Forty-one percent of women aged 14and above are in the labor force, compared with 47 percent ofmales. Jamaica's work force is well-educated and highly skilled.The literacy ate is 98 percent. Nearly one-quarter of the workforce has some education beyond secondary level, according toCraighead's International, Business, Travel, and Relocation Guide1996-97, although only 4 percent have actually graduated.Approximately 6 percent have vocational degrees. Use ofprofessional titles, such as Doctor or Professor, is consideredgood business manners.Unemployment is a problem in Jamaica, and women and young personsare the hardest hit. While overall unemployment was 15 percent in1994, the actual unemployment rate for males was 10 percent andfor females, 22 percent. Worse yet, according to Labor ForceSurvey, 48 percent of those unemployed in October 1994 wereworkers between the ages of 14 and 24.Government "downsizing" through privatization accounts for some ofthis unemployment--the government work force was cut by over 20percent. Data from the Statistical Institute of Jamaica showsemployment increasing across all categories, and there has been asteady increase in jobs in the private sector, especially inservices and in self-employment. But for workers in agricultureand fishing, jobs are decreasing due to a decline in manufacturingoutput and agricultural exports.Direct labor costs are low by U.S. standards. In 1994, the averagehourly wage of workers in businesses with 10 or more employees wasapproximately J$37, or less than $1.15. Wages are generally evenlower in establishments with fewer than 10 employees. Even so,wages have kept pace with Consumer Price Index increases over thelast few years.According toLA/C Business Bulletin, the government no longer setswage guidelines for the private sector other than the minimumwage. In 1995, the minimum wage was increased from $J350 to J$500per week, or from US$10.54 to US$15.05 (with the exchange rate ofJ$33.22 per U.S. dollar at that time).Although Jamaica's work force is literate and skilled, thegovernment is emphasizing the importance of higher and technicaleducation to cope with increasing labor market technology.Despite an otherwise disciplined economic plan with limitedexpenditures, the government is allocating about 10 percent of itstotal spending in the 1990s to education.Enrollment at post-secondary institutions, including theUniversity of the West Indies, has increased despiteimplementation of a student cost-sharing plan. As a furtheremphasis on the importance of technological training, the Collegeof Arts, Sciences, and Technology (CAST) was converted into theUniversity of Technology (Jamaica U Tech). Current enrollment isover 6,000.INFRASTRUCTUREJamaica has natural harbors, many of which cater to transport andcruise vessels. There is specialization among the ports, however.Cruise ships stop at Ocho Rios, Montego Bay, and Port Antonio.More than 50 percent of all incoming cargo is handled at the Portof Kingston. Most of the outgoing cargo is loaded at ports otherthan Port of Kingston.Many international shipping lines maintain offices in Jamaica, andothers are represented by various steamship agencies. Over 14million tons of cargo were transported in and out of Jamaica in1994. Transshipment cargo--cargo entering the country temporarilyen route to other countries--represented nearly 12 percent oftotal cargo movement in 1994 and is growing rapidly.Air traffic is served by two international airports, one locatednear Kingston on the southeast end of the island, the other nearMontego Bay in the northwest. The latter airport serves most ofthe tourist resort areas and accounted for two-thirds of passengerarrivals in 1994. Fifteen foreign airlines fly in and out ofJamaica, in addition to Air Jamaica.THE FUTUREIn 1994, Jamaica implemented its National Industrial Policy, aplan to upgrade the country's infrastructure to better accommodateincreasing economic activity. All ports and airports will beupgraded, and new port transshipment facilities will be built totake advantage of the boom in transshipment service. Constructionof a new airport terminal in Montego Bay is already underway.The 1995-96 fiscal year is the last one during which Jamaica iscovered by an International Monetary Fund borrowing agreement.Jamaica's economy appears to be stabilizing, although it has grownonly slightly since the start of the decade.International reserves have grown substantially, and foreigncurrency can now be obtained from banks and cambios reducing thelevel of black-market activity.Back to Headline List WT03-B06-8IA087-000634-B041-153http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it109.html 205.156.212.5 19970122030650 text/html 67617HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:04:47 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:48 GMTContent-length: 67430Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it109.html Sample Issue Copyright MEXICO & NAFTA REPORT via NewsNet July 18, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CHILE: CHILE'S DEAL WITH THE MERCOSUR: BOLIVIA TO FOLLOW? (828 words) REGION: HELMS BURTON: PREPARING FOR RETALIATION: TO TRY AND HEAD OFF THE US (1778 words) REGION: AROUND THE BLOCS (988 words) MEXICO: WHY ZEDILLO MUST PROSECUTE RAUL SALINAS TO BOLSTER LAW AND ORDER (438 words) MEXICO: GUERRERO: ANOTHER REVOLT?: OR AGENTES PROVACATEURS (1041 words) MEXICO: OAXACA: MORE GUERRILLAS?: PRD CLAIMS (477 words) MEXICO: CHIAPAS: MASSACRE: IN NORTH OF STATE (369 words) MEXICO: POLITICAL REFORM: PRD PROTESTS OVER TABASCO: AND WITHDRAWS FROM political reform talks (1436 words) MEXICO: THE PRD ELECTION: THREE CANDIDATES: 1.4M VOTERS (529 words) MEXICO: THE DROUGHT: MAIZE IMPORTS TO DOUBLE TO 7M T IN 1996: STRUCTURAL adjustment in agriculture (1150 words) MEXICO: GAS: PRIVATE PIPELINES: 10 NETWORKS (123 words) MEXICO: THE UNIONS: TEACHERS' DEMO ENDS IN VIOLENCE: MEXICO CITY POLICE chief sacked (600 words) MEXICO: FOCUS ON THE SALINAS BROTHERS: THE PRESSURE MOUNTS (596 words) CopyrightMEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNetJuly 18, 1996 CHILE: CHILE'S DEAL WITH THE MERCOSUR: BOLIVIA TO FOLLOW? Chile finally signed an agreement on commercial association with the Mercosur on 25 June. The deal, which effectively makes Chile an associate member of the trading bloc, will come into force on 1 October. This deal, and the somewhat fudged framework agreement with Bolivia, were driven forward by Argentina, which held the rotating six month presidency of the Mercosur until the end of June. The presidency for the next term is held by Brazil, which is keen on making similar agreements with Colombia and Venezuela. The Mercosur's agreement with Chile will not make the country a full member of the Mercosur and will mean that any future agreements between the Mercosur and other countries will have to be agreed by the Mercosur and also by Chile (the so-called four plus one formula). The Argentine foreign minister, Guido Di Tella, admitted that Chile's position could be seen as an intermediate step: he said that the Mercosur would like Chile to have an even closer relationship and did not rule out this possibility. The big sticking point here though is external tariffs: Chile has a fixed 11% tariff while the Mercosur's tariffs range in bands from zero to 20%.  The agreement between the Mercosur and Chile runs to 58 articles and 27 chapters which deal with topics such as commercial and customs arrangements, fiscal policy, capital movement and integration of infrastructure. The two sides also agreed on a dispute settlement procedure based on a panel of experts. Under the terms of the agreement roughly 80% of the trade between the Mercosur and Chile will face immediate tariff reductions of 40% and more than 90% of the value of the products traded between Chile and the Mercosur will be free of tariffs in eight years' time. Some products (mostly agricultural, but also carparts) have been excluded from the arrangement. In Chile's case these products are meat, edible oil and sugar. Chilean production of these products will be protected by tariffs for 15 years.  Chile's wheat tariffs will only start to come down after eight years, provided that 90% of the rest of the trade between the Mercosur and Chile is free of any tariff, as is envisaged. The Chilean wheat market will be open to its Mercosur partners from 2014.   Sticking points. One of the thorniest issues that had to be resolved before the agreement was signed was over rules of origin. The Mercosur's rule is that 60% of a product has to be manufactured in the Mercosur area to be considered local and therefore eligible to be bought and sold free of tariffs in the Mercosur. Chile broadly agreed with this but wanted exceptions made for some bottled foods, clothes and printed and computer goods coming from Chile. Argentina made a concession on textiles and shoes, agreeing that Chilean products could enter its market on the same terms as other Chilean products.  The two sides have also fudged the issue of whether in future agreements the concessions offered to a third country should automatically be offered to the other parties to this agreement. The two sides agreed to set up a committee to study this.  One big attraction of the deal with Chile from the Mercosur's point of view is Chilean agreement for the use of its ports to ship Mercosur products to the booming markets of East Asia.  Bolivia. Di Tella said that the Mercosur and Bolivia had agreed on mechanisms covering 80% of the trade between the Mercosur and Bolivia. They failed, however, to sort out a deal for the other products. Bolivia wanted an asymmetrical deal under which the Mercosur would open its market to 50% of Bolivia's exports but Bolivia would only open up to 25% of the Mercosur's exports. Bolivia also wanted a special deal on local content: 40% instead of the Mercosur's 60%. The two sides have now come to an agreement: signing a framework document at the end of June that commits them to negotiating a free trade deal within 90 days. This deal is supposed to come into force on 1 January 1997.  According to Alejandro Mayoral, the Argentine foreign trade minister, what the Mercosur has done with Chile is sign a framework agreement that will allow each Mercosur country to then sort out bilaterally its tariff arrangements with Bolivia. This, he pointed out, was very different from what had been arranged with Chile, and the framework agreement with Bolivia was more likely to be a model for future Mercosur trade agreements with Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia, Peru and Ecuador, Mayoral said.  He argued that this was an extension of the old Aladi (Asociacion Latinoamericana de Integracion) system, which grades each country according to its economic development and uses this as a basis for fixing trade preferences. This means that each country in the Mercosur could have different trade arrangements with a third country with tariffs ranging from 12% to 41%. Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNetJuly 18, 1996 REGION: HELMS BURTON: PREPARING FOR RETALIATION: TO TRY AND HEAD OFF THE US So far the US has only been criticised for approving the Helms-Burton law which seeks to penalise non-US companies which do business or invest in Cuba. The law was even discussed at the recent G7 summit in France: the other industrialised countries made it clear to the US that they disagreed with the law but agreed to wait a bit longer before they launched a concerted protest at an international body such as the World Trade Organisation. What everybody is waiting for is 15 July. By then President Bill Clinton has to decide whether to allow the sanctions envisaged by the Helms-Burton Act to be imposed. If he does so, he is likely to trigger a welter of reprisals from two of the US's most important trade partners, Canada and Mexico. The penalties envisaged by the Helms-Burton law (or to give it its proper title, The Cuban Liberation and Democratic Solidarity Act) are due to come into force from 1 August. Last month the US published details of how it would apply these provisions of the Act (the so-called Title III) and a list of which companies would be subject to them. Blacklist. In accordance with the law, the US warned three companies that they were falling foul of the Helms-Burton Act by using assets which were claimed by their original US owners. The three companies are Sherritt International, a nickel mining company which uses nickel deposits and equipment claimed by Freeport MacMoRan; Domos from Mexico and Stet from Italy, both of which are developing Cuba's telephone system with assets claimed by the US company AT&T. Though these companies have 45 days to withdraw from Cuba or face the penalties, they have all said that they will not withdraw from Cuba. On the other hand Cementos Mexicanos, the world's third largest cement company, has bowed to US pressure and told Washington that it will withdraw from Cuba. Cemex had already suspended its activities in there as a precautionary measure.  Around 340 Mexican companies, all with business and investments in Cuba, could be affected by the Helms-Burton Act.  So far, Mexico has taken a more conciliatory attitude to the Act than Canada. Mexico seems determined to go through all the Nafta hoops before it starts to take reprisals. Canada, on the other hand, has already prepared its retaliatory legislation. It is only using the Nafta mechanisms as a back-up.  Nafta hoops. Mexico has asked for a meeting of the Free Trade Commission, which is composed of the three countries' trade ministers, to discuss the issue raised by the Helms-Burton Act. Mexico intends to argue that the Helms-Burton Act violates Nafta. Herminio Blanco, the secretario de Comercio y Fomento Industrial (Secofi), called for the  meeting under Article 2.007 of Nafta. Canada. Blanco's Canadian counterpart, Arthur Eggleton, has also called for a trade ministers' meeting but has already drafted retaliatory action. Canada had previously held two bilateral meetings with the US on this issue, to no avail. Eggleton accused the US of taking aim at its foes but shooting its friends. He said Canada was the US's closest ally and that if the US has a disagreement with Cuba it should not take it out on Canada. Canada's government has drawn up legislation which would allow its citizens to sue in Canadian courts to recover any losses caused by Helms-Burton and to block the enforcement in Canada of judgments handed down under any objectionable foreign law, such as  the Helms-Burton Act.  The Canadian legislation is in the  form of an amendment to the Foreign Extraterritorial Measures Act. The amendment also raises the maximum fine under Fema from Can Dollars 10,000 to US Dollars 1m to match the maximum imposed by Helms-Burton. The government, which has been criticised for proposing the changes as amendments to a current act rather than proposing them to parliament, says that the counter-measures will be in place by 1 November. This is the first date by which companies could be punished by Helms-Burton.  Pre-emptive. The Canadian action is specifically designed to stop President Bill Clinton authorising implementation of the penalisation clauses of the Helms-Burton Act. The President has the right to impose or suspend the provisions of the law according to his view of events in Cuba, though the first period of authorisation expires in mid-July. Concerns. Both Canada and Mexico are worried that their companies and nationals could be punished by the US for doing business with Cuba. The most controversial provision of the Helms-Burton Act gives US companies the right to sue any company in the world for the losses it claims to have suffered from the use of its expropriated assets in Cuba. Besides this, the US government also has the right to refuse entry to executives (and their families) of companies who trade and invest in Cuba. Already the children of some senior executives at Mexican companies with extensive businesses in Cuba, have been withdrawn from US universities.  Mexican companies trade and invest extensively in Cuba. In 1995 the two countries exchanged goods and services worth US Dollars 363m, according to Secofi. This was nearly twice as much as in 1994.  Mexican argument. Herminio Blanco at Secofi argues that the Helms-Burton Act clearly infringes both chapter 11 and chapter 16 of Nafta, which enshrine the free circulation of investment, trade and businessmen throughout the territory of the three Nafta signatories.  Schedule. Under the terms of Nafta, a commission has to be convened within 10 days of one of the members calling for it. (Both Mexico and Canada have done so). The Mexicans lodged their application on 18 June, but the commission failed to meet by the beginning of July. Nafta rules stipulate that as the next stage a complainant can call for a Nafta panel to be set up to consider the issues. This panel, which will be composed of experts and officials, has five months to reach a decision. Reprisals. Although the Mexican government's line appears to be to exhaust Nafta procedures before taking unilateral action, some Mexican senators are already preparing retaliatory legislation. Rodolfo Becerril Straffon, a member of the ruling Partido Revolucionario Institucional and chairman of the senate's trade committee, has tabled a draft bill which would penalise companies owned by Cuban-Americans which wanted to do business in Mexico. Another suggestion is that companies that withdraw from Cuba because of the Helms-Burton law should be fined.  Becerril Straffon said that the tricky part of such a bill was to ensure that it did not lead to further countermeasures by the US against Mexican companies trying to do business in the US. The senate has plenty of time to come up with a solution, as it is currently in recess and not due to reassemble until September.  The senate reckons it is in a strong position. It notes that according to Secofi, Mexico's imports from the US increased from US Dollars 41.6bn in 1994 to US Dollars 46.3bn in 1995.  Cuba. The island's government is also working hard on ways of getting around Helms-Burton, the Cuban minister of foreign investment, Ibrahim Ferradaz said. He refused, however, to go into details about what the government would (or could) do. He pointed out that the international community had objected in very strong terms to the law and the people most penalised by it would be US executives wanting to do business in Cuba. The minister was speaking during a trip to Europe last month (June) to promote Cuba's new free trade zones. Although no zones have yet been created, there is legislation in the works to set them up, probably in Mariel, Cienfuegos and the area around the airport at Havana. Ferradaz said that the legislation would be designed to attract foreign investors and create jobs.  Regional objections. Apart from Canada and Mexico, the US's closest allies in the region reckon that the US has overstepped the mark. Venezuela's foreign minister, Miguel Angel Burelli, said that Helms-Burton broke the first principle of international law which was that one country could not apply its laws to another. He said that Venezuela would continue to do business with Cuba and not stop businessmen from travelling there.  Burelli noted that the OAS had also asked its legal committee to comment on the scope of the Helms-Burton Act. He said that 32 of the 34 members of the OAS had voted for the report on the Act. [Dominica was an absentee, while the US voted against]. Honduras was another country to support the OAS report. The foreign minister, Delmer Urbizo Panting, said that there were some elements of extraterritoriality about the law which needed clarification.  Russia: An official close to the Russian foreign minister, Yuri Primakov, said that he doubted that the Helms-Burton Act would affect Russia's relations with Cuba.  Mexico: Three Mexican daily newspapers, La Jornada, El Financiero and Excelsior are now free to circulate in Cuba. Currently Excelsior is sending about 50 copies a day to the island. The papers are sold for dollars in tourist resorts. Other foreign publications on sale in Cuba include Hola, Cambio 16 and El Pais from Spain, Le Monde from France and Corriere della Sera from Italy.  Spain: The right-wing government of prime minister Jose Maria Aznar is taking the most pro-US line. Aznar announced that Spain would stop official cooperation with the Cuban government. The projects covered by this programme are minuscule (the only one still running is for a bakery) but the symbolic effects of the suspension are far more significant. The Cuban government is fretting that Spain might end a US Dollars 160m credit line which insures Spanish exporters to Cuba. Another vulnerable project is the Instituto de Cooperacion Iberoamericana which is providing US Dollars 2m to help repair one of Havana's aqueducts.  Chile: The Chilean government said that seven Chilean companies could be vulnerable to the Helms-Burton Act. The bulk of the companies involved have made investments in Cuba's citrus industry, though one has invested in the shoe industry and another in the tourism sector. The companies involved are: Zapatos Dolphin and in the fruit sector Ingelsco, New World Fruit and Pole. The three companies with tourism investments are Latinexim, Santa Ana and Inmobiliara Santa Cruz. Altogether Chilean companies have invested about US Dollars 60m in Cuba. The right in Chile alleges a US Dollars 23m credit line to finance Chilean humanitarian exports to Cuba from the Banco del Estado de Chile has been used to finance newsprint which is used for propaganda. Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNetJuly 18, 1996 REGION: AROUND THE BLOCS Mexico: Mexico's trade is becoming even more dominated by its North American partners, the official Instituto Nacional de Estadistica, Geografia e Informatica reports. It noted that despite government efforts to diversify the country's trade, the US and Canada accounted for 86% of Mexico's exports and supplied 78% of its imports. In the comparable period of 1995 the figures were 80% for Mexican exports and 70% for Mexican purchases. Mexico's free trade deals with other Latin American countries (Bolivia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Chile and Venezuela) are not doing as well. In the first quarter of this year only 8% of Mexico's exports went to Latin America and only 5% of its imports came from the region. Only Chile, among Mexico's regional partners, has seen its exports to Mexico increase between the first quarter of 1995 and the first quarter of 1996. Overall Mexico's exports in the first quarter were US Dollars 21.9bn and its imports were US Dollars 20.3bn.  Chile/Mercosur trade: Chile's trade with the Mercosur boomed last year. In 1995 Chilean exports to the four Mercosur countries were US Dollars 1.77bn. This was 157% up on 1994's figure. The Mercosur's exports to Chile increased by 154% in 1995 to US Dollars 2.56bn. Chile/Mercosur deal:  President Eduardo Frei has agreed that congress should have the right to vote on the trade deal with the Mercosur. Previously the government had been unwilling to do this arguing that the deal was an extension or modification of existing Aladi arrangements and therefore there was no need for congress to become involved. The opposition parties had argued that the deal was in fact a treaty and therefore should be submitted to congress. The foreign minister, Jose Miguel Insulza, said that the President was making a goodwill gesture and not setting a precedent. EU: The EU's relations with the Mercosur are getting closer. An EU commissioner, Miguel Marin, attended the recent Mercosur summit in Argentina (at which the deal with Chile was signed) Earlier the EU's (almost powerless) parliament agreed a framework trade agreement with the Mercosur.  Labour challenge: Three groups from Mexico and the US are protesting over alleged labour violations in Mexico. Human Rights Watch/Americas, the International Labor Rights Fund and the Mexican Association of Democratic lawyers submitted a petition in mid-June to the US National Administration Office claiming that the Mexican government has not upheld workers rights and in particular has impeded their freedom of association and their legal rights of a fair trial and appeal.  The case will go a long way to settling whether Nafta can be used to uphold Mexican labour rights. The USNAO was set up to respond to violations of the North American Agreement on Labour Rights, commonly known as the Nafta side agreement on labour. In their petition the three groups accuse Mexico's federal conciliation and arbitration tribunal of repeatedly violating the labour side agreement in its deals with the former union at the fishing ministry. According to the petition, the tribunal has prevented members of the independent fishing ministry union (the Sindicato Unico de Trabajadores de Secretaria de Pesca) from exercising their right of freedom of association and to organise a union. This behaviour started in 1995, when the union ws replaced by one that was more loyal to the ruling PRI. The tribunal, which deals with issues involving public sector employees, used a law that prevents government agencies recognising more than one government entity. Once the new union was recognised the SUTSP was outlawed.  The executive director of Human rights Watch/ Americas, Miguel Vivanco, argues that what the tribunal has done falls into a pattern in which the laws and structures of pro-government unions in Mexico are used to inhibit independent union activity. he said that he hoped Nafta's labour rights' side agreement would be strong enough to resolve both the case and the fishing ministry's wider problem.  The USNAO panel has 60 days to decide whether to take the case. Even if it does, it has no powers to force a change or a remedy upon Mexico. The Human Rights Watch/America people realise this and say that the true test will be how the Mexican government reacts to the findings.  The omens are not good. The government failed to act even after the SUTSP won some favourable rulings in the Mexican courts. On the other hand, the ILO argues that this case is much stronger than previous cases dismissed by the USNAO because it focuses on the law than restricts the number of unions in federal workplaces. This law is, according to Joel Solomon, Human Rights Watch's research director, a clear violation of the Nafta side agreement that guarantees that workers can organise unions free of government interference.  The Mexican counterpart to the USNAO is currently  considering a claim from the Mexican telecommunication workers' union which claims that a US company, Sprint, closed down a San Francisco office to prevent a unionising effort by 235 employees. The Mexican NAO has agreed to delay action until the US National Labor Relations Board makes its final ruling on the case.  Costa Rica-Chile: The two countries have agreed on an investment protection deal. The deal will be signed during President Eduardo Frei's visit to Costa Rica in July. This has suddenly become important following the purchase of the Del Monte fresh fruit company (which has US Dollars 200m worth of investments in Costa Rica) by Chilean investors. Chilean companies also have important investments in the Costa Rican fertiliser company, Fertica.  Mercosur/Textiles: Brazil has agreed not to cut the period for financing textile imports from six months to one month. Its Mercosur partners had said that this measure would damage their textile exports to Brazil. Brazil has also been criticised by Paraguay and Uruguay respectively for blocking exports of dairy goods and rice from its two neighbours. Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNetJuly 18, 1996 MEXICO: WHY ZEDILLO MUST PROSECUTE RAUL SALINAS TO BOLSTER LAW AND ORDER As we warned last month, President Ernesto Zedillo's run of luck so far this year was overdue a reverse. The government has had a bad month: the unrest in the south of the country, which we examine in some detail in this issue, has been capped by the appearance of the Ejercito Popular Revolucionario in Guerrero. Political analysts in Mexico have hinted very broadly that the EPR may be a group of agentes provocateurs, set up by the authorities to justify a crackdown. The yearning for law and order is not confined to the government. Even the EPR called for more law and order in its Declaracion de Aguas Blancas: a strange demand for a group that is also apparently calling for the overthrow of the state. Opinion polls in Mexico City show that the rise in crime is the main concern. This is why the President's decision to replace Mexico City's police chief with a general (who in turn has appointed soldiers to key positions) may well be politically astute.  Yet establishing the rule of law means, as the ordinary Mexican understands, curbing the rule of men. This means that the government has to make up its mind about the Salinas brothers. There is growing evidence that Raul Salinas de Gortari made money because his brother was President. So far the focus of the investigatory efforts, both official and by the media, have been on Raul. His brother, and other key people in his entourage, have just as many questions to answer.  If President Zedillo is serious about reform, unraveling the tangled affairs of the Salinas brothers is vital. Raul must be brought to trial.  The case will clearly pose a serious problem for the ruling Partido Revolucionario Institucional where the Salinas brothers still have large numbers of supporters. But Zedillo could turn this to his advantage, using the case to separate the party from the government, which is the key objective of his political reform programme.  Zedillo could also argue that such a dramatic court case, culminating in the conviction of Raul, could help the PRI in next year's mid-term elections. And the PRI is going to need all the help it can get. The economy is still centrifuging: the export companies and the rich are doing well but for the domestic economy and the poor life is getting tougher. It seems almost inevitable that the US Federal Reserve will start to raise short-term US interest rates in the autumn to slow down the US economy. Once this happens, Mexican exporters may well start to feel the pressure.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNetJuly 18, 1996 MEXICO: GUERRERO: ANOTHER REVOLT?: OR AGENTES PROVACATEURS The government tried to play down the sudden appearance of another guerrilla army, the Ejercito Popular Revolucionario, in Guerrero. The guerrillas, who appeared to be well-equipped and armed with new guns, made their appearance on 28 June at Aguas Blancas, the site of a brutal massacre of 17 peasants exactly a year earlier: that massacre and the revelation of the ham-fisted attempt by the governor of the state, Ruben Figueroa, to make it appear that the peasants were armed, forced his resignation earlier this year. Upstage. The EPR's sudden appearance upstaged 5,000 other political figures who had come to pay homage to the peasants killed in the massacre. Among the notables attending the ceremony at Aguas Blancas, was Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, the left-wing presidential candidate (and probable victor) in 1988. He was clearly surprised by the EPR's appearance and annoyed when they started to read a document they called the Declaracion de Aguas Blancas.  This declaration appeared to be a justification for the armed struggle. It termed the government anti-democratic and committed to protecting the interests of foreigners and the business class. The document claimed that, against a background of institutionalised violence, the armed struggle was a legitimate and necessary means for a people to recover their national sovereignty and the rule of law. The EPR. The guerrillas themselves numbered about 100, according to those at the ceremony. The Secretaria de Gobernacion and the Procuraduria General de la Republica were more precise: they said that exactly 38 'armed persons' interrupted the ceremony as it was concluding.  The guerrillas had their faces hidden with balaclavas and handkerchiefs (like the Zapatistas) and were dressed in olive-green military fatigues. They were armed with AK-47s, which are known in Mexico as cuernos de chivo (goats' horns).  The guerrillas laid flowers at the tombs of the massacred peasants before reading out their declaration. During the reading of this document, the guerrillas claimed that they numbered 500 and were active right across the mountains in the south of the state. They said that the organisation had arisen after men and women from the oppressed sectors of society had realised that they must organise themselves to fight back against their exploiters. One theme that runs through the declaration is the need for justice. This, the EPR reckons, can only be achieved by overthrowing the existing government.  One significant difference between the EPR and the Zapatistas is that the EPR does not make any claims to be speaking for the Indians. The EPR also seems to be much more aggressive: it called for the creation of popular tribunals to judge enemies of the people.  On the evening of 29 June, the EPR (apparently) stopped motorists on the highway between Mexico City and Acapulco and gave them copies of the Declaracion de Aguas Blancas. This led to a confrontation with the police. The guerrillas, according to the police, opened fire on them from a lorry which they were using to block the road. Three policemen and one civilian were wounded in the exchange of fire before the masked members of the EPR escaped. The police say that they found weapons and explosives in the lorry.  Government response. Like the PRD, the federal government doubted that the EPR was anything more than a publicity stunt. The government said that the only subversive groups in the mountains were drug traffickers and criminal bands. Nevertheless, the federal government sent 3,000 troops and police up into the mountains to try and flush out the guerrillas. The government said it would ensure that the army took more care than it did in Chiapas, where it was used to reclaim territory occupied by the Ejercito Zapatista de la Liberacion Nacional in 1994. Guerrero, more than Chiapas, has a reputation in Mexico for being the last redoubt of guerrilla bands. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the remnants of Maoist focos holed up in the mountains. They were only dispersed when their ideological leader, professor Lucio Cabanas was killed in December 1974. Cabanas was the leader of the Partido de los Pobres.  Criticism. Unlike the Zapatistas, whose leader subcomandante Marcos impressed the middle-classes with his wit and general air of romance, the EPR has annoyed the middle classes. One of the most annoyed was Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, one of the PRD's most senior figures. The EPR's arrival at the tombs of the massacred peasants interrupted his eulogy of them. All of the murdered peasants had been PRD members.  Cardenas and other senior PRD figures at the ceremony left Aguas Blancas almost as soon as the guerrillas appeared. Cardenas then issued a fierce statement from Mexico City. He called the EPR's appearance a grotesque pantomime. He said that the appearance of the group 'disguised as guerrillas would have been unimportant if it was not for the fact that they were carrying heavy weapons.' He called the 'guerrillas' both 'irresponsible' and 'provocative'. He accused them of being under the control of those who had ordered the killing of the 17 peasants a year earlier.  Other politicians as well as NGOs, the Church and businessmen have said that an armed uprising is a dead end and that the EPR risks undoing what the Zapatistas have achieved.  Gonzalo Ituarte, a priest in San Cristobal de la Casas, said that the EPR would definitely have an effect on the peace talks between the government and the Zapatistas but it is still too early to speculate on what the effect will be.  Some analysts have even claimed that the EPR is a group of agentes provocateurs, set up by the authorities to link the left-wing Partido de la Revolucion Democratica to guerrillas and more importantly, head off the investigation into who knew what about the cover-up of the massacre at Aguas Blancas. This scepticism is shared by locals who say that the army has been patrolling the mountains for the past couple of years and found traces of guerrillas. In Chiapas, it should be remembered, the army found several camps six months before the Zapatistas seized San Cristobal and the other towns on 1 January 1994. The army, though, thought that the camps were not important. Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNetJuly 18, 1996 MEXICO: OAXACA: MORE GUERRILLAS?: PRD CLAIMS Hector Sanchez, a PRD senator and a likely candidate for the governorship of the state, claims that Oaxaca, a traditionally polarised state, is also on the point of revolt. He claimed that there were guerrillas to the south and east of the state and in the northern Indian communities there was a feeling that the political system had failed them and they needed to resort to arms to make their points. Sanchez claimed that the state government, headed by Diodoro Carrasco, was to blame for letting the situation get out of hand. He said that the Oaxquenos are irritated at what is happening in Chiapas, where Indian issues are (now) treated delicately. Oaxaca, which was the scene of bitter feuds and fighting in the Revolution, is still a very Indian state. According to the 1990 census, 40% of the state's 3m inhabitants  either speak an Indian language or are dependents of a head of a family who is either bi-lingual or a monoglot speaker of an Indian language. Government. According to the senator, the state government does not realise that the state is a tinderbox. He accused the government of not realising that the chorus of complaints were about similar things: political assassinations, squabbles over the results of elections, crime, the hopelessness of the law enforcement agencies, the use of troops in the state and the lack of democratic accountability were all part of the same story. The state government prefers to view each case as a product of a unique circumstance.  Carrasco admitted that there had been and there still were social problems in the state and pressure for the fight against poverty to be speeded up but he flatly denied that any of the agitators on social questions had links to armed groups, with political and ideological objectives.  The senator claimed, in Proceso, a news magazine, that the heavy handed use of troops to try and prevent the Zapatistas establishing their organisation in Oaxaca could trigger an uprising. The army, under the pretext of clamping down on drug traffickers, has been moving into Indian villages and interrogating Indian leaders. The focus of this activity has been in the Sierra Sur where hundreds of police and soldiers have been searching for Zapatistas. Politics. What is clear is that electoral violence (including assassination) is on the increase in the state. According to Proceso, there have been at least 11 political assassinations in the past six months. In April alone first Feliciano Riano Lopez, the president of the Comisariado de Bienes Comunales de San Lucas Atoyaquillo and two of his supporters were gunned down by a group, presumably hired by local landowners, and then Orlando Guerra Guerra, a leader of the local left-wing opposition was killed by Mariano Guerra Lopez, the mayor and a member of the ruling Partido Revolucionario Institucional. Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNetJuly 18, 1996 MEXICO: CHIAPAS: MASSACRE: IN NORTH OF STATE The outbreak of political violence in the north of the state in June has left 26 people dead. In the first half of 1996, clashes between the ruling Partido Revolucionario Institucional and the opposition Partido de la Revolucion Democratica and the Partido de Trabajo have cost 34 lives. According to the opposition parties and human rights organisations, the PRI is backed by thugs known as guardias blancas. These groups are financed by local landowners and politicians and even federal deputies.  The violence may be the start of an attack on civil society, said Samuel Ruiz, the bishop of San Cristobal de las Casas. He is also the president of the Comision Nacional de Intermediacion, which is trying to mediate between the government and the Ejercito Zapatista de Liberacion Nacional. The people behind the killings, according to the bishop, are being backed by the authorities. He said that in several cases where witnesses were prepared to testify the authorities refused to act. he said that the killings had been responsible for driving 800 peasants from their homes. The bishop pointed out that the authorities, instead of acting, preferred to blame priests for fomenting the social unrest in the area and even sometimes being involved in murder. He also claimed that the authorities were using evangelical Christians to try and weaken the support for the Roman Catholic Church in the area of conflict.  The big problem in the state, besides the Zapatistas, is land. The peasants want to use it for subsistence farming while the landowners prefer ranching. According to figures from the state government, 80% of the people in the area where the killings are most numerous are illiterate and landless.  Zapatistas: The government is due to hold another round of talks with the Zapatistas on 8 July. This will follow their Foro Especial Para la Reforma del Estado, which was scheduled for the first week of July. As a token of good faith, the Zapatistas would like the government to release 17 Zapatistas held in prison and cancel the arrest warrants for other Zapatista leaders. The government negotiators, in the form of the Comision de Concordia y Pacificacion, are disposed to agree.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNetJuly 18, 1996 MEXICO: POLITICAL REFORM: PRD PROTESTS OVER TABASCO: AND WITHDRAWS FROM political reform talks The left-wing Partido de la Revolucion Democratica has withdrawn from the political reform debate that is being held in the national congress. The PRD's decision, which is more symbolic than practical, came after President Ernesto Zedillo made a visit to Roberto Madrazo, the governor of Tabasco on 25 June. The PRD saw this visit as a gesture of support for Madrazo. The government accused the PRD of trying to use the negotiations over political reform as a lever to achieve its own political ends. The PRD is well aware that the main opposition party scored a success by refusing to take part in the negotiations over political reform until the result of an election in Huejotzingo, in the backwoods of Puebla, had been resolved in its favour.  The PRD has accused Madrazo, and produced supporting evidence, of breaking the legal limit on how much could be spent on his (successful) election campaign in 1994. According to the PRD, Madrazo spent 128m pesos on his campaign: at the then prevailing exchange rate that was US Dollars 43m (or more than President Bill Clinton spent on his election campaign in 1992). The defeated PRD candidate, Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, said that the President's visit to Madrazo was unwise and provocative. Wisely, Lopez Obrador chose to spend the day of the President's visit in Monterrey, in Nuevo Leon. Lopez Obrador is one of the three candidates to take over from Porfirio Munoz Ledo as president of the PRD. The PRD has accused Madrazo of taking money from some doubtful sources, as well as breaking the law on election spending. In particular, the party has accused him of taking US Dollars 4m from Carlos Cabal Peniche, the former head of the (now bust) Banco Union-Cremi. Peniche is now on the run, with warrants out for his arrest. He has been accused of using his fresh fruit business as a front for drug-running. Violence. The PRD was also angry at being blamed for the violence that accompanied Zedillo's visit. There were riots in the capital Villahermosa which left 20 people injured.  The riots were at their worst when the President visited the state's Procuraduria General de Justicia. The PRD claims that the riots were caused by the PRI, which assembled 200 thugs, armed them with machetes and then set them loose. The PRD said that the people who caused all the trouble had also demonstrated in favour of Roberto Madrazo. The PRD admitted to trying to seal off the capital from the rest of the state for the duration of the President's visit but claimed that its protest was peaceable. It said that the police did nothing to stop its supporters manning the roadblocks from being attacked by the Priistas  According to the authorities, the PRD's supporters blocked the roads leading to Villahermosa and burnt a  bus that was bringing Priistas to a rally in the city. The authorities also say that the PRD burnt a lorry as well as causing damage to other vehicles. The authorities said that two of the PRD's leaders, Julio Cesar Alvarez Santos and Alejandrino Alvarez, were leading attacks by PRD supporters on the passengers in the bus. Both men are local PRD deputies. The authorities also claimed that another PRD leader, the federal deputy, Octavio Romero, was leading another band of Perredistas who were blocking the road between Villahermosa and Ciudad del Carmen.  The unrest around Villahermosa led to the President cutting short his visit and departing from his published schedule. After the President had left, somebody threw a petrol bomb at Lopez Obrador's house in Villahermosa.  Demand. The PRD has now demanded that the national congress declare Tabasco ungovernable and that the current state government should be replaced. What the federal PRD deputies are asking is for the national congress to declare that the authorities in Tabasco have lost their powers, technically desaparicion de poderes.  This is a legal term which can only be declared by the federal congress. It means that the federal authorities recognise that the state government no longer has the legal and political authority to carry out its duties. The PRD argues that the state government is no longer in control and that the federal authorities must now, as the constitution envisages, step into the breach. One PRD leader in the state, Rafael Lopez Cruz, made the barely veiled threat that there was a danger of people in Tabasco taking the law into their own hands.  The PRD pointed out that the day after the President's visit, Priistas had stormed the XEVA radio station to broadcast a message of support for Madrazo. They added that two days after the President's visit, local Priista deputies and officials had attacked Julio Cesar Alvarez Santos, the PRD deputy and supposed leader of the demonstrations on the day of the President's visit, in the local congress.  Federal level. The PRD has also called on the federal Procuraduria General to complete its investigation into Madrazo's election expenses. The local PRI had tried to claim that the federal authorities had no rights to investigate elections in the state, but the supreme court ruled against them. The Procuraduria investigation, though, is proceeding slowly. The PRD denies that it is playing politics over constitutional reform. The head of the party in the lower house, Jesus Ortega, said that the first condition for the party's resumption of talks is that the PRI publish its final, edited version of its proposals for constitutional reform. The second condition was that the main parties should set up a so-called mesa de coyuntura which would sort out the politics of introducing the reforms. The PRD would be happy for the question of Madrazo's election to be settled at the same time.  The PRD's third condition for rejoining the discussions is that the authorities in Tabasco should abandon their attempt to gaol the Perredistas whom they blame for the riots during the President's visit.  State of play. The discussions on constitutional reforms are currently trying to take on board the proposals made by the Partido Accion Nacional. The PAN had withdrawn from the discussions for three months, during which the PRI, PRD and the Partido de Trabajo, reached an agreement in April. The PAN wanted to get the result of an election in Huejotzingo overturned.  After winning its point a month ago, the PAN rejoined the discussions in congress. Currently legislators are considering 27 modifications to the constitution and a further 80 amendments to other laws.  The main change, which is supported by all the parties, is for the President and congress to surrender their (dominating) roles in the Instituto Federal Electoral. The IFE is in charge of running federal elections. The current proposal is that there should be an absolute majority of independents on the IFE board and that its president should be chosen by at least two thirds of congress.  The parties have also agreed that the Tribunal Federal Electoral, which is responsible for resolving election disputes, should now be answerable to the supreme court rather than the President.  A mechanism for the allocation of federal funds for elections was also agreed by the two parties: 70% should be awarded according to votes won while 30% should be awarded in inverse proportion to votes won. The government has also conceded that Mexicans resident abroad should be allowed to vote. The parties are now trying to find ways of turning these agreements in principle into legislation.   PAN. After getting its way over Huejotzingo, the PAN is now trying to behave in a statesmanlike way. Its president, Felipe Calderon Hinojosa, said that the riots in Tabasco did nobody any good. The party's secretary general, Juan Antonio Garcia Villa, has accused the ruling PRI of deliberately trying to stall the electoral reform programme. He accused the PRI of wanting to keep the negotiations deliberately ambiguous. The PAN's congressional leader, Ricardo Garcia Cervantes, accused the PRI of delaying talks for meetings where no firm proposals were made or crazy ideas were floated.  Garcia Cervantes pointed out that the politicians were running out of time. He said they had to agree on reforms, by the end of this month (July) at the very latest. If this did not happen, it was unlikely that the 1997 mid-term elections would be held under the new system.  The PAN complains that the PRI refuses to distinguish its position from the other parties. This, it says, will enable everybody to reach compromises that will work. Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNetJuly 18, 1996 MEXICO: THE PRD ELECTION: THREE CANDIDATES: 1.4M VOTERS The country's third largest party, the left-wing Partido de la Revolucion Democratica is electing its new president on 14 July. The PRD's  1.2m members are all entitled to vote in the secret ballot.  The three candidates are Heberto Castillo, a veteran senator from Veracruz; Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, the PRD leader in Tabasco and Amalia Garcia, a member of the party's national committee. Our bet is that Lopez Obrador will be elected. He is younger than Castillo and better known than Garcia. Castillo is the most interesting: he is campaigning on a platform of better organisation for the party and a harnessing of support from environmentalists and other activists.  The winner will take over from Porfirio Munoz Ledo, one of the senior Priistas who left the ruling party in 1987 to support Cuauhtemoc Cardenas in his run for the presidency in 1998. Mass suffrage. In order to enable most of its members to vote, the party expects to set up 6,000 polling booths across the country. Gerardo Unzueta, the head of the PRD's election committee and a former member of the Partido Comunista,  says that this part of the election alone will cost US Dollars 400,000.  This will be the first time that a political party in Mexico has used a method that allows (most) of its members to vote. Previously, parties such as the PAN (the clericalist opposition party) held special congresses to elect members. The PRD claims that this method is the most democratic way to elect a new leader. The PRD says that it will even allow members who join at the polling station to vote. The party expects voting to be heaviest in the capital where it claims to have 135,000 members. It also has 48,000 members in Chiapas and 33,000 in Jalisco. Other important states are Sonora with 27,000 and Cardenas's home state of Michoacan, which has 25,000 perredistas.  PAN: Vicente Fox, the governor of Guanajuato and a possible presidential candidate in 2000, if the constitution is changed to allow the children of foreign nationals to become President, shocked both the PAN and the country by saying that Petroleos Mexicanos should be privatised. Fox, who was recently on a visit to New York, was quoted as saying that Pemex, a national icon, should be sold off. Although Fox has not denied what he was reported to have said, he has backed away from repeating it. Fox has long had a stormy relationship with some of the more orthodox Panistas, such as the former party president Carlos Castillo Peraza. Fox is widely thought to be out of sympathy with the current party president (and Castillo protege) Felipe Calderon Hinojosa.  In a long interview in Proceso, Fox appears to rule out an alliance between the PAN and the PRD in either of the next two elections (the mid-term congressional elections in 1997 and the presidential elections in 2000). He points out that under the current election law, alliances between registered parties are specifically outlawed. Indeed the PRD had to become a new party in order to fight elections as the party of the united left.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNetJuly 18, 1996 MEXICO: THE DROUGHT: MAIZE IMPORTS TO DOUBLE TO 7M T IN 1996: STRUCTURAL adjustment in agriculture The consequences of the drought in northern Mexico are beginning to become severe. On 30 May, 400 women and children stopped a train at San Nicolas de los Garza, near Monterrey, by putting cement bars across the tracks: they then carried away 40 tonnes of food in buckets. On 11 June, 50 youths stopped a grain train in the same area and raided it.  According to Mexican Commentary, a twice-weekly E-mail publication, an official report on the drought in Chihuahua found that 77 indigenous people (mostly children and the elderly) had died because of malnutrition and associated conditions in the first four months of the year. As we have reported regularly this year, the drought has become steadily worse. At the end of June, Proceso  published an in-depth report on the state of Mexican agriculture. The report was a damning view of recent Mexican agricultural policies.  Over the past three years Mexico has grown to become the US's fourth biggest agricultural market. According to US agricultural exporters, Mexico's maize crop (which provides the country's staple food, tortillas) averages between 12m and 15m t a year, but demand from human beings alone runs to 22m t. Proceso claimed that the government would have to spend at least US Dollars 4bn on grain imports this year. The agriculture minister, Francisco Labastida Ochoa, said that the country would have to import between 8m and 10m t of food. He reckoned that this would cost at least US Dollars 1.9bn. Labastida claimed that the country's stocks of food were adequate: he said that the Compania Nacional de Subsistencias Populares (Conasupo) had four months worth of meat and grains in its stocks.  This may be an overestimate: farmers are beginning to demand back crops which they have sold to Conasupo: at General Frias, members of the Frente Democratico Campesino said that they wanted 1,900 t of beans back. They said that Conasupo had paid them only 1,940 pesos a tonne when the market price was 4,000.   Labastida also claimed that the government would not alter its policy of subsidising staple foodstuffs. He said that the tortilla subsidy alone would cost 6bn pesos this year.  Infrastructure strains. The huge increase in Mexican imports of grains is putting a heavy strain on the country's infrastructure. Recently 30,000t of maize could not be unloaded at the port of Coatzacoalcos for two weeks because there were not enough railway wagons to transport the grain.  Cycle. The government has admitted that this year's production of grains will be badly hit by the drought. Farmers have been unable to sow for the spring summer season. The worst hit states according to the government are Baja California Sur, Coahuila, Chihuahua, Durango, Nuevo Leon, Sinaloa, Sonora and Tamaulipas. The problems this year follow on from a poor crop last year. US figures, cited by Proceso, put last year's harvest in Mexico at 23.77m t of grains and oilseeds. This was 11% down on the previous harvest of 26.8m t. The Union Nacional de Organizaciones Regionales Campesinas y Autonomas reckons that this year Mexico's maize, wheat, rice and bean crops will be 13% down on 1995's. It reckons that the oilseeds crop will be 33% down. Unorca reckons that the country will have to import more than the regular 3m t of maize it has averaged over the past six years. The deputy trade minister has said that the government expects to import 5m t of maize and 250,000t of beans. According to Ricardo Celma, director of the Consejo Norteamericano de Granos Forrajeros, the Secretaria de Comercio y Fomento Industrial has already authorised maize imports of 7.3m t for 1996.  The government reckons that the drought in these states (the worst for 50 years) has prompted an increase in immigration. The government says that day-labourers have lost 25m working days because of the drought. Worries. Mexico has been using credit to help buy grain from US farmers. As part of the bailout package last year, the Mexican government got a credit line from the US Department of Agriculture of US Dollars 1.1bn which it has drawn down.  The problem this year is that US farmers are loth to allow grain to go to Mexico at subsidised rates. Ranchers in particular are putting pressure on the US government to halt the exportation of animal feed to Mexico. US ranchers say that the price of their animal feed has increased because of the drought in the Great Plains and that they have been forced to cut their losses by slaughtering cattle early. They now want the US to halt grain exports so that the price of feed can come down and they can start making a profit again. The US harvest this year is likely to be well down on last year's 275m t. The wheat crop this year is likely to be around 56m t (or 3m t less than last year. Wheat available for export is likely to be around 26.5m t (or 35% less than last year). The same sort of figures apply to maize.  Policy issue. The Mexican government is being criticised for having to spend so much on imports when it could avoid them by investing a fraction of the money in domestic agriculture. In particular, farmers say that the government should encourage banks to lend to agriculture. Farmers leaders, from the Congreso Agrario Permanente and the Union Nacional de Trabajadores Agricolas, claim that bank lending to agriculture has dropped by 50% since the economic crisis and the consequent increase in bad debts.  The Union Nacional de Organizaciones Regionales Campesinas y Autonomas recently distributed a report, Mexico y la Seguridad Alimentaria, which claimed that Nafta had severely damaged the prospects for 80% of Mexican farmers: the 3m ejidatarios and the 2.5m small farmers. Unorca also blames the agricultural reforms pushed through by the Salinas government (as a result of Nafta) for the fall in agricultural output. Essentially, the Salinas administration wanted to move from subsidising maize production to subsidising small maize producers.  The report reckons that the country will have to import a third of its food this year. This is despite a 29% fall over the past six years in demand for basic grains.  Dams: An official report by the Secretaria de Agricultura reported that at the beginning of June the country's 137 dams, which have a capacity of 135,000m cubic metres, held only 10,000m cubic metres of water. This is only 5m cubic metres more than the lowest figure ever recorded. The water levels at the beginning of June were 15,000m cubic metres below the normal level for this time of year and 15,000m cubic metres below the levels of a year ago. In round figures, the dams now hold 68% less water than they did a year ago. Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNetJuly 18, 1996 MEXICO: GAS: PRIVATE PIPELINES: 10 NETWORKS The government is inviting bids from the private sector for the construction of 10 new pipelines to supply industrial zones with natural gas.  One of the most attractive franchises will be to supply Mexico City. Its 16m people use 350m cubic feet a day. Guanajuato also looks promising: its industrial zones at Leon, Salamanca, Celaya and Irapuato are also heavy users of gas.  The government hopes that bids will be made over the next 18 months and that the licences will be awarded and work will start at the end of 1997.  Pemex: The government's second attempt to sell off the country's petrochemical industry is not going well. Even the government admits that there are lacunas in the documentation.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNetJuly 18, 1996 MEXICO: THE UNIONS: TEACHERS' DEMO ENDS IN VIOLENCE: MEXICO CITY POLICE chief sacked The President sacked Mexico City's police chief at the end of May after his brutal crackdown on a teachers demonstration in the capital. To the horror of the opposition the new police chief is General Tomas Salgado. Salgado further alarmed the opposition by saying that he in turn would appoint soldiers to the principal police jobs in the capital. The dissident teachers were demonstrating for higher wages. They wanted a doubling of their US Dollars 150 a month salaries. Their union had settled for a 10% rise in January and a further 12% rise in May.  The official teachers union, the Sindicato Nacional de Trabajadores de la Educacion, is one of the most powerful unions in the country. Its head, Elba Esther Gordillo, has been mentioned as a possible president of the ruling Partido Revolucionario Institucional. The teachers have embarrassed  President Ernesto Zedillo before when he was minister of education. They forced him to withdraw a revisionary history textbook that put a positive gloss on the Porfirio Diaz period. Earlier textbooks had focused on the Revolution, which followed Diaz's fall, as laying the basis for modern Mexico.  The demonstration against the smallness of the pay award was led by the dissident Coordinadora Nacional de Trabajadores de la Eduacacion. The police argued that they had been attacked, but the President, in sacking the police chief David Garay, said that they had used too much force.  Fears that the country might be facing a wave of labour unrest are abating. The university teachers at the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico have settled for the 12% increase offered.  On the other hand the Sindicato de Telefonistas is taking a tough line with Infonavit, the state organisation charged with supplying cheap housing. The union says that Infonavit has not been offering mortgages to telephone workers in proportion to the worker's contributions.  The telephone workers' union is one of the strongest in the country. It has survived the privatisation of the state telephone company, Telmex. The union's leader, Francisco Hernandez Juarez, has long squabbled with other unions which he sees as arms of the ruling PRI. The telephone workers' union is also concerned that Infonavit has not invested the money collected from workers wisely. Most of the money is currently held in low-yielding government bonds. The union wants its members' contributions to be invested in higher yielding (but not speculative) instruments.  Colosio killing: The judge has said that he will take another month to decide whether Othon Cortes Vazquez was in fact the man who fired a second shot in the murder of Luis Donaldo Colosio. Colosio was the ruling PRI's presidential candidate. He was killed on 23 March 1994 in Tijuana. Othon Cortes's lawyers argue that the prosecution case is weak: they point out that the only witness who says that he saw Cortes fire a shot was 17 metres away. Another two witnesses who claimed to see Cortes brandishing what looked like a gun could not agree on his appearance. The defence also noted that the prosecution had not found the gun that Cortes was supposed to have fired, nor had they produced any forensic evidence to suggest that he had fired any gun.  The prosecution alleges that Cortes fired into Colosio's body while the convicted assassin, Mario Aburto, fired at Colosio's head. The Procuraduria General de la Republica said that the investigation into the supposed plot behind Colosio's assassination would continue to be run by Pablo Chapa Bezanilla, even though he was now moving to be subprocurador de procedimentos penales.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO & NAFTA REPORT  via NewsNetJuly 18, 1996 MEXICO: FOCUS ON THE SALINAS BROTHERS: THE PRESSURE MOUNTS The scandal over the way Raul Salinas de Gortari, the elder brother of the former President, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, acquired his wealth refuses to die down. At the end of June, following a couple of US TV investigations into Raul's finances, the procurador general de la Republica, Antonio Lozano Gracia, announced that the Mexican authorities were investigating to see whether Raul had committed tax evasion. He is already in prison, accused of being the mastermind behind the assassination of the secretary general of the ruling Partido Revolucionario Institucional, Jose Francisco Ruiz Massieu. According to the investigation, broadcast on CBS, Raul had used false identities to accumulate US Dollars 300m in bank accounts outside Mexico. The implication is that Raul used his position as a senior official, and his relationship with his brother, for his own purposes. A programme on NBC implied that the President knew of this. The procurador said that his investigation had already discovered that Raul had understated his assets in Mexico alone by US Dollars 24m. In his position at the Comision Nacional de Subsistencias Populares, Raul's annual income should never have exceeded US Dollars 190,000.  The procurador is coming under pressure to take evidence from Amy Elliot, Raul's banker at Citibank. She is presumed to know more about Raul's finances than anyone else. CBS claimed that she had already been 'secretly' interviewed by officials from Mexico, the US and Switzerland about her client. CBS said that she had checked into Raul's background and been told that the money he was depositing came from the sale of a construction company. The procurador also claimed that the notion that Raul was involved in drug trafficking comes from the US Drug Enforcement Agency.  According to an article in La Jornada, which seems to draw on information that Raul gave to the Swiss authorities when they interviewed him in gaol last year, US Dollars 86m of his fortune was payment for advice he gave Mexican firms. Raul apparently said that this money would be used to set up an investment fund to promote Mexican economic development after his brother left office. This chimes with what Carlos Peralta, the head of Iusacell, a mobile telecoms company, said in January: he said that he had paid Raul US Dollars 50m towards a fund.  Property: Before the programmes were broadcast the authorities seized 13 of Raul's properties on the Pacific coast. He has 10 apartments and two building lots in Ixtapa-Zihuatanejo and one apartment in Acapulco. Carlos: The government tried to deny that it has dismissed its ambassador to Ireland, Agustin Gutierrez Canet, for sponsoring the interview between the commentator, Jorge Castaneda and the former President, Carlos Salinas. It said that it had offered Gutierrez Canet the ambassadorship to Haiti which he had turned down.  The foreign minister, Jose Angel Gurria, said that the ambassador had lost the government's confidence and that the Irish post was important since Ireland held the presidency of the EU for the second half of 1996. Wages: The government said that claims from the independent Alianza Civica that President Zedillo's pay had trebled to 82,000 pesos (US Dollars 10,900) a month over the past 18 months were nonsense. It said that the President's pay had in fact dropped from 124,372 pesos (US Dollars 16,583) to 59,139 pesos (US Dollars 7,885) a month. The Alianza was equally surprised when the presidency claimed that President Salinas had been paid US Dollars 36,050 a month. The Alianza thought he was being paid US Dollars 4,000. Back to Headline List WT03-B06-9IA087-000634-B041-178http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it10.html 205.156.212.5 19970122030711 text/html 62935HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:05:12 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:26 GMTContent-length: 62748Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it10.html Sample Issue Copyright MEXICO SERVICE via NewsNet July 10, 1991 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SPECIAL REPORT DIVIDED OPPOSITION: THE PAN (2783 words) GENERAL ECONOMY BANAMEX PUT UP FOR BID (453 words) SWELLING CONTINGENCY FUND (88 words) FINANCE PEMEX ISSUES ECU BOND (259 words) FREE PESO FUTURES (170 words) TRADE AND INDUSTRY COMERCIAL MEXICANA DEAL (183 words) KOREAN AUTO INVESTMENT (73 words) LABOR PEASE LETTER ON FORD LABOR PRACTICES (552 words) POLITICS NUEVO LEON ELECTIONS (1441 words) ELECTION DEBATE INTENSIFIES (351 words) SALINAS TOUR OF EUROPE (428 words) MARKET REPORT EXCHANGE AND METALS (62 words) INTEREST RATES (42 words) STOCK MARKET (192 words) SPOTLIGHT ON . . . MEXICAN STOCK MARKET: FIRST SEMESTER 1991 (2292 words) CopyrightMEXICO SERVICE via NewsNetJuly 10, 1991DIVIDED OPPOSITION: THE PANAs campaigns for the gubernatorial and midterm congressional electionsmove into the final stretch, the PRI could hardly be in a better position.Deep divisions have been reactivated within both major opposition parties-- the rightist National Action Party (PAN) and the center-leftDemocratic Revolution Party (PRD), as their leaders battle overcandidacies and campaign strategy.  The bitter fights waged in partyconventions have exacerbated factionalism and created confusion amongparty rank-and-file, while publicly displaying the two top oppositionparties' disorganization and lack of definition.  Needless to say, the PRIand government publicists have hammered these points across in the printand electronic media.While no one expects the opposition to gain ground in this year'selections, to be held on August 18, the voting outcome will be highlysignificant.  First, the PRI sees it as absolutely vital to recovervotes lost in 1988 to verify its historic claim of being "the partyof the 74 majorities." If the PRI can win more than 50% of the votecleanly, so much the better.For their part, the PAN and PRD are locked in a bitter battle to securethe position of the nation's second strongest electoral force after thePRI.In the 1988 elections, the National Democratic Front (the pro-Cardenas,four-party coalition) overtook the PAN to become the strongestopposition force, winning 31% of the national vote in the presidentialrace, according to official statistics.The strength of the Front forces (now registered as the PRD) has rankledthe administration ever since, because Cardenas's strong showing in theofficial vote count caused Salinas's legitimacy to be questioned when hetook office.  Since the beginning of this year, senior PRI officials haveconfidently predicted the demise of the Cardenista PRD party in thisyear's elections, asserting that the PRD will only get 15% of the vote.PRI leaders see similarly dim prospects for the PAN, and they predictthe conservative party will "return to its historic levels" of perhaps 20%of the vote.The best chances for significant opposition victories -- numerical ormoral -- lie in the gubernatorial races (see Mexico Service April 10,1991).  In San Luis Potosi, a broad opposition front, the CoalicionDemocratica, which includes the PAN and PRD and other political and civicgroups, is considered a serious challenger to PRI candidate Fausto Zapata.(It would hurt the administration little to sacrifice Zapata, who isidentified with the administration of former President Luis Echeverria;other Echeverria associates --like Colima gubernatorial hopeful SocorroDiaz -- are being sacrificed as part of the Salinas administration'smessage that the liberal wing of the PRI is dead.)In Guanajuato, PAN candidate Vicente Fox is considered a strongcontender against the PRI's Ramon Aguirre, an unpopular formerMexico City mayor who has weak ties in the state.  The surprising, last-minute registration of PRD candidate Porfirio Munoz Ledo (see XI-13),however, opens up new scenarios.  According to some observers, MunozLedo could come in second after Aguirre.  This would represent a moralvictory for the PRD, particularly because Guanajuato is traditionally aPAN stronghold, being one of the Catholic bastions dating from the daysof the Cristero war.  Perhaps more importantly, if Fox is relegated tothird place, this sends a devastating message to the PANistas, like Fox,who oppose negotiating with the PRI government.In the senatorial races, the only major contest where the opposition hasa strong chance of winning is in Mexico City.  Observers now say thePAN contender, Vicencio Tovar, could upset PRI challenger ManuelAguilera, who is a little-known figure in the mammoth capital.  PRDchallenger, Heberto Castillo, a former presidential candidate for the ex-socialist party coalition (PMS), is well known and well liked in thecapital and cannot be discounted.PAN and PRD are expected to win a modest number of Deputyships thatare elected by direct majority vote, particularly in their respectivestrongholds of Baja California, Sonora, Yucatan and Chihuahua, andMichoacan and Guerrero.  The strongest hopes for PAN and PRD arethe "proportional representation" or "plurinominal" contests in whichDeputy seats are apportioned according to the percentage of votes wonby each party in a congressional region (called "circumscription") thattakes in several states.  Proportional representation traditionally favorsopposition parties of all stripes because it grants seats to parties thatwon less than a majority vote.  (Indeed, proportional representation wasincluded in the 1970 political reform as a means of creating spaces foropposition participation and provides for a more pluralistic, lesshegemonic political system.)While PAN and PRD might each win dozens of proportionalrepresentation seats, neither party is expected to equal its take in the1988 races, which gave an unprecedented 110 seats to the PAN and closeto 50 seats to the parties that made up the National Democratic Front.Most observers predict the real winner at the polls will be what Mexicanwags call "the abstentionism party."  This group of non-voters typicallyranks high in all Mexican elections, and by tradition the congressionalraces evoke even less participation than the presidential contest.  Inthis, Mexicans correctly identify the presidency as the key office in theirpolitical system.In this SPECIAL REPORT, MS begins a two-part series focusing oninternal divisions in Mexico's leading opposition parties.  In this issue,we examine the splits afflicting the PAN.NATIONAL ACTION PARTYThe PAN regional and national conventions earlier this year underscoredthe divisions within the party between the neo-PANistas and the so-called"traditionalists," or "democratic forum."  In the last decade, andparticularly since 1985, the neo-PANistas have gained power in theparty, and this year they virtually secured control of all key leadershipposts and the overwhelming majority of congressional candidacies.ASCENDANCY OF NEO-PANISTASThe neo-PANistas are the businessmen-turned-activists who have pushedthe PAN to take a higher profile and challenge the government moreopenly.  As such, they have moved away from the more traditional,sedate style of a loyal opposition party adopted by the PAN from itsfounding in the 1930s through the mid-1970s.  The fiercest advocates ofthis position are wealthy northern ranchers who were infuriated -- andpolitically motivated -- by former President Echeverria's 1976confiscation of private ranches in the fertile Yaqui and Mayo valleys ofSonora state.  Former PAN gubernatorial candidate for Chihuahua,Francisco Barrios, and PAN President Luis H. Alvarez, a Chihuahuabusinessman, exemplify the neo-PANistas.The neo-PANistas are allied with and inspired by conservative forces,particularly the far-right civic group, Desarrollo Humano Integral,Asociacion Civil.  Today, the PAN has largely abandoned its traditionalrole of crying out against fraud, corruption and mismanagement in thePRI government in favor of a new tune.  Since President Salinas cameto power, he has preempted the PAN's program by deepening theeconomic liberalization program, hinting at an end to the agrarian reformlands (ejidos) and has begun courting the Roman Catholic church,allowing it greater latitude in society.  In this context, the neo-PANistashave been the first in Mexico's oldest opposition party to cooperate withthe PRI by holding regular meetings and negotiations with Salinas.Their strategy of alliance with the government is based on a congruenceof ideology with Salinas and the fact that the PAN secured anunprecedented 106 Chamber of Deputy seats (of 500 total) in 1988,giving the party the swing vote on issues such as constitutional reformsthat require a two-thirds majority.  Concomitantly, the PRI gained onlya 10-seat majority (with 260 seats), and was compelled to forge analliance with PAN in order to pass constitutional reforms.Seeking to capitalize on their newfound strength, the neo-PANistaseagerly entered into talks with the government aimed at influencingpolicy.  Early on, Salinas scored an important victory by gaining PANsupport for the constitutional reform that revised the electoral code andset the new rules that will govern the 1991 races.  Support for theelectoral reform is the single best example of how much the newlyascendant ideologues of the PAN are willing to compromise with thegovernment.  The electoral reform vote took place just three weeks afterformer PAN presidential candidate Manuel Clouthier died in a caraccident.  Clouthier was an adamant opponent of such collaboration andspecifically opposed voting with the PRI to pass the electoral reform.Neo-PANistas justify this action by saying that they demanded and gotgovernment compliance to formulate a new and clean voter registrationroll. In exchange, however, the PAN voted for electoral rules thatlimit or close off opportunities for opposition representation in thelegislature.  These are the "governability clause," which provides thatthe party winning 35% of the vote will automatically be awarded 50% plus1 of the Chamber of Deputy seats, and a prohibition on the formation ofelectoral coalitions.  Most analysts believe the governability clausefavors the PRI because no opposition party has ever been awarded morethan 31% of the count in official election results; they say the PRIwould not have supported the measure if it would harm its own interests.Also, the electoral reform bans the formation of coalitions, such as thefour-party National Democratic Front, which backed Cardenas and nearlytoppled the PRI in 1988.In exchange for collaborating on the electoral reform, the PAN hasreaped rewards on several fronts.  First, it has gained unprecedentedelectoral victories, most notably the governorship of Baja California.Central government collusion in the PAN win is suggested by the factthat PRI President Luis Donaldo Colosio went on national television toannounce the victory of PAN's Ernesto Ruffo at the same time that PRIleaders in Baja California were still debating the outcome.  Building onits newfound strength in the legislature, the party has become aninfluential mediator of government policy.The association with the ruling group has also bolstered the party'streasury -- a direct outcome of the ascendancy of the neo-PANistas, whooverturned the 50-year policy of refusing to accept money from thegovernment.  The PAN now receives financial support assigned it by theInterior Ministry in proportion to the number of votes won by the partyin national elections.It is doubtful that the PAN-PRI alliance will become a permanent featureof Mexico's political landscape, even though it has served Salinas'sinterests well.  The informal association became mutually beneficial in1989 when a shaken PRI, commanding a slim 10-vote majority in theChamber of Deputies, was obliged to seek cooperation to gain passageof constitutional reforms.  In a formal sense, the alliance has fallen intodisuse ever since the October 1989 electoral reform.  Since then, Salinashas not advanced a single legislative initiative that would require a two-thirds majority.  Additional constitutional reforms are probably beingheld back until after the new Congress is seated, with the PRI expectingthat more than two thirds of the seats will be occupied by loyal PRIistas.As a result, the August mid-term congressional elections could severelycurtail the PAN's newfound power.DISSIDENTS OR FORISTASThe rise of the neo-PANistas has been countered by a faction thatdefends the traditional PAN stance as an uncompromising oppositionparty that cuts no deals with the government.  The fissure widenedduring the debate about allying with the PRI to approve the electoralreform.  The PANistas who opposed that alliance have formed a groupcalled the Foro Doctrinario y Democratico.The Foristas oppose negotiations with the government and are pressingfor greater rank-and-file participation in party conventions and selectionof party nominees, and in the political system as a whole.  On the issueof electoral fraud, the Foristas follow the lead of Clouthier, who stagedhunger strikes to protest fraud and steadfastly refused to negotiate withthe PRI government any compromise regarding electoral procedures andoutcomes.  In this, they are similar to the so-called "intransigent"faction in the PRD, which is identified with Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, whoadamantly refuses to meet with President Salinas for private talks,demanding instead that talks with the government be conditioned on theprior setting of an agenda.Indeed, two prominent Foristas have joined the "National Accord forDemocracy," a pluralistic group launched by Cardenas that calls forclean elections and negotiations to set the terms of a peaceful transitionto democracy.  For the coming August elections, the Foristas call for notalks between the national PAN leadership and the government that coulddecide outside the ballot "on the outcome of congressional andgubernatorial races."Foristas have occupied important leadership posts in the party in recentyears, from which they have been able to confront directly the neo-PANistas.  Mexico City PAN President Jose Angel Conchello and NuevoLeon PAN leader (and former presidential candidate) Pablo EmilioMadero are Foristas who have led head-on confrontations withideological opponents in the party.  Other leading figures of the dissidentgroup include former party Secretary-General Jesus Gonzalez Schmal,Deputy Bernardo Batiz, former Federal Election Committee delegateJuan de Dios Castro and Mexico City Assemblyman and former PANpress spokesman Gonzalo Altamirano.Guanajuato gubernatorial candidate Vicente Fox is also a Forista.  Foxis an important figure in PAN because the party generally lacks strongcandidates for senior elective offices.  Fox is considered a seriouscontender for that governorship, thanks to his personal dynamism, hisrepeated stumping of Guanajuato state and the flatness of PRI candidateRamon Aguirre and internal PRI squabbles.  However, Fox'sidentification with the Forista cause worries the party's national leaderswho, it is said, are willing to sacrifice him order to cement the neo-PANistas' stranglehold on the party.Foristas who campaigned to run as PAN candidates for Congress wereblocked in their bid for nomination at both the national and Mexico CityPAN conventions.  At the national convention, the National ExecutiveCommittee vetoed the candidacy of Jesus Gonzalez Schmal, a formerDeputy, as a Mexico City Assemblyman.  Gonzalez Schmal had won68% of the convention's vote for his nomination.  Forista Jose AngelConchello opted to withdraw from the competition for proportionalrepresentation slots after he was excluded from the party's list of pre-candidates.  At the Mexico City convention, rivalries between the twofactions were opened wide when neither Abel Vicencio Tovar, a neo-PANista, nor Forista Bernardo Batiz captured the necessary 66% of thevote for securing the nomination.  In two rounds of voting, Batiz won52% against 48% for Tovar.  However, Tovar came out the nomineewhen the issue was put to a vote by the National Executive Committeewhich defeated Batiz, 13 to 3.  Batiz blames his defeat on his activismas a Forista.The rough handling of Foristas has precipitated a predictable airing ofthe party's dirty linen in public.  Gonzalez Schmal has publicly protestedthe veto of his candidacy (which the party's senior leaders refuse toconfirm), claiming that he was given no reasons for the rebuff.  In earlyJune, Batiz announced his resignation from his post as vice-coordinatorof the PAN delegation in the Chamber of Deputies.  His resignationcame after Tovar, PAN's congressional coordinator named two non-Foristas as vice-coordinators to take over his responsibilities while hecampaigned for the Senate.  At the same time, a letter circulated amongPAN Congressmen calling for the resignation of Batiz from thecoordinator post.  Batiz has launched barbs at the party, saying it isrunning for the distinction of being the "second official party" after thePRI.CONCLUSIONFacing the upcoming elections, PAN's national leadership is in a hopefulmood.  Party President Alvarez confidently predicts the PAN will takefive governorships: Vicente Fox in Guanajuato; Rogelio Sada Zambrano,in Nuevo Leon (see POLITICS); coalition contender Salvador Nava inSan Luis Potosi; Moises Canale, in Sonora; and Arturo Nava Bolanos inQueretaro.  In addition, party leaders believe that PAN candidates willwin 74 direct majority deputyships (primarily in Baja California,Chihuahua, Guanajuato, Jalisco, Mexico City, Nuevo Leon, San LuisPotosi, Sinaloa, Sonora and Yucatan).However, most political observers expect the PAN will win only onegovernorship outright -- perhaps Guanajuato -- and, at most, a secondstatehouse in coalition with the PRD in San Luis Potosi.  And takingeven 74 deputyships would still leave the PAN delegation diminished incomparison with its showing in 1988.This year's races are likely to be even tougher for the opposition than1988.  The PRI campaigns are more intense, as the ruling party isforewarned this time about popular discontent, and is taking stepsthrough populist spending programs to woo voters.  The divisions withinthe PAN can only debilitate the party on the eve of elections that arelikely to bring setbacks for the conservative party.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO SERVICE via NewsNetJuly 10, 1991BANAMEX PUT UP FOR BIDWith Banamex formally put on the block on July 2, the bankprivatization goes into full swing.  In a press conference on July 4,Finance Undersecretary Guillermo Ortiz, in charge of bankprivatizations, announced that all these privatizations should becompleted in the first half of 1992.The government will sell off its 70.7% holding in Banamex, the largestand most profitable in Mexico, in several tranches.  The sale conditionsdiffer from those of the other banks so far offered, owing to Banamex'ssize and relative importance.  Some 31% of its shares will be offeredthrough an auction mechanism; another 20% will be offered to directorswho form part of regional boards and already have expressed an interestin participating.  The winning bidder will have the right to the shares nottaken up by the regional directors.  The remaining 20% may also bepurchased by the winning bidder in order to attain the 51% necessary foroverall voting control -- although it is likely that most of this will beplaced, subsequent to the award of the controlling stake, with foreigninvestors.Payment terms for the auctioned shares are: a deposit (in Cetes) ofMex$150 billion (US$50 million) prior to the auction on August 23; 20%of the bid price to be paid five days after the award; and four other equalinstallments at 30 day intervals after that date.  Bids are due to beawarded by September 6.Banamex currently has a market capitalization of approximately Mex$12trillion (US$4 billion), implying that 20% would cost US$800 million.With a net worth of US$1.8 billion, this implies a current ratio of priceto net worth of 2.2 times: should the bank go for 2.5 times net worth,as is expected, this would represent an overall value of US$4.5 billion.The bank's Mex$78 trillion (US$25 billion) in total assets represents25% of the Mexican banking system, and its profits for the first fivemonths of 1991 were Mex$512 billion (US$170 million).  Withannualized profits of approximately US$400 million, this would putBanamex's prospective P/E at current market levels at 10 times earnings.Key bidders for Banamex are likely to be Roberto Hernandez and theAccival brokerage; Manuel Senderos and the Grupo Desc (to whom weunderstand that Alberto Bailleres, a major industrialist, has alliedhimself); and the Visa group, headed by Eugenio Garza Laguera (whichalready has all elements of a financial group, except a bank, throughGrupo Vamsa, and formerly owned Banca Serfin).  Hernandez, who wasthe underbidder in the Telmex auction, is currently the favorite forBanamex.  However, Desc has a good chance.  The Visa group isconsidered to be more interested in recovering its former bank, Serfin.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO SERVICE via NewsNetJuly 10, 1991SWELLING CONTINGENCY FUNDGuillermo Ortiz also stated that the Contingency Fund, formed as a kindof reserve to protect Mexico against oil price fluctuations has alreadyamassed US$4.5 billion.  Funds have come from the Telmexprivatization (both the controlling stake and L shares), which havebrought in approximately US$4 billion, and some of the proceeds(estimated by the government at US$632 million) from the three banksalready sold off (Multibanco, Banpais, Cremi).  With only half the yeargone, the government has practically achieved its US$5 billionprivatization target for this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO SERVICE via NewsNetJuly 10, 1991PEMEX ISSUES ECU BONDIn the first such bond issued by a Latin American borrower, Pemexplaced an ECU100 million bond in the Eurobond market, according toa July 5 announcement.  The bonds have a term of 3 years, a coupon of11.5%, and were priced at 100.05, giving a yield of 11.48%, equivalentto 9.68% in dollars.  The lead manager was Paribas, with co-managersSwiss Bank, Bear Stearns, Banque Bruxelles Lambert, Bankers' Trust,Deutsche Bank, JP Morgan and Merrill Lynch.This latest bond issue follows a total of US$650 million raised throughseven issues by Pemex, Nafin and Bancomext in 1990.  The coupon isthe lowest yet achieved by a Mexican state borrower.  It represents thebeginning of a second financing stage for Pemex.  In the first, the stateoil company sought to reestablish its image as a borrower in internationalmarkets (after the 1982 debacle): the second stage is intended to fund itsexpansion program.  Pemex plans to raise US$500 million annually overthe next four years, which would cover at least 10% of its investmentprogram during that period.The "voluntary" return by Mexican borrowers to the international marketis considered by the Mexican government as a sign that the debt crisis isover.  The key change from 1978-1982 borrowing patterns is that, sofar, all Mexican financings have been made through bond and equitymarkets.  This approach offers marketable instruments and spreads therisk over a broad range of investors.  The earlier practice of direct bankborrowing, which concentrated the risk, led directly to the 1982 crisis.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO SERVICE via NewsNetJuly 10, 1991FREE PESO FUTURESThe market for exchange rate cover (coberturas cambiarias) was extendedto the free rate on July 1.  The new system has several limiting features:* Participants must be corporations in the private sector.* Settlement, although denominated in dollars, will only be in pesos.* Terms are between 72 hours and 365 days.* Rates will be set with reference to free rates fixed for Tesobonos(government short-term loan instruments denominated at the free rate).As of July 5, quotations for exchange rate cover at the free rate wereexactly the same as those for the controlled rate.The introduction of this market could lead to two positive outcomes overthe medium term for Mexico: unification of the free and controlled rate,and introduction of a more orthodox peso-dollar futures (or forward)market in Mexico.  This development, as well as the return to theinternational marketplace (see previous item) would mark the final stagesof rehabilitation of the Mexican economy following the 1982 crash.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO SERVICE via NewsNetJuly 10, 1991COMERCIAL MEXICANA DEALComercial Mexicana, one of three major Mexican supermarket chains(along with Cifra and Gigante), has associated with Price Club of the USin a 51-49% joint venture.  They plan to set up 12 stores, beginning inDecember, the first one to be located in the heavily populated middleclass suburb of Satelite in Mexico City. Comercial Mexicana, whichowns 75 stores throughout Mexico, went public earlier in 1991 on theMexican Stock Exchange.  Price Club operates 59 stores (51 in the USand 8 in Canada) on a wholesaling formula.  The initial plan for theMexican venture is to supply US-made products, but the new stores willbe gradually moving towards stocking Mexican merchandise.  Price Clubalready supplies several of Comercial's competitors in Mexico, and it isrumored that they have stopped these purchases since hearing of itslinkup with Comercial. Gigante, the other main supermarket chain, islikely list its shares on the Mexican Stock Exchange in July.  It intendsto make an up to US$200 million share offering through Inverlat (inMexico) and an international underwriting group led by Bear Stearns.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO SERVICE via NewsNetJuly 10, 1991KOREAN AUTO INVESTMENTKia Motors, Korea's third largest auto manufacturer, announced on June26 that it plans to invest up to US$2 billion in an auto assembly plant inthe state of Tamaulipas or Sonora.  Other major Korean chaebols(groups) that already have investments in Mexico include Daewoo(televisions), Hyundai (containers and trailers), Goldstar and Samsung(both electronics).  Korean companies are clearly intent on imitatingJapan in using Mexico as a platform for entry into NAFTA.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO SERVICE via NewsNetJuly 10, 1991PEASE LETTER ON FORD LABOR PRACTICESUS Congressman Don Pease (D-Ohio) is preparing a letter to PresidentCarlos Salinas questioning the handling of a recent labor dispute at theFord plant in Mexico City.  Pease is a member of the House Ways andMeans Committee, the key committee with oversight over the free tradenegotiations.  His inquiry into Mexican labor practices, as reported bythe official news agency Notimex, could set a precedent for ongoing UScongressional questioning of the Mexican government for the duration ofthe FTA talks.The letter will express the congressman's concern about the dispute overwhich labor confederation is to represent Ford employees.  Copies of thePease letter will be sent to the US Trade Representative, senior officersof the Ford Motor Company and the United Automotive Workers union.The Pease inquiry stems from a year-long dispute over whether the Fordworkers would be represented by the PRI-affiliated Confederacion deTrabajadores Mexicanos (CTM) or by the less official ConfederacionObrera Revolucionaria (COR).  Earlier this year, the CTM allegedly wonthe majority of workers' votes to renew its control of the union.However, COR-affiliated workers, who claim to have the allegiance of55% of the 3,000-plus members, demanded a recount. Official results inthe June 3 reballoting gave a slim majority to the CTM -- with 1,325votes against 1,112 for the COR.  That narrow margin has raisedquestions in many quarters.  PRD congressmen denounced the recountin advance, revealing that Labor Minister Arsenio Farell had intervenedto favor the CTM.  They disclosed a letter signed by Farell in which herequested Trade Minister Jaime Serra Puche's "intervention to makeFord see the grave consequences it would bring to lose."  Several daysbefore the new balloting, Senator Paul David Wellstone (D-Min.)expressed his concern about the fairness of the recount procedure in aletter addressed to Mexican Ambassador to the US, Gustavo Petricioli."From my point of view, the letter [of Farell] puts in serious doubt theimpartiality and fairness of the preparation of the election forrepresentation of the Ford plant.  I am very worried that undergroundintimidation, such as open violence, not be repeated in this conflict," theSenator wrote, alluding to attacks by shock groups on the union picketlines on Jan. 8, 1990 that ended in the death of one worker, CletoNigmo Urbina.  On the day of the recount, workers had to make theirway through police lines manned by traffic cops, anti-riot squads,highway police and judicial police and Interior Ministry agents to casttheir ballots while helicopters flew overhead.Following the alleged CTM victory in the recount, workers supportingCOR were threatened with loss of their jobs.  The CTM has demandedthat COR backers who want to continue working at the Ford plant mustsign a letter which says: "...due to confusion or lack of thought, Iexpressed my vote (in the June 3 recount) in favor of the COR, however,in reasoned reflection I have reached the consideration of accepting fullymy union discipline as much for the organization I belong to...as for theCTM, which has always been characterized by its defense of workers."As the free trade talks progress, more US Senators and Congressmenwith close ties to the US labor movement are sure to scrutinize Mexicanlabor practices very closely.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO SERVICE via NewsNetJuly 10, 1991NUEVO LEON ELECTIONSThe leadoff contest in the gubernatorial stakes, in Nuevo Leon, offers apreview of what to expect from the August 18 contests in the otherstates, hints at upcoming administration policy, and puts to the testgovernment promises that electoral procedures will be cleaned up (MSXI-13).  The outcome shows that charges of electoral irregularities areunlikely to be put to rest this year.As expected (XI-8), PRI candidate Socrates Rizzo held a strong lead overPAN and PRD challengers in preliminary returns from the July 7 NuevoLeon state gubernatorial elections.  With more than 60% of the votecounted, Rizzo had won 62% of the ballots, against 38% for PANchallenger Rogelio Sada and 3% for PRD contender Lucas de la Garza.According to official statistics, more than 50% of eligible voters casttheir ballots.  This is a high voter turnout for Mexico where abstentionrates of 65% or more are common in state elections.  Early returns hadno information on the outcome of the vote for 26 state congressionalseats.  The turnout for all parties other than the three leading contenderswas abysmal: 0.2% each for the Partido Popular Socialista and thePartido del Frente Cardenista de Reconstruccion Nacional, both satelliteparties controlled by the PRI; 0.1% for the Partido Autentico de laRevolucion Mexicana, another PRI satellite; less than 0.2% for theconservative Partido Democrata Mexicana and the locally based PartidoLiberal Revolucionario.The Nuevo Leon campaign was significant in that it was the first realthree-way race for governor in country's history.  Each of the candidatesof the three leading parties -- PRI, PAN and PRD -- is a prominentfigure, has roots in the state, and commands a strong base of support.In a sense, Rizzo was the least locally based of the leading challengers.He was launched as candidate for Monterrey mayor in 1988 by then-Programming and Budget Minister Carlos Salinas de Gortari.  Once inthe mayorship, and bolstered by official backing from the centralgovernment, he was able to preempt the governor in many functions, andsucceeded in completing public works programs that gained himpopularity. Rogelio Sada is a prominent business leader descended fromthe founding families of the Monterrey industrial establishment.  He wasCEO of the glass giant, Vitro, until six years ago when the firm ran himout for participating openly in PAN party politics.  He enjoys a strongfollowing among the PAN's traditional constituency, the conservative,pro-business upper class and the middle classes.Lucas de la Garza, PRD candidate, is the son of a popular formergovernor.  A cattle rancher, de la Garza served the previous governorfor five years as planning director and was the top cabinet official(Secretario de Gobierno) for the sitting governor, Jorge Trevino, until heresigned to protest corruption in government.  De la Garza's naturalconstituency is in the state's rural areas, but his charisma, home-stylecampaigning and reputation for honesty have gained him support inMonterrey as well. Rizzo's closeness to President Salinas lend a specialnote of significance to the governor-elect's pronouncements, which canbe interpreted as a signal of the policy thrust the Salinas administrationhas in mind for the remaining half of the sexenio.  At the July 2ceremony closing his campaign, Rizzo proposed a Pacto Nuevo Leonwhich, he said, would improve the standard of living in the state.  Theseven points of the Pacto are:* Internationalization of Nuevo Leon: make the state into a beachhead ofeconomic modernization in preparation for the FTA;* Decentralization and regional development;* Growth with order: improve urban transportation, emphasizing electrictransport;* Improve the quality of life: substitution of fuel oil with natural gas inindustry and promote supply of ecological fuels;* Safety and justice: create an office to defend citizens, set up a HumanRights Commission and a special appeals office to improve theadministration of justice;* Modernization of finances and public administration: renegotiate thestate debt, extending the repayment period and improving the interestrates;* Democratic Solidarity: "implement democracy as a form of life that isnot reduced to political and electoral aspects, end arrogance andarbitrariness of public officials."On a symbolic level, the close of the Rizzo campaign also sent someclear messages.  The ceremony, attended by 9,000 PRIistas, was held inCintermex.  This is the new international trade center built by the majorMonterrey enterprises on land donated by the government to serve as aconvention center and to house permanent exhibits of Monterrey industryproducts, including ordering and shipping facilities.  Rizzo tookadvantage of the setting to leave behind his former life as an activist inan ultra-left group related to the Spartacus League.  Seeking to touch allthe right buttons for his audience, Rizzo embraced the conservativeMonterrey values, saying, "I believe in the family as the essential pillarof society.  I believe in the enterprising spirit, in the strength andvalues of the work ethic that have created the Nuevo Leon of today."  In ahighly unusual statement for a PRIista, Rizzo overlooked the formalseparation of church and politics and said, "I believe in God above allthings."The Nuevo Leon gubernatorial and state congressional contest alsomarked the debut of the new federal voter registration list and votercredentials.  It thus provides early warning of problems that may beexpected to plague the six gubernatorial and nationwide congressionalraces on August 18.  Opposition parties of all stripes reportedirregularities that would permit fraud or prevent eligible voters fromcasting a ballot.  Political parties received the voter registration listlater than scheduled, allowing them minimum time to correct errors on thepadron.  PRD militants detected names that appeared three and fourtimes on the voter registration list. In addition, the list of designatedopposition party observers scrambled the names of poll-watchers andtheir respective districts, forcing opposition parties to work quickly tocorrect these errors.The Federal Electoral Institute delegate for Nuevo Leon, RobertoVillarreal Roel, reported July 5 that more than 228,000 voter credentialshad not been distributed, meaning that 15% of the state's 1,564,972voters were effectively disqualified.  Two days before the election, PRDcandidate Lucas de la Garza charged the PRI was organizing shockgroups to intimidate voters and "carrousel" operations to transport PRIsupporters to different voting booths to vote several times.  De la Garza,saying he had received information from high-ranking state PRI sources,claimed that the PRI had already decided how many votes it wouldobtain in various districts.PAN and PRD had arranged to run a joint operation on election day todetect and report election fraud and to compare voting results.  The twoparties agreed to "share" poll-watchers, with PRD militants covering thepolls in rural areas and PAN in charge of the greater Monterrey pollingbooths. The two parties will cross and compare information gathered bytheir poll-watchers about the vote counts at each precinct.  The electionwas to be watched by at least 150 observers gathered by the AsambleaDemocratica por el Sufragio Efectivo (ADESE), a national, pluralisticgroup formed by representatives of opposition parties, human rightsgroups and civic associations.Nevertheless, the elections themselves were marred by a series ofirregularities.  PAN candidate Sada Zambrano alleged that the ballots hadnot been appropriately signed by electoral officials at the state capital.There was a heavy voter turnout in two large townships governed byPAN mayors, but insufficient ballots available at voting booths: the StateElectoral Commission sent only 200 ballots to precincts that hadregistered 1,000 voters.  Throughout the day, "carrousels," traditionallyoperated by the PRI, were reported to be carrying voters to differentlocations to vote several times.  Poll-watchers from the PAN and PRDparties were expelled from several precincts.  In districts that areopposition strongholds, voters were allowed to vote without credentials,a move alleged to favor the PRI.  One person was arrested for stealinga ballot box and another charged with trying to organize a carrousel.Other serious irregularities reported in rural areas included no ballotssent to the rural town of Montemorelos, and in the towns of Mier yNoruega and Dr. Arroyo, the location of voting booths was scrambledso that citizens did not know where to cast their ballots.  By the close ofelection day, the PRD issued a list of 69 irregularities - although it isnot clear how much difference they would have made, while Lucas de laGarza, the PRD candidate, said it was too early to make a judgementabout them.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO SERVICE via NewsNetJuly 10, 1991ELECTION DEBATE INTENSIFIESThis experience will only intensify the growing controversy overelectoral procedures and the government's intention of democratizingMexican political life.  The PRD delegation in the Chamber of Deputiesproposed on July 3 that the August 18 elections be postponed untilSeptember 22.  The purpose would be to allow enough time to hand outcredentials to all eligible registered voters and to provide politicalparties with the voter registration list enough in advance of the elections toallow for corrections to be made.  The proposal is to be debated in theChamber beginning July 8.  As the preparations for the Nuevo Leonelection demonstrate, the government has been unable to meet either ofits self-imposed deadlines for handing out the voter registration lists ordistributing voter credentials to all eligible voters.Questions about the government's intentions are being raised anewbecause of recent statements made by President Salinas that indicate thateconomic reform takes a higher priority that political reform.  During histrip to Europe (see below), President Salinas stated that democracycannot become strong nor justify itself in the absence of appropriateeconomic conditions. "For that [reason] stability has a high priority,because without it the reforms of the productive apparatus, expectationsand even the social spirit (could) be placed at risk," Salinas told CzechPresident Vaclav Havel.  Also in Europe, Salinas reiterated hisadministration's refusal to admit international observers to elections.These comments sparked a sharp response from PAN President Luis H.Alvarez.  Speaking in Monterrey, at the close of the PAN  gubernatorialcamapaign, Alvarez said, "We will insist that in Mexico economicmeasures cannot be successful if they are not matched by an opening inthe political sphere.  A common effort between people and governmentis needed to face the challenges, and this can only take place in ademocratic setting."  Those thoughts were echoed by the director of theManufacturers' Chamber of Nuevo Leon, Mariano Montero Zubillaga,who commented that "We see some advances in political matters,although the ideal would be for those advances to be more rapid in orderto match the economic opening."Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO SERVICE via NewsNetJuly 10, 1991SALINAS TOUR OF EUROPEThe primary goal of President Salinas's early July swing through Europewas to seek foreign investment, particularly in Germany and Italy.  Thepurpose of the visits to the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia, accordingto sources close to the president, is to observe first hand thetransformation of those societies.In Germany, Salinas met with the presidents of Volkswagen andMercedes Benz.  Both automotive giants announced new investments:US$900 million to expand the VW plant in Puebla, and DM27 millionfor Mercedes Benz, which will begin producing light trucks in Mexico.In Germany, the two governments signed an agreement establishing amechanism for holding bilateral talks to strengthen cooperation, andanother arranging joint financing, with a German loan and Banobrascredits, for construction of a second light train line in Guadalajara.  Atthe conclusion of the German tour, Trade Secretary Jaime Serraannounced that more than 60 German firms have pledged to invest aboutUS$3 billion in Mexico over the next few years.During his brief visit in Czechoslovakia, Salinas met with PresidentVaclav Havel, and called for a European dialogue with Latin America.Reflecting on the contradictory forces of Balkanization that is breakingup European republics and globalization of national economies, Salinasaverred that foreign financing and opening of trade opportunities are thenecessary ingredients to bolster incipient democracies.  In this regard,Mexico sees the successful completion of the Uruguay Round of theGATT as critical, the president said.In his meeting with Salinas, Soviet President Gorbachev expressed hisinterest in deepening ties with Latin America and Mexico.  The two mendiscussed the free trade agreement, Cuba and the July 18-19Iberoamerican Summit to be held in Guadalajara.  Cuban President FidelCastro is to attend, which could lead to policy decisions about relationsin the hemisphere with the Castro regime.  In a press conference,Gorbachev announced that he will make a state visit to Mexico next year.The presidents signed agreements that provide for Pemex to offertechnical assistance in reconstruction of an oil refinery, setting up adirect telephone line between the two countries, and establishing jointcooperation in combatting drug trafficking.Salinas also held talks with Boris Yeltsin, president of the RussianFederation, and former Foreign Relations Minister EduardSchevardnadze, who resigned from the Communist Party hours after hismeeting with the Mexican president.Salinas was accompanied on his trip by leading Mexican businessmenincluding Carlos Slim, owner of Telmex, Claudio X. Gonzalez, directorof Kimberly Clark and presidential adviser on foreign investment, andRoberto Hernandez, head of the Accival brokerage.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO SERVICE via NewsNetJuly 10, 1991EXCHANGE AND METALSThe exchange rate continued to devalue by 40 centavos/day.  During theperiod, exchange cover for the free rate was introduced (see FINANCE),on the same lines as that for the controlled rate.  There was no differencein quotes between free and controlled rate cover.  This could be theprelude to an eventual unification of rates, but the government seems inno hurry.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO SERVICE via NewsNetJuly 10, 1991INTEREST RATESRates for 28-day Cetes backed up for two successive weeks, with 91-daypaper rising in sympathy, as the government mopped up liquidity withlarger Cete issues.  With projected real rates close to 6%, we considerit unlikely rates will rise much further.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO SERVICE via NewsNetJuly 10, 1991STOCK MARKETThe stock market index advanced by 3% over the period, although it isstill just off its June 6 high of 1,131.  The period began with a fall of28points (to 1,052) in sympathy with the Dow, itself influenced by theNikkei, which had plunged on the Nomura revelations.  It was choppyfor the rest of the week, closing on June 28 (the end of the month andthe semester) at 1,058.Influenced by the Dow, the market showed a strong upswing at thebeginning of the second week, with rises of 19, 18, 2 and 23 points onthe first four days of trading, before profit taking on July 5 pushed itback down to 1,114 at the end of the period. An analysis of the marketfor the second quarter and the first semester is provided in this week'sSPOTLIGHT.  In it, we continue to recommend 30% in stocks in:Cemex, Cifra, Codumex, Kimberly, Telmex and Ttolmex.There is no change in the overall MS portfolio recommendation:positions of 10% in Adjustabonos, 25% in Tesobonos, 30% in stocks,30% in money market instruments and 5% in BIBs.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEXICO SERVICE via NewsNetJuly 10, 1991MEXICAN STOCK MARKET: FIRST SEMESTER 1991Favorable developments on the financial and privatization fronts havelifted stock prices beyond the highs achieved in the previous quarter, andthe market still has plenty of momentum.  The Bolsa index shot aheadby 32% from April through June (up from 28% in the first quarter),cresting at a record 1,131 on June 6.  For the semester, the gain was68% in peso terms and 65% in dollars (see Table 1B in printed copy ofnewsletter).In this regular quarterly MS analysis of the Bolsa, we look at themarket's performance in the second quarter (see Mexico Service, April 10,1991 for first quarter results) and the first half of 1991, breaking downthe surveyby sector and individual companies.  Then we consider the factorsmoving the market, prospects for the remainder of 1991, and offer ourstock portfolio recommendations.SECOND QUARTER TRENDSThe market had closed the previous quarter at a record 803 points.(Note that the final three zeroes were removed from the index on May13; for purposes of this analysis, we have dropped these three digits forearlier figures retroactively).  That spurt was followed by four distinctphases in the market's behavior in the second quarter, with alternatingperiods of advances and consolidations.April 1-17: Scaling new heightsBy the end of the first week of April, the market had risen to 859 andcontinued on its upward course in the second week, reaching a new peakof 934 on April 17.  Fueling the drive were the bull market in the US,where the Dow broke 3,000 on April 17; generally favorable reviews ofSalinas's April visit to the US and Canada to promote the FTA; andmarket anticipation of a successful selloff of the government's TelmexL shares, which boosted the Telmex stock quotation.April 18-May 6: ConsolidationFollowing the explosive advances in the first half of April, the markettook a breather, mainly on technical grounds, through the beginning ofMay.  It had doubled back to 919 on May 6.May 7-June 6: Further advancesThe following period saw the Bolsa breaking a succession of records,propelled by two important developments.  One was the success of theTelmex issue as priced on May 13, reinforced by positive news for theFTA as two key US congressional committees rejected resolutionsblocking extension of the fast-track on May 14, and as other obstacleswere cleared away thereafter.  The index leaped from 931 on May 7 to993 on May 9, and attained a new closing high of 1,008 on May 13(without the index adjustment that day, it would have broken through theone million barrier).  By May 17, it had soared to 1,018.  The index wasfurther spurred the following week by positive fast-track votes in theHouse on May 23, putting it up to 1,045, and the Senate on May 24;  byMay 31,  it had reached 1,096.  The market crested on June 6 at an all-time peak of 1,131 (80% above its level at end-1990).June 7-28: Second RetracementFollowing May's extraordinary performance, the market went througha period of consolidation in June, dropping back to 1,080 by June 21.The main influences during this period were the announcement of thefirst three bank sales at higher prices than expected, which causedswitching on the margin between nonbank and bank stocks by someMexican investors.  A slight backup in interest rates also took its toll,as did profit-taking to cash in on the gains of the previous month.  Even so,the market closed the semester on June 28 at 1,058, only 6% off its all-time high.  This meant a 68% advance in pesos and 65% in dollars overthe end-1990 level.SECTORAL PERFORMANCESECOND QUARTERAgainst the average (index) increase of 32%, eight sectors came in aboveaverage and twelve below (see Table 2 in printed copy of newsletter).Only three sectors failed to keep pace with the 3% estimated CPI increasefor the quarter. The top eight groups were as follows: Banks, Construction,Insurance, Clothing, Brokerage, Food, Groups and Tobacco.  Financialconcerns (banks, insurance, brokerage) dominated the lineup owing toeuphoria over the bank privatization and the potential synergies from theformation of financial groups.  The Construction sector was spurred on bycontinued strong performances by the cement companies (Cemex, Ttolmex).Food was boosted by good results for Bimbo, and Groups by the big hikes inthe shares of Contal and Visa, whose main holding is Femsa.Metallurgy, Electricals and Engineering, at the other end of the scale,did not even beat inflation.  The primary cause of this weak performanceis the unmarketable nature of the stocks in the Metallurgy andEngineering sectors.  In the Electrical sector, share prices of telecomssuppliers (Ericsson, Indetel) also failed to lift off due to investorconcerns that Telmex, under new ownership and management, wouldsqueeze their margins.  Codumex also showed little positive movement.Several high capitalization, marketable sectors are clustered in the areaabove inflation, but below the average.  In the Utilities sector, Telmex -- with the dominant weighting -- turned in a moderate 26%.  In Steel,Tamsa's 24% increase also held down the overall sectoral results.Exporting sectors (Chemicals and Mining) continued to do relativelypoorly, pending confirmation of a US recovery.  Paper and Stores stocksadjusted downward after relatively strong performances in the previoustwo quarters.FIRST SEMESTERFor the first half of the year (see Table 3 in print copy of newsletter),there are just five sectors that beat the index increase of 68%, with 15sectors underperforming.  Only three sectors did worse than inflation,estimated at 9% for the period. The big advance in Construction stocksreflected a major catchup by Cemex and Ttolmex, which had underperformedthe market during the two previous years.  The surge in bank stocks isattributable to movement on  the  privatization  front;  when  the  firstthree banks were sold at multiples of price/book at least 50% higher thanhad been expected, the sector was revalued overall.  The strength showed byGroups reflected advances in Contal, Visa and Desc.  A major runup inTelmex prices prior to the latest phase of its privatization underpinnedthe move in Utilities.  Steel's good showing was accounted for byadvances in both Tamsa and Sidek (which still has about half its assetsin Steel, with the rest in tourism).At the bottom of the ranking, Mining stocks were damaged by softdemand for exports (stemming partly from the US recession), andspecifically by stagnant metals prices; all the key mining players(Penoles, Grupo Mexico, Frisco and Sanluis) underperformed themarket.  The next two sectors from the bottom, Electricals andMetallurgy, slipped badly in the second quarter, driving their first-halfpositions down.  The Electrical sector was undermined by the poorperformances of Indetel and  Ericsson, which were not compensated bya reasonable increase in Codumex.Beating inflation but still below average were: Drinks, Food, Brokerage,Insurance, Clothing, Tobacco, Consumer Goods, Paper, Engineering,Stores, Autoparts and Chemicals.  Of these stocks, the advance infinancial stocks (Brokerage and Insurance) in the second quarter did notovercome their relative stagnation in the first.  Meanwhile, of the mainmarketable sectors, Paper and Stores drew back from theiroverperformance in the previous year, while Chemicals continued to behurt by the US recession.INDIVIDUAL COMPANIESSECOND QUARTEROf our 88-company sample, 31 overshot the Bolsa's general advance of32% and 57 fell short of it (Table 5 in print copy of newsletter), while 29matched or fell below the estimated 3% inflation for the period.  Thefifteen stocks that did not move at all (0% increase) reflect mostly lackof marketability rather than price stagnation.Financial companies dominated the top ten stocks.  The sharp increasesin the price of Vamsa (insurance), Atlanti (bank), Cbobsa (brokerage),Confia (bank), and Promex (bank) all reflect the current euphoria aboutbank privatization and the formation of financial groups.  Alsooutperforming the index were Comermex, Banamex, Cremi, Bancen,Bacomer, Banorie, Serfin, Banorte, Banoro, Intenal and Inverlat.  Thismeans that 16 of the 31 companies that outdid the index were financialstocks.Nonbank high achievers were Visa, a holding company with illiquidstock whose price caught up with that of its key holding, Femsa; Cemex,whose profits were improved by price increases and reduced debt; Vitro,benefitting from the turnaround in Anchor; Sidek, boosted by investorperceptions that it is the only strong tourism play in the market; andTtolmex, benefitting from higher cement prices.In the below-inflation group, companies whose stocks are relativelyvisible and marketable include telephone suppliers (Ericsson, Indetel andLatinca), still subject to a squeeze from Telmex's new cost-mindedmanagement; mining companies suffering from weak metals prices (e.g.Frisco, Sanluis, Grupo Mexico, Penoles); and chemical exporters hit bythe US recession (Neromex, Celanese, Carbide, Borden). In the middle-range are companies that did not keep up with the index but still didquite well (by most country standards).  Femsa, Telmex, Cifra, Tamsa,Apasco, Kimberly and CMA stocks are marketable and a positive casecan be made for their prospects.FIRST SEMESTEROver the first semester, 21 stocks raced ahead of the 68% gain in theBolsa index and 67 came in behind it, with 33 of these stocksunderperforming estimated inflation of 9% (Table 6 in print copy ofnewsletter).Of the 21 highest-ranking stocks, there continued to be a preponderanceof financial institutions: Atlanti, Promex, Cremi, Bancomer, Banamex,Vamsa, Banoro, Serfin, Intenal.  However, unlike the second quarteralone, they are not generally among the top performers; other,nonfinancial stocks surpass them because of excellent performances inboth quarters.  These stocks include Cemex, Contal, Eaton, NadroSidek, Tremec, and Ttolmex in the top seven places, with Telmexplacing 11, Visa 12, Vitro 16 and Apasco 19.At the lower end of the scale are marketable companies in the Mining(Sanluis, Frisco, Grupo Mexico) and Electrical (Indetel, Ericsson,Latinca) groups.  The middle range contains several companies that didwell last year (Cifra, Sanborn, Kimberly, Crisoba) and appear to haveleveled off.MARKET FACTORSThe major trends of the first and second quarters overlapped for the mostpart, but with a marginally different emphasis.  The key driving forceswere as follows:* Mexican investors focused on banks and financial companies.  Theirinterest was only reinforced in the second quarter when prices under thefirst three bank privatizations exceeded the most optimistic estimates.This optimism spilled over into evaluations of most other financialcompanies and lead to a leveling off of nonfinancial stocks.* Foreign investor demand continued to set the tone for prices of non-financial stocks (foreigners may not buy bank or brokerage stocks, andinsurance stocks are illiquid).  Foreigners continued to focus on highlymarketable, high-capitalization stocks with strong product focus and adomestic orientation.  This explained the strength of companies such asContal and Sidek, the cement companies, and Telmex.  It also accountsfor the relative weakness of conglomerates such as Desc and Alfa).* Weakness in the stocks of internationally oriented companies.Chemical and mining operations continued to do poorly, as the marketremained uncertain about the duration of the US recession.PROSPECTSIn our last report (XI-8), we stated that if Mexico reaches a historicprice/earnings multiple of 20, it would imply an index level of 1,150.The index is not quite at this point yet, as we reckoned without theearnings strength of the first quarter.  The index peak of 1,131 wasreached on June 6, with a historic P/E we calculate at around 18 and aprice/book value ratio of around 180%.The outlook for further gains is favorable, as the same positive factorswill continue to operate in the market in the third quarter:* strong earnings growth for most companies in 1991 combined withbetter-than-expected GDP growth (higher than 4%);* continued price flexibility under the Pact, permitting higher operatingand net profit margins;* further reductions in nominal and real interest rates despite the currentblip (see MARKETS);* continued foreign investment in the Mexican market; and* ongoing improvements in capital market mechanisms.Factors that could put a brake on stock prices include an increase in thenumber of new stock issues, or a diversion of repatriated Mexican capitalaway from the stock market and into bank privatizations.  However, onmost fundamental valuations, the Mexican market is still rated lower thanmost Asian emerging markets with similar growth prospects.RECOMMENDATIONSOf the stocks in the MS portfolio, only two -- Cemex with 79% andTtolmex with 52% -- performed better than the average of 32% in thesecond quarter.  The other stocks advanced as follows: Telmex 26%,Cifra 25%, Kimberly 15%, and Codumex 6%.  Assuming an equalweighting in each stock, this provides an average return of 34% againstthe index average of 32%. Over the semester, the portfolio did evenbetter.  Stock gains have been: Cemex 210%, Ttolmex 121%, Telmex92%, Cifra 60%, Kimberly 39%, and Codumex 38%.  Again equallyweighted, this would produce an average return of 93%, against themarket index of 68%.Given the continued positive outlook for the market, we still recommendretention of the existing portfolio at 30% (cost) in stocks.  We still havenot reached the point when out-of-favor stocks (Conglomerates, Mining,Chemicals) will return to popularity: this could occur before our nextquarterly report, and we will advise readers accordingly.  Therefore, ourrecommended peso stock portfolio remains invested in Cemex, Cifra,Codumex, Kimberly, Telmex, and Ttolmex.Back to Headline List WT03-B06-10IA087-000634-B041-295http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it142.html 205.156.212.5 19970122030902 text/html 384535HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:05:31 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:37 GMTContent-length: 384347Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it142.html Sample Issue Copyright NEW STRAITS TIMES via NewsNet September 16, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES By Georges, they're gorgeous! (504 words) Foreign film showcase (501 words) Your last chance to catch `Tanah Abang' (197 words) Just think: Childers, a true servant of justice (1645 words) Bolshoi Ballet set to mesmerise KL folk (570 words) Music magic from piano duo (639 words) First person: Why some films turn me into a wretched sob queen (746 words) Enlightening on AIDS (296 words) Rekindling passion in your love life (694 words) Bead stringer's adroitness draws the crowd (271 words) KL to play major role in R&D of renewable energy resources (379 words) KL to play major role in R&D of renewable energy resources (379 words) A new section on science and technology (130 words) Interview checklist (452 words) Health threat from poor alien worker screening methods (511 words) Picture perfect: Caring for the camera (707 words) Did you know: Did you know (270 words) Good to know: Good to know (416 words) Towards more open education (HL) (1281 words) Klang heartbeat: Motorcycle thefts getting serious (479 words) Many candidates seeking clarifications on functions (145 words) City sidewalks: Ugly attitude of urban indifference (1025 words) Town Planning head to perform duties of council secretary (277 words) Megat Junid heads Sabah Yang di-Pertua's honours list (457 words) Feedback: Letter: Towards a better bus service (387 words) Feedback: Letter: Bugged by flood problems (178 words) Penang takes court action against 10 for polluting rivers (394 words) Feedback: Letter: `Killer' Seremban junction (388 words) Feedback: Letter: One lane access problem (201 words) King sends National Day greetings to PNG (139 words) Concert in honour of Tamil poet (309 words) Stipe's report: Maszeli suspended three days (839 words) Carnival atmosphere at 3-on-3 tournament (385 words) Palm oil (150 words) Rubber (161 words) Berita Harian-EON East-West Tour 1996.: Cycling.: Domingo dominates stage five (516 words) Tin (93 words) Memo: The week that will be (394 words) Taking stock: Prestar may scale new highs in profit growth, turnover (879 words) Boardroom: Tradewinds (M) Bhd (47 words) Currency review: Currency review (325 words) Boardroom: Westmont Land (Asia) Bhd (68 words) Boardroom: Westmont Industries Bhd (53 words) Boardroom: L&M Corporation (M) Bhd (57 words) Boardroom: Insas Bhd (61 words) Technically speaking: KLCE CI's short-term trend shaping up well (833 words) Clean-up Day team clears up 620kg of rubbish (295 words) Using cards to pay toll by year 2000 (486 words) `Ban Singaporeans from buying food' (267 words) Hamdan: Open system a burden (291 words) Girl needs RM20,000 for heart operation (145 words) State aims to reduce number of poor families (426 words) Gold cheaper by RM3 per gm due to price war (373 words) Hotel Equatorial opens doors in Ho Chi Minh City (212 words) Memo: The week that was (847 words) Golden Valley expects RM20m from sale of lots (270 words) Emerging companies: Company profile: Saujana sees lots of opportunities waiting (1065 words) Electrolux aims for larger market share in Asean (683 words) Shop-offices in Kesuma Lakes available soon (155 words) Germany's Vega eyes Malaysian mart (229 words) RM1b sales expected form Lestari Perdana (269 words) Bank to expand savings products (381 words) Telekom gets Amalan Tepat jobs (162 words) First Islamic credit card in region launched by Arab-Malaysian Bank (461 words) Talking point: Don't fall into credit card trap with wild spending (833 words) Restructing to put TRI ahead in telecoms (669 words) Petronas set to issue third Yankee bond (184 words) My Wakil Rakyat and I: Paloh "to be back on fast lane when S46 members join Umno" (426 words) My Wakil Rakyat and I: The prince has big plans for placid Gua Musang (822 words) My Wakil Rakyat and I: Requests for land titles will test rep's abilities (333 words) RM150,000 grab from goldsmith shop (209 words) Bahasa: An appeal to private sector (461 words) 60 unwed pregnant women find shelter in Negri (309 words) My Wakil Rakyat and I: Rozali Isohak: A genuinely nice chap in politics (561 words) Squash.: Ong to skip Hong Kong doubles tour (307 words) Squash.: SRAM prepare players for England stint (434 words) ACC qualifier 1996.: Cricket.: Bangladesh outclass UAE (647 words) Hockey.: Yayasan see red despite victory (818 words) Women's soccer.: Sabah favourite for title (185 words) Climbathon.: Salagan's hat-trick (238 words) Sepaktakraw.: Pahang A win Sabah leg (221 words) Badminton.: Fancied Roslin too good for off-form Lo (409 words) Soccer.: Chow tells youngsters to prove their worth (454 words) Letter from Moscow: Enthralled by the change in seasons and fortunes (888 words) Asean Football Federation Championship Cup (September 1-15, 1996 : Singapore).: Soccer.: What they said (142 words) Asean Football Federation Championship Cup (September 1-15, 1996 : Singapore).: Soccer.: End of a fairy tale (895 words) Editorial: Bosnia votes to make or break (591 words) Letter: Artists as keepers of Malaysian national heritage (412 words) Letter: Desludging of septic tanks: IWK explains (283 words) Letter: JB council's reason for failure to pay its debt is a real joke (180 words) Letter: Arts or Science: Ringgit and sen is main issue (667 words) Outlook: Safety at workplace not for government to shoulder alone (418 words) Jitters over control by consortium (1074 words) Hanky-panky in garbage collection jobs (602 words) Concerted effort vital to maintain clean image of Langkawi island (608 words) Demand for inquiry into death of workers (187 words) A higher standard of cleanliness is needed (1659 words) Top Asian athletes among 3,000 for Terengganu run (237 words) Police launch city-wide campaign to fight crime (413 words) Fire razes factory, two houses (107 words) Fire Services Department to get new name, responsibilities (416 words) Pepsi contributes RM5,200 to Harian Metro contest (299 words) Call for more biographies to be written on past leaders (179 words) Spectacular dance contest (915 words) MAS wins bid to stage road race (189 words) New committee to hold meeting (412 words) Police urged to act fast against petrol bombers (501 words) Clinic by Ginn (112 words) Azean and son win top awards for roles in drama (395 words) Keen tussle expected for PJ honours (350 words) Three JB council officers told to explain (207 words) Rakan Muda `promotes a healthy lifestyle' (290 words) Getting students to study nature at park (275 words) Pahang to woo more tourists (386 words) Knockout tournament set to kick off Sunday (315 words) Team's dismal performance (174 words) RM100m request to buy `naltrexone' (309 words) Driving licence: Minimum age stays (151 words) Ling: Spend quality time with the family (307 words) Selangor veterans score narrow victory (236 words) Kelana Jaya vs Bavani in final (140 words) `Study wage disparity between expatriates and Malaysians' (164 words) Buddhist temple holds food fair (180 words) Annual charity bazaar by Aussie, NZ women (134 words) Boost for musical production (301 words) Ceremony to mark opening (138 words) Celebating with the less fortunate (336 words) Certain KL roads to have gazetted bus lanes (391 words) Low cost homes for villagers (345 words) Video game machines seized in raid (631 words) Fines reflect indifference to City Hall regulations (457 words) Lunch-cum-prize presentation (267 words) Insurance men meet (455 words) Silently Yours reigns again (369 words) CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996By Georges, they're gorgeous!from NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 1By Hisham HarunWHEN my two friends and I were invited by French fashion export agentBeatrice Bostyn to view several items from Georges Rech's latestFall/Winter accessory collection from Paris, we didn't quite expect to bethoroughly bowled over.  So what if Rech was famed for integrating creativity with realism, orthat he was one of the pioneers to revolutionise ready-to-wear in theearly 60s... we've seen so many great designs by numerous top couturiersand so how much different could Rech be?  Then we saw his new line of bags, scarves, shoes and jewellery whichwere simply displayed on Bostyn's hotel room bed. We were captivated, tosay the least. Why, we even picked up some items with intent to buy.  Sweet as she was, however, the marketing executive who had brought theitems down with her couldn't help us here as she was assigned by hercompany, Anne Mucci, to look for potential Georges Rech distributors inthis region.  The items Bostyn had brought with her would have to follow her to thenext destination, Singapore, and then later to Hong Kong and "a few otherplaces" before going back to the world's fashion capital.  So there we were, clinging on to some of the most vibrant flowy floralsilk scarves, jewellery pieces, bags and shoes, feeling a taddisappointed.  Under Rech's establishment, big and bold jewellery that belonged to the80s looked nonetheless elegant and classy.  The smaller, simpler pieces looked chic and sophisticated while the moreartistic, almost avant garde ones, were contemporary, fun, stylish andmost importantly, still wearable.  Rech's jewellery - that formed bracelets, necklaces and earrings - tookon basic oval, round or square shapes and came either in matte silver orgold. Onyx and sparkling clear Swarovsky crystals were the main stonesused.  The belts were mostly slim, and came in shades of brown and black withsilver and gold detailing as well as the popular GR logo that didn't seemtoo loud or overbearing but gelled naturally with the overall look.  In keeping with current trends, one could see that Rech also includedPrada-like buckles and the ever-popular Paloma Picasso criss-cross in hisrange.  Both the shoes and belts collection in ebony conformed to the minimalistrequirements of all that's classic and refined.  Besides the generous flower prints, most of his designs for the scarveswere presented in a delicious offering of brown and red hues. Ribbons andfruits were also the main focus.                       Pix: Bold baubles ... An attractive selection of chunky jewellery fromRech.-By Wong Sung Jeng.Pix: Fabulous fabrics ... Fruits and flowers are Rech's main themes.-ByWong Sung Jeng.Pix: Classic and refined ... Chic shoes from Rech's latest collection.-ByWong Sung Jeng.Pix: Black beauties ... These stylish sling bags certainly have class.-ByWong Sung Jeng.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Foreign film showcasefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 4By Tan Ling AiKELAB Seni Filem Malaysia, in co-operation with the foreign missions inMalaysia, is organising the second International Film Festival, which endson Thursday. The film festival is being held at the British Council Hall(BC) in Jalan Bukit Aman, Kuala Lumpur, and HELP Institute (HI) inDamansara Town Centre.  The list of films are:  * Hot Lemon Tea (Cha Forte Com Limao) from Portugal, a family dramaabout murder, incest and the supernatural set in 1870. Will be screened atBC today at 6.30pm and at HI on Thursday at 8.30pm.  * Wild Daisy from Japan, a story about young love touched by tragedy.Tonight at BC at 8.30pm.  * A Winter's Tale from France, about a woman who could not get over anold summer romance and faces difficulties in choosing between two suitors.Tonight at HI at 6.30pm.  * The Confessional (Le Confessional), a Canadian movie concerning afamily and the skeletons in its closet. Tonight at HI at 8.30pm.  * According To Pereira (Sostiene Pereira), an Italian piece set in 1938Lisbon, about an old-time reporter whose chance encounter with a young manprompts him to question his choices in life. Tomorrow at HI at 6.30pm.  * The Boys From Fengkuei (Fengkuei Lai De Ren) from Taiwan, about thetrials faced by three youths who leave their fishing village to seek theirfortunes in the city. Tomorrow at BC at 8.30pm.  * Tata Mia (My Dear Nanny Tata) by Spanish director Jose Luis Borau,about a woman in her late 30s who turns to her old nanny when her troublesare more than she can handle. Tomorrow at HI at 8.30pm.  * Carl - My Childhood Symphony (Min Fynske Barndom) from Denmark, apoignant movie on the life of Carl Nielsen, one of the greatestsymphonists of the 20th century. Wednesday at BC at 6.30pm.  * Ballad Of A Soldier (Ballada O Soldate) from Russia, about the plightof a Russian soldier who falls in love with a country girl during WorldWar II. Wednesday at HI at 8.30pm.  * Constance from New Zealand, a tale about an ambitious teacher whosefantasy life is influenced by images from the Hollywood films she loves.This leads her to act as if she is a character in a movie, with tragicresults. Wednesday at HI at 6.30pm.  * The Land Of Happiness from Finland, a nostalgic love story with atouch of comedy set in the early 1960s. Wednesday at BC at 8.30pm.  * Nikolaikirche from Germany, a political drama set in 1987 about thefight against oppressive totalitarian rule. Thursday at HI at 6.30pm.  * Yellow Earth from China, which is directed by Chen Kaige. Thursday atBC at 8.30pm.                       Pix: Russia ... Ballad of a Soldier.Pix: Finland ... The Land of Happiness.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Your last chance to catch `Tanah Abang'from NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 4By Shuib TaibTANAH Abang, a period play produced by Panggung Negara, will end its runat Auditorium DBKL tomorrow. The curtain rises at 8.30pm.  Tickets priced at RM10 can be obtained from Panggung Negara (tel:2943022) or Matic (tel: 2643929).  Scripted and directed by Onie Moraza, Tanah Abang tells of the Britishintervention in the administration of Perak in 1528. In order tostrengthen his position, Sultan Muzaffar Shah (played by Karim Latiff)decides to marry Tun Merah (Erma Fatima) and make her the new queen.  However, his intention is misconstrued. Tun Merah's parents and brotherthink he only wants her to fulfil his sexual needs, thus making her agundek or mistress. Tun Merah is naturally disgusted by the thought.Besides, she has a long-time fiance.  Also in the cast are veteran actor Zulkifli Zain who plays MegatTerawis, Sidek Husin (Anjang), Mustafa Abu Bakar (Pedro) and Wan Norazlin(Tun Perabu).                       Pix: In the spotlight ... Juhara Ayob (Puteri) and her maids.-By Yip HeeKheong.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Just think: Childers, a true servant of justicefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 6By Chandra MuzaffarONE of the most courageous and eloquent voices in the eternal struggle fora just world is silent.  Erskine Childers died of a heart attack on Aug 25 in Luxembourg hoursafter making an impassioned speech on his favourite theme - the importanceof UN reform - at the 50th anniversary congress of the World Federation ofUnited Nations Associations (WFUNA) of which he was Secretary-General. Hewas 67.  In the last few years of his life, Childers campaigned with relentlessvigour for a United Nations which in its structure and content wouldreflect the interests of the majority of humankind.  He wanted the UN General Assembly in particular strengthened because itwas that one political organ in the UN system that, theoretically atleast, treated each and every member state as an equal.  But the UN, he argued, should go beyond the nation state. It should,through the creation of a new tier, give real meaning to that fundamentalconcept embodied in the UN Charter, namely, "We, the peoples of the UnitedNations."  It was one of his great sorrows that the UN had been hijacked by thepowerful in the North, especially after the 1991 Gulf War. It was beingused against the nations of the South.  For Childers, the UN was vital for the well-being of the South or theThird World. It gave them the collective security that they needed in aworld dominated by the elites of the North.  In a 1993 essay, essay he noted that, "The arrival of the Third World inthe United Nations ... was a truly epochal, history-making moment ... forthe whole of humankind ... For it was the first moment in the entirehistory of human life on this planet when all of its societies could meetin one place, supposedly on terms of equality and mutual respect amongnations large and small, to strengthen common standards of behaviour andto develop and then implement all across the world common programmes forpeace, justice, and social and economic equity."  But Childers knew that if the UN had failed to realise the aspirationsof the people of the South, it was because the entire international systemwas weighed against the interests of the majority of humankind.  The intellectual, economic and social, and political frameworks had beenestablished in such a manner that they facilitated the dominance of theworld by a small minority located largely in the West.  Western intellectual domination, for instance, "closed down, placed in astraitjacket, all indigenous processes of intellectual enquiry andevolution of political and social institutions of most of humankind...Whole peoples were taught that nothing in their culture, however longproven and however vibrant, was any longer worth anything; that the onlyway to that condition called `progress' was to learn from their colonialmasters."  As he lamented the intellectual suppression of the South, so didChilders lambast the gross iniquities in the economic and social relationsbetween the North and the South.  He was never tired of highlighting that indisputable fact that in theNineties, the 20 per cent Northern minority controls 82.7 per cent ofworld gross national product; 81.2 per cent of world trade; 80.5 per centof domestic investment; and 94 per cent of research and development.  Childers would often quote the UN Development Programme which hascalculated that "the developing countries are losing over US$500 billion ayear in income that they could earn, because of protectionist barriersagainst the exports they try to sell to the North, because of Northernmanipulation of interest rates on their borrowings, and because of otherstructural inequities between the North and the South. That is to say thatthe policies of Northern governments are preventing the developingcountries from earning 10 times all the official aid they receive from theNorth."  For Childers, the political framework of the North-South divide was alsoa major cause of global tensions and conflicts.  He bemoaned "the imperial legacy of grafting the western centralistnation state onto every society in the world, whether or not thatstructure had the remotest relevance or "fit" to the value-systems of agiven culture."  It is partly because of this that ethnic conflagrations continue tobreak out every now and then in many post-colonial societies.  These conflagrations deeply troubled Childers which is why he oftenimplored the UN to develop mechanisms that could deal with ethnic andcultural conflicts.  The UN - its shortcomings notwithstanding - had a very special place inChilders' heart for it was in the UN that he built his career.  He joined the UN secretariat in 1967 and worked with almost every organand agency within the UN system in different parts of the world for 22years.  His last UN post was that of Senior Adviser to the UN Director forDevelopment and International Economic Cooperation.  After his retirement, he continued to travel all over the world talkingand writing about global injustices with that passion and commitment thatwas his trademark.  It was at one such conference on UN intervention and nationalsovereignty in Sigtuna, Sweden in May 1992 that I first met with ErskineChilders.  We met a couple of times after that and corresponded with one another.  When Just World Trust (JUST) established an International AdvisoryPanel, he was one of the first persons I approached to become a member. Heaccepted the invitation with much enthusiasm.  Later, in December 1994, he was one of the main speakers at the JUSTinternational conference on "Rethinking Human Rights" in Kuala Lumpur.  At the conference and in a television interview I did with him, Childersspoke in great detail about how crucial it was to organise and mobilisethe South to fight the injustices in the global system.  Indeed, fighting for justice was in the genes of the man. Hisgrandfather was a revolutionary who gave his life for the cause of Irishfreedom.  Executed by the British in 1992 for treason, Erskine Childers woninternational fame as the author of the classic, The Riddle of the Sands.  His son, also Erskine Childers, became President of Ireland and was alsoa steadfast advocate of social justice.  It is one of the sad ironies of life that the second Erskine Childersalso died after delivering a speech.  Coming from a family with such a strong love for justice, was it anywonder that the third Erskine Childers took up cudgels on behalf of theoppressed and the downtrodden?  It is significant in this regard that the cause that first attracted theenergy of the young Childers was Palestine.  His first book, Common Sense about the Arab World, was a product of thiscommitment. His second book, The Road To Suez: A Study In Western-ArabRelations, expanded the ideas in the first book and articulated profoundconcerns about inter-civilisational ties which remained dear to Childerstill the end of his life.  In more specific language, Childers felt that the West has been terriblyunjust in its treatment of Arab, and, in a larger sense, Islamiccivilisation.  The West has to this day sought to block out its collectiveconsciousness its immeasurable debt to the Arabs and Muslims for "the veryrise of Western civilisation itself".  Childers called this "the largest self-induced amnesia in humanhistory".  His incisive analysis of this phenomenon is contained in one of his mostbrilliant essays entitled "Amnesia and Antagonism" which JUST helped todistribute worldwide.  In it Childers employs meticulous scholarship to illustrate how inalmost every sphere of human activity, Europe borrowed heavily from Araband Muslim sources.  From medicine and mathematics to architecture and the arts to governmentand commerce, the European Renaissance absorbed a whole variety of ideasand institutions from the Islamic world.  As an example, Childers observes that, "The million word Qanun of Ibn-Sina (980-1037) cataloguing all then-known ailments, diseases and theirtreatments, was the prime textbook of the new medical schools at Paris,Bologna, Montpellier, Padua and Naples and continued in use until theearly eighteenth century."  The adamant, arrogant refusal to acknowledge the pervasive influence andimpact of Islam upon the West was not the only injustice which concernedChilders; in the interface between the two civilisations, the West hasalso displayed a great deal of antagonism towards Islam.  He attributes Western antagonism to theological differences, to theMuslim occupation of parts of Europe, to the Crusades, to colonialism, andto contemporary neo-colonial interests.  It is mainly because of the desire of the centres of power in the Westto protect and perpetuate their economic interests, specifically oil, thatcertain important Western governments pursue foreign policies that are sopalpably unjust to the Muslim world - especially those countries that aredetermined to preserve their independence and autonomy.  Childers regarded this as a formidable obstacle to any Western-Islamicdialogue.  In fact, he believed that, "The dissolution of the Russian-Soviet empirehas released the West from its historically brief fixation with thatparticular "East", just as its concerns with its original demon-East -Islam - have begun a new cycle of volatitily."  In order to break this volatile cycle, the West, Childers was convinced,should try to be just and fair to Islam and Muslims.  Whether it was the relationship between the West and Islam or the dividebetween the North and the South, Erskine Childers' paramountconsideration, it is apparent, was justice. It is, in that sense, that hewas a true servant of justice with very few parallels in the modern world.                       Pix: Incisive ... For Childers, the UN was vital for the well-being ofthe South or the Third World.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Bolshoi Ballet set to mesmerise KL folkfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 5By Hafidah SamatIT isn't everyday that Sleeping Beauty wakes up to paint the town red. Butthe Bolshoi Ballet of Tashkent is offering nothing less with theirmesmerising performances when they stage a three-act ballet of the 19th-century classic Sleeping Beauty, in Kuala Lumpur.  The performance, which will be taking centrestage for two days startingOct 31, is organised by Event Management (EM) Consultants Sdn Bhd incollaboration with MAA-Medicare Kidney Charity Fund.  To formalise the understanding between MAA-Medicare and EM ManagementConsultants Sdn Bhd, a memorandum was signed recently.  Signing on behalf of MAA-Medicare was Datuk Lee Lam Thye, a member ofthe Board of Trustees, while EM Consultants was represented by itsmanaging director, Syed Isa Syed Alwi.  According to Lee, the primary aim of the MAA-Medicare Kidney CharityFund is to provide more affordable dialysis treament to patientsthroughout the nation.  "In only one-and-half-years, we have successfully set up three charitydialysis centres which are located in Kuala Lumpur, Teluk Intan andButterworth," he adds.  The largest is the one in KL which is treating 89 patients and has 19haemodialysis machines. The Teluk Intan branch has seven machines andtreats 14 patients, while the Butterworth branch, which was launched inMay, is treating seven patients with five machines.  "Our efforts have benefited more than 110 patients who are charged RM99per bicarbonate treatment. This is much cheaper than those charged byprivate clinics and hospitals which are between RM150-RM250 pertreatment," says Lee.  According to Lee the urgent need for more charity centres is evident asinsufficient funds and the lack of machines have caused many unnecessarydeaths.  "These projects require huge funding. Besides appealing to corporatebodies and the public for financial support, we are open to co-operatingwith any party to organise fund-raising activities," says Lee.  And of course, one such event will be the Bolshoi Ballet's performancesin KL. According to Syed Isa, the 120-member troupe will include 40orchestra musicians and 53 dancers.  "The Bolshoi Ballet is in the middle of its Asian tour and Malaysia willmark its first stop," says Syed Isa.  "We strongly feel that this cultural exposure will enable Malaysians towitness world-class performances ...  "We will ensure that its two-hour show is going to be entirely differentfrom any other ballet performance," say Syed Isa.  All proceeds from the performances will be forwarded to MAA-MedicareKidney Charity Fund.  "We hope to donate about RM500,000 to the fund, but this depends on theticket collection," says Syed Isa.  The production of Sleeping Beauty was first staged in St Petersburg in1890 and was adapted from Charles Perrault's fairy tale.  Tickets for the charity premier show on Oct 31 are priced at RM250,RM350, RM550 and RM800. Tickets for the performance on Nov 1 are priced atRM180, RM250, RM450 and RM800.  For corporate bodies, tickets can be purchased in various packages ofdiffering amounts and privileges.  For futher information, call Abdul Aziz of EM Consultants Sdn Bhd at 03-9811129 or MAA-Medicare Kidney Charity Fund at 03-4447906.                       Pix: For a good cause ... Lee (left) and Syed Isa at the signing of thememorandum of understanding.Pix: A scene from the Bolshoi Ballet's `Sleeping Beauty'.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Music magic from piano duofrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 5By Shuib TaibWHEN you are on your own in a foreign land, the will to "carry on"inevitably becomes stronger despite the odds.  Take Dennis Lee, for instance. Born in Penang, the professional pianisthas come a long way since the first time he played the piano. Like mostprofessional musicians, Lee also had to sit for one exam after another toupgrade himself.  At 14, Lee won a scholarship to study piano - with Angus Morrison - andviolin at the Royal College of Music. Having obtained his Bachelor ofMusic with First Class Honours and his Masters of Music, he then receivedan Austrian government scholarship to study with Joseph Dichler in Viennawhere he earned both the Akademie Diploma with Distinction and theStepanow Prize.  And when he was in Venice, Lee had to continue his piano lessons inMilan. He had no money then.  "Then again, music has nothing to do with economics. It's not only forthe rich, and no one should be deprived of it," chips in his wife, TohChee Hung.  Lee, who was penniless at the time somehow managed to find his way toMilan for his practices. This he did religiously until he completed hiscourse.  "I think music is magic. It is multi-functional and can help train yourmind. It teaches you to be disciplined, helps you to co-ordinate and touse your five senses to your advantage," says Lee.  It was also in Milan that Lee met his wife, Toh.  "You could say that, for us, Europe is where it all happened. Musicallyspeaking, it's where classical music began and it is also where we firstmet." While Lee had to travel from Venice to Milan, Toh travelled fromSwitzerland for her piano lessons with the same 95-year-old teacher namedKodaly.  "For geographical reasons, we are now based in London as it's difficultto stay in Asia and travel to Europe regularly to fulfil engagements,"explains Toh.  Like Lee, Toh also sat for many examinations and won many prizes. Bornin Singapore, Toh studied at the Royal Academy of Music in London underMax Pirani. She then won the Sterndale Bennett Prize, Christie Moore Awardand MacFarren Gold Medal (the top piano prize).  She has also made recordings that have been aired worldwide over the BBCWorld Service. Before finally residing in London, she held variousprofessional posts in Switzerland.  While Lee has performed in Washington DC, Japan, Malta, France, Germany,Malaysia, Singapore and Hong Kong, Toh has toured Britain, US, Canada,Switzerland, France, Germany, Italy, Denmark and the Far East.  Their 1996 appearances include performances in France, Italy, US,Canada, Malaysia and the Barbican Centre in London.  Lee and Toh are in Malaysia for a series of special performances - twoheld over the weekend in Ipoh and Penang and the third tomorrow - called"Piano Duo" where, for the first time, they are featured side by side.  Although it is rare to see two pianists playing simultaneously, Lee saysthat "it should be interesting to hear different interpretations of thesame melodies. We will do four songs together and one solo piece each".  "You will hear stereo-phonic sound and it should also be interesting tosee two people in action at the same time."  Their final performance will be held tomorrow at the Petaling Jaya CivicCentre at 8pm. Tickets, priced at RM30, can be obtained from Yamaha Musicbranches in Kuala Lumpur and Petaling Jaya as well as Sedaya Music Collegeand L & J Music Studio, Old Klang Road.                       Pix: Talented duo ... Toh (left) and Lee have performed all over theworld.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996First person: Why some films turn me into a wretched sob queenfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 7By Saleha AliI TRIED but I still cried.  Okay, if you must know, movies have a way of affecting me up close andpersonal. Forget about self control, the tears will just roll.  Last week, I found myself weeping unabashedly in the theatre (yetagain!) as this guy puffed his last breath in the arms of his lady,stricken as he was with some malignant brain disease.  I wasn't sure who was more devastated, me or the silver screen blonde.As I stumbled out of the darkened cinema, I remembered why I had vowed tosee tear-jerkers only in the safe haven of the living room.  You see, once the lights go up and reality bites, red puffy eyes arejust a no-no.  This crying game will strike when you least expect it too. For instance,is Independence Day a heartrending tale? Far from it, right?  Hmmm, that was what I thought. No prizes for guessing who left thecineplex with a wrung-out heart and an all-night sniffle after seeing thenewly-widowed US President holding on to his little daughter for strength.  On assignment in Singapore some time ago, I caught a movie called BrightLights Big City, about a young man coming to terms with his mother'simpending death from cancer.  That struck too close to home. A colleague, Joan, who shared the sameexperience, broke down in floods too.  Boy, was I glad I was home alone when I saw The Joy Luck Club. Griefstruck at almost every juncture and at the end of it, I felt faintlydehydrated.  The film, on the lives of four courageous women and their rapport withtheir daughters, was only too reminiscent of my sometimes turbulentrelationship with my late mother.  I saw my enterprising, take-the-bull-by-the-horns Mak in the mothers andcaught glimpses of the hurting child that I used to be in the daughters.  You see, because of Mak's constant chidings (she used to think I was theworld's greatest procrastinator), I thought she loved me least until I sawher hastily wiping away tears when I made my maiden voyage to KL to attendcollege years ago.  Altitute doesn't help matters, I have discovered. The watertap can stillflow some 15,000km above sea level.  I recall seeing several in-flight movies which left me completelybereft. One was Father Of The Bride II (I know, I know!).  You see, while it had a good dosage of Steve Martin's hilarity, therewere also plenty of tender father-daughter bonding scenes, not unlikemoments when my dad carried me on his back at age five to do some awesomeunderwater swimming and gave me the thumbs-up when I brought home my firstdomestic science achievement - a wobbly concoction called cornflour mould.  The list goes on. Watching The Mambo Kings turned me into a wretched sobqueen. It was seeing the sacrifices that the older sibling made to keepthe younger one afloat that got me.  Another film, Mr Wonderful, about a couple who separate only to discoverthat there are many invisible threads holding them together, sadlyreminded me of ... well, never mind.  So, you get the picture. Tales of family, loss of a loved one, humanbonding, unrequited love, injustice and missed opportunities touch me inthe raw.  I wish sometimes that I could crow along to Jim Carrey's antics butslapstick humour leaves me cold. No, you would not find me buying popcornin readiness for an Ace Ventura evening.  Nor am I inclined to drool over brawny Arnie Schwarzenegger in TheTerminator or hunky Bruce Willis in the Die Hard series.  But I relish feature films which are warm and witty, with a pulse onreal life situations. I appreciate lines which remind us of something orsomeone.  But then again, these are the very movies which can ruthlessly peel awayat the layers of armour we wear to shield off the elements.  I would like to think it is all therapeutic, this blubbering and losingall sense and sensibility watching films like Sleepless In Seattle, FrenchKiss and Forget Paris, not to speak of the out-and-out "heavies" likeCyrano De Bergerac and The Scarlet Letter.  But it has made me distinctly wary of even titles like Pinocchio and TheHunchback of Notre Dame....!                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Enlightening on AIDSfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 9By Cheah Chor SooiTHE deadly HIV/AIDS is the cover story for this month's issue of Jelita.  Writer Lily Haslina Nasir interviews Health Ministry Public HealthDepartment AIDS/HIV Division deputy director Datin Dr Harrison AzizShahabuddin as well as Tenaganita director Irene Fernandez on the issue.  They agree that every woman should have the right to question her hubbyif she is doubtful of his health status.  "The present mind frame that the decision to pursue sexual intercourselies with the man should change.  "Women have the right to probe if they become suspicious of theirspouse's movements. The truth is, it has become more difficult these daysto ascertain if one party has remained faithful to the other."  Jelita relates the first-hand experiences of women who have fallen preyto the disease because of their husbands' infidelity.  Early detection helps greatly to counter the spread of the disease. Findout the necessary steps to take if the medical check-up shows that you area carrier or have contracted AIDS.  There is also a list of counselling bodies and voluntary organisationsthat can lend a hand to ease suffering.  In the world of dresses, view the elegant kebaya and baju kurung madecontemporary after being fashioned from silk and batik.  For those taking exams, Jelita gives tips on how to get good grades.  Annual subscription rate for Jelita is RM64.30 in Peninsular Malaysiaand RM84.30 for Sabah and Sarawak.  Maxima cardmembers enjoy a special subscription rate of RM56.20 forPeninsular Malaysia and RM73.70 for Sabah and Sarawak.                       Pix: The cover of the September issue of Jelita.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Rekindling passion in your love lifefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 9By Sharmane RaphaelYOU do not need to resort to acrobatics and black leather to have goodsex. All you need is a little time and an indispensable guide to rekindlethe passion in your love life.  In The 7-Day Guide To A Better Sex Life, the writer says that "the badsex or no sex at all situation" can be improved and sex life can be mademore enjoyable.  If you would like to bring back the excitement and romance into yourlife, why not get a few helpful hints from the writer?  Those who wish to protect their skin against stretch marks can look intothe three simple steps offered in The Truth About Stretch Marks.  Here, the writer sheds the age-old myth about acquiring stretch marksonly after pregnancy and offers useful tips on reducing them, since totalelimination seems to be out of the question.  If you think fashion is only limited to your wardrobe, handbag andshoes, think again as eyewear begins to join the line-up, says Anis Ramliin Vision 20/20.  "It is no surprise that some eyewear companies consider eyeframe designa work of art," she says. "They combine new materials with majorbreakthroughs in technology and engineering to develop the most advancedand high tech eyeframes ever to be seen."  So, if you want to be part of the in-crowd, catch some of the latesttrends for this year's eyewear fashion.  In Dressing The Dormant Dragon, Natasha Kraal takes a look at the hotfashion ideas streaming through the veins of young Hong Kong designers.  With a line-up of designers like Barney Cheng, Lulu Cheung, Peter Lauand William Tang, several new faces were on the scene of this year'sfashion parade aptly named "The New Design Force".  And if this is not enough about fashion, catch some of the latestwardrobe collection guaranteed to send you wild, available at the city'shottest shopping centres in Natasha Kraal's Escapades Essentials.  Find out if you're cut out to be a high-flyer simply by circling someanswers in a stress test and read all about what some experts have to sayabout a woman who quits her fortune-making job to be a homemaker.  Not only that, read what Elspeth Reid has to say about the benefits ofbeing an under-achiever in Are You Cut Out To Be A High Flyer?  Starting your own business is certainly no easy task and creating aneffective business plan is one way to avoid the nerve-wracking pitfalls.  So if you're an aspiring entrepreneur, Nathan Balakrishnan, in his two-part series, gives five tips on what an effective business plan shouldcover.  "Whatever your intentions, a plan that's well thought of will help youmap out the course of your business and help uncover areas you hadn'tconsidered before," he says in Start Your Own Business Successfully.  He also gives several pointers on promoting your products and servicesand how you can increase sales.  If you're bidding farewell to those good 'ol thirties and preparing toenter a new decade of life, Surinder Jessy and Anis Ramli can certainlyoffer some helpful hints in Health Beauty For The Mature Woman.  The key seems to be in successful ageing and the authors have certainlypresented several simple yet effective secrets to maintain that fountainof youth.  If you think your face alone will conceal your real age, your hands,neck, decolletage and feet will certainly betray you if you have not beenlooking after them, says Sunita Chhabra in Telltale Anatomy.  She offers some helpful prevention measures.  Still on the "age" topic, find out about the benefits of HormoneReplacement Therapy which can drastically improve your life aftermenopause in Surinder Jessy's HRT Myths and Marvels.  For health enthusiasts, Agnes Chang offers some enticing and delectablerecipes in Microwaved Herbal Soups, while belacan-lovers can feast onseven appetising recipes in Bewitching Belacan.                       Pix: The September issue of Her World is now on the newsstands.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Bead stringer's adroitness draws the crowdfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 1By Azura AbasCULTURAL EXTRAVAGANZA ... Nonrinji Mantuku from the Rungus tribe was astar attraction with her bead work at the "Mini Sabah" promotion at theSungai Wang Plaza in Kuala Lumpur yesterday.  The promotion was among a host of cultural activities held inconjunction with Malaysia Fest which was launched on Saturday night.  Mantuku, 36, from Kudat, a full-time beads stringer in her village,said: "It only takes me a day to string beads with simple patterns whileit takes almost a week to complete those with difficult patterns."  She learnt it from her mother when she was only 10 and hopes her sixdaughters will continue the colourful tradition. Beads are the maindecorative items of the tribal women.  Other attractions of the promotion included demonstrations on making theKota Belud parang or machete, Tandek rattan mat, Ranau tree bark yarn,Nabawan bag and Kota Merudu basket-weaving.  The 15-day promotion was launched by Sabah Tourism and EnvironmentalAssistant Minister Nahalan Damsal.  Meanwhile in Petaling Jaya, the Pahang Government launched its Culturaland Arts Festival under the theme "Treasures of Pahang".  State Culture and Arts Committee chairman Datuk Law Kee Long launchedthe festival using a traditional blow-pipe to burst a balloon filled withcoloured particles at the foyer of Subang Parade shopping complex.  It was then followed by an Orang Asli dance and several cultural dancesstaged by a State cultural group.                       Pix: Pix without caption.-By S. Sugumaran.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996KL to play major role in R&D of renewable energy resourcesfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 1By Syed Nadzri in HarareMALAYSIA will play a major role in the development of renewable energyresources in the absence of a strong commitment from the West towardsinternational efforts in this area.  Prime Minister Datuk Seri Dr Mahathir Mohamad said the country wasalways prepared to be at the forefront of research and developmentstrategies to counter depleting energy sources.  "We are showing our commitment and will continue with our efforts," hetold reporters after attending an investment briefing at the ZimbabweIndustrial Corporation office yesterday.  Dr Mahathir's affirmation came a day after he was appointed vice-president of the World Solar Commission which is organising the SecondWorld Solar Summit here from today.  He is one of the two vice-presidents of the commission headed byZimbabwe President Robert Mugabe. The other is Pakistani President FarouqAhmad Khan Leghari.  The presence of Dr Mahathir and Leghari added the only sparkle to theotherwise lacklustre summit which was supposed to be attended by no lessthan 14 heads of government.  Asked on the poor turnout, especially the absence of leaders fromdeveloped countries, Dr Mahathir said he could not find a clear reason.  "Maybe they are not interested in solar energy," he quipped.  The Prime Minister was also asked whether the commission would faceproblems due to lack of financial support from the richer countries.  He admitted that development efforts would be a little difficult because"people with funds are not too keen".  Later in the afternoon, he witnessed the signing of investmentagreements involving YTL Corporation which has won the privatisationcontract of a power station at Hwange.  Asked on the role of Malaysian companies in the development of Zimbabwe,the Prime Minister said the firms could contribute effectively based ontheir experiences in Malaysia which had trodden Zimbabwe's path before.  "Zimbabwe is at the begining of an industrial process and this issomewhat similiar to what Malaysia went through several years ago.  "At the moment, Malaysian companies are concentrating on infrastructuredevelopment. Once this is achieved, they will venture into other areas,especially labour-intensive industries," he said.                     Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996KL to play major role in R&D of renewable energy resourcesfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 1By Syed Nadzri in HarareMALAYSIA will play a major role in the development of renewable energyresources in the absence of a strong commitment from the West towardsinternational efforts in this area.  Prime Minister Datuk Seri Dr Mahathir Mohamad said the country wasalways prepared to be at the forefront of research and developmentstrategies to counter depleting energy sources.  "We are showing our commitment and will continue with our efforts," hetold reporters after attending an investment briefing at the ZimbabweIndustrial Corporation office yesterday.  Dr Mahathir's affirmation came a day after he was appointed vice-president of the World Solar Commission which is organising the SecondWorld Solar Summit here from today.  He is one of the two vice-presidents of the commission headed byZimbabwe President Robert Mugabe. The other is Pakistani President FarouqAhmad Khan Leghari.  The presence of Dr Mahathir and Leghari added the only sparkle to theotherwise lacklustre summit which was supposed to be attended by no lessthan 14 heads of government.  Asked on the poor turnout, especially the absence of leaders fromdeveloped countries, Dr Mahathir said he could not find a clear reason.  "Maybe they are not interested in solar energy," he quipped.  The Prime Minister was also asked whether the commission would faceproblems due to lack of financial support from the richer countries.  He admitted that development efforts would be a little difficult because"people with funds are not too keen".  Later in the afternoon, he witnessed the signing of investmentagreements involving YTL Corporation which has won the privatisationcontract of a power station at Hwange.  Asked on the role of Malaysian companies in the development of Zimbabwe,the Prime Minister said the firms could contribute effectively based ontheir experiences in Malaysia which had trodden Zimbabwe's path before.  "Zimbabwe is at the begining of an industrial process and this issomewhat similiar to what Malaysia went through several years ago.  "At the moment, Malaysian companies are concentrating on infrastructuredevelopment. Once this is achieved, they will venture into other areas,especially labour-intensive industries," he said.                     Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996A new section on science and technologyfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 13BEGINNING this Friday Life & Times will introduce The Cutting Edge, abrand new section that promises to update you on everything you wanted toknow about science and technology in Malaysia.  Also this week, a question-and-answer column on science makes its debut.The fortnightly column aims to reduce complex issues to essentials.  If you are a teen with an inquiring mind, write to us and we will do ourbest to answer all your questions on science.  Send your questions to:  JOTHI,  c/o Life & Times,  The New Straits Times Press (M) Bhd,  Balai Berita,  31 Jalan Riong,  59100 Kuala Lumpur.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Interview checklistfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 13By Nor Azlina Abdul WahabYOU can't escape them. For most of us anyway. For employment or enrolmentin a tertiary institution, the interview can determine, in a large part,your acceptance or rejection by the other party.  In an interview, which is a face-to-face meeting, communication skillsare required. This is not as complicated as it sounds. You won't need toattend classes to acquire such skills. What would be useful is a checklistof what you would need, and need to avoid.  Before the interview, make sure you:  * Confirm your attendance by calling up the organisation or sending thereply cards if required.  * Find out the exact location of the interview prior to the session sothat you will know your way around on the big day.  * Read and find out more about the job or course that you are applyingfor and the organisation or the institution involved.  * Prepare the relevant documents in a file. Don't have them folded orstapled together.  * Prepare intelligent questions, such as "What are the job/courseprospects?"  * Prepare the correct attire and be presentable. Avoid wearing coloursthat are too bright. Try to wear soft, but not dull, colours. Avoid jeansor T-shirts.  * Arrive early and act in a proper manner while waiting for your turn.  During the interview:  * Do knock on the door before entering unless the door is being openedfor you.  * Do greet the interviewers appropriately and wait until you are askedto be seated. Sit straight, but not stiffly with your hands folded overdefensively.  * Do watch your body language. Avoid habits such as picking your nose orbiting your nails.  * Do relax and answer positively but politely. Avoid answering with asimple "yes" or "no". Try to use "Usually, but...", or "Yes, unless...",or even "It depends on what you mean by..."  * Do take the chance given to ask questions.  * Do watch out for the interviewer's tricks. Try not to be angry easily.Furthermore, do not curse in any language.  * Do thank the interviewer for seeing you when leaving.  Even though the qualities that interviewers look for differ depending onthe situation, there are a few aspects that are usually evaluated. Theseare:  * Physical appearance, which includes your dressing.  * General knowledge.  * Special skills that you have.  * Personal interests.  * Your attainments.  This may not be the A to Z guide on interviews, but it is a basicchecklist for that all-important date.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Health threat from poor alien worker screening methodsfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 1By Ramlan SaidKUALA LUMPUR, Sun. - The Malaysian Medical Association today expressedconcern over weaknesses in the health screening procedures for foreignworkers which are posing a threat to public health.  Dr Tibbs Fernandez, chairman of its Private Practitioners Section, saidthis was the reason behind the increase in cases of communicable andcontagious diseases in the country, some of which had for years beensuccessfully controlled or eradicated.  Public health would be at risk as the diseases were contractable, headded.  He said reported cases like malaria, tuberculosis and elephantiasis atgovernment hospitals among foreign workers were disproportionate to theirpopulation in Malaysia, indicating the seriousness of the problem.  He said even diseases that had never been seen or detected for a longtime in Malaysia like kala-azar had surfaced. Kala-azar is a viralinfection which causes inflamation of the liver.  "No doubt the country's development is partly dependent on foreignworkers but it should not be at the expense of public health."  There are about two million foreign workers in Malaysia.  Dr Fernandez was speaking to reporters after chairing the section'sfirst national working committee at Bangunan MMA. Also present was MMApresident-elect, Dr Milton Lum.  Dr Fernandez said the diseases were most probably brought in by foreignworkers who came mostly from less developed countries with inferior publichealth systems.  He said the problem could be overcome through a concerted and systematicapproach from the authorities, like stricter enforcement especially innabbing illegals and enhancing screening procedures.  "For instance, one problem that can be ironed out is the refusal by someImmigration Department offices to use a medical examination form with anew format for foreign workers although the Health Ministry and MMA haveagreed on it."  Dr Fernandez said the council had tried to solve the matter with theTask Force on Foreign Workers but was unsuccessful.  He also said medical tests for foreign workers should not be monopolisedby certain groups. He declined to elaborate on the matter.  Dr Fernandez added that MMA fully supported action against those foundmanipulating medical tests for foreign workers, even if it involvedprivate doctors and laboratories.  "The medical screening exercise is time-consuming and costly especiallyfor employers.  "But we can't afford to cut corners as the consequences would bedisastrous."  A standard medical test for a male and female foreign worker costs RM205and RM220 respectively.  Dr Fernandez said the council viewed with concern the danger posed bythe foreign workers, especially those who entered illegally as the latterwere not subject to any health screening tests.  "If left unchecked, it can turn into a national security problem.  "Nobody knows the exact number of the illegals, so the magnitude of theproblem could be far worse.  "We fear we will reach a stage where diseases like malaria andtuberculosis can be easily contracted by, or passed to, the public."                    Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Picture perfect: Caring for the camerafrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 13By Zahari ZakariaBESIDES picture-taking accessories, a complete photographic outfit shouldcontain a range of accessories for maintaining and repairing equipment.  Like any equipment, cameras and lenses need a certain amount ofattention if they are to continue functioning accurately.  Heavy use, particulary on location, inevitably causes wear and tear, andcertain moving parts, optical surfaces and integrated circuitry aresufficiently delicate to be affected by dirt, moisture, heat and cold.  The basic maintenance programmes consist of care in use, regularcleaning and regular checks of major systems. In addition, damage may berepaired by the user, although this should be approached with caution.  Regular checking of all camera functions is an important precaution.Familiarity with the sound, feel and appearance of the mechanisms makes iteasier to identify potential faults and can be an aid to repair. A goodoccasion is when the camera is empty.  There are, in most cameras, five major systems in the camera body -shutter, wind-on, mirror box, viewfinder and metering, and three in thelens - focusing, aperture diaphragm and aperture lingkage.  The slower speeds of the shutter can be checked visually by opening thecamera back, holding the camera to the light and triggering the shutterfrom its slowest speed to its highest.  Speeds of about half a second and longer can be timed, whileprogressively reducing the speed-setting makes it possible to judge speedseven to about 1/125 second, as each should appear to be about one half theduration of the previous one. Faster speeds cannot be reliably assessed bythe eye.  The winding mechanism should feel and sound smooth and an additionalcheck is to watch the movement of the film leader when a new cassette isinstalled. In use, the rewind lever on a 35mm single lens reflex willmove, although not necessarily each time the film is moved on.  The mirror operation in a single lens reflex can be checked from thefront with the lens removed, both during normal operation and by movingthe mirror lock-up lever fitted to some models.  Any significant problems in the viewfinder system will be immediatelyobvious, but the seating of the viewing screen should be checked byinspection.  Any optical faults in the viewfinder which might affect accuratefocusing can also be checked by opening the shutter and the camera back,fitting a lens and focusing an image on a piece of tracing paper heldagainst the open shutter.  This should compare with the focus as seen through the viewfinder. Thebest immediate check of the metering system is to compare it againstreadings from at least one other meter.  Two likely lens-focusing faults are a slack mechanism and lateralmovements, and both can occur through extended wear and tear.  The first can be checked by holding the lens face down and watching itto see if the focusing bow slips down under its own weight.  Lateral movement can be seen through the viewfinder while shifting thefocus; it does not effect the recorded image but is distracting.  The aperture diaphragm should be checked visually, with the lens both onand off the camera, for smooth operation and to make sure that it stopsdown to the full range of apertures.  Careful handling of photographic equipment under normal circumstancescan be vital to avoid later problems or damage. Both front and rear lenssurfaces, and the body aperture can be protected with caps and clear glassfilter.  When carried, equipment should be packed carefully. In use, movingcontrols like the cocking lever and the rewind lever should be operatedsmoothly and without straining.  In storage, tensioned parts, which include the shutter mechanism and thefull automatic diaphragm (FAD) should be left slack.  Equipment should be regularly serviced by professionals. A well-usedcamera, for instance, should be serviced at least once a year.                       Pix: The director of Nikon Corp Japan, T. Nakano, with a range of hiscompany's products. Though regular checking of all camera functions is animportant precaution, the equipment should be regularly serviced byprofessionals.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Did you know: Did you knowfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 13By Farouk Aziz PeruONE of the kings of France was a vicious and cruel man. He loved torturinghis enemies to death and his favourite method was to wrap them up inanimal skin, let them escape and hunt them down with dogs, letting theanimals tear them to pieces.  For all his cruelty, however, he was also fascinated by animals. He keptan elephant, monkeys and bears. He had a tame lioness even, which he oftentook with him as he travelled throughout his kingdom.  His weirdness reached new heights when he asked the Abbot of Baigne, alocal cleric, to produce a concert using swine voices.  The abbot (who was probably used to the king's nonsense) agreed andasked for a sum of money which was immediately delivered to him.  He gathered hogs of all ages and got them together under a tent. He keptthem under a cover of velvet and made an organ out of them.  How?  His "keys" to the organ were little spikes which pricked the hogs oncommand. Apparently he delighted the king and his companions that day.  About 400 years later, the instrument created by the abbot was adaptedby the inventor of the so-called Porco-Forte.  This device, however, was a little different. The pigs were put in apartitioned box and their tails projected through holes.  With a keyboard mechanism, the tails were pinched to produce aharmonious range of oinks.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Good to know: Good to knowfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 13By Farouk Aziz PeruHERE is a relaxation method for those who feel tense after a hard day'swork or at school. It may seem a little strange to do it at first but ifyou keep at it, you'll find yourself more energetic and relaxed than everbefore:  Do a little stretching before the exercise. Gently please! No bouncingand forced stretching which can only heighten tension.  Find a place free of interruptions. Loosen all clothing and removewatches, belts and glasses.  Lie down and close your eyes. Feel the heaviness in your body. Feel yourbody melting into the ground. Breathe deeply. Again, no forced efforts.Breathe as deeply as you possibly can.  Keep this breathing up for another two minutes.  Now curl your toes up as  tightly as possible. Hold to a count of five.At that point release and relax. Feel the difference?  Next, tense up the muscles in your lower legs like the feet, calves aswell as the toes. Count to five and release. Enjoy the feeling.  Next, tense up the muscles in the upper as well as lower part of thelegs. When you feel the tension, tense them a little more. Count slowly tofive and release. As usual, enjoy the feeling.  Then tense up the buttocks, lower back and abdomen. Hold for a count offive and release.  The upper torso such as the shoulders hold a lot more tension. When youtense them, do so more than for the other parts of the body. Hold for acount of five and release.  Now, tense up your arms. Hold them for a count of five. Release and letthem hang loose at your side.  Squeeze the muscles of your face like your jaw, cheeks and scalp. Holdfor a count of five and as usual, release. Feel the relaxation in everypart of your face. This exercise makes you look younger!  Now tense your entire body, starting with your toes and working your wayup. Hold for a count of five. Now relax. Unwind. Release. Let go. Mentallyscan your body for any tense parts and relax that body part.  Now count to five slowly. At the end of the count, open your eyes. Keepup the practice and your sense of well-being will experience a dramaticincrease.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Towards more open education (HL)from NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 1By A. Kathirasen; Noor Adzman BaharuddinPENANG, Sun. - A more open education with stress on critical and creativethinking, and the atmosphere to voice them, is needed for Malaysia toprogress in the information age, Deputy Prime Minister Datuk Seri AnwarIbrahim said today.  He added that Malaysia could not afford a copycat mentality, especiallyin the field of science and technology, if it wanted to progress andcompete in the global arena.  "We need in Malaysia today an education which is open; where people canvoice their views, offer and accept criticism while being committed toacquiring a diverse range of knowledge and skills.  "We need to master new skills and disciplines to progress. A countrywill not progress if its knowledge is copycat knowledge; if itsscientists, experts and knowledgeable persons simply copy what others havesaid and done.  "We must have innovative technology, creative minds and criticalthinking for society to progress."  In this context, he said, it was also important to master the Englishlanguage.  Anwar said this when launching the Penang Free School Foundation at thePFS hall this afternoon. Also present were Chief Minister Tan Sri Dr KohTsu Koon, PFS Foundation chairman Tan Sri Mohd Sheriff Mohd Kassim, oldboys Tengku Datuk Ahmad Rithauddeen and Tan Sri Elyas Omar, and PFSprincipal Mohd Ismail Ibramsa.  "We want Malaysians to master Bahasa Malaysia. It is the nationallanguage. But we also want Malaysians to master other languages,especially English. While we maintain Bahasa Malaysia as our nationalbase, our attitude should be global. This means better mastery ofEnglish."  He said many Malaysians wanted to learn various languages. Mandarin, forinstance, was now being encouraged as it had potential to be a language ofthe economy. More people were picking up Tamil too, just as an increasingnumber are learning Japanese, French and German, he added.  "Mastery of other languages would not obstruct the usage of BahasaMalaysia or result in the sacrifice of Bahasa Malaysia. We are promotingEnglish after being satisfied and convinced that the promotion of BahasaMalaysia will proceed undisturbed at a greater pace."  He said the country could progress only if it pursued a more open policyand encouraged the mastery of English and other languages so that moreknowledge could be derived from the mastery of these languages and used intaking the country to greater heights.  The Finance Minister said while academic excellence was important, itshould not be at the expense of the creation of a wholesome adult and theinculcation of moral and religious ideas.  "At present there is too much stress on our schoolchildren. Parentsappear obsessed with academic excellence - at the expense of the birth ofa wholesome man.  "I do not deny that Malaysia needs academic excellence - that we need tomaster new disciplines - but it should not stop there. Emphasis should beplaced on morality. Critical and creative thinking should be our goal too.  "How can we progress if the thinking habit is absent, the love ofscholarship is not there?" he added.  Anwar also reminded Malaysians of the need to temper material goals withmoral goals, adding: "There is excessive and unbridled individualism todayin our country. This has caused the downfall of many civilisations in thepast. If the motivation is materialistic and individualistic, we will bein trouble. And that is why wholesome education is needed."  The Deputy Prime Minister praised PFS, the oldest English school in theAsean region, for coming up with the foundation and suggested that theboard prepare a list of all successful old boys and get them to contributeto its fund.  The foundation is a charitable organisation to raise and donate fundsfor upgrading and improving the school and to carry out activities in theinterest of the school. Mohd Sheriff, who is also chief executive officerof Khazanah Holdings, hopes to set up a RM5 million trust fund.  Anwar later received RM494,000 in donations from various groups,organisations and companies including RM375,000 from the Kuala Lumpur andSelangor PFS old boys association headed by Mohd Sheriff, RM100,000 fromold boy Datuk Md Zain Yusof and his relatives and friends, RM34,000 fromPFS, and RM11,000 from Elyas.  Earlier in Prai, Anwar urged politicians and community leaders toencourage more youths to participate in team sports and recreationalactivities.  He said by doing so, they would not idle their time away, and could putto good use their youth and strength towards racial harmony and nation-building.  "Let's stop nagging them on what they should do with their youth.  "Instead, provide useful programmes and activities such as canoeing,hill-climbing, jet-skiing and the various games and sports to them so thatthey can participate actively as a team.  "Also, don't just provide them with the programmes and activities thatcan be participated by all, but we must also join them so that they canfully understand why we are encouraging them to do so," he said afterparticipating in an eight-km canoeing competition along Sungai Prai, fromTiti Timbul in Sungai Dua to the Seberang Prai Municipal Councilrecreational park in Ampang Jajar.  It was organised by the State Youth and Sports Department to promoteSungai Prai and the Ampang Jajar recreational park as a major watersportscentre in Seberang Prai.  Also taking part among the 400 participants were Chief Minister Tan SriDr Koh Tsu Koon, his deputy, Datuk Mohd Shariff Omar, State Land,Entrepreneur and Co-operative Development Committee chairman Abdul LatiffMirasa and several State Assemblymen.  Anwar also reminded schools against being too obsessed with achievingacademic excellence that they neglect or downplay the importance of sportsand athletics.  Earlier when launching a cleanliness campaign in Jalan Tuna here, Anwarsaid the Government would not budge from its policy in requiring housingdevelopers to build low-cost houses in their schemes.  "We have to insist that they comply with the requirement (of buildinglow-cost houses in their schemes) since this is the only way to ensure thepoor can enjoy affordable housing," he said.  More than 200 flat-dwellers took part in a gotong-royong, held inconjunction with the ceremony.  He also urged all developers to fully understand why it was necessaryfor them to assist the Government in providing ample affordable housingfor the people.  Anwar also took to task some residents, especially flat-dwellers, whorefused to participate in cleanliness campaigns organised in theirneighbourhoods.  "It is for the good of all. Gotong royongs help ensure your surroundingsare clean besides fostering closer relationship among neighbours," hesaid.  Later, when witnessing the sale of 8.4ha land, valued at RM6.5 million,belonging to the Sungai Pelet area farmers' organisation to JKP Sdn Bhd inPenanti, Anwar praised the organisation for its efforts to venture intonon-agricultural activities which could bring bigger returns for itsmembers.  JKP Sdn Bhd, a company formed by the State Bumiputera Steering and Co-ordination Committee, plans to carry out a RM40 million mixed developmentproject on the land.  The company was represented by its managing director Dr Zulkifli Hassanwhile the organisation was represented by its chairman, Adnan Ramli.  At the same function, Adnan announced the organisation's purchase of 20shophouses in Taman Sama Gagah, costing RM6.9 million, from Permatang PauhRealty Sdn Bhd.                     Pix: Thanks ... Anwar presenting a mock cheque for RM6.5 million toAdnan. Looking on (from left) are Abdul Latiff, Mohd Shariff and StateAgriculture Committee chairman Rashid Abdullah.-By Nik Rosli Ishak.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Klang heartbeat: Motorcycle thefts getting seriousfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 17By Annie Freeda CruezTHEFTS of motorcycles are becoming a serious problem in Klang especiallywith at least 150 of them being reported stolen every month for the pastfew months.  Strangely, there are many who are not reporting the theft of theirmachines  to the police in the hope that they would recover theirmotorcycles or for reasons only known to them.  Klang district police chief Assistant Commissioner Aziz AriarasaAbdullah strongly feels thefts of motorcycles can be prevented if ownersare more responsible and take proper security measures.  He said many of the motorcycles are stolen when the owners leave theirmachines unattended with the keys still in the ignition, not properlylocked or in places known for such thefts.  "There were even instances when thieves rode away with motorcycles afterthe owners left their machines running while going into a shop to getsomething," he said.  "If people are more careful, many of the motorcycles would not have beenstolen."  He said the public should take the initiative to protect and safeguardtheir property.  He said motorcycle thefts could be reduced only with the co-operation ofthe owners who had to ensure their machines were always locked upproperly, possibly with additional security locks.  Motorcycle thefts have been reportedly high at Kampung Delek, BerkeleyGarden, Taman Sentosa, Jalan Meru, Jalan Kapar, Bandar Sultan Sulaiman,Jalan Kem and Taman Sri Muda.  Most of these bikes, especially the brand RXZ Yamaha, were reportedstolen near flats and shopping complexes in the district.  Aziz said the recovery rate of stolen motorcycles per month was about 15to 20 per cent with many of them found abandoned along road sides andrecovered during police operations.  Recently, police arrested eight youths aged between 15 and 20 years,mostly school dropouts and recovered from them eight stolen motorcycles.  "People steal motorcycles for joyrides, transportation, to resell themfor cheaper price or to cannibalise and sell to illegal racers," saidAziz.  He said many of those who steal motorcycles for joy-rides wereschoolchildren and youths.  Aziz said it would surprise many that there were even people who"borrow" motorcycles as a means of transport to take them to a particularplace where on reaching they abandoned the machines.  "Those who actually steal them are groups of youths usually schooldropouts who sell them at a cheaper price to unsuspecting buyers inestates and Felda schemes or cannibalise the parts to sell to illegalracers to make quick money," he added.  So far this year, Aziz said, the police had picked up eight such groupsor in police jargon "pocket groups" with each group comprising betweenthree and seven people, and recovered several stolen motorcycles.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Many candidates seeking clarifications on functionsfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 2PENANG, Sun. - Umno deputy president Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim said todayhe was getting letters from Umno Ministers and leaders contesting forposts in the October party elections, seeking clarification on functionsthey could attend following the ban on election campaigning.   Speaking in his capacity as Umno disciplinary committee chairman, hesaid: "Several of them have written to me seeking my advice on certainprogrammes that they were slotted to attend. I have cleared someprogrammes and disapproved some programmes."  He was asked on the fact that many Umno Ministers were not attendingeven official functions following the directive of the Umno supremecouncil that they should not attend functions which could be construed ascampaigning.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996City sidewalks: Ugly attitude of urban indifferencefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 17By Balan MosesCONSIDER this assumption: As a nation develops and people become moresophisticated and knowledgeable with better education, civic consciousnessshould be heightened.  Right-thinking people will probably rationalise this as being logicaland, therefore, theoretically quite probable.  But does this actually happen in Malaysia, or closer home, in KualaLumppur today?  Let's look at the facts. Between January and July this year, City Hallcollected RM6 million in fines and compound penalties from a total of228,042 notices issued to the public.  This is RM400,000 more than what was collected for the same period lastyear. Are city folk regressing as far as civic responsibilities areconcerned?   Facts, invariably cold and bare, give an accurate picture.They are neutral and do not lie.  What then ails city folk that they end up paying so much to theauthorities in fines and compounds for civic infringements?  As Datuk Bandar Tan Sri Kamaruzzaman Sharif said on Saturday (see storyon Page 23), the figures show that some city folk are not interested inobserving the law.  Lamenting on the increase in fines and compounds, he said it was not agood sign of the times.  More received compound notices for not paying metered parking charges inthe first seven months this year compared with the same period last year.  They paid a total of RM2,792,175 to City Hall for the period this yearfor the offence.  The local authority collected RM1,267,130 from hawkers for a variety ofoffences while traffic offences brought in RM1,220,480.  Other offences that brought in substantial amounts in fines werecommitted under the Earthworks By-Laws 1988, Parks By-Laws 1981, Streets,Drainage and Building Act 1974 and the Collection, Disposal and Managementof Garbage By-Laws FT 1981.  Why this indifference among city folk to rules and regulations?  A critical look around will show that indifference to rules are not theonly thing city folk are guilty of.  Many are also indifferent to fellow Malaysians and in some cases, theirneighbours.  Granted that there is an equal number or more of caring Malaysians whoalways rise to the occasion when it comes to caring for others, the uglyMalaysian syndrome and the number of people subscribing to it isfrightening.  Why do people dump rubbish along roads and in front of their neighbours'homes? Why do people wantonly dirty public toilets?  Why have more road bullies surfaced recently? Some men have even takento assaulting women drivers, something unheard of before.  Why do drivers end up in fist fights over trivial issues like cuttinglanes or blaring the horn?  The Press has also reported recent cases of people standing by whilerobberies were being committed.  The environment, especially green lungs and forests, are also becomingvictims of indifference. Some businessmen are beginning to think that aconcrete jungle and the almighty ringgit are what life should be allabout.  They do not have time to stop and smell the flowers.  Something needs to be done to check this rot before it is too late andsuch abberant behaviour becomes an accepted part of Malaysian culture.  City folk have to sit up and ask themselves if indifference is what theywant to leave behind as a legacy to their children.  We, as a society, will suffer if this becomes a reality.  The authorities also have a role to play in helping Malaysians becomemore caring and responsible.  The young should be taught the need to help and care for one another,regardless of their station in life. After all, this is what communityliving is all about.  Religious education, regardless of the faith, will go a long way ininculcating civic consciousness among people.  In the final analysis, however, change has to come from within. Cityfolk, and others, should give their best in making Kuala Lumpur and thenation a better place to live in.  * Sometimes, the most obvious things are the last seen. And so it mayhave been in the case of the city-above-the-river Kuala Lumpur Linear City(KLLC) project.  The river and its reserve were there waiting when some developers werebusy cutting trees and hills for projects.  We could have saved some of our natural heritage if the project had beenproposed earlier.  The KLLC, to be built over the Sungai Klang, will result in a deeper andwider Sungai Klang besides a squatter-free environment along the riverwhich will ensure a less polluted waterway.  The People-mover Rapid Transit system which runs alongside the river isanother benefit accruing from the project.  The mega-project itself will cover 117.6ha over a 12km route along theriver.  It will stretch above and along the Sungai Klang between the Jalan TunRazak bridge at the upstream and the Jalan Klang Lama bridge downstream.  It will have offices, entertainment centres, restaurants, hotels,medical centres and apartments on arch frames over the river.  While the benefits cannot be denied by way of more space fordevelopment, the authorities also have to ensure that the project isenvironment-friendly.  This means that they have to ensure that the quality of river water isnot affected by the project.  At a time when many children have not seen cows or goats save for whatis shown on television or in movies, we hope they will not forget what ariver looks like.  We hope there will still be something of the river to see when theproject is completed. With the deepening and widening of the river, wealso hope it will lose its ugly brown hue for a healthy colour.  It is left to be seen if the KLLC will spawn similar projects over otherrivers in the city.  Some have raised the question of whether the project is violating theguidelines of the Drainage and Irrigation Department.  The authorities have to provide acceptable answers to such questions.                       Pix: Unsightly ... indiscriminate dumping of rubbish is part of theMalaysian malaise. - NST file picture.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Town Planning head to perform duties of council secretaryfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 2KOTA BARU, Sun. - The Kota Baru Municipal Council has appointed its TownPlanning Division chief Kamaruddin Mamat to take over the duties of thecouncil secretary.  Its president Hassan Abdullah said the appointment which was approved bycouncillors at the special full council meeting today took effectimmediately.  He added Kamaruddin was asked to perform the duties because MPKB did notrecognise the appointment of Shokri Mohamed.  The council and the State Civil Service Commission are facing a standofffollowing the council's rejection of Mohd Aiseri Alias to the post of MPKBdeputy president and Shokri as secretary.  Hassan said MPKB had nothing against the two officers but did notrecognise their appointment by the commission because they were not madeaccording to procedures.  Under service circular 5/1989, appointment to the two posts can only bemade upon the council's request. However, Hassan had said that thecommission did not refer the matter to him before making the appointment.  However, he added, the council would not ask the two to leave or vacatetheir posts.  "I have no plans to take any action against the two but would appreciateit very much if the commission withdrew the appointment," he said afterchairing the meeting.  Hassan also did not rule out the possibility of the council filling theposts with officers of their own choice.  "If we do appoint our own people to fill the two posts, they would haveto be appointed by the State Exco," he added.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Megat Junid heads Sabah Yang di-Pertua's honours listfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 2KOTA KINABALU, Sun. - Deputy Home Minister Datuk Megat Junid Megat Ayubheads the list of 930 recipients of State honours in conjunction with the66th birthday of the Yang di-Pertua Negeri Tun Sakaran Dandai tomorrow.  He was conferred the Seri Panglima Darjah Kinabalu (SPDK), the State'shighest award, which carries the title Datuk Seri Panglima.  Other recipients of the award are former Chief Secretary to theGovermment Tan Sri Ahmad Sarji Abdul Hamid, Inspector-General of PoliceTan Sri Rahim Noor and State Secretary Datuk Khalil Datu Jamalul.  Kota Kinabalu High Court judge Datuk Charles Ho Nyen Cheung, formerChief Minister Datuk Seri Salleh Said, Angkatan Keadilan Rakyat Bersatupresident Datuk Mark Koding and businessman Datuk Kassim Kamidin were alsobestowed with the SPDK.  State Social Services Minister Raymond Tan Shu Kiah were among 41recipients of the State's second highest award, the Panglima GemilangDarjah Kinabalu (PGDK), which carries the title Datuk.  The other recipients of the PGDK are Deputy Dewan Rakyat speaker JuharMahiruddin, Assistant Ministers to the Chief Minister Abdul Rahim Ismail,Sapawi Ahmad and Hajiji Noor, Assistant Minister of Tourism andEnvironment Nahalan Damsal, Assistant Minister of Social Services MarkusMajihi and Assistant Minister of Communication and Works Rubin Balang.  Federal Secretary for Sabah Datuk Zainuddin Awang Ngah, TandekAssemblyman Saibul Supu, Kota Kinabalu Municipal Council president DavidLee Thau Phin, Institute for Development Studies chairman Masidi Manjunand Fifth Infantry Brigade Commander Khairuddin Mat Yusof also receive thePGDK.  Also conferred the award are Federal police CID director Datuk NorianMai, Bishop Cornelius Piong, State RTM director Mokthar Abdul Kadir, PartiDemokratik Sabah women movement chief Christine Van Houtten, StateInternal Affairs secretary Ghulam Jelani and East Malaysian PlantersAssociation president Jaswant Singh Kler.  The other recipients of the award are Abdul Kadir Pateh, Abu BakarUntung, Professor Dr Arbain Kadri, Chu Vui Fai, Dr Dharmapalan Murugasu,Jacob C. Sadang, James Siew Tsyap Fah, Senior Assistant Commissioner IKamaruddin Ali, Kandiah Ampala Vanar, Lau Hieng Vui and Malali Malai.  Public Service Commission deputy chairman M.Y. Ismail, Ngui Tet Yin,Phang Miow Sin, Rear Admiral Ramli Shamsuddin, Salleh Otik, TaiminLumaing, Tan Sui Fu, Victor Paul, William Lau Kung Hui, Wong Boon Loongand Yong Tet Thiam were also conferred the PGDK.  Sixty-six people were confered the Ahli Setia Darjah Kinabalu (ASDK),145 the Ahli Darjah Kinabalu (ADK), 340 the Bintang Setia Kinabalu (BSK)and 306 the Bintang Kinabalu (BK).  Agriculture and Fisheries Minister Datuk Pandikar Amin Mulia and formerAssistant Communications and Works Minister Datuk Mathius Majihi wereamong 25 made Justices of Peace.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Feedback: Letter: Towards a better bus servicefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 17By A Regular CommuterON taking over the Sri Jaya operated bus service 244 (Klang bus stand-Bandar Utama through Pusat Bandar, Damansara Utama, Damansara Jaya andTaman Tun) recently, Intrakota has redesignated the route as 21C.  In addition, it has renamed Service 21 as 21A, and introduced 21B to Lot10, giving all three services a common path between Bandar Utama and BankNegara.  Unfortunately, the rather pale yellow dot-matrix numbers on a lightblack, often greyish black, background becomes readable only when the busis almost upon one.  Is it possible for Intrakota, which no doubt has the interests of bothcommuter and driver at heart, to have the numbers boldly displayed as SriJaya did?  Would it also be possible for Intrakota to make available the scheduleof buses on this route so that, while allowing for the time of day anduncertain traffic conditions, one can attempt to minimise waiting time?  Can it be possible as well to have this information displayed at theterminals at least for the benefit of all?  When, for example, does the first bus leave either end of the route inthe morning and when does the last bus do likewise?  Now that commuters can only board the bus one at a time - and atterminals when the bus is ready to move - should not steps be taken toinculcate the habit of queueing?  For example, during the initial days, a security guard could bestationed at the Klang bus stand during peak hours to ensure commuterswait in line.  In the mornings and evenings and during peak periods, one only has tosee the rush to board buses at the Klang bus stand to realise howimmeasurably advantageous it would be for all concerned - young and old,men and women, drivers and management alike - to have such a systemenforced.  Despite its many idiosyncrasies, Service 244 was predictable. Regularcommuters would undoubtedly in due course have the information to managetheir commuting but at this stage of Intrakota's takeover, the companyshould make such information more widely available.A Regular CommuterKuala Lumpur                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Feedback: Letter: Bugged by flood problemsfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 17By Joe and familyWE are an elderly couple who have been staying alone in a TOL home at LoopRoad, Seremban for some 30 years now.  Often our house and nearby homes get flooded when a nearby riveroverflows during heavy rain.  Although some digging at the river was done sometime ago, the situationhas not improved.  On Sept 2 at 3.30am, flood waters entered our home and there was notmuch we could do as the flood waters damaged our carpets and furniture.  We aren't against development but such things should not mean that wesuffer as a result of it.  We are appealing to our State Assemblyman and MP to please look intothis and help us improve the situation here.  The Menteri Besar has promised titles to this place during the lastelections but nothing has come about so far.Joe and familySeremban                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Penang takes court action against 10 for polluting riversfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 2By K. SuthakarPENANG, Sun. - The Penang Water Authority has initiated legal actionagainst 10 private landowners for allegedly polluting rivers in watercatchment areas.  The charges included that of diverting water flow illegally.  A source said some of the cases were being heard while others were inthe pre-trial process.  The action is being taken following the gazetting of all rivers ascatchment areas in April 1994 under the Penang Water Authority Enactment1972.  The cases included development which had polluted rivers as early as1991.  The source said this when commenting on a recent New Straits Timesreport that pollution resulting from encroachment into catchment areas bydevelopers was threatening the quality of water supply in the State.  The report quoted State Infrastructure Facilities, Transportation andTelecommunications Committee chairman Datuk Dr Hilmi Yahaya as saying thatthe water authority had detected mud and E. Coli in the raw water suppliedto water treatment plants.  He was also reported to have said the State Government had yet togazette land around the rivers as catchment areas "due to limitations inthe law".  The source said three catchment areas on the island - at Teluk Bahang,Sungai Pinang and Air Itam - were facing serious water pollution problemscaused by encroachment.  Private landowners who have put up structures to tap the potential ofeco-tourism have been blamed for this state of affairs.  "We have detected toilets built near rivers and some people diverting astream to create a `private reservoir' for water durian trees.  "We have also detected a bungalow in the catchment area. The PenangIsland Municipal Council had removed the roof as it was an illegalbuilding, but the owner has since put up a new roof," the source said.  The source also said the water authority had taken a developer in TelukBahang to court two years ago for allegedly polluting a river fromhillslope cutting activity. The case is pending.  Meanwhile, Penang Housing Developers Association chairman Datuk EddyChoong said the authorities should allow owners of land within catchmentareas to develop their property. However, he advocated conditions such asa minimum distance from rivers to ensure pollution was averted.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Feedback: Letter: `Killer' Seremban junctionfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 17By G. Tarlochan Singh GillLOOP Road in Seremban and its surrounding areas have seen much improvementlately with the upgrading of roads, the new Sungai Senawang, constructionof new bridges and overall renewal of Tenaga cables.  Thanks to efforts undertaken by wakil rakyat Goh Siow Huat and DatukWong See Wah, who have visited the areas frequently.  Furthermore, another Bailey Bridge has been completed and was officiallyopened on Sept 8, to the relief of many residents of Kampung Semarak andsurrounding areas whose schoolgoing children now have a proper access togo to the Jalan Loop schools, and the working class group.  However, attention has not been given to the "killer junction" (pictureabove) at the trunk road which leads to Taman Rasah Jaya, Taman ThivyJaya, Taman Blossom Park, Taman Blossom Heights and the many housingestates which have sprung up in the area over the years.  Even southbound traffic ply this road to get to Port Dickson and KualaLumpur via the south toll plaza.  As a result of the heavy traffic, there have been many accidents at thespot.  Recalling an incident, a motorcyclist was dragged to his death some 200metres while coming out from Taman Ujong and colliding with a car comingdownslope towards the town from Rasah Jaya. Months later, a pasar malamoperator was dragged similarly along this stretch.  Since then, there have been more accidents, including fatal ones.  It is advisable to have traffic lights controlling the Taman Ujong andTaman  Blossom Park traffic flow, possibly also with a new approach routeto Taman Ujong at the upper section for oncoming traffic.  Residents staying nearby are so used to the sounds of "bangs" that theywould quickly quip satu lagi, meaning one more accident, when they hearone.  The accidents at the nearby Rahang overhead railway bridge and JalanTampin-Jalan Tuanku Antah junction have also kept the Seremban trafficpolice very busy, especially during weekends.  Since this falls under the Seremban Municipal Council's trafficcommittee, it is hoped the committee will act promptly before more livesare lost.G. Tarlochan Singh GillSeremban                       Pix: Pix without caption.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Feedback: Letter: One lane access problemfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 17By Wife of Agitated DriverPLEASE do something about the one lane going in and out of Plaza Phoenix,Km 10.4 Cheras.  The junction is the only access to 14 housing estates in the area.  In addition to the one lane problem, there is also a big hole at thejunction, adding to the massive congestion which lasts throughout the day.  Two-way lanes have been turned into one lane. It would not surprise meif accidents were to occur and even result in lives lost as motoristsusing the lane to get to work or return home are getting very impatient.  Can someone do something about this? Just getting out of this placeduring peak hours to the main road in Cheras takes almost half an hour.  Think of the precious time wasted. And even in town, we have to face thecrazy traffic situation.  I know that jams are everywhere. But residents in Cheras have beenputting up with traffic jams for quite some time.Wife of AgitatedDriverCheras                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996King sends National Day greetings to PNGfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 2KUALA LUMPUR, Sun. - The Yang di-Pertuan Agong Tuanku Ja'afar has sent acongratulatory message to Papua New Guinea's Governor-General Sir WiwaKorowi on the occasion of the nation's independence day tomorrow.  He expressed confidence that the close and friendly relations betweenthe two countries would continue to be strengthened in the years ahead.  Prime Minister Datuk Seri Dr Mahathir Mohamad also sent a congratulatorymessage to his counterpart in Papua New Guinea, Sir Julius Chan, wishingthe country and its people greater progress and prosperity in the yearsahead.  Foreign Minister Datuk Abdullah Ahmad Badawi sent a congratulatorymessage to Papua New Guinea's Foreign Affairs and Trade Minister KilroyGenia.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Concert in honour of Tamil poetfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 18THE Temple of Fine Arts Malaysia will stage a Sangeetha Nruthya NatakaUpanyaasam entitled Krishnaarpanam at the PJ Civic Centre on Thursday.  The programme celebrates Shri Oothakkadu Venkatasubbier's selectedinspired outpourings.  This is the first time a concert in recognition of the poet is beingattempted in the country although most Carnatic music lovers here arefamiliar with the Shri Thyagaraja's compositions.  Venkatasubbier was a poet, musician-cum-saint who lived 350 years ago inthe Tanjor district of South India, dedicating his life to Krishna.  Many of his pieces such as Alai Paayuthey, Paal Vaadiyum and AadathuAssangathu are popular pieces to those who appreciate Tamil poetry.  Most lovers of Carnatic music and the bharatanatyam dance form arefamiliar with his immortal composition Taye Yasodha.  Many of Vekatasubbier's compositions are a delight to dancers becausethe percussion sounds are rhythmic in character.  TFA's music department director Suresh Ramachandran said thepresentation of song and music would follow the traditional Nadopasanastyle of Vadya Gita Brindam or a vocal and instrumental ensemble.  The 50-member ensemble includes instruments like the veena, violin,flute, harmonium and mridangam.  "Adding to this and giving visual imagery to the saint's inspiration isan exposition of Abhinayam and Nrittam by our dancers," he said.  "To enable the younger generation to appreciate the programme, we havedecided to explain and compere the evening both in English and Tamil."  The programme will see the presentation of seven numbers.  Admission is by invitation and enquiries can be made by calling 03-2743709.  TFA has also made an appeal to members of the public to sponsor thesouvenir programme, promised to be a quality publication with translationsand transliterations in English and Tamil.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Stipe's report: Maszeli suspended three daysfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 43APPRENTICE Maszeli Amin pleaded guilty to a charge of careless riding andwas suspended three day by the Stipendiary Stewards yesterday. He wasastride Allez Allez III in Race 6.  The Stipe's report is as follows:  RACE 1: Park Lane III (S Sam), Vietnam Ranger (A John) and Caro Lad (IAzhar) which were difficult to be boxed, will each be required to pass onestarting stall test prior to them being declared to race again. Inside thefinal 100m, Caro Lad drifted out under pressure, causing Bendemus tosteady. Jockey I Azhar was warned to make more attempt to keep his mounton a straight course in future.  RACE 2: Near the 300m, Aspen Gold (App M Zaini) was steadied whenFullmarks (I Azhar) was carried inwards by Pay Me Cash (A John) whichshifted in.  RACE 3: Soviet Wonder drifted outwards in the closing stages of the racecarrying Mega Gold (WH Lao). Jockey WH Lao (Mega Gold), placed second,lodged an Objection against Soviet Wonder, being declared the winner, ongrounds of interference in the last 200m of the race. After consideringall of the evidence, the Race Meeting Stewards were of the opinion thatthe incident had not affected the result and the Objection was overruled.The result stood and Jockey Lao's deposit was refunded.  App SH Lee was warned to make more attempt to keep his mount on astraight course in future.  RACE 4: Acting on veterinary advice that Haramoun (J Saimee) wascoughing, the Race Meeting Stewards ordered its withdrawal. Jockey SYLeong, the rider of Gleam, reported that this horse did not act in thegoing.  RACE 5: Trainer D Baertschiger was fined $50 for failing to produce thecorrect colours on Silently Yours.  Near the 600m, Bellotto Glory (KL Oo) was steadied to avoid the heels ofJade Princess II (SH Oh).  RACE 6: Rounding the 800m turn, Dear Sir and Brown Sugar were bothchecked when tightened between Treasure Dragon (App T Ong) which washanging out and Allez Allez III (App M Maszeli) which shifted in. Thisincident also resulted in Track Lark II having to be steadied. At asubsequent Inquiry, App Maszeli, in the presence of his master, Trainer DDragon, pleaded guilty to a charge of careless riding under MRA Rule 149(a) (ii) in that he allowed his horse, Allez Allez III, to shift in on theturn at the 800m mark causing varying degrees of interference to BrownSugar and Dear Sir. The Panel took into account mitigating circumstancesand suspended App Maszeli from riding in three race days with effect fromMon, 16 Sep 96. He was advised of his Right of Appeal.  Near the 100m, Jockey SH Oh the rider of Valid dropped his whip whenattempting to straighten the horse who had a tendency to lay in. Hepleaded guilty to a charge of careless riding under Rule 149 (a)(ii) andfined $500. He was informed of his Right of Appeal.  RACE 7: Approaching the 1100m, mark Charming Star (V Sivan) began tobuck repeatedly losing some ground. Charming Star will be required to passa 100m, gallop trial from the barrier and veterinary examination.  Trainer JF Heng was questioned about the apparent reversal of form ofKing Of Hearts II (WH Au-Yeung). He explained that this horse had returnedfrom a break prior to which he had problems with its off-fore hoof.  RACE 8: Rounding the home turn, Martina (App B Tai) when racing tight onthe inside of Because Of You II (KL Oh) steadied and then stumbleddislodging App B Tai. Game Of Bridge (SH Oh), Showgirl VIII and SparrowHawk had to take evasive action losing some ground. Shortly after thisincident, High Colours stumbled over the fallen rider, App Tai, dislodgingApp SH Lee. Wings Of Freedom (L Cropp) and Air Jumbo had to take evasiveaction losing some ground.  App Tai was taken to hospital for observation and a statement concerningthe fall will be taken from App Tai when he is available.  RACE 9: Approaching the 300m mark, Sunway was held up for a run on theinside when Dingsheng (M Narredu) drifted inwards. Jockey KK Loh wasquestioned regarding his ride on Sunway in the early part of the race. Headvised the Panel that his instructions were to settle the horse in midfield but he found that the pace was too fast and he ended up further backthan he had wished.  RACE 10: Shortly, after the start, Raphael Gold (M Narredu) wastightened when Yes It's True (P Carbery) and Jiwa Jiwa (TM Wan) bothshifted ground. Linford (J Saimee) was also tightened when River Palace(KL Oo), and My Encore (L Cropp) both shifted ground.  An investigation will be opened into the running and handling ofChattaronga II (CH Chua).                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Carnival atmosphere at 3-on-3 tournamentfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 44By Hanizah HashimTHE mood for celebration was still in the air for the crowd that turned upto watch the 3-on-3 basketball tournament held in conjunction with the39th Merdeka Day at Klang yesterday.  Over 281 teams competed in the tournament, which was jointly organisedby the Klang Municipal Council and Klang Basketball Association, at thePandamaran Sport Complex.  The carnival atmosphere was also felt by four foreign students from theInternational Islamic University who turned up to have fun while puttingtheir basketball prowess to the test.  Calling themselves "Darockz", second year Law student Oseni Enemosah ofNigeria, first year Economics students Eyat Attalah of Jordan, HarrisBrian of the Philippines and Rijal Alhuda of Indonesia decided to join thefun.  Enemosah said they would often get together to play basketball duringtheir free time at the university.  Klang Basketball Association secretary Nyo Chew Hong said at that theend of the one-day tournament, the 45 stands and hoops used - costingRM1,300 each - would be sent to the various schools, residential housingestates and villages to popularise the game in the district.  Sponsors for yesterday's event were New Straits Times Sdn Bhd, Nike,Berjaya Prudential, Milo, Gatorade, Spalding, Ho Chui Sing Transport, LuxAppliances, Axel Sports, Chicago Town Pizza and Dairy Farm Ice-Cream.  The Malay Mail also sponsored the tournament as part of its centennialcelebrations.  Results (all final) - Boys: Non-chinese: 1 IIUM; 2 Devils; 3 Oopreurs;Under-22: 1 Tornado; 2 Magic; 3 Berkeley; Under-18: 1 Hin Hwa; 2 Sunday; 3State Pet; Under-15: 1 Jejaton; 2 State Pet A; 3 Empat Sekawan; Under-12:1 Gombak I; 2 Pandamaran A; 3 Gombak II.  Girls - Open category: 1 YNGN; 2 Kepong; 3 SRJK (c) Khai Tee; Under-15:1 Jenjaron Old Boy (A); 2 Jenjaron Old Boy (B); Under 12: 1 SRJK (c) KhaiTee; 2 SRJK (c) Chong Hua Sasaran; 3 SRJK (c) Chen Noh.                       Pix: Follow me ... Yap Yen Nam shows his skills during an exhibitionmatch yesterday.-By Hamzah Mohamed Som.Pix: No way ... International Islamic University players (right) attemptto stop an opponent from scoring.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Palm oilfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 35CRUDE palm oil physicals ended sharply lower the week in moderately activetrading, in line with the weaker CPO futures contract and uncertainty inthe Chicago market.  Talks that palm oil production for end-August will be 15 percent firmerover July contributed to a bearish sentiment on the cash market.  Estimates by private crop forecaster Ivan Wong that end-August oil palmproduction would increase by 11 percent to about 800,000 tonnes from Julywhile palm oil stocks to grow to 775,000 tonnes from the official figureof 754,634 in July, however was factored in by the market.  A lack of fresh leads and uncertainty over the market's trend in theimmediate and near term contributed to lacklustre trading on the cashmarket.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Rubberfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 35THE Malaysian rubber market closed mixed to lower last week in overallquiet trading despite brokers regaining confidence to trade actively inthe market.  The International RSS One buyer was unchanged from last Friday at 329.00sen per kg while SMR 20 declined by one and a half sen to 314.00 sen perkg.  Improved buying interest from local traders and increased overseasenquiries, had boosted prices Thursday.  A dealer said there would be encouraging buying interest in theimmediate term, following traders' response to what they describe as"comfortable" price levels.  The market see-sawed in a tight range owing to the uncertainty inregional markets and the lack of fresh factors.  The International Natural Rubber Organisation (INRO) daily marketindicator price for Friday (September 12) was at 250.30Malaysian/Singapore cents per kg.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Berita Harian-EON East-West Tour 1996.: Cycling.: Domingo dominates stagefivefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 44By Zakri BaharudinTHE Philippines strengtened their lead in the overall team standings afterEnrique Domingo won the fifth stage of the Berita Harian-EON East-WestTour from Taiping to Sungai Petani yesterday.  Domingo's time of three hours 33:11.41 not only enabled his team to pullaway from the rest but it also allowed him to snatch the overall leader'syellow jersey from teammate Victor Espiritu.  Kuala Lumpur B's Wong Ah Thiam came in second in 3:34:57.12 while HarrisFadzillah Osman of Kuala Lumpur B was third, a futher 56.71 secondsbehind.  Domingo put up a strong performance and led the first breakaway 30kmafter the starting line near Pondok Tanjung.  He maintained his lead through the flat and narrow 140km stretch andpulled away again with about a dozen other cyclists near Selama.  "With this win, I have avenged our defeat in the first stage of theTour," said Domingo.  "I knew that this stage was in the bag because as I got closer to theend I could only see Wong trailing me," added the 26-year-old who worksfor the Philippine Star daily.  Philippines coach Bart Flores was glad that his cyclists adhered to hisorders.  "My plan is working, especially now that the team are in a solidposition," said Flores.  He added that it would be very difficult for any of the other teams towin the overall championship at the end of the Tour in Langkawi.  Meanwhile, Kuala Lumpur A coach Ng Joo Ngan admitted that his strategydidn't quite work out.  "The Philippines are a strong team but I didn't expect them to breakaway as early as in Kamunting," said Ng.  All 86 riders will lineup at the Kuala Muda District Council office tobegin the 137km stage six from Sungai Petani to Alor Star today.  RESULTS - 140km stage five from Taiping to Sungai Petani - Individual: 1Enrique Domingo (Phi) 3hrs 33:11.41, 2 Wong Ah Thiam (KL B) 3:34:57.12, 3Harris Fadhilah Othman (KL B), 4 Mohamed Hardi Razali (Joh), 5 Tran Thoi(Viet), 6 Abdul Muaiz Othman (Pah), 7 Sabri Mustaffa (Ter), 8 MohamedMahazir Ahmad (Sel), 9 Jalil Mohamed (Police), 10 Amir Mat Ansar (Police)- all 3:35:13.83.  Overall (after five stages): 1 Enrique Domingo (Phi) 23hrs 08:32.21s, 2Victor Espirito (Phi) 23:09:52.85, 3 Nor Effandy Rosli (KLA) 23:10:42.98,4 Paterno Curtan Jr (Phi) 23:20:14.07, 5 Tran Thoi (Viet) 23:20:56.88, 6Tsen Seong Hoong (KL A) 23:21:41.50, 7 Suhaimi Keton (KL A) 23:21:41.50, 8Mohamed Hardi Razali (Sel) 23:22:54.23, 9 Wong Ah Thiam (KL B)23:23:00.56, 10 M. Kumaresan (KL A) 23:23:38.37.  Team: 1 Philippines 69:23:47.78, 2 Kuala Lumpur A 69:42.03.91, 3 Vietnam70:14:40.18, 4 Kuala Lumpur B 70:23:12.56, 5 Police 71:03:3.95, 6 Selangor72:07:57.15, 7 Pahang 73:19:06.16, 8 Penang 73:39:03.33.  Overall: 1 Philippines 69:23:47.78, 2 Kuala Lumpur A 69:42:03.91, 3Vietnam 70:14:40.18, 4 Kuala Lumpur B 70:23:12.56, 5 Police 71:03:32.95, 6Selangor 72:07:57.15, 7 Pahang 73:19:06.16.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Tinfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 35TIN price on the Kuala Lumpur Tin Market (KLTM) settled the week 11 senlower at RM15.02 per kg from the previous Friday on overall higherofferings and volatility on the London Metal Exchange (LME), dealers said.  An overall drop of three-month tin on the LME by US$30 from last Friday,resulted in sentiment being easier which sparked off a wave ofliquidations by miners.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Memo: The week that will befrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 35MONDAY, Sept 16* DEPUTY Prime Minister Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim opens the 1996International Company Secretaries Conference, 8.30am, at Hotel Istana,Kuala Lumpur.* INTERNATIONAL Trade and Industry Minister Datuk Seri Rafidah Aziz opensthe seminar/exhibition organised by Taiwan Marble Association and LumutMaritime Terminal Sdn Bhd, 9am, Crown Princess Hotel, Kuala Lumpur.* RENONG Bhd holds its EGM, 10am, Hotel Equatorial, Kuala Lumpur.* NEGARA Properties Bhd holds its AGM, 11am, Pan Pacific Hotel, KualaLumpur.* UNZA Holdings Bhd holds its AGM, 11.30am, at Bukit Kiara Country &Equestrian Resort, Kuala Lumpur.TUESDAY, Sept 17* DEPUTY Prime Minister Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim attends the launch of theKajang Utama low-cost apartments, 8.30am, Kajang.* ENTREPRENEUR Development Minister Datuk Mustapa Mohamed launches theTransTECH '96 exhibition, 8.30am, Kontena Nasional Bhd, Petaling Jaya.* INTERNATIONAL Trade and Industry Minister Datuk Seri Rafidah Aziz opensa forum on technology transfer, 9am, ITM Hotel, Shah Alam.* CHEMICAL Company of Malaysia Bhd holds its EGM, 10am, Pan Pacific Hotel,Kuala Lumpur.* LAI Sing Holdings Bhd holds its AGM, 11.30am, Renaissance Hotel, KualaLumpur.* INTERNATIONAL Trade and Industry Minister Datuk Seri Rafidah Azizlaunches the Netrade industrial directory, 2.30pm, Pan Pacific GlenmarieResort, Kuala Lumpur.* DEPUTY Finance Minister Datuk Wong See Wah launches the "World GoldBanking Workshop", 4.30pm, Renaissance Hotel, Kuala Lumpur.WEDNESDAY, Sept 18* CHONGAI Corporation Bhd holds its AGM, 2.30pm, Syuen Hotel, Ipoh.* GOLDEN Hope Plantations Bhd holds its AGM, 11.30pm, Pan Pacific Hotel,Kuala Lumpur.THURSDAY, Sept 19* MALAYSIAN Industrial Development Finance Bhd holds its AGM and EGM,10.30am, Kuala Lumpur Hilton.* SOUTH Peninsular Industries Bhd holds its AGM,10.30am, Amcorp House,Jalan Dua, off Jalan Chan Sow Lin, Sungai Besi, Kuala Lumpur.* KEDAH Cement Holdings Bhd holds its AGM, 10.30am, Renaissance Hotel,Kuala Lumpur.FRIDAY, Sept 20* SITT Tatt Bhd holds its AGM, 11.30am, Equatorial Hotel, Penang.SATURDAY, Sept 21* REPCO Holdings Bhd holds its EGM, 10am, Shangri-La Tanjung Aru Resort,Kota Kinabalu.* PROMTO Bhd holds its EGM, 10am, KL Hilton.* MANCON Bhd holds its EGM, 11am, Hotel Istana, Kuala Lumpur.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Taking stock: Prestar may scale new highs in profit growth, turnoverfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 34By S. N. LockAS the KLSE second board continued on its unabated record-breaking surge,some second board counters went about their consolidation while someothers were in a hurry to complete their base-building consolidation tojoin in the superbull bandwagon.  On Friday, some second board counters broke out of their recent lull andmaintained their technical composure while the second board underwent itsmeaningful consolidation in late afternoon trade.  Prestar Industries Bhd (Prestar) was one such counter that bucked theKLSE SBI trend on Friday while Sin Kean Boon Group Bhd was the other.  Prestar was incorporated under the Companies Act 1965 as a privatelimited company on July 12, 1984 by some members of the Toh family.Subsequently, it was converted into a public limited company on June 27,1994 when it changed its corporate identity to its present form. Thechange in its corporate identity was a move that prepared Prestar for itslisting on the KLSE second board.  Prestar is principally involved in the manufacturing and trading ofwheelbarrows, building materials and material-handling equipment hardwarewhich includes hand-trucks, wheels and hot-dip galvanised overheadtransmission accessories and parts.  The manufacturing set-up of Prestar was originally intended tocomplement the marketing and trading services of YK Toh Marketing Sdn Bhdwhich was involved in the importation and distribution of hardware,building materials and material-handling equipment. The group laterdiversified into the manufacturing of other related material-handlingequipment like hand-trucks and hot-dip galvanised products.  Besides meeting the domestic demand for wheelbarrows, Prestar embarkedon an international marketing campaign and has successfully secured ordersfrom the United States of America, Japan and Middle East countries. Withthe increasing domestic and export market demands, Prestar undertook anexpansion programme when it moved to its new factory in Rawang.  In July 1995, Prestar subscribed to a 35 per cent equity stake inZelleco Metal Galvanising Sdn Bhd. The remaining stake in the jointventure company was taken up by Selleco, a subsdiary of MalaysianResources Corporation Bhd. The joint venture company was formed toundertake projects undertaken by MRCB-PNB Consortium.  Chartwise, Prestar made its debut on the KLSE second board on Sept 20,1995 when its shares were traded from an intra-day low of RM3.26 to anintra-day high of RM3.62 before easing to close at the RM3.54 level with913,000 shares changing hands.  Immediately after its listing on the KLSE second board, its price trendwent sideways for the next 2 1/2 months before embarking on its firstupleg to RM7.45 on Jan 23, 1996. Prestar's price trend corrected down toRM5.00 on Feb 13, 1996.  A new uptrend unfolded immediately after its price trend reversed out ofits short consolidation. The feverish uptrend with the KLSE second boardrun-ups sent its share prices to yet another all-time historical high ofRM10.60 on April 26, 1996.  The ensuing second board corrections sent its price trend all the waydown to RM5.50 on June 3, 1996. A strong technical rebound to RM8.15 onJuly 17, 1996 followed by a swift retreat to RM6.20 on July 30, 1996 setthe stage for its current uptrend breakout. Its share prices closed atRM9.00 on Friday.  Here are the readings of some of its technical indicators:-  Moving Averages: Prestar's current prices continue to stay above all its10-, 20-, 30-, 50-, 100- and 200-day moving averages in their bullishsequential order.  Momentum Index: Its short-term momentum index has since reversed to theupside following its recent successful re-test of its neutral referenceline.  On Balance Volume: Its short-term OBV is firmly staying above its 10-dayexponential moving averages after moving sideways for four months.  Relative Strength Index: Its 14-RSI staged a decisive breakout of itsimmediate overhead resistance at the 65 per cent level.  OUTLOOK:  After establishing its market leadership in wheelbarrows, hand-trucksand other material-handling equipment in the domestic market, Prestar ison the move once again.  Its joint venture with Selleco into a galvanising project for worksundertaken by MRCB-PNB Consortium and its venture into the manufacture ofsteel guard rails (used mainly as road dividers) clearly signalled itsdetermined diversification into supplying projects related toinfrastructure development of the country.  Apart from its diversification into infrastracture projects, Prestarmoved further upstream when it acquired a 70 per cent stake in SummitSteel Service Centre Sdn Bhd. Summit Steel Service Centre Sdn Bhd sheerssteel into coils and supplies them to the steel industry, including metalstamping companies.  Its diversification exercise coupled with its domestic market leadershipin material-handling equipment will afford Prestar to scale newer highs,both in terms of turnover and profit growth. This will continue tounderpin share prices.  Technically, Prestar's decisive breakout of its immediate overheadresistances (See Prestar's weekly bar chart - D3-D4 - and daily bar chart- E1-E2) clearly signals a trend reversal to the upside. Its price trendhas successfully taken out the neckline (E1-E2) of its double-bottompattern formation.  Its pattern measuring objective is likely to take Prestar's short- tointermediate-term to stage a re-challange of its all-time historical peakat the RM10.60 level.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Boardroom: Tradewinds (M) Bhdfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 34TRADEWINDS (M) Bhd has appointed Syed Abu Bakar Syed Mohsin Almohdzar itsmanaging director with effect from Sept 1.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Currency review: Currency reviewfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 34THE greenback is poised to strengthen further against the ringgit in theweeks ahead on the softening ringgit interest rate outlook. Although theringgit was steady against the greenback last week, we expect a decliningringgit trend to commence soon. The greenback closed Friday at 2.4895,unchanged from the week before.  * THE Singapore dollar's recent rise took a turn downwards against theringgit last week. This was due to the unloading of Singapore dollars byan institution last week. The Singapore dollar closed Friday at 1.7640,down from 1.7700 the previous Friday. Although still on a medium termbullish trend, the dollar's rise could continue to be checked this week.  * THE Japanese yen continued to fall against the ringgit last week amidexpectations that the BoJ would maintain the yen's interest rate at itshistoric low. This expectation was strengthened further when data onFriday showed that Japan's second quarter gross domestic product shrank0.7 per cent. The yen closed Friday at 2.2560, down from 2.2780 the weekbefore.  * AFTER being boosted by the previous week's tension in the Middle East,sterling pared its gains last week against the ringgit. The latesteconomic figures show that the UK economy is growing steadily. This couldmean the end of further UK rate cuts and should be bullish for sterling inthe medium term. Sterling is not expected to rise just yet.  * THE Australian dollar surged against the ringgit and other currenciesMonday on the expectation that global inflation would boost Australiancommodity prices. But the dollar weakened Thursday and Friday when thecentral bank hinted that there was still room for lower Australian rates.The Australian dollar closed Friday at 1.9750, from 1.9688 the previousFriday. It is expected to be steady this week.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Boardroom: Westmont Land (Asia) Bhdfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 34WESTMONT Land (Asia) Bhd announced the appointments of Ms Ong Wei Yeangand Ms Woo Ying Pun as secretaries of the company in place of Mr Lim PhooiKee and Ms Teh Poi Hwa who have resigned from Sept 10.                        Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Boardroom: Westmont Industries Bhdfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 34WESTMONT Industries Bhd has appointed Ms Ong Wei Yeang as joint companysecretary in place of Ms Chua Chiew Moi who resigned with immediateeffect.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Boardroom: L&M Corporation (M) Bhdfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 34L&M Corporation (M) Bhd has appointed Mr Winarto as director and Mr PattisNaidu s/o M Danapal as his alternate director. Both the appointments areeffective from Sept 11.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Boardroom: Insas Bhdfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 34INSAS Bhd announced the appointment of Mr Tan Vooi Giap and Ms Chow YuetKuen as joint company secretaries in place of Mr Wong Mun Wai whoresigned, with effect from Sept 9.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Technically speaking: KLCE CI's short-term trend shaping up wellfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 32By S. N. LockSHARE prices on the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange closed broadly higher lastweek. The bullish run-ups on the KLSE second board spilled over to somesecond and third liners on the main board. Selective buying support onblue-chips and index-linked counters underpinned the KLSE Composite Index.  Persistent retail buying support chased KLSE second board counters onMonday but blue-chips and index-linked counters continued to trade loweramid lack of institutional support. In its earlier trading the CI dippedto its intra-day low of 1,101.40 points before recovering to close at1,104.28.  The broader market ignored news that Malaysia's gross domestic productwas higher at 8.4 per cent in the second quarter of the year when comparedwith 8.3 per cent the previous quarter. From the look of things, it wasexpected and within the confines of some fund managers' forecasts.  The KLSE Second Board Index cooled momentarily on Tuesday when itsadvance was clipped 5.44 points, or 0.97 points, to 555.55 level. However,the SBI managed to post an all-time intra-day high of 566.41 points in itsearlier trading  Some investors switched from speculatives on the second board coupledwith some renewed buying from institutional investors sent the CI 7.47points higher to 1,111.75 level on Tuesday. Many investors viewed thesecond board as way overstretched and took profits accordingly. Thisexplained why the SBI suffered its first loss following four consecutivedaily upticks.  Contrary to many investors' expections, the SBI reversed when retailplayers resumed buying second board counters. Some second board counterswere marked up with triple-digit gains. There was talk that some fundmanagers who missed the second board run-ups were waiting for the secondboard bubble to burst before returning to invest in blue-chip stocks.  While the second board continued with its unabated record-breaking run,many analysts started to question the overvaluations on some second boardcounters. On Friday, there were bouts of profit-taking pressure on secondboard counters but bargain huntings managed to absorb the selling pressureremarkably well.  Reflecting the consolidation mood of the broader market, the CI managedto put up a good show when it gained 12.22 points, or 1.10 per cent, toclose at 1,117.55 points on Friday. The KLSE All Share EMAS Index rose4.28 points, or 1.34 per cent, to 324.20.  The KLSE Industrial Index recovered 21 points, or one per cent, to2,114.21 level. The SBI jumped 17.85 points, or 3.22 per cent, to 572.24points.  On the sectoral performance analysis, the property sector was the topgainer with gains of 3.86 per cent followed by second board in secondplace with a gain of 3.22 per cent. Elsewhere, all other remaining sectorsposted gains ranging from 0.26 per cent to 2.57 per cent.  Chartwise, the CI recovered from its initial setback on Monday when itstaged a successful re-test of its 1,100 support.  The next four trading sessions saw the strong buying support on blue-chips counters. The following are readings of some of its technicalindicators:  Moving Averages: The KLSE CI managed to recover above its 10-, 20-, 30-,50- and 200-day moving averages while its 100-day moving averagescontinued to hover.  Momentum Index: Its short-term momentum index moved out of its recentfalling field trend.  On Balance Volume: Its short-term OBV trend staged a re-penetration ofits 10-day exponential moving averages.  Relative Strength Index: Its 14-RSI continued to trade within theconfines of its neutral zone.  OUTLOOK:  The KLSE CI successfully moved out of the upper two per cent standarddeviation band of its Keltner Channel. Similarly, it managed to break outof its short-term downtrend (See KLSE CI's Daily Bar Chart - B3-B4). Bothof these technical scenarios suggest that the CI's short-term trend isfast improving as it approaches its next bullish time window.  From its weekly bar chart, the CI continued to stay within the gradualupward path of its Andrews' Channel. Its immediate-term Andrews' Channelprovides glimpses of the CI's intermediate-term perspectives.  The CI violated the Andrews' lower median line (See KLSE CI's weekly barchart - A5-A6) in November 1995, but was quickly vaulted back into thechannel, staying right below its median line (A1-A2). Once again, itstaged a successful re-test of the support of its lower median line (A5-A6) on July 30, 1996.  Thus, the CI's short- and intermediate-term perspectives are shaping upvery nicely as it approaches its next bullish time window. This week, theCI is poised to take out its immediate overhead resistance at 1,123 pointlevel. Its next resistance zone hovers around 1,140-1,155 points.  The SBI is poised to crack the 600 level this week amid intermittentprofit-taking. Rotational plays will once again feature prominently as theSBI will continue to move along its uptrend channel (See KLSE SBI - C1-C2and C3-C4).                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Clean-up Day team clears up 620kg of rubbishfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 7KLANG, Sun. - A car-seat, a baby-walker and motorcycle spare parts wereamong the "treasures" collected at The Body Shop's Fifth Annual CoastalClean-Up at the esplanade, Port Klang, today.  More than 100 participants from The Body Shop, Klang Municipal Council,Klang Youth Council and Red Crescent societies from schools here scouredthe 1.5 kilometre esplanade for trash dumped by inconsiderate people.  The total amount of trash collected weighed 621.20 kilogrammes.  The clean-up was held in conjunction with International Coastal Clean-UpDay which is co-ordinated by the Centre for Marine Conservation inAtlanta, the United States.  CMC is a non-governmental organisation which co-ordinates more than200,000 volunteers in clean-up efforts around the world on the secondSunday of every September.  The Body Shop's public and media relations manager, Molly Fong, said itinitiated the first Malaysian clean-up in 1992 and had co-ordinated annualclean-ups at different coastlines, including at Langkawi, Tioman andPantai Morib.  Today's clean-up was launched at 9.30am by Sementa Assemblyman DatukAbdul Rahman Talil.  Mina Foong, managing director of The Body Shop Malaysia, said the clean-up was to single out the kinds of rubbish dumped indiscriminately.  Participants recorded information about the trash collected on datacards which will be sent to CMC. The information will be processed andbecome part of CMC's annual International Coastal Clean-Up report.  Foong said CMC would use the report to lobby Governments, the UnitedNations and companies whose products were commonly found in coastal trash.                       Pix: Hard work ... Volunteers from Klang area Red Crescent Societycollecting rubbish along the Port Klang esplanade yesterday.-By Wong SungJeng.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Using cards to pay toll by year 2000from NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 7By Mimi Syed YusofSUNGAI SIPUT, Sun. - Motorists in the Klang Valley will have to useelectronic cards for payment under the open toll system which will beintroduced in the year 2000, Works Minister Datuk Seri S. Samy Vellu said.  He said the central electronic toll collection system would reducemanpower at toll stations.  "The best option is to introduce electronic toll cards as a mode ofpayment for motorists entering the Federal capital," he told reportersafter attending a badminton exhibition match yesterday.  Samy Vellu said the proposal was submitted to the Cabinet at its meetinglast Wednesday.  The move would ensure smooth toll collection as motorists need not queuefor long periods at toll booths.  Under the system, motorists will have to purchase the electronic tollcards.  The Minister also said the Cabinet had requested his ministry to submita report on the system within two to three months.  On the system, Samy Vellu said a central collection agency would be setup to collect all toll payments via the electronic cards.  The agency will then channel the payments to all the companies andconcessionaires of road projects.  He said to date 12 road projects outside Kuala Lumpur had been approved.  After the roads are completed there will be toll stations every three orfive kilometres along the roads leading to the city centre.  "This means there will be about 200 toll stations around the KlangValley," he said, adding that several companies had recommended that anintelligent system be implemented to facilitate toll collection.  On whether Projeck Lebuhraya Utara Selatan would be included in the newsystem, Samy Vellu said PLUS would be exempted because it dealt with long-distance travelling based on the closed toll concept.  "The focus is now on the toll collection system in Kuala Lumpur whichwill include all the roads around the capital and from Kuala Lumpur to thehighways," he said.  Also included are the Federal highway and roads from Kuala Lumpur-ShahAlam, the integrated highway from Kuala Lumpur-Putrajaya and Kuala LumpurInternational Airport in Sepang, Shah Alam-Putrajaya and KLIA, JalanKuching to Kuala Lumpur and Shah Alam-Petaling Jaya.  Another route is Jalan Cheras-Batu 7 Kajang which is connected to theNorth-South Expressway.  Samy Vellu said the system must be adopted because it was the best wayto collect toll from all the entry points of the city centre.  He said the ministry would also hold discussions with consortiums ofroad projects in preparing the proposal.  He said six companies had started work on several toll stations and atleast two would start collecting toll when the roads are completed.  He also said experts would be called in to study the situation and toprovide feedback.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996`Ban Singaporeans from buying food'from NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 7TAIPING, Sun. - The Federation of Malaysian Consumer Association wants theGovernment to ban Singaporeans from taking any food items out of JohorBaru.  It has proposed that the Government check the car boots of Singaporeansleaving Johor Baru for the purpose.  Speaking at a press conference after a forum on current consumer issuesorganised by the Consumer Association of Taiping held at a leading hotelhere, Fomca president Mohamed Hamdan said the move was aimed at protectingconsumers in Johor Baru.  He said if the Singapore Government could have a half-tank policy tocheck on the petrol tanks of cars entering the republic, then it was notunreasonable for the Malaysian Government to check the car boots ofSingaporean motorists to prevent them from taking away food items.  Mohamed Hamdan said as the country was not self-sufficient and importingmany essential food items like rice, flour, fish and chicken, it wasunfair for Singaporeans to be allowed to take away food items fromMalaysia.  "How can we allow Singaporeans to take away our imported essential fooditems," he said.  Mohamed Hamdan also cited as an example how Malaysia was importing wheat100 per cent.  He added that the Singapore Government was imposing a lot ofrestrictions on Malaysians entering the republic.  Mohamed Hamdan said since food had become costly in Johor Baru, it waswise for Malaysia to control the "re-exportation" of such items by non-Malaysian individuals.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Hamdan: Open system a burdenfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 7IPOH, Sun. - The Federation of Malaysian Consumers Association presidentMohamed Hamdan Adnan said today the open toll system requiring motoristswho enter Kuala Lumpur to pay toll was a burden to consumers.  He said consumers were currently burdened with many taxes, whichincluded paying the highway toll.  He said the association would only support the system if the Governmentensured that the public transportation system and infrastructurefacilities within the Klang Valley were up to the mark.  While agreeing that this would help reduce traffic congestion within thecity centre, Hamdan said without a proper public transportation system,the open toll concept was inappropriate.  He also said there were other ways to reduce city centre trafficcongestion such as moving activities from Kuala Lumpur to other parts ofKlang Valley.  "Kuala Lumpur is congested because development is currently concentratedthere.  "The Government should also consider other alternatives such asorganising activities outside the city and to put a stop to developmentplans within Kuala Lumpur," he told reporters after giving a talk at theOld Andersonian Club on current consumer issues.  Hamdan also said the Government should not concentrate solely ondevelopment within the city but that it should be balanced and spread outevenly.  He proposed that the Government set up townships outside the citycentre. He, however, said development of townships should not harm theenvironment but should be properly planned so that it would complement theoutskirts of the city.  "The Government should not burden the consumers by asking them to paywithout giving them an option," he said.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Girl needs RM20,000 for heart operationfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 8KOTA BARU, Sun. - Four-year-old Nik Nurul Akalili Mohd Nasir needsRM20,000 for a heart operation at the National Heart Institute very soon.  Her father, Mohd Nasir Zakaria, said she was diagnosed as suffering fromComplex Congenial Eyanotic since birth.  Public donations had helped pay for an operation on Sept 23, 1994.However, Nik Nurul needs another operation, scheduled for Sept 27. "Wecannot raise the money as my wife and I are only pettin Kampung To KuSering today.  Donations can be sent to the New Straits Times, 31 Jalan Riong, 59100Kuala Lumpur. Please write the girl's name on the back of the cheque.                       Pix: Help needed ... Mohd Nasir holding four-year-old Nik Nurul.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996State aims to reduce number of poor familiesfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 8By Sa'odah EliasSABAK BERNAM, Sun. - The Selangor State Government aims to reduce thenumber of poor families to less than one per cent of the State'spopulation before the end of the century.  The number of families living below the poverty line in Selangorcurrently stands at 2,302 or slightly over two per cent.  Menteri Besar Tan Sri Muhammad Muhammad Taib said besides direct helpand assistance, various programmes would be introduced to provide membersof these families with new skills to enable them to better their lives.  "Through our concerted poverty eradication programme, we hope to reducethe number of poor families in Selangor to below 1,000 by the year 2000.  "With the help of the State Poverty Eradication Foundation, we areconfident of meeting this target," he said at a key presenting ceremony to14 proud homeowners whose houses were built by YBK.  Each of the two-bedroom houses built under the YBK Desa Kasih scheme inKampung Tebuk Pulai near here cost about RM20,000 which includes the valueof a piece of land measuring 15 by 21 metres.  They were built for families in the district identified as being verypoor. Besides a house, each family was provided with 20 hydrophonic casesto enable them to venture into hydrophonic farming.  Muhammad said in the effort to eradicate poverty in Selangor, emphasiswould be placed on upgrading the skills of the people to enable them to beindependent and discourage them from expecting Government handouts.  He said the programme, which also encompassed the poor in urban areas,would be further intensified over the next few years to ensure their placein the mainstream of development in the State.  He said the rural poor would be supplied with new farming skills whilethose in urban areas would be provided with business opportunities withthe setting up of stalls and hawker centres.  YBK chairman Datuk Zainal Abidin Sakom said since 1991, the foundationhad provided monetary aid to 481 families living in Malay traditionalvillages to repair or rebuild their houses under the Lindungan Kasihscheme.  Under the Desa Kasih scheme, he said, three housing schemes - which havebenefited 90 homeless families - had been built.                       Pix: What is that ... Muhammad Taib asking about growing vegetables usingthe hydroponic method. With him are (from left) houseowners KamariahMansor, Azman Ahmad and Hassan Hamid.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Gold cheaper by RM3 per gm due to price warfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 8IPOH, Sun. - The price of the top three grades of gold is down by RM3 pergramme after a price war between Federation of Malaysian Goldsmiths andJewellers' Association members and non-members.  Perak branch chairman Y.M. Chong said the price reduction came aboutafter an emergency meeting in Kuala Lumpur on Sept 3.  "We are doing this to stabilise the price of gold in the local market,"he told a news conference today.  He said about 200 members in the State had been advised to adhere to theassociation's resolution although their profit margin could be cut to lessthan five per cent.  Chong said non-members were selling gold at a lower price and this wasseriously affecting the business.  "In the past, it was up to 12 per cent but we are making a sacrifice toalert consumers of what is happening in the industry," he said, addingthat the price was expected to go up early next year.  He said the 999 (24 carat gold), which was sold at RM39 per gramme, wasnow being sold at RM36, 916 (22 carat) from RM37 to RM34 and 835 (20carat) from RM34 to RM31.  Chong claimed many non-members sold gold to customers at a cheaper ratebut this was of inferior quality.  "There are also goldsmiths who offer gifts like radios and cameras.  "This could be a sales gimmick to sell off inferior quality gold," Chongsaid.  He said these errant goldsmiths refused to become members because theyhad to adhere "to our strict business ethics, rules and regulations".  "We self-regulate ourselves by investigating members if customerscomplain they have been cheated or shortchanged by them," he said.  He advised consumers to buy jewellery from reputable goldsmith outletswho were also members of the federation.  Chong said customers could not get good resale prices for theirjewellery if they bought inferior items.  He said the standard rate was 18 per cent off the current gold marketprice.  Chong said the Domestic Trade and Consumer Affairs Ministry'senforcement unit also periodically checked the outlets.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Hotel Equatorial opens doors in Ho Chi Minh Cityfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 8By Shareem Amry in Ho Chi Minh City, VietnamTHE Hotel Equatorial chain was extended to seven locations when its latestaddition in Ho Chi Minh City officially opened its doors on Saturday.  Owned by Singapore-based Planergo Pte Ltd, the RM87.5-million hotel wasopened by the acting chairman of Ho Chi Minh City People's Committee, VoViet Thanh.  Pembangunan Anika Sdn Bhd, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Hotel Equatorial(M) Sdn Bhd, is the biggest shareholder in Planergo with a 31 per centstake. Arab-Malaysian Development has 20 per cent, while Singapore'sNatSteel Properties Pte Ltd and Lim Kah Ngam (Investment) Pte Ltd hold23.75 per cent and 20.25 per cent respectively.  Vietnamese entrepreneur Phan Thanh holds the rest.  Speaking after the launch, Planergo's executive chairman Datuk Lim KongWai said:  "We think things will improve here, especially since Vietnam establishedrelations with the Asean. We even upgraded the hotel because of ourconfidence in Vietnam's economic reforms."  The hotel now registers an occupancy rate of between 40 and 50 per cent.  The chain extends to Kuala Lumpur, Penang, Singapore, Jakarta, Guangzhouand Shanghai.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Memo: The week that wasfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 35MONDAY, Sept 9* LAND & General Bhd said it plans to list Bumi Armada Navigation Sdn Bhd,its subsidiary in the oil and gas sector, through a new investment holdingcompany called Bumi Armada Bhd.* BANK Negara Governor Datuk Ahmad Mohamed Don reiterated his call thatsmall-sized local banks consider merging.* John Hancock Life Insurance (Malaysia) Bhd said it was seeking BankNegara's approval to introduce a new investment-linked policy which wouldhave some of its premiums invested in unit trusts.* PETRONAS president and chief executive Datuk Mohd Hassan Marican saidAmerican threats of sanctions against companies investing in Iran andLibya would not affect Petronas' oil field deals in Iran.* CONFECTIONERY firm Apollo Food Holdings Bhd's public issue and offer-for-sale was oversubscribed by 70.6 times.* UNILEVER (M) Holdings Sdn Bhd was confident of achieving between eightto 10 per cent growth in its turnover for the year ending Dec 31, 1996,despite facing stiff competition, said chairman and managing director ChimHowe Lai.TUESDAY, Sept 10* BANK Negara will implement a new cheque clearing system in three phasesfrom next year which will see outstation cheques being cleared within fivedays instead of the present maximum of 14 days.* CHIN Teck Plantations Bhd, through new associate company GlobalFormation (M) Sdn Bhd, said it was participating in joint ventures todevelop oil palm plantations and processing plants in Indonesia.* HONGKONG Bank Malaysia Bhd launched an insurance plan for its housingloan borrowers - known as the Mortgage Protection Plan with CriticalIllness - which assumes the policyholder's house mortgage once theborrower is diagnosed with critical illness.* FEDERAL Hotels International formed an alliance with Inter-ContinentalHotels and Resorts to enhance its operations and management efficiency.* THE 28th Asean Economic Ministerial Meeting in Jakarta, Indonesia, woulddiscuss the progress achieved so far in co-operation in trade, investmentand services among member companies and approaches to enhance Aseaneconomic integration, International Trade and Industry Minister, DatukSeri Rafidah Aziz said.WEDNESDAY, Sept 11* LEADER Cable Industry Bhd, a subsidiary of listed Leader UniversalHoldings Bhd is said to be planning to build a RM1 billion, 100MW powerplant in Xiamen City, China.* BANK Negara said it would implement guidelines for minimum auditstandards for internal auditors of financial institutions beginning Jan 2,1997.* MALAYSIAN Resources Corporation Bhd signed a memorandum of understandingwith the Kelantan Economic Development Corporation for the development ofinfrastructure, industry and property in the State.* AMMB Holdings Bhd, the holding company of the Arab-Malaysian bankinggroup, said it would make a large cash call soon to help in the expansionof its commercial banking arm, Arab-Malaysian Bank Bhd, and to raise thebank's shareholders' funds to qualify it as a Tier-1 bank.THURSDAY, Sept 12* BANK Negara said it will soon implement a merit/demerit system forinsurance companies to bring about changes and improvements in theindustry.* THE Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange announced that regulated short-sellingwill start on Sept 30.* DEPUTY Prime Minister Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim said that Malaysia wouldlike to diversify its exports to South Korea.* YE Chiu Metal Smelting Bhd made an impressive debut on the second boardof the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange, chalking up a gain of RM11.80 over itsRM4 offer price.* THE country's first impartial unit trust performance table was launched,enabling Malaysian investors to monitor the performance of the variousunit trust schemes.* CCM Chemicals Sdn Bhd was reported to be gearing up to expand itsbusiness by participating in the RM1 billion chlor-alkali plant project inKerteh, Terengganu.FRIDAY, Sept 13* FINANCE Minister Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim has directed Bank Negara tostudy how credit card users can get better protection.* NEW Straits Times Press (M) Bhd said it had sold its 20.1 per cent stakein Commerce Asset-Holding Bhd, which controls Bank of Commerce, to anotherlisted company, FCW Holdings Bhd, for nearly RM1 billion in cash.* NAM Fatt Corporation Bhd will become the owner of the RM2 billion KesumaLakes and Sciencity Integrated township in Semenyih, Selangor, after itannounced a proposed acquisition of property developer Agenda Istimewa SdnBhd.* PHILEO Allied Bhd, which has introduced the PAL Virtual Kiosk offering avirtual banking concept, said it plans to utilise the technology basedmultiple delivery channel with the introduction of more technology-basedproducts and services.* MALAYAN United Industries Bhd has no plans to buy a bank following itsacquisition of Pengkalen Holdings Bhd, said management services divisionmanaging director Ng Kwan Cheong.* PJ Development Holdings Bhd has projected sales of RM150 million fromits Damai Laut holiday apartments, which is part of its integrated DamaiLaut Country Resort project inLumut, Perak, said managing director TangEng Lam.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Golden Valley expects RM20m from sale of lotsfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 30GOLDEN Valley Golf Resort Bhd expects a return of RM20 million from thesale of 180 bungalow lots at its course in Air Panas, Jasin, Malacca.  Its executive director, Azman Abdul Ghani, said the 180 lots were 7,000to 15,000 square feet in area and were being sold for between RM14 andRM16 per square foot.  "Those who had purchased these lots can choose from our 10 models ofbungalow houses. Our subsidiary company will construct them at a cost ofRM200,000 to RM500,000," he said.  Azman added buyers would also get a free membership to the golf clubwhich is worth RM36,000.  He told this to reporters after witnessing Chief Minister Datuk SeriMohd Zin Abdul Ghani launch the project on Saturday.  The development of the bungalow lots is the second major projectundertaken by Golden Valley.  Its previous project was a 27-hole golf course with a clubhouse, seminarfacilities, a karaoke lounge and a Japanese hot bath on 160ha.  Azman said the company had spent RM8 million on the infrastructure fordeveloping the bungalow lots.  He said owners who chose to let their houses could get assistance from aGolden Valley subsidiary.  Future projects for the company include the development of chalets and220 service apartment units.  "This project would be completed in five to eight years and we hope theprofit generated from this and our other projects would spur our drive tobecome a listed company," Azman said.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Emerging companies: Company profile: Saujana sees lots of opportunitieswaitingfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 30By Zuraimi AbdullahAS suggested by the Malay word saujana, which is often associated with thephrase sejauh mata memandang (as far as the eyes can see), Kuala LumpurStock Exchange main board-bound Saujana Consolidated Bhd sees its days ofglory not within its grasp yet.  "The horizon is endless, and so are the opportunities," managingdirector Abu Bakar Mohamad Nor said during a recent interview.  Although it has carved a niche for itself in the hotel and golf coursemanagement business the company believes there is a lot more businessopportunities to be seized.  Recalling the history of Saujana, Abu Bakar said it all began in theearly 1980s when Prime Minister Datuk Seri Dr Mahathir Mohamad, afterreturning from an overseas trip, instructed Peremba Group of Companies -via the Urban Development Authority - to set up a company to manage hotelcum golf resorts.  "Peremba at that time was under UDA, and the Prime Minister who was inhis early years in office, had this vision. Thus, Saujana came intoexistence.  "Eventually, with the combination of expertise from three good partners- Hyatt International, Peremba and Saujana itself - and after someproblems, we have grown to what we are today."  Saujana now owns and operates the renowned Hyatt Regency Saujana Hoteland Saujana Golf and Country Club, both in Subang Jaya, Selangor, anddevelops and markets computerised information systems as well as sellsturf equipment to golf clubs.  And more recently, it diversified into the property sector afteracquiring 30 per cent equity in developer PGK Sdn Bhd.  Abu Bakar said Saujana was proud to have built the country's best golfcourse at the Saujana Golf and Country Club. The 18-hole course had beenvoted the best course by Golf Malaysia magazine in 1991, 1993 and 1995.  He admitted Saujana had benefited much from its link with its parentcompany, Peremba.  The alliance with Hyatt was formed over eight years ago. The partnershipallayed Saujana's fears of stiff competition in the hotel and hospitalityindustry.  "When we mention the name Hyatt, the thing that crosses people's mind isits five-star hotel. During the recession, when several hotels were comingup in the Klang Valley, we still managed to record an occupancy rate above75 per cent."  Abu Bakar said Hyatt Regency enjoyed an average occupancy rate of 74 percent last year and 82 per cent for the first six months this year. This ishigh when compared with the 66 per cent registered by other hotels inPeninsular Malaysia.  About 75 per cent of Hyatt Regency's customers are corporate andbusiness travellers and of this, about 65 per cent are repeat customers.  Now after eight profitable years, Abu Bakar said Saujana wanted tointroduce the concept in other places in the country.  "Future expansion will be geared towards synergistic growth consistentwith our core business."  He foresees more golf courses will be built, providing greater businessopportunities for the company.  "The best way to exploit this is to support them through fullutilisation of our Toro turf equipment and Club Car golf buggies. We havealready captured 70 per cent of the market share in turf equipment.  "On top of that, we believe many local authorities are going to developparks and football fields and they still need our machinery.  "Furthermore, many other hotels as well as airports need our productslike the buggies," he said, adding that Saujana is the sole distributorfor Toro products and the golf buggies.  It also plans to increase its land bank, which stands at 7.6ha andlocated close to Sultan Abdul Aziz Shah International Airport in Subang.The land was initially earmarked for the development of 569 units ofcondominium.  "Although the development of the condominiums has been approved, we willstill evaluate other proposals to maximise returns on investment and thosethat complement our core business."  Saujana is now scouting for land in Johor, Phuket in Thailand and Baliin Indonesia for property development.  "We are now talking to several parties. In Johor, we hope to secureabout 400 acres (160ha) of land. As for Phuket and Bali, we cannot saymuch as the discussions are still at the preliminary stage," he said.  Abu Bakar said Saujana, backed by expertise from Peremba and itsassociated company PGK, was capable of undertaking any propertydevelopment.  PGK is now developing Bandar Baru Wangsa Maju in Kuala Lumpur which isexpected to be completed in about 10 years.  The company recently completed Phase Six of the project and to date hasrecorded sales of about RM650 million.  He ruled out the possibility that the property sector would supplantSaujana's core business, saying that income from both sectors wouldprobably be the same in a few years.  "In the next few years, our hotel business and property business eachwill contribute 40 per cent to our revenue. The remaining 20 per cent willcome from our golf business."  Currently, the core business contributes about 60 per cent of its incomeand property 30 per cent.  Saujana has forecast a pre-tax profit of RM15.76 million for thefinancial year ending 1996. Last year, it made about RM11.18 million.SAUJANA CONSOLIDATED BHDBUSINESS:The company is an investment holdings company with its main activitiesinclude the management of hotel com golf resort as well as golf course,distribution of Toro turf equipment and Club Car golf buggies, and thedevelopment and marketing of computerised information systems to golfclubs.HISTORY:Incorporated in Malaysia under the name of Saujana General Assets Bhd andassumed its present name on Jan 10, 1996.BOARD OF DIRECTORSChairman: Datuk Mohd Rozali Abdul RahmanDirectors: Abu Bakar Mohd Nor, Lim Li Li, Thomas Mun Lung Lee, MohamadAbdul Halim Ahmad.Authorised capital: RM150 millionIssued and paid-up capital: RM110 millionFinancial year-end: Dec 31Pre-tax profit: RM11.18 million* RM15.76 miilion**Gross earnings per share: 30.4 sen**Gross dividend per share: 5 sen**Listing sought: Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange main board* Pre-tax profit for the financial year ended Dec 31, 1995.** Forecast for the financial year ending Dec 31, 1996.                       Pix: Abu Bakar ... managing director.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Electrolux aims for larger market share in Aseanfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 28By Noorzita Samad in Stockholm, SwedenSWEDISH home appliances giant Electrolux AB aims to be among the top threesuppliers of washing machines, refrigerators and vacuum cleaners in Aseanby the year 2000.  The target was set amidst its comprehensive plan to capture a largershare in Asia's emerging consumer markets - traditionally dominated byprice-competitive products from Japan and to a lesser extent, South Korea.  Apart from Asean countries, other potential markets in Asia identifiedby Electrolux are China and India.  And having set its goal to make further inroads into Asia, Electroluxhas consistently focused its efforts in developing products as well aswidening its investment in manufacturing operations in various Asiannations.  The group recently unveiled a new range of environmentally-friendlyproducts known as AlphaCare in Singapore.  The new Electrolux washing machine, refrigerator, vacuum cleaner, built-in oven and gas hob, and microwave oven will be launched in Malaysia,Indonesia and Thailand next month.  Its senior executive vice-president and chief financial officer LennartRibohn said EIectrolux hoped the introduction of the AlphaCare range wouldprovide an impetus towards realising its goal of becoming tops in Asean.  The group is aiming for a 20 per cent market share of washing machinesand a 10 per cent market share of refrigerators in Asean within the nextfour years.  It is estimated that by then, the washer market in Asean (excluding thePhilippines) will be worth about US$500 million (RM1.25 billion) andrefrigerator, almost US$1 billion.  Ribohn said this to a group of journalists from Malaysia, Thailand,Indonesia, Vietnam, Hong Kong and China during a visit to Electroluxglobal headquarters last week.  The group also visited Electrolux-Zanussi factory in Pordenone, nearVenice in Italy; the group's vacuum cleaner factory, quality control andtesting facilities in Vastervik, about 280km from Stockholm; and,Electrolux Home Centre and retail shops in Sweden's capital city.  Ribohn said the group was now evaluating the feasibility of setting upmanufacturing facilities in the Asean region.  Although he declined to disclose the possible locations and theestimated investment for the ventures, Ribohn said the plants wouldproduce washing machines and refrigerators.  They will likely be in the form of joint ventures with local partners,with Electrolux maintaining the majority control.  The deals are expected to be finalised by the end of this year, saidRibohn, who also heads the new markets division which besides Asia alsoincludes Latin America, Eastern Europe and parts of Africa.  Electrolux (Malaysia) Holdings Sdn Bhd deputy managing director S.N.Soon was quoted as saying last month that the company planned to increaseits investment in Malaysia through the establishment of another factory.  He said the company had yet to determine what to manufacture, addingthat the final plan would be decided by its Stockholm head office.  Electrolux now has a vacuum cleaner factory in Shah Alam, Selangor.  Electrolux is not a newcomer to the Malaysian market, having been aroundsince the 1970s. In fact, Electrolux is almost synonymous with vacuumcleaners in Malaysia.  But there is more to the group than just vacuum cleaners.  It also produces other household appliances, commercial appliances andoutdoor and industrial products. It manufactures washing machines,dishwashers, industrial-size laundry machines, lawn trimmers andchainsaws, to name a few.  Last year, sales reached 115.8 billion Swedish Kroners (RM45.16billion).  The group now manufactures appliances under a number of brand names ofcompanies which it had acquired over the years. In 1994, for instance, ittook over German appliance company AEG Hausgerate.  It shifted to higher gear in its global expansion drive with theacquisition of the famous Italian brand name, Zanussi, in 1984.  Electrolux now has investments in more than 90 countries in commercialappliances, industrial products and outdoor products.  While its brands are tops in Europe and North America, sales in Asiaonly contributed 5.1 per cent to the group's turnover last year.                       Pix: Lennart Ribohn ... chief finacial officer.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Shop-offices in Kesuma Lakes available soonfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 28AGENDA Istimewa Sdn Bhd, a member of the Gasing Heights group, will soonopen for sale Phase One of its shop-offices at Kesuma Lakes, a RM2 billiontownship in Semenyih, Selangor.  The three-storey shop-offices have an average built-up area of 22X70feet, with prices ranging between RM425,000 to RM730,000.  They are located within the proposed shopping mall area, between theresidential and commercial sections of the township, the company said in astatement.  Sales of the shop-offices are expected to be as brisk as those for thebungalow lots, which breached RM120 million since the launch in July.  Kesuma Lakes is a 548ha self-contained township comprising residential,commercial and industrial development with facilities such as a privatecollege, four schools, a medical centre, police and fire stations.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Germany's Vega eyes Malaysian martfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 28GERMAN-BASED Vega AG, which produces unplasticised polyvinyl chloridewindow and door systems, will join up with Malaysian companies to marketits products.  "The companies will buy the (window and door) profiles from us as wellas the machinery for cutting the profiles. We hope to identify long-termpartners by the end of the year," regional manager (Asia Pacific) LionelTeng said in a statement.  He added that the company had taken the first step towards regionalexpansion by increasing the use of its softline system of window and doorprofiles for the Asian market.  "Veka is also seeking to consolidate its foothold in markets such asIndonesia, Vietnam, South Korea, Taiwan and the Philippines.  "To date, we have formed strategic alliances with manufacturers inSingapore, Thailand and Brunei," said Teng.  To cater for the requirements of the Asia Pacific market, Veka hasdeveloped a "tropical compound", which safeguards against discolourationof uPVC from prolonged exposure to intensive solar radiation, heat andhumidity.  "In Malaysia, profiles will be developed in co-operation with leadingarchitects and designers to ensure local appeal."  Veka headquarters is in Sendenhorst, Germany and it also has operationsin the United States, Britain, Belgium, France, Spain, Poland and China.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996RM1b sales expected form Lestari Perdanafrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 28SAP Holdings Bhd expects RM1 billion in sales from its latest developmentproject, Lestari Perdana, situated next to a forest reserve in Selangor.  The 400ha project will see the mushrooming of bungalows, semi-detachedunits and link houses situated within an integrated garden township.  Residents will also enjoy facilities such as fibre optic networks, ahypermarket, a private hospital as well as schools and community halls.  The project, managed by SAP Air Hitam Properties Sdn Bhd, is expected tobe completed within eight to 10 years.  Sales of the first phase of the project, comprising bungalow lots, waslaunched in Kuala Lumpur Saturday.  SAP Air Hitam general manager (property sector II) Ahmad Azhar Hanafisaid the response had been satisfactory with 65 of the 200 bungalow lotssold during a soft launch a month ago.  "Sales from the 65 lots amount to RM20 million," he told reporters,adding that the cost per square foot ranges from RM28 to RM37 while thebungalow built-up designs range from 8,000 square feet to 17,000 squarefeet.  SAP is now finalising the details and plans for the link houses andsemi-detached units which are expected to be launched mid next year.  Lestari Perdana is the latest of a string of housing developmentprojects undertaken by SAP.  Other projects under the company include Taman TAR in Kuala Lumpur andBandar Baru Selayang.                       Pix: Mingling with the crowd ... Ahmad Azhar (in suit) talking withpotential buyers.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Bank to expand savings productsfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 26By Kasmiah MustaphaPACIFIC Bank Bhd plans to boost its savings products and services inresponse to the Government's call to nurture the saving habit especiallyamong schoolchildren and workers.  President and chief executive officer Tan Sri Dr Lin See Yan said withthis in mind, the bank intends to introduce more savings products targetedat people from various ages.  "Our savings programme will be divided into four phases, starting fromage one right up until the person retires, as the needs of the public aredifferent."  To develop the saving habit among the public, the Government has alsoformed a Cabinet Committee on Savings, envisaged to help raise thenational savings rate and reduce the savings-investment gap.  The country's savings rate which currently stands at 34.3 per cent isinsufficient to balance the needs for investment, which has reached 40 percent.  Lin said as a first step, Pacific Bank has launched the Dolphin Saveaccount nationwide, to coincide with the opening of its branch in BandarSunway, as part of its national savings campaign drive.  Holders of the Dolphin Save account, who are children aged 12 and below,will enjoy a free personal accident insurance coverage up to 10 times theaccount balance and extended two-way insurance coverage which covers bothchildren and adults.  Lin said through the systematic programme and a good branch network,Pacific Bank hopes to attract more depositors. Last year, Pacific Bank'stotal deposits were RM5.5 billion.  "To date, the amount has increased to RM6.5 billion and we hope torecord total deposits of RM7 billion by the year end."  Speaking to reporters after officiating Pacific Bank's latest branch inBandar Sunway on Saturday, Lin added the bank plans to have 60 branches bythe end of the year from 57 at present.  "We believe with a strong branch network, we would be able to attractmore depositors and at the same time encourage people to save."                       Pix: Bearing gifts ... Lin (right) and Pacific Bank Bandar Sunway branchmanager Steven Lai Fuk Siong with the `Blue Dolphin', a mascot for theDolphin Save account.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Telekom gets Amalan Tepat jobsfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 26TELEKOM Malaysia Bhd has been given the exclusive rights for the next fiveyears to provide telecommunications infrastructure for projects conductedby Amalan Tepat Sdn Bhd in Malacca.  This includes the A Famosa Golf Resort in Alor Gajah.  Telekom expects to spend a total of RM4.2 million as an initial cost toprovide telecommunication facilities there and to Amalan Tepat's otherprojects in the near future.  A memorandum of understanding was signed between the two companies onSaturday in Malacca.  Amalan Tepat was represented by its managing director Alex Lau whileTelekom by its senior vice-president, Dr Mohd Khir Harun. Also presentwere Telekom's general manager for main trade and Government, Adnan Rofieeand Amalan Tepat's executive director, Kevin Lau.  Lau said Telekom was chosen for its wide experience in the field oftelecommunications.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996First Islamic credit card in region launched by Arab-Malaysian Bankfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 26THE Southeast Asian region's first Islamic credit card launched by Arab-Malaysian Bank Bhd on Friday is designed to help Muslims conduct onlyhalal transactions, said managing director Azlan Zainol.  Payments for haram transactions - as for liquor, gambling activities orpornographic materials - will be automatically barred, following VisaInternational Inc's agreement to block such payments worldwide.  "This AMBank Al-Taslif Visa card is designed to help Muslims live theIslamic way of life," said Azlan, adding that only about 15 types ofproducts and services out of Visa International's 2,000-odd categorieswould be affected.  He also said the card, designed in accordance with Islamic principles,is not a credit card by conventional definitions.  Other Islamic cards have been issued by Pakistan and some Middle Eastnations, he said, but their adherence to Islamic principles is not ascomprehensive as the Al-Taslif card.  For one, the credit limit for the AMBank card is determined by how muchthe subscriber has placed as a fixed deposit in the Al-Mudharabah account,and is as such different from convetional credit cards which require nocollateral.  Further, the management fees or effective interest rate applied tooutstanding balances is capped at 12 per cent per annum.  When the return on investment or interest earned on the fixed deposit isalso factored in, the net interest rate applied to outstanding balancesfor card users works out to about only six per cent annually.  "There is no other additional penalty charge on outstanding balances,"Azlan said after the card was launched at Restoran Seri Melayu in KualaLumpur by Deputy Prime Minister Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim.  Conventional credit cards usually charge an additional five per centinterest on late payments.  However, the Al-Taslif card user will still have to pay a minimum of 15per cent of his outstanding balance at the end of each month in compliancewith Bank Negara's ruling.  Another feature of the card is that no cash advance can be obtained; itcan be used only for transaction payments.  "We may allow this in the future if advice from the Syariah Council isthat such a service is within Islamic principles," said Aslan, adding thatthe card can also be used to make zakat payments.  Further, a RM1 rebate will be given to the subscriber for every RM100spent on payments using the card. Part of this annual total of rebateswill be given out to charity on behalf of the cardholder.  "This is how Islamic principles should be applied. When doing business,be prepared to also give to charity," Anwar said at the launch.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Talking point: Don't fall into credit card trap with wild spendingfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 26By K. H. LimCREDIT cards. Are they a boon or a bane? Depending on whom you talk to,they can be either or both. We have heard of high income-earningexecutives being hauled to court by card issuers for failing to pay theirdebts. On the other hand, there are thousands of satisfied cardholders whofeel the card is as good as cash.  Which brings us to the point: the card IS as good as cash. Therefore,manage it like you manage your cash. Don't spend more than you can afford.Of course, this is easier said than done. Which is why hundreds (maybethousands) of people have ended up on the wrong side of the law.  In a timely move Finance Minister Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim last Fridaydirected Bank Negara to study how regulations could be further tightenedto protect card users.  I suppose he had in mind the questionable practices of certain issuers.These may range from being Shylock-ish in their unending search forinterest charges or their incessant barrage of unsolicited mail.  But then again, why do banks have such an image problem when it comes tocredit cards? Is it because they need the revenue from penalties on latepayments or are they incurring high costs in their card operations.  Other than charging penalties for late payments or direct interest onrollover balances, banks also get revenue from card acceptors, ie outletswhich have signed contracts with the various card companies to accepttheir cards.  Certain issuers charge as much as two per cent of the value charged astheir commission while others go as low as 0.5 per cent. Market forceshave determined that these rates cannot be arbitrarily increased just toensure card-issuing banks meet operational costs.  One will then have to look at the cost of their card operations.Although costing profile and work culture may differ from bank to bank, Icannot help but notice that at least two banks are very aggressive intheir marketing campaigns to attract cardholders.  Besides enticing customers with various gifts (which means more costs),these banks hire card sales executives on fairly high salaries and thenimpose high targets for them to achieve.  It's no wonder that these banks record the highest turnover of staff incard sales operations. One must bear in mind that all these costs willultimately have to be borne by customers, in this case, cardholders.  The pressure on these young and ambitious salespeople is so great thatthey have, to their credit (pardon the pun), managed to sell theirproducts to people already holding cards belonging to other issuers.  I know of people who not only carry different cards, but have two ormore Mastercards or Visa cards from different banks.  Bank Negara statistics show that there were 1.8 million credit cards inuse as of end-June 1996 compared to 1.6 million a year earlier. I don'tthink there were 200,000 new cardholders in the intervening 12 months.This means among them were people who already had cards and were reeled inby the "pressure-selling" tactics of these card sales executives who hadto meet quotas, failing which they would lose their jobs.  Is it a wonder then, that the default rate has increased? One must bearin mind that there are annual charges to pay besides the interest onrollover balance.  Here again, consumers must be aware of the various costs of owningcards. Credit cards are no longer a status symbol; they have become anecessity unless one relishes the idea of carrying large amounts of money,or using ATMs every other day.  Consumers must demand that card issuers do not charge annual fees, notonly for the first year, but also for subsequent years. After all, theyshould run their card operations based on revenue from outlets and notcardholders' penalties.  To be fair, cardholders must charge a minimum of, say RM5,000 a year, sothat issuers can recoup costs. The minimum could be two or three tiereddepending on the "colour" of the card.  Cardholders must always remember never to under-estimate what a monsterinterest can turn out to be. Its cousin, called compound interest, is evenworse. I have personally known of people who surrendered their cards tothe issuers and gradually paid back what they owed over the next fewyears. All due to an impulsive spending spree and a gross under-rating ofinterest.  Talking Point: The word credit card is a misnomer. It is theconvenience, not credit, that you need. Use it like a charge card. Makeuse of the 20-day to 50-day interest-free period to pay. And pay in full.Spend only what you can afford to pay in those 20-50 days. Otherwise,don't.  This way, both you and the bank will be happy.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Restructing to put TRI ahead in telecomsfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 25By Elaine JeyakumarTECHNOLOGY Resources Industries Bhd is rearranging its corporate structureunder a five-year plan to further spearhead the group towards realisingits vision of becoming the premier telecommunications company in Malaysia.  In an exercise known as Focus II, TRI is dividing its varioustelecommunication activities into seven core areas:  * mobile services,  * international services,  * value-added/content/multimedia  * transmission  * fixed network  * data group and other products  * international ventures.  Focus II is a continuation of TRI's "Project Focus" implemented in April1993 which outlined the group's focus and emphasis in thetelecommunications industry.  Chairman and chief executive Tan Sri Tajudin Ramli said the group'sbusiness had grown such that there was a need to streamline its activitiesinto these core areas.  "This will give us a better platform to expand each of the sectors andmove forward in the industry," he told a Press conference in Kuala Lumpuron Saturday.  Each of the seven units will be headed by a president who will overseeand manage the activities of each sector, which will eventually beseparate business entities relying on their own strengths.  Effectively, the group's activities will fall under seven main companiesunder the TRI umbrella.  Under the original structure, all of TRI's telecommunication activitiesfell under the umbrella of its 100 per cent-owned subsidiary CellularCommunications Network (Malaysia) Sdn Bhd.  Celcom's subsidiaries include Celcom Transmission (M) Sdn Bhd whichhandles the group's transmission projects such as fibre-optics andmicrowaves and Celcom Technology (M) Sdn Bhd which manages the value-addedand multimedia services.  Under the restructured organisation of TRI, some of these companies willbe brought out from under Celcom and recognised as independent units intheir various sectors.  "We will reposition them and possibly change the names of the companiesto better reflect their importance," said Tajudin.  Meanwhile, Celcom will only concentrate on the cellular business andhandle the group's ART 900 and Celcom GSM services, trunk radio and pagingactivities.  Tajudin added that new companies would be set up for three businessunits, namely the fixed network, data group and international venturesectors.  He said the group was also working towards product branding in a bid toassociate both the company and the products as one.  "TRI is widely-known mainly as a cellular service provider because ofthe Celcom mobile phone service network which is managed by Celcom.  "What many do not realise is that we have a complete range of licencesto conduct a host of other telecommunication-related activities, some ofwhich have already been implemented."  This includes one for the group's fixed network activities, which haveyet to make an impact on the industry. Nevertheless, TRI already has dealswith 25 companies to provide fixed services which are in various stages ofplanning and implementation.  Tajudin said in time, the cellular division, which now contributes 65per cent towards the group's earnings, would become one of the smallercontributors.  The reduced contribution to about one-third of the group's earnings, isexpected in the light of the more rapid growth anticipated for the othersectors.  Tajudin said the ART 900 network was maturing and there was not muchroom for further growth in that area. However, the Celcom GSM network haspotential for expansion.  He said a number of the group's operations, such as internationalservices, transmission activities and value-added services, had alreadystarted turning in a profit.  Certain overseas joint ventures are also profitable. In addition, thegroup has recently received the licence to conduct cellular operations inBangladesh.  The restructuring of TRI is similar to the exercise undertaken byMalaysia Airlines, which is also in Tajudin's stable of companies.  Tajudin said the TRI restructuring exercise was expected to take between12 and 18 months, encompassing the legal aspects as well as thecontractual agreements between the companies within the group.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Petronas set to issue third Yankee bondfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 25PETRONAS has confirmed that it will issue a third Yankee bond soon toraise funds to finance both ongoing and new projects in the downstreamsector.  The national oil corporation's president, Datuk Mohd Hassan Marican,said the bond, to be issued end of this month, or early next month,followed two previous successful issues in 1993 and last year.  Mohd Hassan said Petronas had appointed two American financialinstitutions, CS First Boston and Solomon Brothers, as joint lead managerfor the issue.  "But the size of the bond would be determined later ... if the price andthe response from the market is good, we will take as much as we can," hesaid on Saturday after launching the new image for Petronas servicestations.  The service station at Taman Sri Hartamas in Kuala Lumpur is the firstto adopt the new concept which includes the "Mesra" convenience stores,mini post offices and automated teller machines.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996My Wakil Rakyat and I: Paloh "to be back on fast lane when S46 members joinUmno"from NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 10IT takes a lot to survive as the wife of a politician husband and thiscould not be truer than in the case of the wife of Norzula Mat Diah,Assemblyman for Paloh.  Norzula's wife, a nurse, was transferred from Gua Musang to Kota Barulast year in a move perceived to be connected to the fact that her husbandwas an Opposition strongman. It seemed that the local Wanita Umno wingthought she was campaigning among the patients.  Since Norzula could not possibly move to Kota Baru, the couple made thedifficult decision that she resign from the service. And she did,reluctantly and not without a great deal of resentment.  The family also had to move out of the government quarters into amakeshift home in the annex of the Semangat '46 service centre.  Thus, it is high irony that barely a year later, her husband is nowpreparing to return to Umno.  "That's politics, I suppose," he said with a shrug.  His long-suffering wife, he claimed, had been sabar sangat over thelatest development, or so he thinks.  Norzula's constituency is virtually one huge land resettlement tractvariously under Kesedar or Felda. About the only big areas not under someland scheme or other are the Orang Asli settlement in Pasir Linggi and atraditional village in Limau Kasturi.  Limau Kasturi is Paloh's current and sole claim to fame. The village wasthe inspiration behind the award-winning TV drama of the same name, itsstoryline woven around a teacher's dedication to his pupil in the face ofdaunting Islamic fundamentalism.  Fortunately, the problems faced by Norzula are far less unnerving.  The population here is still very much tied to the land and subjected tothe caprices of nature. Thus, the off-fruit season often finds himreaching deep into his pocket to meet requests from settlers for money fortheir children's examination fees, uniforms or books. Requests for biggersums are forwarded to the Yayasan Kelantan Darulnaim or Kelantan ReligiousAffairs and Malay Customs Council.  A large chunk of his wakil rakyat allocation goes to constructing fishponds.  Paloh, he said, will be back on the fast lane once Semangat '46 membersjoin Umno.Norzula Mat Diah(APU-Parti Melayu Semangat '46)N42-PalohAge: 39Married with five children;party youth treasurer and vice-chairman for Gua Musang division; second-term Assemblyman.                       Pix: (Norzula Mat Diah).Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996My Wakil Rakyat and I: The prince has big plans for placid Gua Musangfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 10All reports on "My Wakil Rakyat and I" by Joceline Tan; Badrul HishamMahzanTENGKU Razaleigh Hamzah's association with Gua Musang began in 1969. Thus,it seemed best not to be argumentative when he claimed to know almostevery nook and cranny of the constituency.  Back then, getting to Gua Musang town - if it could be called a town -meant a journey of a day and a half. The prince would motor from Kota Baruto Kuala Krai where he would put up the night.  The next morning he would be up at the crack of dawn, down some coffeeand head off to the train station to wait, hopefully, for the 6.15am,southbound train. If all went well, meaning there was no derailment orother delays, he and his entourage would arrive at Gua Musang before 11pm.  Otherwise, he would still be waiting when the sun was overhead.  The river was an alternative. But it was accessible only during therainy season which could be dangerous and less than accessible during thedry season when it was safe.  To his credit, the Kelantan prince endured the hardship and now, lookingback, even claimed that he found it beneficial.  "It was a challenge. This is the best constituency for me to learn aboutmy state and my people," said, involuntarily slipping into the royal "my".  Tengku Razaleigh is in Gua Musang at least once a month.  There seems little doubt that he intends to roost over the constituencyfor awhile to come judging by the house he has built as well as the annexof facilities for meetings and gatherings nearby.  It is here that even the humblest of constituents will come to see him.  "Mostly they want a land title to their name," he said in what was tobecome  a ringing refrain among the other wakil rakyat here.  Being the benevolent host that he is, he ensures that they are fed andrested before they depart. Those who have come long distances, as most ofthem are apt to, often receive some reimbursement for the journey home.  But Tengku Razaleigh's long-term intentions are perhaps most revealingin his plans for the constituency. For several years now, he has beentalking about elevating Gua Musang into the State capital while Kota Baruwill enjoy the status as a royal town.  The rationale is that Gua Musang is far more central a location thanKota Baru in the peninsular context.  And it is, geographically speaking. Gua Musang is certainly nearer KualaLumpur, and all other major towns in the peninsula than Kota Baru.  Unfortunately, only his supporters and those living in Gua Musang seemto find this idea exciting.  Shifting the capital calls for a great deal of political clout and untilsuch time that Tengku Razaleigh manages to rally such clout, then GuaMusang town will remain a placid and sequestered dell.  He also has grand plans for the town centre which he was unable todevelop further after breaking away from Umno.  But now that he is breaking away from Pas, he intends to revive thoseplans or as he put it: "I want to re-do the town centre once Nik Aziz (theTok Guru) retires."  Then, more seriously, he said: "They (people here) have been leftbehind."  He believes some of the more immediate solutions to the people'sproblems can be solved with better infrastructure (especially more feederroads linking remote villages to main route), residential schools and, ofcourse, jobs.  Among the ordinary people, especially the Malays who make up 90 per centof the 100,000 population here, there is, after all these years, a certainawe that a privileged personality like Tengku Razaleigh would choose tospend time, money and effort on their behalf.  Although much of his accomplishments came during the 1970s and 1980s,the projects he pushed forth were right on target on the Malay pulse. Hequenched their thirst for land and he basically opened up what was tillthen a god forsaken terrain.  The Orang Asli support for him has also not been for nothing. He standsamong a handful of politicians who have treated the Orang Asli with therespect and dignity they deserve and not only when he wants their votes.  All this, explains to a large extent the bedrock of support that hecontinues to command in spite of his political vacillation.  Given the Malaysian propensity for titles, it would not come as asurprise if he is lauded as the "Father of modern Gua Musang" one of thesedays.Tengku Razaleigh Hamzah(APU-Parti Melayu Semangat '46)P32-Gua MusangAge: 59Married; Member of Parliament here since 1969; Parti Melayu Semangat '46president.                       Pix: (Tengku Razaleigh Hamzah).Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996My Wakil Rakyat and I: Requests for land titles will test rep's abilitiesfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 10OMAR Muhamad favours the jubah and with his flowing beard and whiteturban, he looks more like a Pas man than a Semangat '46 assemblyman.  He also did not look well. The effects of a serious road accidentseveral years ago seem to have affected his train of thought and hisopinions came in hesitant spurts.  Omar presides over the largest of the three State constituencies withOrang Asli form a substantial segment of the electorate.  His is perhaps the only constituency where special campaign strategiesand tactics are employed on the parts of both the ruling and oppositionparties to win over the Orang Asli.  During the by-election, the BN air-dropped thousands of posters andpamphlets from helicopters. The paper campaign may not have been veryuseful then, given the less than desirable literacy rate, but the posterswere probably put to good use by the Orang Asli to cover up cracks andgaps on the walls in their houses.  Although many Orang Asli have been moved to more permanent settlements,a large number still prefer to stick to their traditional sites that canonly be reached by river or on foot in a journey that sometimes takes upto two days.  And according to Omar, the best form of persuasion with these gentlepeople is not through "air-mail" but face-to-face contact.  "Everybody wants land titles ... Malays, Orang Asli, squatters," he saidin a resgned manner.  The legendary Malay attachment to the land could not be more stark thanhere in the Kelantan heartland.  In fact, there are some 1,000 squatters clamouring for land titles inhis constituency, a task that will surely put him to the test in the nextfew years.Omar Muhamad(APU-Parti Melayu Semangat '46)N43-GalasAge: 48Married with 11 children; second-term assemblyman                       Pix: (Omar Muhamad).Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996RM150,000 grab from goldsmith shopfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 11SEREMBAN, Sun. - Four masked men, three with pistols and another with aknife, escaped with jewellery worth RM150,000 during a robbery at agoldsmith shop in Jalan Datuk Bandar Tunggal yesterday.  The robbers who struck just before the shop closed for business at6.30pm escaped in a car which was later found abandoned near a shoppingcomplex about 200 metres away.  A district police spokesman said the robbers had warned several workersand its owner to surrender jewellery placed in several trays inside aglass showcase.  He said the robbers scooped the jewellery into several bags. However,during the heist an alarm in the shop was triggered and the robbers fledwith the loot in a car driven by another accomplice, which was parkedoutside the shop.  Police later found a white Proton Saga car, believed to have beenabandoned by the robbers, at the basement of a shopping complex in JalanTuanku Munawir, about 200m from the goldsmith shop at 9am today.  Those with any information on the robbery are urged to contact thedistrict police station at 06-7635522.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Bahasa: An appeal to private sectorfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 11By Hanizah HashimKUALA LUMPUR, Sun. - Private sector leaders should show their commitmenttowards Government's efforts to increase the use of Bahasa Malaysia byholding discussions through open forums.  Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka`s director-general Abdul Aziz Deraman said theparticipation of the private sector in forums to be held in the 1996-98Private Sector National Language Movement was essential.  He said these forums would provide a platform for discussions and give aclearer picture on the problems faced by the private sector inimplementing the use of the national language.  Abdul Aziz was opening the forum "Enhancing the Economic Value of theNational Language" organised by the DBP and Malaysian LinguisticsAssociation yesterday.  The panelists were Permodalan Nasional Bhd's group chief executive DatukMohd Helmi Mohd Taib, Bank Islam Malaysia Bhd's managing director DatukAhmad Tajuddin Abdul Rahman and Universiti Sains Malaysia lecturerProfessor Abdullah Hassan.  Abdul Aziz said open forums would provide the best arena for theexchange of ideas and opinions on ways to achieve the movement's objectivewith the support and co-operation of the private sector.  During the panel discussion, chaired by former DBP director-generalDatuk Hassan Ahmad, Mohd Helmi said it was important to find ways toencourage the use of Bahasa Malaysia in the private sector.  However, he said, in the financial sector, clearer directives wereneeded from Bank Negara for the increased use of the national language inofficial transactions.  "The current reality of the job market in the private sector is thatgraduates with a good command of the English language was preferred asthis is the language used for business communication.  "We have to find ways to increase the use of Bahasa Malaysia in theprivate sector or else graduates from local universities would not beaccepted as their lower proficiency in English could be viewed as aweakness," he said.  Ahmad Tajuddin said extra effort from all sectors and closer co-operation between the public and private sectors would be needed to makeBahasa Malaysia a respected language in the business community.  He said the profit motive was an important factor in the private sector,thus it would seem unnecessary to translate a document into BahasaMalaysia if the English version was more commonly used.  Economic strength was vital, he said, citing the "language pride" of theJapanese as an example which made it necessary for those interested indoing business with them to learn the Japaneses language for easiercommunication.  "If we are economically successful, more people will want to know how wesucceed and will learn our language and culture."                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 199660 unwed pregnant women find shelter in Negrifrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 11SEREMBAN, Sun. - Sixty unwed pregnant women have been placed under thecare of the State Welfare Department and a non-governmental organisationin Negri Sembilan.  Of the total, 56 have been placed in welfare institutions under thedepartment throughout the State while the remaining are under the care ofthe State Malaysian Islamic Welfare Organisation branch.  State Unity and Community Development Committee chairman Goh Siow Huatsaid today most of them were students of private learning institutions andfactory workers aged between 16 and 19 years.  He said some of them had sought the assistance of the departmentvoluntarily while the others were either sent by their families or orderedby the courts to be placed under the department's care.  "Most of them became pregnant after indulging in sexual relationshipwith their male companions who later abandoned them," he said, adding thatthese women came from all over the country.  He said the four women under the care of Perkim were from outside theState who became pregnant while working here.  Goh said the department would take care of the pregnant women includingdelivering their babies who would be returned to the mothers or theirfamilies or placed under its adoption scheme.  "We are really serious in wanting to help unwed pregnant mothers. So wehope they will not be shy or afraid to come forward."  The department's move was not to encourage pregnancies outside marriagebut to provide a place for these women to deliver their babies in effortsto curb cases of abandoned babies, he said.  Goh urged parents to instil discipline among their children especiallythrough values and religious knowledge to prevent them from indulging inunhealthy activities.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996My Wakil Rakyat and I: Rozali Isohak: A genuinely nice chap in politicsfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 11IT was hard to believe that the voice roaring through the loud speakerbelonged to Datuk Rozali Isohak.  The first and last time I met him, had been in his office. Then, he hadstruck me as a gentle soul, soft-spoken and muted in his views.  And here he was, under the blazing mid-afternoon sun, lambasting Pas ina fashion almost comparable to the king of political oratory, Datuk SeriAnwar Ibrahim.  Later, he said a little sheepishly: "This is Kelantan. You have to talklike that to get their attention."  Actually, as the Kelantan media clique will tell you, Rozali is agenuinely "nice chap", so much so, that one wonders what he is doing in abusiness like politics. Then again, niceness is not exactly the mosteffective of political tools.  He is one of Tengku Razaleigh's most trusted party comrades whichperhaps explains his appointment as Deputy Menteri Besar II. The party hadto settle for the "II" after failing to get their hands on the "I", and itwas incidents like this which eroded the early camaraderie of Semangat '46and Pas.  His constituency, Dabong, is one of the most remote and underdevelopedin Kelantan. Here, roads are more the exception than the norm and manyvillages are accessible only by river.  The country may have been catapulted along at eight per cent growth andskyscrapers in KL may be making headlines worldwide, but life has changedminimally for Malays here.  The everyday act of going to school continues to be a physical challengewhile a simple illness may lead to death. Amenities and services urbanitestake for granted are still the stuff of dreams or as they say here, mimpisaja.  According to Rozali, projects scheduled under the Sixth Malaysia Planwere not implemented. This included a road linking Dabong and Gua Musangand a bridge over Sungai Galas.  The rural economy does not generate new employment and Dabong has seen asteady migration of its young people.  The biggest employer is the Komplex Perkayuan Kelantan, a subsidiary ofthe Kelantan Economic Development Corporation with a payroll of 200; theMajlis Daerah Kuala Krai Selatan comes a close second with 100 employees.  "Dabong needs at least 1,000 more jobs," Rozali said.  Like most politicians, Rozali thinks his constituency has tourismpotential. The Stong Hill Resort, boasting the longest waterfall in SouthEast Asia, has attracted more than 10,000 visitors, mainly foreigners.  The Assemblyman returns weekly. As is typical of the way politics andreligion tend to merge in Kelantan, Rozali arrives in Dabong in time forFriday prayers and then stays back at the mosque to meet his constituents.  He has a service centre run by five volunteers but some constituentsstill travel all the way to Kota Baru to see him.  Rozali is confident the Dabong electorate will go where Tengku Razaleighgoes. And although his party's pending merger withUmno has captured thenational imagination, life in Dabong is unlikely to change radically.Datuk Rozali Isohak(APU - Parti Melayu Semangat '46)N41 - DabongAge: 46Married with five children; Deputy Menteri Besar II; third-termAssemblyman; State S46 liaison chief.                       Pix: (Datuk Rozali Isohak).Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Squash.: Ong to skip Hong Kong doubles tourfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 47By A. DevarajPROFESSIONAL player Ong Beng Hee, who has set his sights on winning theMilo-Dunlop PJ Open title early next month, intends to skip the doublesplaying tour of Hong Kong on Sept 27-29.  Beng Hee's father, K.H. Ong, said yesterday that the playing tour is tooclose to the PJ Open, which is scheduled for Oct 2-5 at the Astaka courts.  Said Ong: "Quite frankly Beng Hee is not very keen on playing doubles.He'd rather concentrate on singles and for this year's PJ Open. I think hehas a very good chance of winning it."  Ong has requested the SRA of Malaysia to reconsider sending his son forthe Hong Kong trip.  SRAM executive director Lt Kol (R) Wong Ah Jit said yesterday they werelooking into Ong's request. "If Beng Hee is not really keen on playingdoubles in Hong Kong, there's no point in sending him. However, we willmake a decision soon."  National director of coaching Mej (R) S. Maniam is currently in India ona coaching course and SRAM are likely to wait for him to return beforemaking a decision.  Beng Hee is supposed to partner Kenneth Low in Hong Kong. The otherplayers named for the Hong Kong trip include Yap Kok Four, Ng Tian Sin,Tan Tian Huat, Ricky Lee and Allan Soyza.  For the PJ Open, Beng Hee is seeded second behind Low and the duo areexpected to meet in the final.  Said Ong: "If Beng Hee is excused from the Hong Kong trip, he will befresh for the PJ Open and that is another reason why I would prefer himnot to go.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Squash.: SRAM prepare players for England stintfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 47By A. DevarajTHE SRA of Malaysia will concentrate on improving the fitness of KennethLow, Ong Beng Hee, Yap Kok Four and Kuan Choy Lin before they leave for afour-month stint in England on Nov 1.  SRAM executive director Lt Kol (R) Wong Ah Jit said this is to ensurethat they will be ready for the tough training and playing stints inEngland.  Said Wong: "We don't want them to waste time on their fitness there whenwe can do it here. That is why they are doing a lot of runs and gym workand will be ready, fitness wise, for the England stint."  Low and Yap will be attached to John Milton, who runs Proace Managementin Broxbourne, outside London.  Ong and Choy Lin will be attached to national coach Jamie Hickox. Butall of them will be staying together, only the training programmes will beseparate.  "In the case of Ong, he will be playing matches with professionals inLondon and also Wales while the others will be basically staying inBroxbourne.  "Proace, who manage several top profession`ls, will come up with atraining programme for Low and Yap while Hickox will prepare a schedulefor Choy Lin and Ong.  "However, we have insisted that the players be involved in the Leaguewhere they will be able to play against some of the top names in theworld. The English League is a very tough one and most of the top playersin the world are involved in the League in November and December.  "However I'm not sure whether there is a League for women where Choy Lincan compete."  Wong said that in the latest fitness tests conducted on the playersearly this month at the National Sports Council sports and medicine unit,Low was the fittest.  "Low's results were impressive. He only has a fat level of five per centand this is very good. Top American athletes have a fat level of three percent.  "Ong's results were also good but Yap is overweight and needs to losesome weight and will have to undergo a special diet.  "Choy Lin is also carrying excess weight and she too will have to diet.  "However, we are still awaiting the final overall results of all theplayers. Once we get that, those who are not fit will have to undergoextra fitness training before they leave for England."                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996ACC qualifier 1996.: Cricket.: Bangladesh outclass UAEfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 47By C. NavaratnamBANGLADESH gave a classic all-round display to outclass the United ArabEmirates by 108 runs in the final of the Pepsi-Asian Cricket Councilqualifying round competition at the Kilat Club padang yesterday.  With this convincing win, Bangladesh have qualified for the Asian Cupfour-nation tournament in Sri Lanka next year. They will play against theTest playing giants Pakistan, India and hosts Sri Lanka.  Bangladesh were certainly a cut above UAE in all aspects of the game.UAE, who fielded five players who took part in the World Cup competitionearlier this year, batted badly and went down meekly.  Bangladesh, electing to bat, knocked up 212 runs in 49.3 overs. Theywere given a flying start by their openers, Shariar Hoss`in and Harun-UrRashid, who put on 66 runs by the 16th over.  Shariar, in particular, was quick to punish the loose balls and went onto make a majestic 58 which included seven fours off 95 balls, while Harunhit a well-grafted 21.  In-form Aminul Islam coming in No 4, kept up the tempo by belting 46runs in only 44 balls.  After his dismissal, wickets began to fall at regular intervals and theywere trotting at 180 for 9 but their last pair, Saiful Islam (15 n.o.) andSheikh Salauddin (8), batted well for a valuable 32-run partnership.  Off-spinner Saleem Raza was easily the pick of the bowlers capturingthree for 31.  Set a target of making just slightly more than four runs an over forvictory, UAE opening bat, Saleem Raza took off in blistering stylesmashing 11 runs in the opening over off left arm medium pacer AnisurRahman.  However, Saleem failed to last long and went out to a superb divingcatch by Mohamed Rafiq at deep midwicket off Khaled Mahmud for 20 runs off17 balls.  They then lost three quick wickets and were precariously placed at fourfor 49 but a fifth wicket stand of 39 runs by Qais Farook (14) and ArshadLaiq (31 n.o.) saw the score move up to 88.  With the Bangladesh spinners bowling intelligently and backed by tightfielding, the UAE batting crumbled and they were all out for 104 in 36.5overs.  Medium pacer Khaled Mahmud, who came in as a late replacement aftertheir regular opening bowler Hasibul Hossain was hurt during a trainingsession on the eve of the competition on Aug 5, was adjudged man-of-the-match by match referee K. Srikanth, former Indian Test opening bat.  "He fully deserves it. He broke the back of the UAE batting by takingthe three vital wickets to put his side on the road to victory," saidSrikanth.  Off spinner Sheikh Salauddin bowled effectively to pick up three wicketsfor 13 runs in six overs while left arm leg spinner Mohamed Rafiq baggedtwo for 10 to trouble the batsmen.  UAE, however, gained some consolation when Syed Azhar Saeed was named theplayer-of-the-series.  FINAL - Bangladesh 212 (Shariar Hossain 58, AminulIslam 46, Harun-Ur Rashid 21, Saiful Islam 15 n.o.; Saleem Raza 3-31, AkbarRana 2-26, Arshad Laiq 2-35, Azhar Saeed 2-45).  UAE 104 (Arshad Laiq 31 n.o.,Ali Akbar Rana 21, Saleem Raza 20, Quas Farook 14; Sheikh Saluddin 3-13,Khaled Mahmud 3- 26, Mohamed Rafiq 2-10).Pix: Gotcha! ... Bangladesh wicketkeeper Khaled Masud sweeps the bails asa UAE batsman struggles to take an extra run at the Kilat club groundyesterday.-By Khairul Ghazali.Pix:  The King and I ...  Bangladesh skipper Akram Khan receives the championstrophy from the King, Tuanku Ja'afar, after the final of the Pepsi-AsianCricket Council qualifying round at the Kilat Club padang yesterday.-ByKhairul Ghazali.  (In 3* edition, pix appeared on pg.  48)Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Hockey.: Yayasan see red despite victoryfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 47YAYASAN Negri Sembilan assistant manager Satwant Singh was an angry manafter his side's 2-0 win over Bank Bumiputra in a Malaysian Hockey Leaguematch at the Tun Razak Stadium yesterday.  Satwant's anger was not aimed at his players, who surprisingly struggledto find the net in a match they dominated from start, but at umpire SurjitSingh of Tenaga Nasional Berhad.  The match ended on a controversial note when Mukesh Kumar was sent offin the 67th minute after apparently hitting BBMB's Masrukin Kadiman on hishead with his (Mukesh) hockey stick.  Mukesh and his teammates claimed it was an accident as Masrukin wasstretchered off with his head bleeding and were livid when Surjit thoughtotherwise and flashed the red card.  Satwant and several of his players could hardly contain their angerafter the match and stated what they thought of the umpiring.  "I am aware that I can be hauled up for speaking my mind but this waspoor umpiring. What happened was not on purpose and I don't understand howthe umpire could have sent Mukesh off," said Satwant.  YNS, who face Tenaga in a top-of-the-table clash next, will miss Mukeshand also Maninderjit Singh and Satwant was furious.  "I don't know what the umpire was trying to do. I leave it to others tointerpret it but something has to be done about the umpiring," saidSatwant.  The red card constitutes an automatic one-match suspension. Maninderjit,who received a yellow card in yesterday's match, misses the Tenaga clashas well as it is his second.  "I risk getting suspended by the Technical Committee but I have to speakout as today's incident was daylight robbery," said Satwant.  The controversial sending-off aside, the finishing of his players musthave also worried both Satwant and coach Stephen Van Huizen.  Besides the two field goals through R. Shankar in the 13th minute andMukesh in the 50th minute, YNS missed one penalty stroke and 11 penaltycorners.  In another match, star-studded Petaling Jaya Municipal Council (MPPJ)returned to their winning ways when they edged Bank Simpanan Nasional 2-1at the Petaling Jaya Stadium.  MPPJ, who suffered a 3-2 defeat to defending League champions Maybank onSaturday, looked lethargic throughout the match and needed a goal in eachhalf to subdue BSN.  Forward Atul Kumar was the toast of the MPPJ team when he scored boththe goals in the 13th and 67th minutes.  BSN, who did well despite losing 3-1 to favourites Yayasan NegriSembilan on Saturday, were again full of life yesterday.  But for all their hard work, they only had a Sarjit Singh goal in the59th minute to show for.  BSN coach C. Paramalingam was obviously unhappy with the result.  "But we are a young side. We will improve as the tournament goes on."  In Ipoh, National player Kerpal Singh scored twice as pacesetters TenagaNasional Berhad destroyed Armed Forces Electrical, Mechanical EngineeringCorps (JLJ) 4-1 to stretch their unbeaten run to three matches at theAzlan Shah Stadium yesterday.  It took Tenaga 30 minutes to breach the JLJ defence off a penaltycorner. The ball hit an onrushing JLJ defender and Kerpal was at the rightplace to slot it home.  Hardly three minutes after the break Tenaga increased their lead to 2-0when ex-national player S. Sivabalan scored off a penalty stroke.  Two minutes later, they were three up. Mahinder Singh scored off a moveinitiated by Nor Basni Abas.  Kerpal struck again in the 47th minute to stretch their lead to 4-0.  However, JLJ never gave up and were rewarded with a consolation goal inthe 69th minute through former National player Zainal Hussain.  In Kuantan, DeTas needed an Azman Ariffin goal in the 50th minute tobeat Segambut Hockey Club 1-0 at the Kuantan Hockey Stadium yesterday.  DeTas controlled the game but could not capitalise on their chances.They had 11 penalty corners, compared to one for Segambut, but failed toconvert any.  Segambut's defence put up a brilliant performance and their goalkeeperJasvinder Singh was in top form.STANDINGS    P   W   D   L   F   A  PtTENAGA      3   3   0   0  10   1   9YNS         3   3   0   0   7   1   9MPPJ        3   2   0   1   9   6   6MAYBANK     3   2   0   1   5   4   6DETAS       3   2   0   1   4   4   6JLJ         3   1   0   2   6  10   3BANK BUMI   3   1   0   2   4   6   3BSN         3   1   0   2   4   6   3RMR         3   0   0   3   2   7   0SEGAMBUT    3   0   0   3   1   7   0.RESULTSMPPJ ...... 2  BSN ........ 1DETAS ..... 1  SEGAMBUT ... 0JLJ ....... 1  TENAGA ..... 4BANK BUMI ..0  YNS .......  2                      Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Women's soccer.: Sabah favourite for titlefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 47SABAH are fancied to win the Tun Sharifah Rodziah soccer title for thesixth consecutive time when the tournament begins at the Police Depotground in Jalan Semarak, Kuala Lumpur, today.  Led by national skipper Beatrice Yaw, 40, Sabah will play Police intheir opening group A tie in the morning.  Other top names in the Sabah side are Haineh Liem, Hanjilin Tindil,Laini Ahing, Popoi Lansiew and Teresa Yaw.  Later in the day, Sabah will play minnows Penang, who will berepresented by schoolgirls.  Penang, who missed the series last year, will play newcomers Pahang intheir opening match.  Last year's runnersup Kuala Lumpur, who are tipped to top their group,will play Perak and Perlis in the morning and evening respectively.  Today: Pahang v Penang, Perak v Kuala Lumpur (7.30am); Sabah v Police,Perak v Negri Sembilan (9.15am); Perak v Johor (3.45), Penang v Sabah,Kuala Lumpur v Perlis - all matches at Pulapol ground.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Climbathon.: Salagan's hat-trickfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 47DEFENDING champion Guainus Salagan coasted to an easy win in the men'scategory of the 10th Malaysia Airlines-Mount Kinabalu internationalclimbathon, to notch a hat-trick of the title in Kota Kinabalu yesterday.  With the exception of Indonesian Yoseph Lawa Yohanes, who finishedsecond, the top 10 finishers in the event - which attracted 164 entriesincluding 17 foreign competitors - were Malaysian runners.  The climbathon is a race up and down Mt Kinabalu, Southeast Asia'shighest peak at 4,101 metres, with the event covering a distance of21.4km. It is jointly organised by the Sabah Tourism Promotion Corporationand the Sabah Parks with Malaysia Airlines as the main sponsor.  The 29-year-old Guianus posted a time of 2 hours 52 minutes and 51seconds to emulate his elder sister Hasny who yesterday extended herwinning streak in the women's category for three years in-a-row.  First runners-up Yoseph recorded a time of 2:56:19 while self-employedRodimin Sodundu finished third with a time of 2:56:57.  Guianus, who finished 82nd from a field of 160 international runners inthe recent World Mountain Race in Austria, received US$4,500 (RM11,250)and a return air-ticket to London.  The father of a three-year-old son also received a bonus of US$1,000 forbeing the first to reach the summit.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Sepaktakraw.: Pahang A win Sabah legfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 47PAHANG A needed just 15 minutes to beat Selangor B 15-6, 15-12 in thefinal of the Perilly's Sabah Open sepaktakraw championship at the LikasSports Complex in Kota Kinabalu yesterday.  Pahang A, comprising Suhaimi Rahman, Iskandar Arshad and tekong Al-Bahtimi Ahmad, pocketed RM6,000 for the win while Selangor B, consistingof Zukri Zain, tekong Kaharuddin Shamsuddin and Suhaimi Yusof, earnedRM4,000.  With the completion of the Sabah Open, the fourth stage in the six-stage Grand Prix Finals, Selangor B are now the sole leaders with 600 points,followed by Negri Sembilan A (520 points) and Pahang A (480).  Results -Q-final:  Selangor B bt Negri Sembilan 15-6, 8-15, 5-1; Armed Forces A btKuala Lumpur B 15-13, 9-15, 5-0; Pahang A bt Terengganu B 15- 9, 15-4; PenangA bt Negri Sembilan B 15-13, 15-12.  S-finals: Pahang A bt Forces A 14-15, 15-6, 5-4; Selangor B bt Penang A15-5, 15-10.  Overall standings (after four stages): 1 Selangor B 600pts, 2 NegriSembilan A 520, 3 Pahang A 480, 4 Selangor A 360, 5 Kuala Lumpur B 320, 6Forces A 280, 7 Penang B and Johor A - both 240.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Badminton.: Fancied Roslin too good for off-form Lofrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 47By J. NaiduTOP SEED Roslin Hashim had no trouble winning the men's singles crown inthe Proton-EON Kedah Open badminton championships at the ASRC Hall in AlorStar last night.  He beat an off-form Lo Ah Heng, the 1995 All-England semifinalist, 15-5,15-11.  The small crowd which turned out last night were totally disappointedwith the token resistance provided by Lo and Roslin was in full controlfrom start to finish.  In the first game, he took four straight points in one service. Afterthat, it was one-way traffic with Roslin collecting his points withpinpoint smashes and drop-shots to wrap up the game in just 16 minutes.  Lo checked himself and led 6-2 in the second game but Roslin caught upat 6-6 and romped home an easy winner in 26 minutes.  This is his fourth win in the circuit. Roslin was champion in the Sabah,Perlis and Johor Opens.  The men's doubles final between the top seeds Lee Wan Wah and Choong TanFook against second seeds Rosman Razak and Chew Choon Eng proved to be thebest tie of the night.  After 72 gruelling minutes, Lee-Choong triumphed 8-15, 15-8, 18-14.  In the women's singles final, second seed Norashikin Amin played a cooland calculated game to upset top seed Geevien Saha 11-6, 11-3 in 23minutes.  The women's doubles final also saw topseeds Kuak Seiok Choon andNorashikin Amin upset by second seeds Lim Pek Siah and Chor Hooi Yee. PekSiah and Hooi Yee gave a sterling performance to beat their opponents 15-10, 15-4.  RESULTS (all finals) - MEN - Singles: Roslin Hashim (Kel) bt Lo Ah Heng(Mal) 15-5, 15-11.  Doubles: Lee Wan Wah-Choong Tan Fook (Pk-Joh) bt Rosman Razak-Chew ChoonEng (NS-Pg) 8-15, 15-8, 18-14.  BOYS - Singles: James Chua (Sar) bt Yeoh Kay Bin (Pk) 15-4, 15-11.  Doubles: Yap Wee Meng-Tang Soo Sen (KL-Pah) bt James Chua-Chan ChongMing (Sar-Sel) 15-10, 15-7.  WOMEN - Singles: Norashikin Amin (KL) bt Geevien Saha (Sel) 11-6, 11-3.  Doubles: Lim Pek Siah-Chor Hooi Yee (Pk-Ked) bt Kuak Seiok Choon-Norashikin Amin (Pg-KL) 15-10, 15-4.  GIRLS - Singles: Ng Mee Fen (KL) bt Law Pei Pei (Kel) 2-11, 12-9, 11-2.  MIXED DOUBLES: Tan Kim Her-Angeline (Pg) bt Pang Cheh Chiang-Kuak SeiokChoon (Mal-Pg) 15-9, 9-15, 15-8.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Soccer.: Chow tells youngsters to prove their worthfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 48By Vijesh RaiDESTINED to miss the Malaysia Cup for the fourth consecutive time, KualaLumpur aim to prove that their season has not been a total waste whenPremier League action resumes on Saturday.  So far it has been a season where the bad things have far outweighed thegood things, starting with the failure to land three Indonesian players,the poor performance of players on whom KL had placed much hope on, rightto the sacking of Azrul Amri Burhan and Wong Kah Loon.  But in coach Chow Kwai Lam, KL have a fighter who will not allow hisboys to surrender until the final whistle is blown on Oct 19 - KL's lastmatch of the season against Terengganu.  "I know that we are almost out of the running as we have dropped toomany points and are far adrift of the others," said Chow.  Far is the right word as KL, above only Kelantan in the standings, havecollected a meagre 13 points from the 20 matches they have played.  Mathematically, they are still in with a chance but Chow knows thattheir fate doesn't only depend on how they do in the remaining matches asthe performances of several other teams too will decide whether KL makethe Malaysia Cup.  "The boys know that we are looking at missing the Malaysia Cup again butI have told them that we have to continue fighting," said Chow.  What Chow wants them to do in the remaining matches is to prove thatthey are worthy of being called professional footballers.  "They must go out and show that they are capable of making the grade andthat KL can again be a team to be reckoned with," said Chow.  But for that to happen, there must be more commitment as this issomething which has been lacking in several players.  "I have been stressing to them that good performances will not onlybenefit the team but individually as well," said Chow.  Indications are that several KL-bred players, who left the team forgreener pastures, might return next year and this is bound to create arivalry for places.  And for those who are still keen on playing for the city side again nextseason, good and committed performances in the remaining matches will helpthem when their contracts come up for renewal.  "All I want from them is a fighting performance that will show that KLmay be down this season but in time, we will rise again," said Chow.                       Pix: Chow.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Letter from Moscow: Enthralled by the change in seasons and fortunesfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 12By Vadim PotapovTO tell you the truth, all the shopping for our family is usually done bymy wife. Actually, it's not a difficult task, as Moscow shops are nowadaysfull of whatever you may want, even such exotic items as shark's fins,giant lobsters and abalone. Prices bite, as we say, but that's anotherissue.  Yesterday, however, quite unexpectedly for myself, I made a smallcontribution towards the family's shopping: I bought five packs ofdetergent for cleaning irons ... I must confess that I've never beforeeven heard about such a thing.  It so happened that while leaving the metro, I noticed an elderly well-dressed man. He was a retail trader and was selling all kinds of stuff.  His appearance was so unusual for a tradesman that I decided to talk tothe man.  His name was Nikolai Ivanovich, he was retired, and before that he hadbeen a scholar in the field of mathematics. He became involved in retailtrade because his pension was too small.  I felt sorry for him, and that's how I found myself an owner of fivepacks of the detergent.  By the way, the sum I paid for the purchase was equal to one US dollar,and I can't even imagine how many such packs it would be necessary to sellin order to earn one's living.  Today, in Russia, it is believed that the market has put everything inproper perspective.  This is true to a certain extent, but there are many people who failedto find their places in this new life.  The government is trying to render assistance to poor and old, but itsreserves are hardly considerable for the given purpose. Its main goal nowis to collect as many taxes as possible.  For the first two weeks of this month, this issue was widely discussedby top government officials.  Trying to increase critically small budget revenues, the governmentprepared a presidential decree allowing tax authorities to levy taxes onall payments into individual bank accounts.  The step could lead to double taxation for simply shifting money fromone account to another, and that's why the news immediately caused a waveof public indignation.  The decree was adopted mainly because of Alexandr Livshits, the newMinister of Finance and a former chief economic adviser to Boris Yeltsin.  Livshits became a well-known personality in Russia for his revenue-rising measures and frequent appearances on TV screen.  Earlier this year, he revealed and made public that directors of bigstate enterprises - instead of paying wages to workers - deposited themoney to commercial banks, gaining high interests.  Then Livshit's revelations caused no negative reaction with the public,while in the last case, the protest were obvious.  "My salary is hardly that of a royal family member, and I am definitelyagainst the government's intention to collect taxes two or even threetimes, and that's exactly what the implementation of this decree mightlead to", said Irina, a salesgirl in a large Moscow supermarket.  Many ordinary people shared Irina's sentiments, and responding to thattornado of public resentment, the new tax decree was cancelled.  The promptness of that decision surprised the public just as much as theabsurdity of the decree.  Early this month, President Yeltsin continue to surprise the Russians.  This time he announced on TV that he had a heart problem, and wouldundergo an operation at the end of the month.  People were astonished as they were not usd to the president speakingabout his health himself, but many of them sighed with relief, as finallythe uncertainty was over and done with.  Those, who just the day before scolded Yeltsin for his two-month absencebefore the public, felt compassion for the man after his annoucement.  "I do hope the president will return to the Kremlin in good physicalcondition, even if it takes a long time. I really wish him completerecovery," Olga, 26, a school teacher, said.  Against the background of Yeltsin's lengthy absence, Kremlin securitychief General Alexander Lebed continues to strengthen his authority.  He is a frequent guest on TV screens, and media comments on his everyword.  The euphoria he causes today eclipses many other news, including theinformation about the creation of a new political union, "For Truth andOrder".  It was announced by Lebed's supporters that the new movement would serveas a kind of supporting force for the general outside the government.  Its creation belonged to Lebed himself, and its main goal now is to backhis peace initiatives in Chechnya.  It is expected that Lebed soon will be elected as the leader of thisparty.  It is also reported that the three organisations that comprise thisparty have branches in more than 60 of 89 regions in Russia.  Thus it may serve Lebed as a good base if he is to make a bid forpresidency.  Summer is over. I thought about it when I saw a man feeding two cutedonkeys with a large red watermelon.  Piles of the fruit have appeared in Moscow along with the first signs ofautumn.  Life goes on.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Asean Football Federation Championship Cup (September 1-15, 1996 :Singapore).: Soccer.: What they saidfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 48DELL AKBAR KHAN (Malaysian team manager): We played well and we couldmatch the Thais. They deserve my praise. We have shown that we can standside by side with the Thais. And if we had a little bit of luck lastnight, we could have won it.********THAVATCHAI SAJAKUL (Thailand coach): It's a relief we are still thekingpins of Southeast Asia football. I've always said it was going to beclose and tough. But as I said again whoever scored first would have theadvantage. We did tonight and that made the difference. But Malaysia haveproven that they are now a force to be reckoned in Southeast Asia footballalso.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Asean Football Federation Championship Cup (September 1-15, 1996 :Singapore).: Soccer.: End of a fairy talefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 48By Dan Guen ChinMALAYSIA  .......... 0THAILAND  .......... 1THE fairy tale had come to an end. A sad end for Malaysia on a night theThais were crowned champions of Asean soccer.  For all their hard work and will to win, the Malaysians knew deep downin their hearts that Thailand were by far the better team in the final ofthe Asean Football Federation championship last night and the winner'scheque of US$80,000 (about RM200,000) rightly belonged to them.  Psychologically, Malaysia were affected even before the start. Theexperience of Dollah Salleh was not there in the starting lineup toprovide the steadying influence in midfield.  Dollah's ankle injury and the fear that it could not take the strain wasthe reason why.  And there was no place for Negri Sembilan fullback Faizal Zainalalthough he had served his mandatory two-match suspension and wasavailable last night.  For the Thais, there was a bonus in the form of skipper SurachaiJaturapattarapong, who returned to the starting lineup - ankle injury orno - for that was the tonic they needed.  Right from the kick-off, the Thais went straight for the jugular andthey kept pressing forward, comfortable in the knowledge that theirattacking flair would pay off.  And it didn't take them long either.  Only nine minutes into the match, the Thais were ahead - and deservinglyso too.  As wave after wave of the blue-shirted Thais charged forward, KiatisukSenamuang - in his roving role - picked up the ball midway in theMalaysian half.  Zainal Abidin Hassan hesitated, so did B. Rajnikandh. Kiatisuk saw theopening and, from 25 metres out, hit a tremendous shot with all the swerveand power that beat Khairul Azman Mohamed all the way.  There was no response from the Malaysians after the early setback, andin all honesty, they could not raise their game to match the Thais.  The Thais were in no mood to give the Malaysians the space andopportunity to create their moves.  Even when Thai skipper Surachai left the field midway in the first halffor Phitaya Santawong to come on, the rhythm of the Thai attack was neverout of sync.  As Malaysia continued to struggle to find their footing and the formwhich had taken them right through to the final, the Thais grew evenstronger and could have punished the Malaysians further in the 25th minutebut Apichard Teelamcharlemdit's attempt from 20 metres smacked thecrossbar.  Even Zainal, who had hardly put a foot wrong throughout the tournament,could no longer carry the burden of rallying his men to the team's causeand neither could K. Sanbagamaran force his way through from midfield insearch of another crucial goal to turn Malaysia's fortune around.  For the 33,000 fans gathered last night, and there were many Malaysiansamong them, they knew deep inside who were the better team.  It had to be the Thais with their fluent movement and the varied attack,leaving the Malaysians with little to offer except maybe to wait for theone silly mistake needed to punish the Thais.  Even when Zainal abandoned his defensive role to push upfront; even whenRusdee Sulong was taken off and even when M. Chandran came in RizalSukiman, there was little likelihood that Malaysia could score from openplay.  But the Thais did look good for another goal. And although it did notcome, there was no denying that the Cup was theirs for the taking.  Malaysia gained some consolation though when Zainal was named the mostvaluable player of the tournament after the final.  MALAYSIA: Khairul Azman Mohamed, Zami Mohamed Noor, B. Rajnikhand, AzmilAzali, Zainal Abidin Hassan, Rizal Sukiman (M. Chandran), Nazri Yunos, YapWai Loon, Azman Adnan, Rusdee Sulong (Shamsurin Abdul Rahman), K.Sanbagamaran (Faizal Zainal).  THAILAND: Wacharapong Somchit, Kritsada Piandit, Surachai Phatanapong(Phitaya Santawong) (Yutana Bolsak), Natee Tongsukkao, ApichadTeelamcharlemdit (Jakarat Tonhongsa),  Natipong Sritong-In, SurachaiJaturapattarapong, Kiatisuk Senamuang, Worawwot Srimaka, Dusit Chalermsan,Phitaya Santawong.  Referee: Yoshimi Ogawa (Jpn).  * IN the third placing playoff earlier, Vietnam came good last nightand, in doing so, made the Indonesians look so ordinary.  Vietnam were one up in the 10th minute thanks to a cheeky back heel fromHuynh Quoc Cuong after Nguyen Hong Son had split the Indon defence.  Vietnam went 2-0 up in the 27th minute when Hong Son's cross from theright saw Indonesian defender Yeyen Tumena deflecting the ball into hisown net.Indonesia pulled a goal back in the 65th minute from a Kurniawan Yuliantoshot from 15 metres out.  But the Vietnamese dealt them another blow in the 76th minute after HongSon was brought down in the box and skipper Vo Hoang Bu made it 3-1 fromthe spot.  There was a brief fightback from the Indonesians after they reduced thedeficit in the 84th minute, from a wonderful goal put away by AplesGidgeon but it came too late.                       Pix: Hotshots ... Malaysia's Zainal Abidin Hassan holds the Most ValuablePlayer Of The Tournament trophy while Thailand's Natipong Sritong-In showsoff the Top Scorer trophy after their AFF Cup final last night. Thailandwon 1-0.-By Khalid Redza.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Editorial: Bosnia votes to make or breakfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 12BOSNIA just made it in time to vote. On Saturday, the last day set by theDayton timetable, the international community narrowly managed to shepherdthe warring sides to the ballot box. It was Bosnia's brightest spot sincethe Dayton signing last year. But plenty of hard feelings remain. Sincethe Dayton implementation, all sides have been gravitating towards theirbastions and strongholds. Returning refugees have not been welcomed,particularly by their Serb transplanters. Local mixed community elections,such as in Mostar, have not been harmonious. Similar elections are due forthe rest of the country, with little cause for rejoicing. All partiesstrike and parry and take postures - each looking to get what they can outof the loose ends of the Dayton plan.  Most of those loose ends could have been tightened by a more resoluteimplementation effort. As it happened, Dayton's sponsors took too much forgranted after the accords' signing. They delayed the removal of itsbiggest obstacle - renegade Serb leader Radovan Karadzic - and gave theindicted war criminal enough freedom to push his own and the other sidesdeeper into their nationalist corners. It is in the safety of thesecorners that they have remained stuck, and where their votes willeventually count.  Disagreements about how sternly to treat the rebel Serbs have remainedto divide the Americans and Europeans even after the removal of Karadzic.The Europeans never acted tough enough to purge the Serb leadership of hissupporters and their persistent calls for a separate Republika Srpska incontravention of the Dayton formula. The Serbs were made to back down onlyabout a week before the elections. They have toned down their defiance,rather cunningly calculating that they have a better chance of holding onto ethnically cleansed territory (Dayton had handed them 51 per cent ofthe country) by fixing ballot majorities than by showing resistance. Inthe elections, non-Serbs returning to their former hometowns werechannelled to polling stations through specified routes, where many ofthem found their names absent from the rolls. The shadow of ethniccleasing and forced eviction clouds the elections in other ways - morethan a fifth of the votes cast were the postal ballots of Bosnians chasedout of their homeland.  Twenty-five years ago, the West pooled some US$60 million to help out aYugoslavia thrown on a limb by Marshal Tito's death. About four years ago,their hastiness in recognising the independence of the Yugoslavconstituent states left the federation in tatters. The Europeans stillcannot see the difference between ameliorating and aggravating their"Balkan problem," acting in two minds over the guilt of the Serbs in thepresent crisis. Their dithering reinforced the Serbs' closed-in mentality,justifying their acts of genocide and brutality on the grounds that therest of the world were against them. Although the holding of the electionshas been a qualified success, its results are anything but certain.Bosnia-Herzegovina is too full of bad memories to cure its history in oneday. At best, Dayton will create something much less than a mini-Yugoslavia - but at least Bosnia will survive, hopefully long enough toheal its wounds. At worse, the institutional strings forced on by a weak-willed international community will be pulled to breaking point - by aBosnia electing, rather than fighting, to carve itself up.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Letter: Artists as keepers of Malaysian national heritagefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 13By Jane HughesDURING a recent visit to Malaysia, I could not help wondering if even thebest Malaysian artist could survive the constant bombardment of culturalimperialism from the West.  Television, cinema, advertising push us all towards an internationalhomogeny that is hard to resist. In the art world, this is particularlydangerous as a nation's cultural heritage needs to be nurtured in order toflourish and move forward.  I have spoken to many Malaysian artists who think deeply about thisthreat and grapple with the problem in their work. Most have trained inthe West or been taught by visiting Western artists. Some influence is nota bad thing as long as it does not become exclusive. Artists must, and do,strive to take only the best of Western influences while remaining firmlyrooted in traditional cultural ideology.  So artists realise the danger and take their role as keepers of nationalidentity seriously but there is an even more insidious threat. This comesfrom the patrons and general public to whom art works are offered. Iftheir tastes are affected by the call to ape Western styles, will they notdemand such art?  Few artists are privileged enough to be able to ignore such economicinfluences.  There are two main courses of action that would help this problem. Thefirst is greater government support for the arts in general with moreconsistent provision for presenting contemporary art to a wide public.While some States seem to provide lavishly, official commitment elsewhereappears to be less enthusiastic. Improved State funding would ease theeconomic pressure on artists.  The second course of action is greater promotion of Malaysian artoverseas.  Although there has been a few forays by artists to exhibitinternationally, Malaysian art is still almost unknown in the UK and theUS. I feel certain that if westerners had access to more contemporaryMalaysian art, it would be applauded unequivocally. Consequently, as theMalaysian public see how their culture is valued, it will encourage aneven greater national confidence that is essential to withstand outsideforces.  Malaysian art is an excellent advertisement for the country and shouldbe given a more prominent role.  Politicians should not forget that, ultimately, all societies areremembered for their culture.Jane HughesSheffield,Britain                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Letter: Desludging of septic tanks: IWK explainsfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 13By Mirza Mohamed TariqI REFER to two letters that appeared in the New Straits Times recently,regarding the need to desludge septic tanks and sewerage rates. Thereseems to be still many misconceptions about desludging of septic tanks.  Septic tanks are settlement tanks and need to be desludged according totheir design. The Malaysian Standard (MS 1228) for a septic tank serving ahousehold of five people is two-metre cubic. These septic tanks aredesigned with a settling basin with a retention time of 24 hours and asludge storage capacity of up to two years.  Accordingly, the Ministry of Housing and Local Government's TechnicalCommittee on Sewerage Services has recommended that septic tanks bedesludged once in two years on an average to ensure that they operateefficiently and their final effluents do not pollute the environment.  If not desludged, these septic tanks will cause sludge solids to bedischarged into the waterways. Hence, it is not surprising that theDepartment of Environment has identified domestic sewage as one of themajor pollutants of our rivers in every annual report.  The sewerage rates for a domestic customer varies between RM2 and RM10 amonth and there are no additional charges for scheduled desludging.Pending the outcome of the Sewerage Review Committee, IWK continues toprovide the scheduled desludging service and appeals to all customers toco-operate and ensure that their septic tanks are desludged in order tosafeguard their immediate environment.Mirza Mohamed TariqSenior General ManagerCustomer ServicesDivision, IWK                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Letter: JB council's reason for failure to pay its debt is a real jokefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 13By H. TanAS a citizen from the State of Johore, and an old resident of Johor Baru,I don't know whether to laugh or cry when I read in the New Straits Timeson Sept 6, that the Johor Baru City Council had failed to pay a debt ofRM100,380.67 to a music production house as a result of which the councilwas sued and its premises, which has over RM100,000 worth of equipment andother items inside, sealed.  Failure to pay the debt, according to the council's secretary, was"because of a communication breakdown". What will happen if the officeequipment and other items are sold to pay off the debt?  Presumbly, the council's entire administrative machinery will grind to ahalt and the reason will be "because of a total office equipmentbreakdown". What other jokes can the council produce to entertain us?H. TanJohor Baru                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Letter: Arts or Science: Ringgit and sen is main issuefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 13By N. SumWE have heard calls from politicians and educationists to arrest thedeclining interest of students in science and to make the subject moreinteresting in class so that students would prefer to take up Sciencesubjects instead of Arts.  But that is not the crux of the problem. It is a matter of ringgit andsen.  At the end of school life and when the person starts to earn aliving, how much more can the former Science student earn compared to theArts graduate despite the extra effort put in to study Science subjects?  The private sector does not call for more Science students as it doesnot need scientists to sell a product or a service. So the banking, hotel,tourism and trading industries, to name a few, do not need scientists.Only in the Research and Development wing of the pharmaceutical, food,chemical, heavy and light industries are a few scientists needed.  In almost every country, it is the Government sector that employs thelargest number of scientists.  Prior to the implementation of the New Remuneration System in 1992, aA11 officer (senior timescale) earned about RM250 more than his junior A19(timescale) officer.  With the implementation of the NRS, the senior timescale officer is nowdowngraded to a timescale officer. Not only that, within the same category(Kategori IV), there are numerous grades according to the departments theyserve in.  For example, in the Education Department, it is DG3, in the Agriculturesector, it is G3, in the Science sector, it is C3, in the Economic sector,it is E3 and so on and so forth.  What is so demoralising is that with the implementation of the NRS, theformer A11 senior timescale officer may be earning a few ringgit less thana former A19 timescale officer in another department. Particularly gallingis that he may have a Master's or a doctorate whereas the former A19officer may only have a general degree (without Honours).  Not only that, the system of salary increments to the P2 and P3 scalesfrom the P1 scale within the same category may see the former A19timescale officer earning more than the former A11 senior timescaleofficer.  It is already bad enough that very often, junior officers are promotedto higher posts (Kategori II) over more senior officers because offavouritism. But to earn less than junior officers may be the last straw.  Such is the anomaly of the NRS in the Government sector that mediocrityis prevalent among the scientists; not that the scientists are mediocre,(after all, they were the creme de la creme of their schools and theiruniversities), nor did they achieve mediocrity, but they had mediocritythrust upon them.  For some of them, their talent in sales matches their talent in science,and so they opt for the private sector. But to rub salt into their wounds,the Government has stopped those in the teaching and medical professionsfrom opting out, citing their services are critically needed; yet at thesame time, treating them like bad step-children, to be punished and notrewarded!  However, for many others, (some have served more than 20 years), theyhave no choice but to remain in the civil service until mandatoryretirement, since the private sector does not require that manyscientists.  So, do not blame the parents, who only have the welfare of theirchildren at heart, if they advise their children to drop science subjects.As it is, it has been stated that the country needs 10,000 accountants bythe end of the century, but has anyone said that the country needs 10,000scientists who will be rewarded according to their work? Since the countrydoes not respect and reward scientists accordingly, how can scientistsrespect themselves?N. SumAlor Star                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Outlook: Safety at workplace not for government to shoulder alonefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 13By Lee Lam ThyeDEPUTY Prime Minister Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim launched a month-longnationwide campaign on occupational safety and health on Sept 3 initiatedby the Ministry of Human Resources.  This effort by the National Council for Occupational Safety and Healthof the Human Resources Ministry is being carried out with the objective ofincreasing awareness among employers and employees on the importance ofoccupational safety and health as well as to make OSH practices part ofour culture.  Deputy Human Resources Minister Datuk Abdul Kadir Sheikh Fadzir hasrevealed that since the introduction of the Occupational Safety and HealthAct 1994, the number of workplace accidents has declined.  He said the accident rate last year was 15 per 1,000 workers (117,231accidents) compared with 17 per 1,000 workers (125,535 accidents) in 1994.  But fatalities rose from 787 in 1994 to 1,167 last year.  Now that the campaign has started, our industries need to re-assesstheir safety and health practices, to see how far they fulfil presentrequirements.  In the final analysis, it is not only the awareness that we should seekto promote but the palpable will to achieve the targets set for anaccident-free workplace.  Employees and unions have a special stake in this life and death issueand must assert their right for a high safety standard at the workplace.  There is also a necessity for people to change to meet the demands ofindustrial development.  The most important change is that of attitude towards safety and healthpractices at worksites.  There is a need to remove the notion that safety and health at work arethe responsibility of the Government alone.  It is not. It is a collective responsibility.  In this respect the top-level management must prove their commitment andadopt a pro-active approach.  They should employ safety engineers, industrial hygienists andoccupational physicians and conduct occupational safety and healthprogrammes.  Industrial accidents, including occupational diseases constitute aserious problem. Apart from loss of life, injuries and personal sufferingto the victims and their dependants, industrial accidents also cause mucheconomic loss.  Unlike accidents, occupational diseases are difficult to detect becuasethe signs take a longer time to manifest. The cumulative cost istremendous.  Everybody loses - the employer, employee, Government and the nation.Losses to property are quantifiable but human suffering is not.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Jitters over control by consortiumfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 14By Harris Iskandar Taib; Shareem AmryPRIVATE waste contractors fear abuse of power, favouritism andvictimisation at the hands of the consortium that won the contract for thenationwide privatisation of garbage collection.  Klang Valley Solid Waste Contractors' Association president Francis Laisaid there was also no guarantee their services would not be wrongfullyterminated in favour of other contractors lobbying to take over theirexisting contracts.  "We are not against privatisation. What we are asking from theconsortium is that it liaise with us and let us know what the entire planwill be like. At the moment it holds our future in its hands."  The consortium, led by Hicom Holdings Bhd, and also comprising MalaysianMining Corporation, Konsortium K.K. Industries and Konsortium Consec Gali,is set to take over the nation's waste collection on Jan 1 next year.  It has set up a company called Eminent Flora Sdn Bhd to undertake theproject, and to date, has already taken over the dumpsite at TamanBeringin.  The consortium recently submitted a draft proposal of a new lawgoverning garbage collection to the Economic Planning Unit.  New legislation is necessary not only to set national standards ofgarbage management, standards now under the discretion of the localcouncils, but also to award the consortium jurisdiction over all areas ofgarbage collection.  This includes collecting, storing, transporting, processing, treatingand recycling solid wastes, dealing with domestic, commercial, non-toxicindustrial and construction wastes and wastes from road cleaning, drainand river cleaning.  Lai said the association could offer some valuable suggestions and ideasto the consortium if there was only an effort to consult them.  "We do not want to get shortchanged by the privatisation programme. Thatis why it is necessary for the consortiums and the Government to let us inon their plans.  "Some of us have invested a lot in machinery and equipment. Contrary tobelief, this is not a very lucrative business.  "Therefore, if it is wiser for us to fold up now we will do it ratherthan lose much more by waiting."  Private sector waste collectors have been working on contract for all142 local municipal councils since 1976. In the central and northernregions alone, their investments add up to an estimated RM240 million andthey directly employ about 2,500 people.  Alarmed by the privatisation exercise, private contractors formed theassociation in December last year to put forward a plea to the Government:Let us stay in business.  In a letter to the Housing and Local Government Ministry dated July 16this year, the association wrote: "We want our stake recognised so that weare allowed to co-exist with the Government-appointment consortium ...Specifically, we would like to continue servicing the trade andindustrial community."  Their stake can only be assured if legislation, currently being draftedto make way for the privatisation exercise, states clearly that theconsortium will only handle residential waste and leave industrial garbagecollection to private contractors.  The consortium is expected to allow private waste contractors alreadyservicing this industry a grace period before eventually being absorbed assub-contractors.  Lai proposed that the consortium draw up a set of regulations andprinciples that would allow the association to supervise and regulate allsub-contractors on its behalf.  He said the consortium should also include in the new legislation beingdrawn up, a provision requiring all sub-contractors to become members ofthe association before being allowed to operate.  This would make it easier to regulate the operators, rather than theconsortium being left with the task of tackling every sub-contractorindividually.  Describing the plans to take over every sector of waste treatment asambitious, he said the consortium should instead concentrate on openingand managing new and existing dumpsites, the building of transfer stationsand incinerators.  Some residents are unenthusiastic about changing the system for fear ofbeing at the mercy of the consortium.  Said Bukit Bandaraya's residents association president Tunku ZahiahTunku Sulong: "Based on our past experience, we are worried that we wouldnot be able to address our complaints to the consortium as effectively aswe can to City Hall.  "At least City Hall has shown that they will respond if we tell them ourproblem.  "When we have complaints about the cutting of grass in our area on theother hand, which is handled by a private company, it is not so easy."  "What happens when the contractors fail to collect our rubbish on thedesignated time and date?" asked Petaling Jaya resident Ramlan Ismail."Does the new legislation allow us the opportunity to seek compensationand damages?"  Another houseowner was worried about the method of billing, fearingthere might not be a way to prove if the contractors were overcharginghim.  "If we are going to be billed by the bin, this means every householdmust keep track of how many bins of rubbish they dispose in a month.  "What happens when our figures do not tally with that of thecontractor?"  Perhaps the biggest question left unanswered in the project to privatisethe country's waste treatment system is whether the consumer will have achoice of disposing the rubbish himself and so avoiding having to pay forprivatised services.  One resident likened the situation to the privatisation of highways: "Ifa motorist refuses to pay toll, he can still use the trunk road. Will wehave the same option?"  Unlike the treatment of sewage, consumers have the capability andresources to discard rubbish themselves as it involves no sophisticatedequipment and technical expertise.  The present system makes it compulsory for consumers to pay for theservices as it is part of the assessment charges which also includes theinstallation and maintenance of street lighting, drains and the cutting ofgrass.  But when charges for rubbish collection are taken out of the assessmentand the service run by a company instead of the Government, then theservice becomes more of an option.  The new legislation is expected to address these issues, besidesproposing methods of how to separate charges for the collection of garbagefrom the assessment charges.                       Pix: No standards ... Local councils turn a blind eye to unsanitarymalpractices such as the transport of garbage in open lorries.-By WongSung Jeng.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Hanky-panky in garbage collection jobsfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 14KUALA LUMPUR, Sun. - Garbage collectors, who make low bids to get theircontracts, are cutting corners to ensure profits by hiring lorry driversand owners to do the job part-time but at the expense of the environment.  The part-timers are dumping garbage indiscriminately as some don't evenknow where the dumpsites are, people in the business said this week.  The contractors' cost-cutting measures also ranged from not picking upgarbage as regularly as the contract specified, to the use of open lorriesinstead of compactor trucks.  "Some who win the contracts don't even own proper garbage compactors.They haul the rubbish in open lorries, which is a cheaper mode oftransportation but very unsanitary," said Yamin Vong, group generalmanager of the Sitamas Group, which also includes Conwaste DisposalServices Sdn Bhd.  Other private garbage collectors, who have been complementing localcouncil services since 1976, said these contractors were able to obtaincontracts from the local councils through low bids.  "But they are not in the business so they don't even know where theproper dumpsites are," said Hi-Tech Waste Management Sdn Bhd directorDavid Zon.  "What happens is they just discard the garbage indiscriminately."  With the average Malaysian tossing out between 0.5kg and 0.8kg ofrubbish a day, this has given rise to a number of foul, illegal dumpsites.  But those in the industry claim that the contractors are not the onlyones to be blamed as the local councils are also partly at fault.  There are allegations that some councillors who sit on the tender boardaward contracts to companies owned by them, relatives or friends byoverriding the Urban Services Department's recommendations by a simplemajority vote.  There are even accusations of councillors or politicians monopolisingthe entire rubbish collection service within one district.  "We know who they are, but there is no way to prove that these companiesbelong to them because the permits are issued in the name of otherindividuals," said one contractor.  "What we know is that they collect a certain percentage at the end ofthe month. Some politicians are also involved, lobbying for contractseither for themselves or for their supporters."  In some cases, allegations have also tainted the local council seniorofficials.  "Don't be surprised if the health inspectors, the council secretary, oneof the directors or even the council president has an interest in one ofthe companies which have been awarded a contract for refuse collection,"said another private contractor.  When contacted, local authorities did not deny that their services fallshort of expectations, but said they were not professionally-trained tohandle the job and did not have the resources to compete with privatecontractors.  "This is why we need professionals to do it. Many of the people in localcouncils today do not have the expertise to handle waste management,because the entire rubbish industry is different today than it was 20years ago," said Petaling Jaya Municipal Council president Mohd Nor Bador.  "In the past, it was just a matter of collecting the rubbish anddisposing it. Today's urban services development involves recycling andincineration. We are not trained to do this, and this will involve plentyof re-evaluation."  Mohd Nor said it would be unfair to say local councils were completelyinefficient in handling rubbish. Because of the lack of a proper systemand proper resources, he said, it would appear as if the local councilswere incompetent.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Concerted effort vital to maintain clean image of Langkawi islandfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 18By K. BalaLANGKAWI, Sun. - Depending on the authorities alone to strive for aconstant clean image for the island resort is going to be a difficulttask.  There must be help and concern from all parties - the business sector,voluntary bodies, schools, sports bodies, political parties and thelayman.  The District Council does carry out clean-up campaigns and invitesvarious parties to join them but these must be prolonged and not on an ad-hoc basis.  Hotels, particularly the bigger ones and other tour related businessesdo organise clean-ups in places other than their surroundings. But theseare few and too far in between to be effective. And one tends to get thefeeling that the outside clean-up is for media publicity.  Sheraton Perdana general manager John O Shea is all for hotels to takepart regularly in such clean-ups by providing the voluntary manpower inorganised clean-ups.  "A group of hotels and tour organisations can adopt a particular areanear their vicinity on a regular basis," he says.  The hotel which opened for full business recently did a clean-up of theMasjid Al-Hana and surrounding areas.  Langkawi Village Resort manager Feisol Danker and public relationsmanager for both Pelangi Beach Resort and Burau Bay resort, David Fong,are also for the move for more co-ordinated efforts.  "True, all the bigger hotels clean their surroundings and beaches dailybut if the other areas where our guests go are not as clean, it may negateour efforts," Feisol says.  Unlike major towns there are not many voluntary and sports bodies on theisland but the few active ones can play their part.  For instance, the active Beach Hash House Harriers who have their runevery Sunday can adopt a particular beach to clean on the eve of the runat least once a month.  Kelab Puteri Langkawi comprising women in business organises an annualcharity event to raise funds for the needy.  Its president Khorshida Begum said they are also contemplating gettingtheir husbands and children to take part in gotong royong activitiesregularly.  Perhaps the political parties particularly the BN component partieswhich have large memberships could devote time to non-political activitieslike clean-up of beaches and the town.  The sector that has benefited most from the Langkawi boom are shoppingoutlets in town, a few of whom were reported to have recorded a turnoverof more than RM1 million a month each.  The least they can do is to employ workers if their own employees arebusy helping out in the business to clean up their surroundings of litterand the clogged drains on a weekly or fortnightly basis instead of merelycomplaining about the problems.  This will sort of repay the island and community for the boomingbusiness they have been enjoying because of the duty-free port status.  Schools too can play their part in inculcating the clean habit fromyoung.  Schools can organise at district level such activities just like they dofor sports and get the children to be involved with parental permission.  All they have to do is pick up the empty cans, bottles, palm fronds anddriftwood without dirtying their hands too much.                       Pix: Eyesore ... Black Sand Beach tends to be littered with garbageoften.-By Rozaki Daud.Pix: Reminder ... One of the many signboards preaching cleanliness.-ByRozaki Daud.Pix: Beautiful ... The clean beaches in Pantai Cenang in front of thePelangi Resort.-By Rozaki Daud.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Demand for inquiry into death of workersfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 19IPOH, Sun. - The Perak Information Network and Service Organisation todaycalled for an inquiry to determine the party responsible for theelectrocution of two factory workers at Sungai Kinta in Jalan Raja MusaAziz on Friday night.  Pinso legal adviser M. Kula Segaran said the Deputy Public Prosecutor'soffice should apply for a magistrate to sit as coroner.  He said the court should also determine whether Tenaga Nasional, IpohCity Council or the contractor carrying out the road widening project wasresponsible for the incident.  The bodies of R. Arumugam, 32, of Taman Emas in Chemor and A.Santhanakumar, 28, of Pokok Assam, Taiping were found at the river bank bya member of the public who called the police about 10.30pm.  Tenaga Nasional staff removed a live electric wire near a bridge whichwas also being widened.  Preliminary investigations revealed that Santhanakumar touched the wirewhile Arumugam was also electrocuted when he went to his friend's aid.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996A higher standard of cleanliness is neededfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 19LANGKAWI, Sun. - Village elder Aziz Musa,77, told his teacher son, Kamal,32, that the big porch in his recently built house on a piece of land hehad presented would be just another tempat ayam berak (a spot for chickendroppings).  Both father and son laughed, for the remark made in humour, is a commonhappening in kampungs on this enchanting island where chicken roam freelyjust like the cows and buffaloes do in the green fields and at times strayon to the roads.  With wooden homes giving way to brick buildings as the island awoke fromits slumber under seven generations of curse by as the legend of Mahsurihad it some eight years ago, the chickens tend to wander into the cementflooring and make their droppings freely.  But the specks of chicken droppings can be easily washed away. Just alittle water and a broom, the droppings disappear only to reappear a dayor two later.  Of course a fencing around the homes can keep the hens, cockerels andthe chicks at bay.  But these days city folk rarely get to see live chicken in their poshhousing estates except for dressed chicken in the supermarkets.  Anyway the kampung chicken is much tastier than those from thecommercialised farms what with worry over use of nitrofuran in chickenfeed.  This chicken episode bears importance when one discusses the cleanlinessof beaches and the blue waters of unique and scenic Langkawi comprising104 islands.  Generally, the beaches and waters are clean except for some litter andoccasional temporary spots of dark patches in the blue waters or on land.  Elsewhere there are muddy or dusty roads depending on whether it wet ordry season caused by the airport runway extension works and the marinaproject on reclaimed coastal land in Kuala Muda and the island-widedigging to lay a modern sewerage system.  When these works are completed in a year or two, there will be biggerrunways to accommodate jumbo jets, a marina resembling the Mediterraneanand a comprehensive sewerage system.  The only problem with this price for development is that most foreignersplan their vacations well ahead.  As they drive or ride a motorcycle along the pothole-ridden stretches,they do not know that all these works are part of the development plan forthe island and that they will turn the muddy beaches of Kuala Muda into aparadise.  There is therefore a need to minimise the discomfort unless we want themto return home with wrong impressions. Anyway the authorities have setsome guidelines of late and there seems to be some improvement.  For an international resort which attracted some 1.83 million touristslast year, there should be a higher standard of cleanliness, notwithstanding the more than a dozen big signboards along the main roadsexhorting the people to "Keep Langkawi clean".  Just as the porch of Aziz's home will be soiled after a period of timeif the chicken droppings are left uncleaned, the image of the island maysuffer the same fate.  The chicken can get away at most with a shoo or by having a slipperhurled at it but the island requires the authorities, the residents,visitors and those involved in development works to act more responsibly.  Talk at coffeshops and pubs - the latter being an attraction amongCaucasians who have managed to make the island their second home - tend tocentre on the rapid pace of development and the accompanying problems itmay face including mantaining the serenity and cleanliness.  Their fears of over-development at the expense of environment appear tohave little basis given the repeated assurances by Government leaders andplanners that the tranquillity of the resort island would not besacrificed.  That means the hills, forests, sandy beaches and clear waters which makethe island unique will always be there for these have made Langkawipopular since it opened its doors in 1987.  "Rest assured that we are not going to kill the goose that lays thegolden egg," said Datuk Abdul Halil Mutalib, the general manager ofLangkawi Development Authority recently.  But the fears expressed at the coffeeshops and pubs should not bedismissed totally. For what it is worth, there is need for vigilance toprevent the island from following the less cleaner ways of Penang or PortDickson.  At present, the island's beaches and waters can be considered clean.  The District Council which is responsible for mantaining the islandclean can do better particularly in Kuah town where rubbish and cloggeddrains are a common sight.  With impending nationwide privatisation of garbage collection, thecouncil should ensure that the company responsible does a better job thanwhat it has been doing.  Most of the white sandy beaches along Pantai Cenang, Pantai Tengah,Tanjung Rhu, Datai and Burau Bay are without doubt clean simply becausethey are fronts for many of the classier hotels.  Just like the family which has to wash the chicken droppings, thesehotels diligently keep their surroundings including the beaches (whichbelong to the Government) clean by deploying workers to pick up litter andother debris washed ashore daily. They are more interested in gettingtheir guests to return.  The problem is with the budget chalets fronting the sea. Theirmanagements are more worried about filling their rooms rather than tospare a worker or two to clean the surroundings including the beaches.  There is also a problem with the public beaches like certain stretchesof Pantai Cenang, Pantai Tengah, Pantai Kok, Pantai Pasir Hitam and PasirTengkorak.  There has been an ongoing debate as to who the culprits behind thelittering are.  The argument by the council that it is the work of visitors seems tohold water.  For generally, the Malays from the kampungs have always taken pride oftheir home and surroundings, however poor they may be.  Of course, Malaysians have yet to learn to take pride in theirsurroundings in their their own backyards let alone when they are out oftown.  Surprisingly, visitors from Asian countries also acquire the Malaysianhabit. Perhaps they want to express their freedom after being subject tostringent anti-litter laws back home.  We too have anti-litter laws. There are signboards in various parts ofthe island which read: Warning. Please do not litter. Fine RM2,000.  If enforcement is lax then we should not put up such signboards as theyare a waste of money. Fine them irrespective of whether they areMalaysians or foreigners and word will get around just like the jail termfor drink-driving which was first enforced here.  The unique Pantai Pasir Hitam (Black Sand Beach) is among the touristattractions which draws a large number of visitors. At times one hasdifficulty seeing the sand as they are covered with plastic and driftwood.  After the clean-up by council workers it looks better but worsens untilthe next spruce-up.  A group of traders operates from stalls built by the Government besidethis beach. A little gotong royong spirit can ensure cleanliness of theshort stretch which is their bread and butter.  But then they would rather be counting the till selling samples of theblack sand and other souvenir items to the tourists. They are thinking ofgetting rich with little investment while the Government and privatesector spend billions to make the island a popular international resort.  Another scenic public spot is the short stretch at Pasir Tengkorak alongthe way to Datai. Several wooden huts have been built amidst trees for useby visitors who enjoy the clear cool waters of the Andaman sea.  There are at least six large litter bins in the area yet garbage isstrewn all over.  Perhaps more garbage bins should be put up. But frankly the beaches andtowns could do with more and bigger bins to prevent over-flow.  But there is hope yet to change the littering habit among Malaysiansjudging from the cleanliness along the Pantai Kok during a recent visit.  It is a popular spot among the young expecially schoolchildren fromoutstation who come to camp at the site. It was refreshing to see thebeach clean though many schoolchildren had camped there during the recentschool holidays.  Perhaps the observations of two foreign tourists best sum up thesituation in Langkawi.  Petite Miharu Nishima, 24, and her sister Yasue from Osaka who spentthree days on their first visit to the island found the beaches generallyclean though they had some reservations about the situation in Kuah townwhere they went shopping.  "You have such a beautiful island. Please ensure that it remains thisway, beautiful and more clean," says Miharu.  Educationist Terry Swanson from New Zealand was at Pasir Tengkorak wherehe had taken his wife Gillian and three children for a dip in the Andamanwaters in a 4WD hired from the five-star hotel where he was staying.  He decided to spend a week in Langkawi - of which he heard so much -after the New Zealand Education Fair in Kuala Lumpur.  Asked for his frank opinion about the state of cleanliness in Langkawi,Swanson, who is Dean of the Faculty of Commerce at Nelson Polytechnicsaid:  "You have beautiful white sand beaches, warm waters that are notpolluted and an enchanting island. You have a valuable asset which needsto be protected and nurtured.  "The island is not at all dirty but (the situation) could be better."  The island could be cleaner just like the porch after Aziz and his wifewash away the chicken droppings. Langkawi can be a shining example toothers with concerted efforts on the land and sea blessed by nature.                       Pix: Swanson ... could be better.Pix: Nishima ... beaches generally clean.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Top Asian athletes among 3,000 for Terengganu runfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 21KUALA TERENGGANU, Sun. - The Sept 22 Terengganu Bridge Run is expected toattract some 3,000 participants.  State Tourism Development, Arts, Culture and Sports Committee chairmanDatuk Aziz Awang said well-known Asian athletes were also expected toparticipate.  "Compared to the previous competitions, this year's response isoverwhelming," he said at a briefing for 700 tournament officialsyesterday.  Among the international runners invited for the run are Myanmar's Thuraand Thinor, Chheng Piseh (Cambodia), Roy O Vence (the Philippines), WongSai Wing (Singapore) and Mujini Ronala (Thailand).  Indonesia will be sending its 15-year-old woman runner, EndangRahauingsih.  India is sending its international woman runner, Sunita Godara.  Singapore and Thailand will be sending the most number of participants,with 250 runners each.  So far more than RM225,000 has been collected for the run.  Aziz said beginning this year the State Government had decided to turnthe 21.1km run into an annual event. Previously it was held biennially.  He said each of the invited runners had a track record of less than 75and 85 minutes respectively for the men's and women's categories.  The run is jointly organised by the State Government, the TerengganuAmateur Athletics Association, the State Youth and Sports Department andAAC Sports Fitness and Recreation Sdn Bhd.                      Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Police launch city-wide campaign to fight crimefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 21KUALA LUMPUR, Sun. - Prevention is better than cure... With this in mind,police today launched a city-wide crime prevention campaign and urgedcityfolk to fight crime.  Police hope the campaign would help reduce the number of break-insreported at homes and business premises.  "Since 1994, we have received 7,613 reports of break-ins at homes andbusiness establishments," city police chief Datuk Ismail Che Rus said.  There were 2,910 reported cases in 1994, 2,922 cases last year and untillast month, police have received 1,781 reports.  Police investigations revealed in most instances the burglars gainedentry into the premises through doors and windows.  "Of the 7,613 cases reported since 1994, this method of entry was notedin 5,636 cases," Ismail said.  Besides this, 770 cases showed the burglars had gained entry through theroof while 247 cases were pulled off with the use of duplicate keys.  Ismail was speaking at the launch of the Crime Prevention campaign atthe Sri Sabah flats in Cheras.  The campaign was jointly organised by city police and the Kuala LumpurHousing Developers Association.   Also present were city Criminal Investigation Department chief SeniorAssistant Commissioner (II) Zakaria Mohamad, Sentul and Brickfields policechiefs Assistant Commissioners J.R.J. Raj and John Chong respectively;Cheras deputy police chief Superintendent Asmaon Alias and KLHDA presidentMustaza Mohamad.  Ismail said despite premises being fitted with window and door grilles,burglars still gained entry using basic house break-in tools likescrewdrivers and crow-bars.  "Very often, these grilles are of low quality material and can be easilyremoved using these tools, he explained.  He also advised property owners to ensure that locks are changed oradded when they receive the keys to their new homes.  "Anyone, from the labourer to the developer, who handled the keys priorto the owners, could easily make duplicates," Ismail said, adding thatpolice have identified the Cheras district as having the highest crimerate.  In view of this, police have intensified their efforts in Jalan Peel,Jalan Menteri, Jalan Bendahara, Taman Kobena, Taman Maluri, Taman ShamelinPerkasa, Taman Miharja and the Sri Sabah flat.  At a similar function in Brickfields, Chong said police have identifiedthe Happy Garden, Taman Bukit Aman and Brem Park housing estates to focustheir efforts as these areas have the highest crime rate in the district.                      Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Fire razes factory, two housesfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 21KUALA LUMPUR, Sun. - Fire destroyed a furniture factory and two squatterhouses in Kampung Michael Chen, off Km13 Jalan Puchong today.  Factory owner, Chin Chong Yau, 40, said the fire, which broke out about4.30pm, destroyed finished products worth about RM900,000.  A Fire Services Department spokesman said the fire was believed to havestarted at one of the squatter houses.  "We have ruled out a short circuit as the houses do not have electricitysupply," the spokesman said.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Fire Services Department to get new name, responsibilitiesfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 21KUALA LUMPUR, Sun. - The Fire Services Department will be known as theFire and Rescue Services Department by the end of the year, under theGovernment's plan to widen the scope of its duties.  Housing and Local Government Minister Datuk Dr Ting Chew Peh said hisministry was preparing a working paper on the change of name and would bepresenting it to the Cabinet soon.  Ting said this was the first time the department would be changing itsname since its formation.  "The ministry plans to enhance the emergency and rescue services of thedepartment. It must be multi-disciplined and multi-skilled to keep abreastwith the rapid pace of development.  "In fact, the department already carries out rescue work, in instanceswhen a building collapses, when there are landslides, flash floods androad accidents. The Pos Dipang incident was a good example where fire-fighters also carried out search and rescue operations.  "The department also does work which has absolutely nothing to do withfighting fires like helping detain mentally ill persons and catchingsnakes."  The Minister was speaking after opening a two-day InternationalConvention of Chung Shan Associations at the Concorde Hotel today.  There were about 600 participants at the convention, which broughttogether people who originated from the Chung Shan province in Kwangtung,China.  Participants came from over 20 countries to the convention, held for thefirst time to discuss investment opportunities in Malaysia and to renewold ties.  Ting said between 20 and 40 per cent of the duties carried out by theFire Services Department had nothing to do with fighting fires. Fire-fighters accepted the duties out of a sense of humanity, he said.  On training for fire-fighters, Ting said the curriculum would berevamped in line with the name change.  "To my knowledge, however, their present training already encompassesthings other than fire fighting."  Ting said a change in uniform for fire-fighters was also beingconsidered. He added: "We are looking at a design which is smarter andmore functional."  Ting also appealed to the younger generation to join the department. Hesaid it was a risky job with very few takers.  "There are also very few Chinese and Indians who want to join thedepartment as the economic boom has given rise to a lot of other jobopportunities."                      Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Pepsi contributes RM5,200 to Harian Metro contestfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 21KUALA LUMPUR, Sun. - Pepsi bottler Permanis Sdn Bhd has contributedRM5,200 to the southern region finals of Harian Metro's Suara EmasIndustri contest.  Pepsi product executive A. Nagarajan presented a mock cheque to NewStraits Times Press (M) Bhd assistant general manager for circulationSaidi Abu Hassan at Balai Berita on Friday.  Permanis is donating RM2,900 in cash and RM2,300 in hampers for thefinals at Dewan Jubilee Intan, Batu Pahat. The event featuring 12finalists from factories in Muar, Batu Pahat and Johor Baru will be heldon Saturday at 8 pm.  "If there's anything to do with music, Pepsi's always there," Nagarajansaid.  He also affirmed Pepsi's commitment to contribute to the East Coast andcentral region finals in October and November.  Saidi said the Suara Emas Industri contest would maintain close rapportbetween NSTP and factories.  Also present was Mizal Hasbullah, NSTP senior executive for marketingand promotions.  The champion of the southern region finals will receive RM1,000 in cashand RM1,500 in prizes. The first and second runners-up will receiveRM2,000 and RM1,500 respectively in cash and prizes.  The other nine finalists will receive RM500 each in cash and prizes.  The contest is co-organised by Sony and Harian Metro, and is beingconducted in four regions - northern, southern, central and East Coast.  The southern region contest is sponsored by Permanis, property developerTrenolo Sdn Bhd of Batu Pahat and restaurant Sri Mutiara of Muar, with theco-operation of the Batu Pahat City Council.                       Pix: For music ... Nagarajan (left) and Saidi displaying the Pepsi bannerin conjunction with Pepsi's contribution to the singing contest.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Call for more biographies to be written on past leadersfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 2KOTA KINABALU, Sun. - Chief Minister Datuk Yong Teck Lee said more booksshould be written about past leaders so that their contribution to theState and nation could be remembered.  He said such books would particularly help the younger generationappreciate the role played by these leaders in developing the State andpromoting unity.  "The struggle of our past leaders ought to be remembered and appreciatedby the people," he said when launching an autobiography of Yang di-PertuaNegeri Tun Sakaran Dandai at the Shangri-La's Tanjung Aru Resortyesterday.  Yong said books on other Yang di-Pertua Negeri such as Tun Datu MustaphaDatu Harun, Tun Pengiran Ahmad Raffae, Tun Fuad Stephens and Tun HamdanAbdullah should also be written.  The autobiography, compiled by former Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka directorIsmail Abbas and DBP staff Nadin Salleh and Japar Ungki, will be launchedon Monday to coincide with Sakaran's 66th birthday.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Spectacular dance contestfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 18By Loo Kian BoonAMATEUR and professional dancers of both the Latin and modern dancedisciplines came together to put up a spectacular dance gala when theycompeted with one another for honours and glory at the second MalaysianInternational Dancesport Grand Prix 1996 at the Mahkota Ballroom of HotelIstana Kuala Lumpur recently.  The competition saw 74 pairs of dancers from seven different countriesin the Asia Pacific region competing in 10 categories.  It was organised by the William and Luisa Danceworld, a dance schoolopened by the husband and wife team of six-time Southeast Asia amateurLatin champion and current Malaysian Professional Latin champion Williamand Luisa Lor.  The competitors, who came from Malaysia, Singapore, Australia, Taiwan,Hong Kong, Thailand and Indonesia, were split into the Latin and modernsections which both included the novice, pre-amateur, senior, amateurClosed and amateur Open categories.  Sixteen adjudicators from the seven competing countries were invited asjudges during the finals.  The adjudicators, who were either former or current ballroom dancingchampions, were led by 14-time Australian professional Latin championAnthony Gauci and Tania McGuinness.  Before the competition commenced, guests as well as the contestants hadthe opportunity to purchase from an array of ballroom dancing shoes forboth males and females outside the dining hall.  The competition then began with the senior modern section in which eightpairs took to the floor in their smart tail jackets and elegant ballroomdresses.  After six finals had been completed, the dance floor was cleared for thearrival of the guests-of-honour Tunku Dara Naquiah Tuanku Ja'afar and herhusband Tunku Mudzaffar Tunku Mustapha.  The competition was then formally declared open by chief organisersWilliam and Luisa Lor, followed by the parade of the contestants accordingto their countries.  In his welcoming speech, Lor thanked all the supporters and sponsors whohad contributed tremendously to the success of the dance competition.  "It is hoped that by hosting this championship, we would be able tofurther raise the level of ballroom dancers in Asia and particularly inMalaysia," he said.  "This championship will feature some of the top professional dancersfrom the Asia Pacific region, who will highlight this event with theirspecial performances."  Prizes were then presented to the winners of the first six finals by theorganising committee patron Datin May Lee Leong.  Among the winners were John Lim and Joanne Leong in the senior modernsection, Sharizal Zainal and Lynette Ow in the novice modern section, andNg Le-On with his partner Cheah Su-Ann in the novice Latin section.  Talking about the victory in the novice Latin category, Cheah expressedher joy of winning her first dancing title.  She then admitted about being a little confused when she was announcedas the winner along with her partner Ng.  "This win was never expected especially when the competition from ourrivals was so strong. It was difficult for us to anticipate victory."  The win was especially sweet for Cheah because she almost didn't make itto the final when she sprained her ankle two weeks earlier.  "Let's just say God answered my prayers," she added.  Ng, who was also the amateur Latin champion at the Kuala Lumpurinternational ballroom dancing championships last year with Andrea Quah,gave full credit to his partner who struck up a good understanding withhim despite dancing together with her for only three months before thecompetition.  As the dinner commenced, the competition continued with the amateurLatin Closed and amateur Latin Open finals.  Unlike the modern dance finals, the Latin sections saw a much a youngerset of dancers.  Dresses worn by the female partners are more vibrant and sexy.  Even their male counterparts discarded the jackets and instead went forplain long-sleeve shirts.  The tempo of the music was also switched from the tango, cha-cha and thewaltz to the hippier tune of jive, samba, ramba (the dance of the bullfighter) and the romantic love dance.  In between competition, guests were also treated to some raredemonstrations of Latin and modern dance by some of the establisheddancers in the region.  Incidentally, most of them have been invited as judges in thechampionships and they sportingly obliged by taking the dance floor withtheir partners to give competitors a tip or two.  Among them were undefeated Indonesian professional modern champions andgrand finalists in all Southeast Asia professional championships SoenarkoJosodihardjo and Jenny Indrawati, 12-time Taiwanese modern champions andprofessional modern and Latin champions John and Jennifer Shih, and seven-time undefeated Southeast Asia professional ballroom champions Melvin andNancy Low.  The highlight of the night was the amateur Latin Open and amateur modernOpen, which saw international participation.  The star attraction was the sole Australian pair of Adam Reeve andRebecca Allen, who amazed the judges with lightning quick movements andsynchronised routines.  There was no doubt they were the true champions when they were announcedas the winners of both the Open categories.                       Pix: Feeling on top of the world ... the three winning pairs withSharizal and Ow on top of the podium.-By Loo Kian Boon.Pix: Novice latin champ ... Ng Le-On (left) and partner Cheah Su-Ann.-ByLoo Kian Boon.Pix: With gusto ... Jimmy Heng and Jessica Lok doing the jive.-By LooKian Boon.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996MAS wins bid to stage road racefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 21MALAYSIA Airlines won the bid to host the World Airlines Road Race or Warr97 in Kuala Lumpur next year.  Although Malaysia Airlines has been participating since 1990, it wasonly last year that it won the bid against five other airlines at theDurban WARR.  WARR is the largest and the most popular airline sporting event in termsof participants.  Hosting the event is a honour for Malaysia as it is the first time WARRwill be held in an Asian country since its inauguration in San Franciscoin 1982.  It is anticipated that about 100 airlines with an estimated 4,000participants will converge in Kuala Lumpur.  However, Malaysia Airlines will be working hard to create history withthe highest number of participants, about 4,500.  Last Saturday, a team of 15 Malaysia Airlines athletes left for Atlantafor the WARR five and 10km races.                       Pix: W.A.R.R. squad ... the MAS team with chef de mission Wan Aidi WanMustafa.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996New committee to hold meetingfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 21THE Petaling District FA, under a new management council, will hold itsfirst meeting on Thursday.  The meeting will be held at association (PDFA) president Megat FirdouzMegat Junid's office in Kelana Jaya.  Megat Firdouz, who at 27 became the youngest PDFA president, will chairthe meeting which is expected to discuss matters pertaining to theadminstration of the association.  But one man who is seen as livewire of PDFA is council member K.Mukunthan, better known as Dass, who was largely responsible for MegatFirdouz being at helm at the last biennial annual meeting.  Mukunthan, a former FA of Selangor (FAS) staff and Selangor teamcaretaker, is the link between the association and Megat Firdouz.  He will be mainly responsible for the daily running of the associationwith secretary S. Selearajan, a Fifa referee, and assistant secretary M.Namasivayam.  The meeting will see the appointment of the various sub-committeechairmen.  Megat Firdouz is expected to head the finance committee. Either MegatFirdouz or vice-president K. Rajendran will take care of youth developmentand rules, vice-president P. Mohan (competitions), vice-president HabibulRahman Kadir Shah (disciplinary) and senior council member Ismail Yaacob(referees board).  The PDFA is RM30,000 in the red and Megat Firdouz, who is also a MajlisDaerah Petaling councillor, will shoulder the daunting task of putting theassociation in the black in the next two years.  The competitions committee will have to look into the three-divisionleague which has been poorly organised by the previous committee.  It has to complete the league and start the FA Cup, which will involveall 38 teams competing in the Super, Div One and Two Leagues.  Besides this, the committee will also have to look at ways to raiseprize money for FA Cup champion and runner-up.  Winners in tha PDFA League and FA Cup have not got their prize money inthe past but with the new council earlier promising to change that, theassociation will have to start off with the current FA Cup.  There has not been much development programmes for youths either. ThoughPDFA has a team playing in the FAS Div Three, the team is in a shambles.  It is time PDFA officials form a management committee for the handlingof the PDFA soccer team and participation in the FAS League.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Police urged to act fast against petrol bombersfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 4By R. SittamparamJOHOR BARU, Sun. - The Information Ministry has urged police to urgentlyapprehend those responsible for hurling petrol bombs at the Royal Museumand the State's RTM complex to avert repeat attacks.  Its Deputy Minister Datuk Suleiman Mohamed said the incident should beinterpreted as an attack against the Goverment and that it was a veryserious matter.  In the incident last Thursday, a youth on a motorcycle hurled two petrolbombs at the Istana Besar, which houses the Royal Museum at Jalan Tun DrIsmail at 4.15pm.  The youth, who was followed by two others in a car, proceeded to the RTMcomplex and threw a petrol bomb at a guard house at the Jalan Tasek Utaraentrance about 45 minutes later. None of the petrol bombs exploded.  The three then made their way to another guard house in Jalan Kolam Airand smashed the glass panes of the guard house.  It is believed that an RTM staff had received an obscene telephone callduring one of their live phone-in programmes on Friday, prompting RTM tocancel all live telephone programmes.  Speaking to reporters after officiating at the Malaysian Ex-Policemen'sAssociation's 24th annual delegates meeting in Skudai today, Suleimansaid:  "The culprits should be nabbed as soon as possible as there is alwaysthe fear that they will repeat the attacks.  "The Ministry has received an initial report on the incident and we areliaising closely with the police to keep in touch with the progress ininvestigations."  Suleiman dismissed the idea that the attack was linked to RTM's pro-Government stand and selective programming.  "Those who are dissatisfied with RTM programmes or its allegiance to theGovernment can use the proper channels such as writing in with theirviews.  "RTM is not purely a profit making organisation, rather it also has asocial responsibility to fulfil, hence it cannot function like otherprivate stations."  Meanwhile, district police chief S. Divakaran said police wereintensifying the investigation into the arson attack and were consideringseveral possible motives.  Asked about grafitti on RTM's signboard at the junction of Jalan KolamAir and Jalan Tasek Utara, he said it was probably not related to theincident.  The word "Ria" was spray painted on the signboard. Ria is believed torefer to the Radio Corporation of Singapore's Malay station "Ria 89.7".  "We have not managed to uncover any clues so far but we hope to get someleads from the findings of the Chemistry Department.  "The department is presently analysing the fragments of the petrol bomband its components."  Meanwhile, the Johor Security Working Committee conducted a thoroughinvestigation of Thursday's incident at the RTM complex today.  RTM southern region broadcasting director Norzihan Mohd Salleh said theprobe was to ensure the premises would not be subject to a similar attack.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Clinic by Ginnfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 21TWO-time Malaysian Open champion Stewart Ginn will conduct an exclusivegolf clinic at the Kuala Lumpur Golf and Country Club on Wednesday at 6pm.  The clinic is organised for corporate clients and intermediate golfersof Commercial Union Assurance Malaysia as a gesture of appreciation.  There will be a total of 24 young amateur golfers participating in theclinic.  Beginning with a one-hour lesson on the basics of golf, Ginn will thenaccompany each flight for three holes. The winner will receive a crystaltrophy.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Azean and son win top awards for roles in dramafrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 4SHAH ALAM, Sun. - "God answered my prayers," says a jubilant actress AzeanIrdawaty who just returned from her Umrah today after she was announcedBest Drama Actress through the drama Kembali at the Anugerah Skrin TV3.  Azean's son, Benji was also named Best Drama Actor through the samedrama. Both took home RM5,000 and a trophy each.  Kembali by Ziela Jalil's Production Eleven Sdn Bhd, was also named BestDrama and grabbed the RM50,000 cash prize award. The movie was alsoawarded Best Drama Script and Best Director through husband-and-wife team,Junaidah Johari and S. Amin Sahab. The couple received RM5,000 and atrophy each.  Sayang Salmah, by Perkasa Filem Sdn Bhd and Grand Brilliance Sdn Bhd,was once again named Best Film and grabbed the RM70,000 cash award. Themovie recently gave victory to Malaysia at the Asia-Pacific Film festivalin New Zealand where Sidi Oraza was announced Best Supporting Actor.  Actor Azhar Sulaiman of Sayang Salmah was also named Best SupportingActor and won RM7,000 and a trophy. The box-office movie Sembilu II gavevictories to Erra Fazira (Most Popular Actress), Awie (Most Popular Actor)who won RM7,000 and a trophy each and Ziana Zain (Most Popular SupportingActress) who took home RM3,000 and a trophy.  There were 31 awards up for grabs at this year's Anugerah Skrin TV3 heldat the Shah Alam Municipal Council Auditorium.  Sixteen awards were also given away to TV3 productions which includedFace To Face - French Nuclear for Best Talk Show (RM5,000), 13 Wonders -Snake Hunters for Best Documentary (RM5,000), Majalah 3 - Tentera Merahfor Best Magazine (RM5,000), Pop Kuiz - Sarawak Cultural Village for BestEntertainment Series (RM5,000) and Juara Lagu 1995 for Best EntertainmentSpecial (RM5,000).   The Jury's Special Award of RM3,000 cash and a trophy went to Mohd PoadOnah, the general manager of the TV3 News and Magazine Department andOthman Hafsham, producer/director of the long-running popular sitcom PiMai Pi Mai Tang Tu.  There was no winner for the drama section of the Jury's Special Award.                       Pix: Joy of it ... Ziela with her trophy.Pix: Benji ... best drama actor.Pix: Azean ... best drama actress.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Keen tussle expected for PJ honoursfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 21By Y.S. SegaranPLAYERS battling for honours in the 16th Petaling Jaya Open squashchampionship from Sept 27 to Oct 5 will have to be at their best to emergeon top.  The Open will be held at the newly renovated Astaka Squash Courts inPetaling Jaya.  Organising secretary Mary Ong said the draw for the men's Open was oneof the best in recent years.  She said Squash Racquet Association Selangor (SRAS) president Datuk MohdAini Taib would contribute RM1,000 to increase the prize money for themen's Open section.  Ong said Mohd Aini, who won the approval from Menteri Besar Tan SriMuhamamd Muhd Taib for the renovation of the Astaka venue, was eager tosee keener competition in the men's Open.  After the draw was made, favourite Kenneth Low is the top seed in themen's Open with fast improving Ong Beng Hee the number two while JamieHickox and Yap Kok Four are joint third and fourth seeds.  Barring upsets, Low and Beng Hee will meet in the final and theirmatches have always been absorbing duels.  With the prize increase from Mohd Aini, the champion will get RM1,500,runner-up RM1,000, third RM800 and fourth RM700.  Australia's Janine Hickey is the top seed for the women's Open whileJapan's Yuko Kimura is second seed, and Malaysians Kuan Choy Lin and LeongSiu Lynn are third and fourth seeds.  The champion will get RM1,000, runner-up RM600, third RM400 and fourthRM200.  Brothers Looi Hong Ling and Fong Sow are the No 1 and 2 seedsrespectively in the junior section.  In Div Two, Michael Tang is topseeded, Abdullah Rahman is rated secondwhile Zain Azlee and Y.C. Song are joint third and fourth seeds.  In Div Three, David Su is topseeded and Ikhwan Kwan Abdullah is rankednumber two.                       Pix: Rivals ... Low (left) is the top seed and Ong the second seed in thePJ meet.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Three JB council officers told to explainfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 4JOHOR BARU, Sun. - Three Johor Baru City Council senior officers have beengiven show-cause letters pertaining to the council's delay in settling adebt with a production company.  Datuk Bandar Datuk Hashim Yahaya said the three had been asked toexplain why action should not be taken against them for the delay ofpayment, resulting in the sealing of the council's office on Sept 3.  Speaking to reporters after closing a property exposition here, he saidthe officers were from its legal, administrative and treasury departments.  On Sept 3, Jojos Production Sdn Bhd obtained a court order to seal thecouncil's office following the council's failure to settle a debt ofRM100,000.  The amount was part of the RM200,000 payment due for services renderedby Jojos Production for an entertainment show organised by the council atthe Dataran Bandaraya here on Jan 3, 1994.  "Show-cause letters were given to the officers concerned on Sept 12.They have one week to reply.  "The disciplinary board will then decide what form of action to be takenagainst them," he said.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Rakan Muda `promotes a healthy lifestyle'from NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 4KUALA LUMPUR, Sun. - Youths in the country should be involved inactivities like Rakan Muda as it promotes a balanced and healthylifestyle, 4B Kampung Selayang Lama branch chief Mohamad Ali Mohamad Odinsaid today.  He said youths were the future of the country since they would determinethe direction of the country's development.  "The Rakan Muda programme launched today is aimed at ensuring thatyouths do not fall prey to social ills.  "They must realise that they are the country's treasure and that theyhave roles and responsibilities," he said.  Mohamad Ali was speaking at the opening of the Kepong Parliamentarydivision's Rakan Muda Day by Youth and Sport Ministry's ParliamentarySecretary Shahrizat Abdul Jalil at Sekolah Menengah Raja Abdullah.  He also urged government agencies and the private sector to co-operatewith Youth and Sports Department in the various Rakan Muda programmes thatwould be organised.  He said this would help to prevent youths from being involved innegative activities such as drug abuse and playing truant.  Mohamad Ali said the Youth and Sports Department had identified a fewshopping complexes where Rakan Muda programmes would be carried out.  Shahrizat, who was also the patron for today's function, expressed herhope that the Kampung Selayang Lama community would take the opportunityto ensure closer rapport among themselves.  She said the programme was not only meant to prevent youths from beinginvolved in negative activities but also for the families to getacquainted.  Earlier, Shahrizat joined several residents in a 20-minutes aerobicsworkout which was part of today's Rakan Muda activities.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Getting students to study nature at parkfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 6SHAH ALAM, Sun. - A joint educational programme between the MalaysianAgriculture Park and schools should be established to help students learnto appreciate nature, Agriculture Minister Datuk Amar Dr Sulaiman Daudsaid today.  He said such programmes would be beneficial to students at all levels asthe park was not confined to the study of agriculture.  "There are a number of other fields that can be explored, ranging fromecology, topography, biology and agronomy," he said at a gotong-royong atthe park organised by Esso Production Malaysia Inc employees.  He added these programmes could also be extended to institutes of higherlearning for research and development purposes.  Sulaiman said this would not only make the park more popular but wasalso in line with the Government's efforts to instil environmental-consciousness at all levels of society.  Situated at Bukit Cahaya Seri Alam, the 1,258ha park is the world'sfirst Agro-Forestry park.  As part of the gotong-royong project, about 70 Esso employees and thepark's workers helped replace broken planks along the jungle pathways andclean up the surrounding areas.  Esso also donated five safety convex mirrors for placement at strategicpoints to warn road-users of on-coming traffic and 10 cement-ferrouspermanent garbage bins.  In his speech, Esso Exploration Manager David H. Lehman said the projectwas part of their community support programme with safety as this year'stheme.  He hoped Esso's contribution would help make the park safer forvisitors.                       Pix: Sulaiman ... more popular.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Pahang to woo more touristsfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 6PETALING JAYA, Sun. - The Pahang Government will implement a "developmentstrategy" for several potential tourist destinations which are situatedalong the proposed East-West expressway, Menteri Besar Tan Sri MohamadKhalil Yaacob said today.  "There are three main corridors which can be further developed andprovided with infrastructure and other facilities, to attract moretourists to the State.  "They are situated in the centre of the proposed East-West expresswaywhich will soon link Kuala Lumpur to Kuala Terengganu via Kuantan inPahang," he said in his speech, read by the State's cultural and tourismcommittee chairman Datuk Law Kee Long, at the launch of Pahang Arts andCultural Festival here.  The three corridors are:  * Highlands Corridor which comprises Cameron Highlands, Bukit Fraser andGenting Highlands;  * Middle Corridor which includes eco-tourism and agro-tourismdestinations like Taman Negara, Endau-Rompin, limestone caves, lakes andother natural attractions;  * Coastal Corridor which covers the entire 208 kilometre stretch fromCheating to Rompin; plus  * Railway Corridor which includes its stopovers at Mentakab and KualaLipis towns.  Khalil said the first three corridors would be developed along the roadnetworks while development activities for the fourth corridor would beconducted along the tracks between the railway stations.  "This Three-plus-One Tourism Corridor package will enable the Stategovernment to increase its number of tourist destinations.  "It will also provide socio-economic opportunities for the localresidents especially in the services and tourism-related sectors," hesaid.  Besides its legendary attractions, Khalil said the State also retainedsuch natural resources like its mountainous terrains, tropicalrainforests, flora and fauna, 208 kilometre-long coastline and tropicalislands, as its other tourist attractions.  "Pahang is popularly known as Peninsular Malaysia's State ofsuperlatives. It can offer you a cultural experience and a chance toexplore the State's natural wonders and marine life.  "With over 60 per cent of the State still covered with forests, Pahangis proud to be in the forefront of making Malaysia greener," he said.  Khalil said the State government was also in the process of gazettingthe Endau-Rompin forest reserve as a State Park, as another addition tothe State's list of tourist destinations.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Knockout tournament set to kick off Sundayfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 21THE 5th Milo Unity Cup Under-18 soccer knockout competition at Jalan Timurground, Petaling Jaya on Sunday is expected to draw a good response.  Organising chairman Mohamed Ariffin Hamzah said they were happy with theresponse for the competition so far.  "The response for the competition is good and we hope the teams willshow up early for the competition."  Mohamed Ariffin said more than 30 teams have made preliminary enquiriesand are expected to participate in the one-day competition.  "The last four competitions have been successful and we will leavenothing to chance in our effort to make this year's competition betterthan the previous years'."  The annual series offers RM300 to the champion, RM150 to the runnerupand RM100 to third and fourth finishers.  The best players in goalkeeping, defending, midfield, topscorer and man-of-the-match in the final will receive special awards.  Besides, there will also be tins of Milo, Milo T-shirts and free drinksfor the top four teams, all sponsored by Nestle.  Mohamed Ariffin said they were thankful to Milo for giving its fullsupport in promoting the game among youths in the Klang Valley.  "The youngsters have not much action as there is no league competitionfor their age-group. Thus, this kind of competition will be much welcomedby the youngsters and parents."  Mohamed Ariffin said that the FA of Selangor (FAS) could also use thecompetition to shortlist players for youth programmes.  Besides, Kelab Sukan Sri Indah is also identifying players to start itsown youth development programme together with Majlis Perbandaran PetalingJaya (MPPJ).  The entrance fees for a team is RM50. For details call Rosnani Wahid at03-2226960 or Sree at 018-8203185.                       Pix: Mohamed Ariffin ... good response.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Team's dismal performancefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 21THE national women's participation in the Kuala Lumpur Hockey AssociationDiv Three League is drawing a big blank.  After three outings, they are right at the bottom of the standings withno points, having lost all three matches.  Despite the disastrous performance, the team is also taking a break fromthe league for training stints and test matches overseas.  In the previous three matches, it lost 3-2 to Royal Selangor Club, 3-1to Bangsar Residents and 6-2 to Stamford College.  And now, it has been reported the national squad will leave for Germanyon Sept 26 for training and test matches.  A KLHA official said the performance and calibre of the national squadwas in question.  "If the players cannot put up a decent performance against the Div Threeopponents, I don't see how they can be prepared to play test matchesoverseas," said the official.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996RM100m request to buy `naltrexone'from NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 6KUANTAN, Sun. - The Health Ministry is seeking more than RM100 millionfrom the Federal Government so that it could implement the use ofaddiction control pill "naltrexone" at the country's 28 dadahrehabilitation centres.  There are now 17,934 addicts being treated at the centres.  Deputy Health Minister Datuk Dr Siti Zaharah Sulaiman said today:"Curbing this social problem will top the ministry's main agenda until theyear 2000. We have to seek this allocation to reduce the number ofaddicts."  Siti Zaharah added that the allocation would be used in part to buy thetablets. The rest would be for management expenses, she said after closingthe Paya Besar Innovative Day at a multi-purpose hall.  From January to May, there were 1,022 cases of new addicts below the ageof 19. To date, 15,000 addicts had been tested positive for HIV and 40 percent of prisoners were found to be dadah abusers.  The Government had to spend some RM517 million last year to curb theabuse of dadah among youths and finance dadah rehabilitation programmes.  Naltrexone is a narcotic antagonist, keeping heroin or other opiateaddicts off dadah. It works by blocking the opiate receptor sites on thecell membranes, where the dadah takes effect. If a person on naltrexonelater takes in an opiate, it will have no addictive effect.  Health Minister Datuk Chua Jui Meng said recently that the ministry hadconducted a one-year study on the use of the medicine on 176 addicts.  The study, run by the Kuala Lumpur Hospital and Universiti SainsMalaysia in Penang, showed encouraging results.  Among others, addicts were able to stop their habit after a year oftreatment, he said.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Driving licence: Minimum age staysfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 6LUMUT, Sun. - The Government has no immediate plans to raise the minimumage of Malaysians to apply for driving licences as it is not an effectivesolution to reduce road accidents, Transport Minister Datuk Seri Dr LingLiong Sik said.  Raising the age limit will only pose problems for working youths.  "Some youths enter the job market when they are only 16 and it will beunfair to them if we raise the age limit," Dr Ling said.  The present minimum age to hold motorcycle licences is 16, 17 for carsand 21 for heavy vehicles.  He said an amendment to the Road Transport Act approved by Parliamentlast month made it compulsory for all new drivers to undergo a probationperiod.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Ling: Spend quality time with the familyfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 6By Vijayan MenonRAWANG, Sun. - MCA president Datuk Seri Dr Ling Liong Sik today urgedparty members to spend "quality time" with their families.  Dr Ling, who is Transport Minister, said the family was the basic unitof the nation and called on MCA leaders to spend more time with theirfamilies despite their demanding schedules.  "When people are involved in demanding careers and have to work longhours, they should endeavour to spend quality time with their families."  He said it was not the quantity but the quality of time that peoplespent with their families that mattered.  "Don't just spend time sleeping while with the family but engage inwholesome discussions, sharing experiences and relating to one another,"he said when opening the MCA national-level Family Day Carnival at SekolahRendah Kebangsaan Sinaran Budi, Kuala Garing.  The family day was organised by the party's Selayang division.  He quoted a Chinese proverb "If the family is united even 10,000problems can be solved," to illustrate the importance of nurturing strongfamily ties.  Dr Ling said the family was not only the basic unit of the nation butalso the fundamental unit of society and "it is also the fundamental unitof the MCA".  Later when asked how family units could be strengthened especially whenthere were more cases of single parents and career-minded people delayingmarriages, he said this was not serious.  "It involves only a tiny proportion of society. In general, people aredating young and marrying early. I think only about five per cent of thepopulation are marrying late or do not believe in the institution."                       Pix: Dr Ling ... quality time.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Selangor veterans score narrow victoryfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 21SELANGOR edged Singapore 2-1 in a veterans' friendly soccer match atYayasan FAS ground in Kelana Jaya recently.  Selangor was represented by FAS officials and former State players whileSingapore was led by the Majid Arif XI team.  The visitors' line-up included former Singapore players Syed Ahmad,Majid Arif, S. Rajagopal, Hasli Ibrahim, Nasir Jalil, Razali Alias andformer Malaysian internationals Ali Bakar and Zulkifli Norbit.  Selangor was led by FAS president Datuk Mohd Aini Taib, deputy presidentTengku Ahmad Shah, vice-president Hamdan Abdul Rahman and council members.  Former Selangor players include M. Chandran, Syed Harun Syed Jaafar,Mohd Shah Norbit, Rashid Hassan, Reduan Abdullah and K. Rajagopal.  FAS secretary Kudus Abdul Karim, 60, was the oldest player on the pitchwhen he played in the second half as a leftback.  Selangor went ahead in the 12th minute through Mohamed Ariffin Hamzah'sheader while Harun Abdul Rahman's half-volley gave them a 2-0 halftimelead.  Midfielder Baharuddin Manan reduced the deficit for the Majid Arif sidewhen his grounder from just inside the box beat Rashid.  Aini gave away prizes to both sides. The prizes and dinner weresponsored by Mohd Ariffin Hamzah.                       Pix: For the champ ... Aini (left) presenting the winner's Cup to TengkuAhmad Shah.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Kelana Jaya vs Bavani in finalfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 21KELANA Jaya United will meet Bavani FC in the Petaling Jaya Open soccerfinal on a date and venue to be decided later.  The date and venue for the final will be determined by the organisingcommittee at a meeting this week.  In the semifinals, Kelana Jaya turned the tables with a 2-1 win overholder Puma-Winners at Jalan Timur.  M. Shangkar gave Kelana Jaya United the lead but Sim Siew Hong repliedfor Puma-Winners.  Striker K. M. Subramaniam, who missed two sitters earlier, made amendsby scoring the winning goal to send the favourites reeling.  In another semifinal at Road 10, Bavani edged Wilayah Maju 1-0 through aManuel George goal.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996`Study wage disparity between expatriates and Malaysians'from NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 6RAWANG, Sun. - The Finance Ministry and the International Trade andIndustry Ministry should study the huge disparity in the wages earned byexpatriate profesionals and managers and Malaysians doing the same jobs,Human Resources Minister Datuk Lim Ah Lek said today.  Lim said some of the jobs currently done by expatriates could be handledby Malaysians who he said were equally efficient.  He said Deputy Prime Minister Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim had onceexpressed concern over the disparity in the wages paid to expatriates andMalaysians.  "On my part I feel there are certain jobs currently held by expatriateswhich can be handled by Malaysians. I personally know cases where jobsheld by expatriates can easily be filled by Malaysians.  "Locals are equally efficient and capable," he told reporters at the MCAFamily Day Carnival.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Buddhist temple holds food fairfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 22TO raise funds for its various ongoing community service projects, the SriLanka Buddhist Temple in Sentul Pasar, Kuala Lumpur held a food fair atthe temple premises recently.  As there was a sea of visitors, there was brisk business for all the 40stalls set up by temple devotees and well-wishers.  The fair, which was earlier launched by Bukit Bintang Member forParliament Dr Lee Chong Meng with a donation RM1,000, is expected to raiseabout RM50,000 for projects like the Siri Jayanti free clinic, tuition forpoor children, annual food distribution to the poor, and visits to wardsand welfare centres with gifts.  Lim Cheng Ean, president of the Siri Jayanti Welfare Organisation, saidthe temple would use some of the money from the food fair to buy a kidneydialysis machine and donate it to an institution.                       Pix: Big turnout ... the large crowd at the food fair.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Annual charity bazaar by Aussie, NZ womenfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 22THE annual Down Under Charity Craft Bazaar organised by a group ofAustralian and New Zealand women residing in Kuala Lumpur will be held atParkroyal Hotel in the city on Oct 1.  The bazaar is to provide an opportunity for both expatriates and localsto sell their handicraft and products.  There will be more than 60 vendors selling varieties of jewellery,paintings, patchworks, quilts, toys, books, handicrafts and food.  Money raised by the organising committee from the sale of table spaceand entry tickets will be donated to Malaysian charities.  RM10 admission tickets will be available at entrance.  For details call Cherie Pert at 03-4563230.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Boost for musical productionfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 22DRAMA Lab's first Malaysian musical theatre production known as StoryTeller recently received RM100,000 sponsorship from Ministry of Culture,Arts and Tourism and Arts Foundation.  Foundation founder and chairman Toh Puan Mahani Idris Daim presented thecheque to Dramalab co-director Zahim Albakri at the Crown Princess Hotelin Kuala Lumpur.  The money will be spent on the various aspects of the musical includingset design, production of musical score and sound system.  The Crown Princess Kuala Lumpur rooms division manager Sonny Limpresented a key to Zahim to announce the hotel as the official hotel forthe production of Storyteller.  Lim said the hotel would provide three complimentary rooms until the endof the show.  He said the hotel would also sell snacks and drinks during theintermission.  Other sponsors for the production include Encorp Group, TourismMalaysia, Australian High Commission, Victorian Arts Centre, NationalAcademy and Shiesedo.  Zahim said Storyteller had reached final rehearsals.  "The Storyteller is an original musical theatre with the story by JitMurad and music by Saidah Rastam."  It features local luminaries like Ning Baizura, Sean Ghazi, Paula MalaiAli, Afdlin Shauki and Jit Murad.  Storyteller aims to create a new and vibrant theatre-going experience.  It is about a storyteller who comes to Tok Mandi Village and changes thevillagers' lives.  The Storyteller will run until Sept 24 at Matic Auditorium as part ofMalaysia Fest 1996. Tickets are available at Actor's Studio Theatre, SkoobBooks, Horizon Music, Supreme Records and the Atrium Cafe at the CrownPrincess Kuala Lumpur.                       Pix: Thank you ... Zahim (left) receiving the mock cheque from Mahaani(centre) and key from Lim.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Ceremony to mark openingfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 22THE Pan Pacific Resort Pangkor hosted the official opening of Teluk Dalamvillage kindergarten on the island of Pangkor recently with a helping handfrom the staff.  The kindergarten was built on a space next to the village mosque whereits foundation was laid in January. It was completed by the end of March.  The occasion began with a speech by the hotel general manager ChristoDiamandopoulos.  The resort pledged a yearly contribution towards the kindergarten.  The human resources department also sends its assistant training managerUma Iyavoo to conduct English lessons once a week.                       Pix: For the album ... the hotel staff with the children after theopening.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Celebating with the less fortunatefrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 22NATIONAL Panasonic Square recently celebrated its seventh anniversary withsome 100 less fortunate children from four homes as its special guests atthe Kuala Lumpur Plaza.  The four homes namely Federal Territory Spastic Children's Association,Federal Territory Mentally Retarded Children's Association, Ozanam Houseand Pure Life Society received a microwave oven each from the NationalPanasonic.  National Panasonic Malaysia Sdn Bhd managing director Shuhei Ogatapresented the gifts to the homes.  The Federal Territory Spastic Children Association was represented byits administrative officer Annie Goh, Federal Territory Mentally RetardedChildren Association by its administrative executive T. Kamaraj, OzanamHouse by its president Elizabeth Vaz and Pure Life Society by its welfarecommittee chairman P.H. Loo.  At the event, the children received gift items and food from theNational Panasonic.  There was a cake-cutting ceremony by Ogata and the cakes weredistributed to the guests.  The mini Miss National Panasonic contest for children aged below 12years old and a singing session by the children from the four homes wereamong the special highlights for the event.  Participants of the mini Miss National Panasonic contest receivedconsolation prizes each at the end of the show.  The winner of the contest was Pang Si Nee, the first runner-up Loke WyYen and second runner-up Eleine Chee.  Last year's Miss National Panasonic Vanessa Chin handed over the titleto Pang during the prize-giving ceremony.  The masters of ceremony were entertainers Jaafar Onn and Saiful.  There was also a live performance by singer and actress Ziana Zain.  National Panasonic Square has weekly activities like karaoke contestsfor families.  The sponsors for the activities include MacDonalds, Nestle, Lam Soon,Johnson and Johnson and Pizza Hut.                       Pix: Pretty little girls ... (from left) Loke, Pang, Chin and Chee.Pix: Showing off their talents ... children from Ozanam House at thesinging session.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Certain KL roads to have gazetted bus lanesfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 23KUALA Lumpur City Hall is in the process of gazetting a few roads in thecity to have special lanes for buses.  City Hall Urban Transport Department director Mahfix Omar said theFederal Government had given its approval to the suggestion but City Hallhad yet to make the relevant changes to the infrastructure on the proposedroads.  The allocation of bus lanes will affect the current location of busstops, taxi stands, road signs and available space for road dividers.  He said this after the 27th City Hall Directorate Day celebration atTaman Tasik Titiwangsa on Saturday.  As a trial, Mahfix said three roads would be gazetted to have bus lanes.They are Jalan Raja Laut, Jalan Tun Razak and Jalan Tuanku Abdul Rahman.  He said under the bus lane concept to be introduced, buses are notallowed to go out of the designated lanes.  "This is different from the concept used in other countries which allowbuses to go out of their lanes but not allowing other vehicles to go intothe bus lanes," he said.  He said the concept was aimed at giving priority to buses to move fasterand also to discipline bus drivers.  "The designated bus lanes are for the convenience of the buses to moveand also to discipline bus drivers from switching lanes or weaving in andout of traffic as they like," he said.  To avoid congestion in the designated bus lane, Mahfix said City Hallplanned to allocate one-and-a-half lanes for the buses.  "It should be sufficient for the buses to overtake the buses that stopto pick up or drop passengers."  Mahfix said City Hall has received support from bus companies operatingin the city about the plan.  Datuk Bandar Tan Sri Kamaruzzaman Sharif was reported as saying thepublic would be invited to comment on the bus lane proposal.  The proposal for designated bus lanes in the city was proposed for thefirst time in 1980 but was later scraped as the authorities found itdifficult to implement the system.  There was a move by City Hall to revive the 1980 plan in 1994 but theresult has yet to be seen.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Low cost homes for villagersfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 23THE Selangor Government, together with Bank Negara, will construct lowcost houses at Kampung Damansara Dalam in Petaling Jaya under the ProjekPerumahan Rakyat Termiskin scheme.  State Executive Councillor Datuk Mohd Aini Taib said PPRT, a subsidiaryof Bank Negara, would acquire the land soon.  He said the project would take off after minor details had beenfinalised.  "We are in the midst of finalising the terms and agreement of the jointproject. It is not easy as it involves villagers, the landowner and StateGovernment as well as PPRT," Mohd Aini said after launching the PetalingJaya Municipal Council's Bersih dan Indah campaign at the villageyesterday.  He said the 10ha site housed more than 1,100 families, of whom a smallnumber were squatters.  On the gotong-royong exercise, Mohd Aini said residents in the Stateneeded to play their part in ensuring their neighbourhood was clean andbeautiful.  "Residents should work together to make gotong-royong a success. We wantto be aggressive in our effort to clean up areas, especially those whichare infested with illegal dumps."  Mohd Aini said to further improve the rubbish collection system inPetaling Jaya, it would have lorries collecting domestic waste and gardenrefuse such as cut trees, twigs and plants.  He said the council would provide the service which was chargable on afortnightly basis for residents.  On the illegal video arcades, he said shopping complexes would also beaffected by the new ruling.  "Our piority at the moment is to close down all illegal video arcades inthe State and concentrate on the legal arcades."  He said the Government expected to shut down illegal arcades in theState by the end of this month.                       Pix: Let's get started ... Mohd Aini (right) shares a light moment withthe villagers before starting work.Pix: The great clean up ... villagers hard at work cleaning up theirneighbourhood.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Video game machines seized in raidfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 23By Angela RaoTHE Petaling Jaya Municipal Council confiscated more than 30 video gamemachines from an illegal video arcade in Section 5, Petaling Jaya.  The operation was the first to be held by the council after the SelangorGovernment gazetted the Entertainment Enactment 1995 on Sept 1.  The joint operation between the Petaling Jaya police department and thecouncil's enforcement unit hit a snag after three of the nine illegalvideo centres visited were closed at 11am on Saturday.  Initially, it was presumed that the operators adhered to the one-weeknotice which ended on Friday to wind up their business but it wasconfirmed later that many of the centres opened later in the evening.  However, there was a two-hour delay during which undercover officersfrom the council's enforcement unit monitored the activities of the areaswhere there were illegal video games operators.  The operation, led by MPPJ health department director Dr Abdul RahimAhmad, caught the owner of a centre at Jalan 5/59 at Section 5 bysurprise.  The 30 video game machines were then loaded into the waiting MPPJenforcement truck.  Abdul Rahim said the operator, Rapi Permai Sdn Bhd had, applied for alicence last August but the council rejected his application.  "We will call the owner to our headquarters for further discussion andlet our legal department take over for further action," he said.  Abdul Rahim said the operator who owned another licensed outlet inSubang Permai, USJ, will be charged under the newly gazeted by-law whichprovided for unlicensed video operators to be fined up to RM20,000 orjailed for a maximum of five years or both.  The operator will be the first video arcade owner in Petaling Jaya to becharged under the enactment.  The by-law covers all forms of entertainment including plays,demonstrations and public performances.  Licensed video arcades found to be operating illegal gambling machinesin their premises or failing to comply with regulations can be fined up tpRM10,000 or jailed a maximum of three years or both.  The council has given five illegal video operators in Petaling JayaSelatan 1, 2, 10 and 11, two in SS2 and one in Section 5 a week's grace tocease operations.  The notice expired last Friday.  Abdul Rahim, who was assisted by the deputy superintendent of healthAhmad Jaffar, is also temporarily heading the newly set up EntertainmentLicensing Unit.  Health inspector Ong Poo Soong, public relations officer NorhayatiSulaiman and her assistant Norshalizawati Baharudin were also present.  The operation will continue for two months or until all illegal videoarcades are shut down.  Confisticated items will be placed in storage at Kelana Jaya.  Enforcement will be carried out phase by phase at legal and illegalvideo and karaoke outlets in the township.  Enforcement officers will be visiting karaoke centres for regularinspections to see that the new rules are being adhered to.  Under the new regulations, guest relations officers are banned fromworking in the centres while tinted glasses will have to be removed.  The council plans to call karaoke and pub operators for a meeting soonto brief them on the new rules.  With the gazetting of the by-law, MPPJ has taken over the licensing ofentertainment centres such as karaoke centres, pubs and discotheques fromthe district office from Sept 1.                       Pix: Hauled away ... enforcement officers load the video game machinesinto the truck. The machines will be stored in Kelana Jaya.-By K.Sukumaran.Pix: Dissapointed ... (from left) Norshalizawati, Ong and Abdul Rahimoutside one of the closed video game outlets in Taman Medan Pejasa.-By K.Sukumaran.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Fines reflect indifference to City Hall regulationsfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 23By Rosnazura IdrusTHE huge number of fines and compounds issued by City Hall for variousoffences for the first half of this year show that the public is stillindifferent towards the rules and regulations set by the authority, KualaLumpur Datuk Bandar Tan Sri Kamaruzzaman Sharif said.  Referring to the increase in the total of notices issued and collectionof compounds from January to July 1995 and 1996, he said awareness of therules and regulations among city dwellers was still low.  The increase in the collection of compound was not a good sign though itmeant an increase in City Hall's revenue.  "Our intention is not to collect as much money as we can but moreimportantly, for the public to be aware of the rules and regulations andabide by them," he said.  From January to July this year, City Hall collected about RM6 millionfrom a total of 228,042 notices issued compared to RM5.6 million from251,346 notices issued last year.  Kamaruzzaman was speaking to reporters after the 27th City HallDirectorate Day celebration at Taman Tasik Titiwangsa on Saturday.  According to the statistics, compounds issued under the Road TransportOrdinance (Metered Car Parks) Federal Territory 1984 recorded the highestincrease compared to last year.  For the same period last year, City Hall collected about RM2.32 millioncompared to RM2.79 million this year.  The offences under this ordinance include indiscriminate parking,parking outside the gazetted areas and causing road obstruction.  "The figure shows the public's attitude of flouting the law," heremarked.  The second highest in collection this year was from offences under theStreet, Drainage and Building 1974 - RM1.26 million.  But this showed a decrease from last year's RM1.58 million.  The Earthworks by-law 1988 which was enforced in April this yearrecorded a total of RM229,730 in collection for 1,479 compounds issued.  Offences committed under this by-law cover dirtying of roads by lorriescarrying earth from construction site, carrying uncovered earth on lorriesand overloading.  Kamaruzzaman said to date the Enforcement Directorate only has 1,200enforcement officers.  "We are still short of 400 enforcement officers and we plan to recruitmore.  "But even with this number, we are still able to be effective in ourenforcement," he said.  During the celebration last Saturday, a total of 82 officers wereawarded medals and certificates for various recommendations.  The highest medals Pingat Khidmat Terpilih-Kelas 1 were given to two ofthe horse unit advisers, Datuk A. Rahim Omar and Dr Bashir Fateh Mohamed.                       Pix: Smart in uniform ... Kamaruzzaman inspecting the guard-of-honour.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Lunch-cum-prize presentationfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 24By Jonathan JosephINNOVEST Berhad hosted a lunch after a successful exhibition of Chinesepainting and antiques at Selayang Summit Square in Kuala LUmpur recently.  The ceremony which was officiated at by guest-of-honour Innovest Berhaddirector Tan Sri Mohd Shariff Ahmad also saw the presentation of prizes tothe winners of their "Name the Painting Contest".  The informal get-together also served as a kind of family day as membersof Innovest Berhad, The Store and other corporations involved, broughtalong their families to enjoy a fun-filled Sunday at the shopping complex.  Adding some glitz to the occasion was the presence of local Chinese popstar Elaine Kang. Though she did not perform, she nevertheless made theday for some of her die-hard fans.  Among those present were Innovest Berhad chief executive officer K.P.Yeo, executive director Sazalina Kamarudin, senior vice-president andoperations division director Soon Kwai Choy and property division vice-president Teoh Kim Bak.  Spotted indulging in some spicy Thai delicacies were Masters-A ArtGallery managing director Chin Thean Soong, Innovest Group IB TimberIndustries Sdn Bhd general manager Ng Sai Hwa, The Store Corporationassistant merchandising manager Collin Mon and executive Jenny Lim, and CCCommunications Consultancy director Christi Hon.                       Pix: Among friends ... (from left) Teoh, Soon and Ng.Pix: Top guns ... (from left) Yeo, Mohd Shariff and Sazalina.Pix: Meeting up ... (from left) Mon, Lim and Chin Thean Soong.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Insurance men meetfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 24By Wan Kong YewINSURANCE sales people thronged the Hotel Istana in Kuala Lumpur recentlycourtesy of the Malaysian Insurance Institution.  Fortunately for the hotel, it wasn't a heavy-duty sales pitch but alecture on "How Information Technology is Changing the InsuranceIndustry".  The speaker was Professor F. Warren McFarlan, head of Harvard BusinessSchool's MIS faculty and is responsible for the use of InformationTechnology with the school.  The co-organiser of the event was the Harvard Business School AlumniClub of Malaysia which boasts of more than 140 active members and 340associate members.  The dinner and lecture was aimed at chief executive officers andmanagers.  Seated at the VIP table included Adrian Loh, Thomas Howell Group (M) SdnBhd managing director Phillip Fong, MII general manager Maizon Omar, PIAMgeneral manager C.F. Lim, MII training manager May Yong andrepresentatives of the alumni club Abdullah Mat Zaid, Mohd Ghazali KamalBahrein and G. Gnanalingam.  Others present included The People's Insurance Co (M) Sdn Bhd assistantmanagers of information systems Arthur Chin and Kok Yoke Wah, JernehInsurance Corporation Sdn Bhd IT department assistant manager Edmund Kok,MII manager of computer, administration, publication and information LiangMui Yong, Sime Axa Assurance IT manager Leow Goh Mee and General InsuranceAssociation of Malaysia general manager Lim Chia Fook.  Also seen were Cigna International assistant manager of finance Ivy KoaySook Wai, Singre Information Technology Sdn Bhd general manager Audrey TohWay Inn, Royal Insurance (M) Sdn Bhd accounts manager Pan Swee Heng, RoyalInsurance (M) Sdn Bhd computer systems manager Cheang Weng Kong, SingreInformation Technology Sdn Bhd assistant manager Joseph Chua Kim Hup, TheAsia Insurance Co Ltd EDP manager Tan Hoi Cheng, Asia Insurance Co Ltdprincipal officer Kamaruddin Mukri, Sun Alliance information technologymanager Julie Tee, Sun Alliance EDP executive Foong Yoke Heong, London andPacific Insurance Co Bhd IT assistant managers Kee Hooi Cheong, Ivy Pereraand Cynthia Ng Boon Howe, Bass Consulting Sdn Bhd sales manager C.J. Changand Continuum Software Services (Malaysia) Sdn Bhd sales manager AliciaChew.                       Pix: For the album ... (from left) Koay, Toh, Pan, Cheang and Chua.-ByRohanis Abdul Shukri.Pix: Guests ... (from left) Maizon, Loh, McFarlan and Fong.-By RohanisAbdul Shukri.Pix: All smiles ... (from left) Tan Hoi Cheng, Leow, Kamaruddin and Tee.-By Rohanis Abdul Shukri.Pix: Chatting ... (from left) Chin, Kok Yoke Wah and Edmund Kok.-ByRohanis Abdul Shukri.Pix: Organisers ... (from left) Liang, Janet Tan, Yong and Lim ChiaFook.-By Rohanis Abdul Shukri.Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List CopyrightNEW STRAITS TIMES                             via NewsNetSeptember 16, 1996Silently Yours reigns againfrom NEW STRAITS TIMES, The News Straits Times Press (Malaysia) Berhad,     16 Sep 1996, page 43By Go-RamSILENTLY Yours proved beyond doubt that she is the champion among themares and fillies in the Malayan Racing Association circuit when she gavea repeat performance to score a back-to-back victory in the S$150,000 NSFBreeders' Vase over 1200m (Race 5) at Bukit Timah yesterday.  Partnered by Saimee Jumaat, the five-year-old New Zealand-bred by ClayHero jumped smartly and positioned herself in third spot early behindGolden Eagle II and My Sweet Partner.  Once the field swung for home, Silently Yours quickly headed off GoldenEagle and pulled away from her rivals to win by 5 1/2 lengths from FancyLady (Chavez). Third was Princess Fury (Lisa) third with Andy's Polly(Yin) fourth.  Prepared by Donald Baertschiger for Silent Stable, she returned S$12 andS$5 (RM14 and RM6) for her fourth success.  Yesterday's event was the seventh occasion that Perkhidmatan Usaha TegasSendirian Berhad sponsored a race at Bukit Timah.  PUT is a Malaysian-based company with a successful track record inproviding telecommunications and broadcasting services.  Imperial Gold II, the likely favourite for the S$650,000 Singapore GoldCup on Sunday, gave a stunning performance to win his warm-up race forClass 1 sprinters over 1200m in Race 9.  Ridden by Oscar Chavez, the four-year-old French-bred by Funambule lastearly made his move at the turn for home where he swept past his rivals towin by a head.  Imperial Gold, trained by Mohamed Yusof, paid S$73 and S$16 (RM70 andRM22).  The day's races started with a shock when Caro Lad upset allcalculations to clinch the Class 3, Div 2 event over 1600m.  Prepared by Mohamed Ismail and ridden by Azhar Ismail, Caro Lad paidthumping dividends of S$467 and S$67 (RM280 and RM45).  Apprentices Lee Soo Hin and Brethem Tai were involved in a fall in Race8 yesterday.  Lee escape injuries while Tai has been sent to hospital for X-rays andobservation.  The going was good for the first two races, changed to yielding for Race3 and soft for the remaining seven races.                       Copyright 1996 The New Straits Times Press (Malaysia) BerhadBack to Headline List WT03-B06-11IA087-000634-B042-20http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it31.html 205.156.212.5 19970122030924 text/html 47360HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:07:27 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:19 GMTContent-length: 47173Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it31.html Sample Issue Copyright NEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNet January 16, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES L'EVENEMENT Betting on confidence in the New Year (428 words) Financing peace (393 words) Cult alert (256 words) The Pope in France in September (101 words) l'Evenement en bref (211 words) PROFIL Popular and solemn (564 words) Death of Francois Mitterrand (482 words) A dependable, yet independent ally (431 words) "We are the Mitterrand Generation" (509 words) A lifetime serving France (522 words) Summary of articles previously published by News from France (386 words) YEAR IN REVIEW 1995: Foreign affairs and economy (942 words) SOCIETE Where did all the farmers go? (461 words) Corsican dialogue (215 words) Societe en bref (284 words) MULTIMEDIA From Minitel to Internet (373 words) Coup d'Oeil (193 words) CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996Betting on confidence in the New YearHarnessing the energy he used on the campaign trail, the Frenchpresident seeks to reopen a dialogue with the people. He hopeshis confidence will be contagious.In his New Year's message on 31 December 1995, President JacquesChirac promised the French a moratorium on tax hikes, a dialogueon employment and a Europe more focused on social issues.After emphasizing that "Europe is now more necessary to us thanever," Chirac declared that he would push the European Union tomake jobs a priority, to be more attentive to daily concerns andto do more to "meet the social aspirations" of the French.Chirac admitted that the year-end turmoil could have caused someto lose the hopes they had held upon his election. The president,who was voted into office on 7 May 1995, said he would see to itthat such hopes were not dashed. At the same time, he paidtribute to the "courageous action" of Prime Minister Alain Juppe.In doing so, he bolstered the position of Juppe, whose reform ofthe social security system--an institution dear to the French butin near-bankruptcy--sparked the wave of strikes in key publicsectors, particularly the railways.In late October, Chirac, a Gaullist who made the battle against"social divisions" one of his campaign themes, chose to achievethis goal by reforming government spending. Chirac aims todecrease France's government deficit from 5 to 3 percent of thegross domestic product by 1997--a necessary move for Frenchfinances and a condition set in the Maastricht Treaty on EuropeanUnion for moving to a single currency by 1999.In the televised message from his office at the Elysee Palace,the French leader also promised to hold off on tax increases andto intensify the battle against unemployment. In addition, heresolved to lower obligatory withholding taxes, noting that hehad asked the government "to stop resorting to new tax hikes andsocial expenditures and to lower these as soon as possible."Juppe had already announced such a future moratorium.A new tax, the RDS, or reimbursement of social debt, will beinstituted on February 1 to progressively bring down the $40billion Social Security deficit.Chirac also expressed his hope that 1996 will "bring a collectivecommitment to adjust and reduce working hours, to encourageemployment and help young people get jobs." Unemployment affects3 million people in France, 11.5 percent of the work force.The president ended his speech with the wish that France "embarkupon the future with confidence, because it has chosen progressand solidarity."Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996Financing peaceFollowing the signing in Washington of the interim agreement on28 September 1995, representatives of the foreign aid community,Israel and the Palestinian Authority met in Paris on 9 January1996. The total to be made available to the Palestinian people bythe foreign aid contributors in 1996 is more than $1.365 billion.Ministers pledged to give a new boost to the aid effort for thePalestinian people and provide additional support for the peaceand reconciliation process under way in the region.The participants expressed their firm intention to contribute tothe success of the peace process. According to the Frenchgovernment, during the ministerial conference, "we have madecommitments. They must be translated into deeds." That is why thecontributors emphasized the importance they attach to theelections due to take place in the West Bank and Gaza Strip on 20January 1996.The conference participants emphasized the importance ofimproving the economic and social conditions of the Palestinianpeople by creating jobs, improving infrastructures and laying thefoundations for sustained economic development.In April 1995, the Palestinian Authority,  Israeli government andthe international community adopted a three-pronged plan ofaction, designed to reduce the Palestinian budget deficit andstimulate economic development. The participants welcomed thesigning of a new version of this agreement which takes intoaccount recent economic and political developments. The Israeligovernment will support and facilitate Palestinian economicdevelopment, while the international community has agreed tocontribute to the development of the West Bank and Gaza Strip.The Palestinian Authority also emphasized the importance of thebasic investment program, adopted unanimously by the Palestiniancabinet and presented by the Palestinian Authority at the meetingof the World Bank's consultative group on 18-19 October 1995.This program, which stresses economic development and jobcreation, involves investments totaling 500 million dollars.Investment projects include roads, wells, schools, hospitals andwater- and infrastructure-related projects.The aid contributors demonstrated their support for the basic$550 million investment program and other priority projectspresented by the Palestinian Authority, including theestablishment of industrial zones, the ongoing aid program andfinancing of the current $75 million account deficit.The total to be made available by the foreign aid community in1996 is more than $1.365 billion. Furthermore, a number ofcontributing countries will continue to provide an appreciablelevel of aid in kind.Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996Cult alertFrance was warned last week that more tragedies like December'smurder-suicide of 16 members of the Order of the Solar Temple arepossible, and the government was urged to keep closer watch oncults. A parliamentary commission has urged the government to setup a special body to monitor such groups.The commission said cults had the potential to grow rapidly inFrance. "In the light of the evidence, the state cannot allowwhat many believe to be a veritable tidal wave to develop withinits core,'' the panel said in its report, released in Paris.The report estimated that there are about 173 cult groups inFrance plus another 800 smaller affiliated entities, andestimated their total membership in France at about 160,000people. It said a new watchdog body should be set up under theauspices of the prime minister's office with doctors, legalexperts and sociologists among its members. Its role should be tomonitor cults in cooperation with the various ministries, informthe prime minister of any developing problems and proposestrategies for handling potentially dangerous activities."To remain passive would not only be irresponsible with regard tothose who are affected (by cults) or open to their influence, buta threat to the democratic principles on which our republic isfounded. It is thus necessary to act.''The report appeared less than three weeks after the discovery ina remote Alpine area in southeastern France of 16 bodiesbelonging to the Order of the Solar Temple, a cult based inSwitzerland.Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996The Pope in France in SeptemberPope John Paul II will visit France in September of this year,for the 1,500th anniversary of Roman Catholicism as France'sprincipal religion. The Pope will be in the country fromSeptember 19 to 22, for his sixth visit to France. He will visitthe Loire valley, Brittany and  Reims. In 496, King Clovisconverted to Christianity and was the first ruler to submithimself to the authority of the Church, giving France thetraditional name of the "oldest daughter of the Church."The fifth underground nuclear test took place on December 27. Theenergy released was less than 30 kilotons.Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996l'Evenement en brefLast issueThe low-cost, full-color daily InfoMatin published its last issueJanuary 8, two years after its launching. Despite a strong startwith sales above 200,000 copies in January 1994, circulationquickly dropped to 70,000 copies. It needed to sell 130,000 tobreak even. One week later the major conservative French daily LeFigaro celebrated its 170th anniversary.Botton affairThe appeals court of Lyon handed down stiffer sentences than theoriginal court's ruling to the three principal defendants in theBotton political corruption affair. Pierre Botton had beencharged with misappropriating $5 million from firms he controlledand with making payments to former Lyon mayor Michel Noir andcurrent Cannes mayor Michel Mouillot to gain influence and publiccontracts. The court gave the two mayors suspended 18-month jailterms, and sentenced Botton to three and a half years in prison.PopularityPresident Chirac and Prime Minister Juppe enjoyed a higherapproval rate to begin 1996, according to the Louis Harrispolling institute. Jacques Chirac's job performance is consideredpositive by 41 percent (up 13 percent) of the French while AlainJuppe received a job performance rate of 34 percent (up 7percent). Despite this improvement, 59 percent of the Frenchbelieve that the government is going in the wrong direction.Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996Popular and solemnFormer President Francois Mitterrand, who died peacefully in hisapartment at the age of 79 only eight months after leavingoffice, preferred an intimate burial to a state funeral. Amilitary band played Beethoven's "Ode to Joy," the anthem of theEuropean Union that Mitterrand worked so hard to build during his14 years in office, as the flag-draped oak coffin carried bymilitary pallbearers set out through the narrow streets ofJarnac, his birthplace. Two hundred fifty miles away in thenation's capital, world leaders bade farewell to the Socialistleader at a requiem mass, with 1,300 French and foreigndignitaries present in Notre Dame Cathedral led by CardinalJean-Marie Lustiger.German chancellor Helmut Kohl, Mitterrand's partner in more thana decade of energetic European integration, wept openly in NotreDame and Cuban president Fidel Castro, one of 65 heads of stateand government present, also cried. Kohl, the head of state whohad met with Mitterrand the most, mourned "a good friend," addingthat  "Europe [had] lost a great statesman."President Clinton said "the entire world benefited from hisstrong and principled leadership,'' calling him a "man ofvision'' (see next page).Before the Paris services, Mitterrand's Gaullist successorJacques Chirac met Russian president Boris Yeltsin and Americanvice president Al Gore at the Elysee Palace.British Prime Minister John Major and U.N. Secretary GeneralBoutros Boutros-Ghali were among the foreign mourners. "PresidentMitterrand was a very big figure in European history. It will berecognized in due course by history," said Major. MargaretThatcher, despite political differences, "liked and respected"Mitterrand, adding that he "had become for the rest of the worlda symbol of the essence of France."From the Middle East, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, Israeliprime minister Shimon Peres and Egyptian president Hosni Mubaraksat close to each other in the cathedral.Peres, a fellow Socialist and old friend, said Mitterrand'smessage was universal and reached far beyond France's borders.Calling the late president "an unusual combination of culture andjustice,'' Peres said: "We shall miss him very much.''In Jarnac, the town of 5,000 in southwestern France whereMitterrand was born in 1916, a private mass was held in SaintPierre Church before Mitterrand was buried in the family tomb.His widow Danielle, sons Gilbert and Jean-Christophe, Mazarine,his daughter born out of wedlock, her mother Anne Pingeot andformer Foreign Minister Roland Dumas attended the ceremony."Adieu" was the most frequently used word in French newspapers,many of which published photos of a huge public tribute at Paris'Place de la Bastille held the day before, beneath a giant posterof Mitterrand waving goodbye. Tens of thousands of supporterslaid red roses, the symbol of the Socialist Party, at the squareand outside the floodlit residence near the Eiffel Tower where hedied. Many wept in the square, a rallying point for the FrenchLeft since the 1789 French Revolution, especially when Americansoprano Barbara Hendricks sang "Le Temps des Cerises," anthem ofthe 1871 Paris Commune rebels.According to a poll conducted at the request of state-ownedtelevision station France 2 and the weekly Le Point, FrancoisMitterrand was considered a "great statesman" by an overwhelming93 percent of French citizens.As the famous Edith Piaf song goes and as those paying hommage atthe Bastille cried, "Non, rien de rien, je ne regrette rien."Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996Death of Francois MitterrandExcerpts from a speech by President Jacques ChiracParis, 8 January 1996"My dear compatriots,President Francois Mitterrand died this morning. The Frenchpeople learned with shock of the passing of the man who guidedthem over 14 years.I would like not only to salute the memory of the statesman, butalso to pay tribute to the man, with his rich and complexcharacter.Francois Mitterrand--his works. A great reader and lover of finebooks, writing for him was as natural as breathing. (...)Francois Mitterrand--his resolve. The resolve to serve certainideals. Solidarity and social justice. The humanist message ofwhich our country is the bearer and which is rooted in the veryheart of our traditions. Europe, one in which France, reconciledwith Germany and working with it, would occupy a leading place.But also a way of living our democracy. A modern, now calmdemocracy, thanks in particular to the smooth changeover ofpolitical power. (...)In politics, Francois Mitterrand had first of all a profoundrespect for the individual, and that is why he decided to abolishthe death penalty. A respect too for human rights:  hecontinually stepped in wherever they were flouted. (...)But it is, I believe, Francois Mitterrand's life which isparamount. (...) He espoused his century. Over 50 years spent inthe center of the political arena, at the heart of things in theprocess of being achieved. The war. The Resistance. The electedoffices. (...)But Francois Mitterrand cannot be reduced to his career. He livedhis life more than to the full because he had a passion for life,one which nurtured and allowed his dialogue with death. Life inall its forms. Life in its dark and its glorious moments. Thelife of the land, of our countryside, of that rural France heloved so much, almost carnally (...).Because he had a passion for friendship, loyalty to friends wasfor him an article of faith, which prevailed over all others. Hearoused in return deep loyalties, through the years and trials.My situation is a singular one, since I was President FrancoisMitterrand's adversary. But I was also his prime minister and amtoday his successor. All this creates a special tie, whichincludes respect for the statesman and admiration for the privateman who fought illness with remarkable courage, in a sense,eyeing it with disdain, and constantly winning victories over it.From these contrasting, but longstanding relations, I havelearned the strength of courage when it is backed up bywillpower, the need to put the human being at the center of anyproject and the importance of experience.In this evening of mourning in our country, I extend my feelingsof respect and sympathy to Madame Mitterrand and her family. AsFrancois Mitterrand becomes part of history, I should like us toponder his message."Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996A dependable, yet independent allyMitterrand embodied the traditional mixture of solid fraternityin critical situations and small irritants that characterizes thefriendship between France and the United States.During his 14 years as French president, Francois Mitterrandproved to be a dependable and yet independent ally to threeAmerican presidents, Ronald Reagan, George Bush and Bill Clinton.The solid bond of longstanding friendship uniting France and theUnited States was in no way compromised by political differencesbetween the Socialist French President and Ronald Reagan.Mitterrand stood shoulder to shoulder with the United Statesduring the Soviet challenges of the early 1980s, the Gulf War andthe peaceful revolutions that ended East-West divisions, asPresident Clinton recalled on January 9, two days before VicePresident Al Gore headed the U.S. delegation to the formerleader's funeral.French support at the end of the Cold War proved to be essential,as evidenced by Francois Mitterrand's key speech before theGerman Bundestag in 1983 stating that "pacifism is in the Westand euromissiles are in the East" at a time when German publicopinion was opposed to the deployment of Pershing 2s. Thisendorsment of American policy in Europe coming from the leader ofGermany's closest friend, a country long known for putting greatstore in its independence toward the superpowers, had tremendousimpact.President Clinton paid tribute to Francois Mitterrand, callinghim "a man of vision'' whose stalwart leadership helped end theCold War and unify Europe. "Not only France but the United Statesand the entire world benefited from his strong and principledleadership,'' Clinton said."I consulted frequently with President Mitterrand, as did mypredecessors, and greatly valued his insights, advice and wisdom.He was a man of vision whose strength helped bring Europe and theWest through a period of tough confrontation to the peaceful,undivided Europe we are building today.''These sentiments were echoed by former President George Bush whoworked closely with Mitterrand during the 1991 Gulf War.''Francois Mitterrand was a great friend and steadfast ally forthe United States. He was a man of his word, and I had greatrespect for his intellect and his innate sense of decency. To besure, he was one of the great leaders of our time,'' said Bush."He laid aside the historic Iraq-French relationship to make apoint that aggression should not stand, that a bully cannot takeover another country, that one member of the United Nations mustnot subjugate and wipe out the sovereignty of another,'' Bushtold France-3 television from his Texas home,  referring to theGulf War.Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996"We are the Mitterrand Generation"It started 10 May 1981. That day, the election of France's firstSocialist president of the Fifth Republic marked the birth ofwhat would be dubbed seven years later in a reelection slogan the"Mitterrand generation"--an age group too young to take a seriousinterest in Valery Giscard d'Estaing's presidency and whichwould, from 1981 to 1995, know one sole occupant of the ElyseePalace--Francois Mitterrand.For many, that May 10 was a cause for major celebration, butothers feared the Red Army itself would march down the ChampsElysees. In 1981, its shadow still loomed large and the Easternbloc and the Iron Curtain were realities. This fear was, ofcourse, unfounded, but came from a generation which had grown upwith the Cold War.The Mitterrand generation, however, over the course of time hadto reevaluate a large part of what they had been obligated tolearn to earn their baccalaureats: the Berlin wall fell, borderschanged, atlases become obsolete, the Soviet bloc fell apart andthe European Union continued to grow, despite it all.These same young people witnessed major changes on thetechnological front as well. The high-speed train (TGV) became areality in 1981, and Great Britain would no longer be consideredthe "isolated kingdom" thanks to the Eurotunnel built beneath theEnglish Channel. The Mitterrand generation learned to use theMinitel and, later, PCs, laptops and the Internet. Computers,which made a limited appearance in lycees at the end of the1970s, were suddenly accessible to everybody.The Mitterrand generation contributed to the emergence of newsocial and humanitarian causes. They gave money to finance airshipments of rice and medicine to the starving in Somalia,attended concerts by their favorite singers to raise money forArmenian earthquake victims and rallied around the comedianColuche and his "Restos du Coeur" (see NFF 95-20, p.6) for thepoor and homeless.  They witnessed the emergence of the suburbs as an entity thatfelt the need to express itself--often violently. The children ofimmigrants (mostly from North Africa) constituted an importantpart of the Mitterrand generation, and SOS-Racisme leader HarlemDesir became the spokesman for an integration movement that wouldsee the wearing of the Islamic scarf in the classroom become amajor issue throughout the country.   In the arts world, the Mitterrand generation even had its ownMinister of Culture in Jack Lang. Rap music, which took root inthe surburbs, found its place on the official list of"beaux-arts" thanks to Lang, whom they considered "incrediblyhip."What lessons did the Mitterrand generation learn from its 14years with the President? Maybe the acceptance of all sorts of"cohabitation": pleasure and morality, show business andhumanitarian crusades, a Gaullist prime minister and a Socialistpresident.Toward the end of his second presidential term, FrancoisMitterrand stated in his own self-effacing manner," Just thinkthat for as long as young people aged 15 to 20 have beenpolitically aware, they have known only me. If I were in theirshoes, I'd be a little tired."Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996A lifetime serving FranceFrancois Mitterrand was born on 26 October 1916 in Jarnac(Charente). His father was then employed by the Paris-OrleansRailway Company.After studying law, arts and political science at the Universityof Paris, Francois Mitterrand was drafted into the army in 1939.Wounded, taken prisoner and transferred to a camp in the middleof Germany during the Second World War, he escaped successfullyat his third attempt in 1942. On his return to France, heimmediately joined the Resistance. Sent on missions to London andAlgiers-- where he was received by General de Gaulle -- he waskeen to return to Occupied France to continue the fight there,which he did on 26 February 1944. In the underground movement, deGaulle appointed Mitterrand Secretary-General for Prisoners ofWar, Deportees and Refugees. In this capacity, he took part inthe first Council meeting of the French Republic's ProvisionalGovernment in liberated Paris on 27 August 1944.In 1944, he married Danielle Gouze, whom he met in theResistance. She was awarded the Croix de Guerre at the age of 18.They went on to have two sons, Jean-Christophe and Gilbert.In 1945, Mitterrand joined the Union Democratique et Socialistede la Resistance (UDSR), formed out of various Resistancemovements. In 1946, he was elected Deputy for Nievre. He remaineda member of Parliament for this department until May 1981, exceptfor four months in 1958. He represented Nievre in the Senate from1959 to 1962. During those 35 years, he held numerous localelective posts, including those of mayor of Chateau-Chinon,general councillor of Montsauche, president of the Association ofMayors and president of the Nievre General Council.During the 12 years of the Fourth Republic (from 1946 to 1958)Mitterrand held office in several governments. In 1947, at theage of 30, he was the youngest minister in a century. Hisministerial career was marked by a number of initiativesheralding, starting in 1950, the decolonization of Black Africa.In May 1958, Francois Mitterrand became one of the mainopposition leaders.In the 1965 presidential election, he was the sole candidate ofthe Left. He won 32 percent of the votes cast in the first ballotand in the second, on 19 December 1965, when General de Gaullewas re-elected, 45 percent of the electors voted for FrancoisMitterrand.On 16 June 1971, at the Epinay Congress, Mitterrand was electedfirst secretary of the Socialist party, an office he held until1981. In June 1972, on behalf of the Socialists, he concluded anagreement with the French Communist party and left-wing radicals:the Common Government Program of the Parties of the Left.In the 1974 presidential election, Mitterrand was again theLeft's sole candidate. In the second ballot, he won 49.19 percentof the votes. Valery Giscard d'Estaing obtained 50.81 percent andwas thus elected.On 10 May 1981, Francois Mitterrand won 51.75 percent of thevotes cast and became president of the French Republic. On 8 May1988, he obtained 54.02 percent of the vote and was reelectedpresident of the French Republic. This second term ended on 17May 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996Summary of articles previously published by News from France"France is our homeland, Europe, our future"Francois Mitterrand's steadfast commitment to a united Europe wasone unwavering point in his diplomatic policy. The president ofthe Republic referred to the eventual unification of Europe asthe  the most important undertaking of our generation. Thisunflinching will to serve Europe earned him the nickname"Mitterrand the European."--NFF05/12/95--From the Cold War to a New World OrderDuring his long tenure as president of the Republic, FrancoisMitterrand had shown himself to be a loyal ally of Westernnations. However, his achievements in foreign policy are notlimited to the confines of the Continent. President Mitterrandhad never wavered in his convictions concerning the Arab-Israeliconflict, declaring himself to be both a friend of Israel and aproponent of Palestinian self-determination. The French praiseMitterrand for the prestige that he brought to their nation onthe international stage.-NFF04/28/95-Fourteen years of domestic policyElected president on 10 May 1981, Mitterrand quickly left hismark on French domestic policy through the abolition of the deathpenalty in October  1981. During Mitterrand's first months inoffice, important laws to protect workers were enacted. On theeconomic front, the priority was lowering the inflation rate andbuilding a strong franc. When Mitterrand was re-elected in May1988, he stressed political reconciliation and unity. In November1988, the "minimum income for integration" (RMI) was created as asafety net for those individuals who were not eligible forunemployment benefits.-NFF04/28/95-Fifty years in politicsFrancois Mitterrand had a rich political experience beforeserving two terms as president of the Republic. He was the firstSocialist to lead the Fifth Republic and the second Socialistpresident in French history. With the parliamentary victory ofthe Right in 1986, then-Prime Minister Laurent Fabius steppeddown and a period of  "cohabitation" began with Prime MinisterJacques Chirac. In 1988 Mitterrand became the first president tobe elected twice through universal suffrage.-NFF04/28/95-Cultural advocateUnder Mitterrand's presidencies, education was accorded toppriority. In 1991, it was allotted for the first time in thehistory of France, the largest portion of the budget, exceedingmilitary expenses. Speaking on the importance of education andthe transfer of knowledge, Francois Mitterrand said, "They mustbe the permanent underlying fundamental preoccupation of allpolitical leaders."-NFF05/12/95-Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 19961995: Foreign affairs and economyFrance played a major role in securing peace in the Balkans andhosted the signing of the peace treaty on Bosnia-Herzegovina.Welfare reform and social movements marked the end of the year.Affaires EtrangeresJanuary 1: France takes over the presidency of the European Unionfor six months the same day the admission of three new countries,Austria, Sweden and Finland, brings the total number of membernations to 15.February 18: Paris hosts a conference on peace in theMediterranean.March 13: Fidel Castro makes his first visit to France.May 7: Jacques Chirac is elected president and pledges continuityin foreign affairs. Herve de Charette is appointed Minister ofForeign Affairs on May 18.May 11: Along with 177 other nations, France signs the 1970nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (up for renewal), making itpermanent under the auspices of the United Nations.June 3: European and NATO countries, led by France and GreatBritain, announce the formation of the Rapid Reaction Force inBosnia.June 13: President Jacques Chirac announces a final series ofnuclear testing before the comprehensive test ban treaty iscompleted for signing in 1996.June 14: President Jacques Chirac meets with President BillClinton, majority leader Bob Dole and Speaker of the House NewtGingrich in Washington, D.C.June 15-17: President Jacques Chirac receives endorsement fordeployment of the Rapid Reaction Force and revival of thediplomatic process in Bosnia at the G-7 meeting in Halifax.June 26-27: The last European Council under the French presidencyof the E.U. takes place in Cannes and reaffirms the push towardmonetary union.August 30: A French Mirage fighter jet is shot down during NATO'soperation "Deliberate Force" in Bosnia. Two pilots are capturedby Bosnian Serbs and released more than 100 days later--shortlybefore the signing of the peace agreement in Paris (see box).September 5: Thetis, the first underground nuclear test of theplanned 6 to 8, is conducted on the Mururoa atoll in FrenchPolynesia.October 4: The French army intervenes in the Comoros to counteran attempted coup by former mercenary, Bob Denard. After 24hours, Denard is forced to free president Mohamed Said Djohar andgive himself up. He is later imprisoned in France.October 22-24: While in New York to commemorate the 50thanniversary of the United Nations, Jacques Chirac calls on allmembers of the organization to pay the dues and resistisolationism.December 1-4: Francophone summit in Cotonou, Benin at-tended byPresident Chirac.December 5: France announces it will be represented in themilitary committee of NATO for the first time since 1966.December 14: The Bosnian peace treaty ending Europe's worstconflict since World War II is signed in Paris (see box).EconomieFebruary 7: The privatization of SEITA, the state-owned tobaccocompany is launched.March 17: Government unveils plan to bail out the state-runCredit Lyonnais bank from losses of approximately $10 billionblamed on mismanagement and venturesome loans. The bill isadopted by Parliament on Novem-ber 28.June 1: Privatization of the steelmaker Usinor-Sacilor isannounced.July 5: An agreement is reached between Unions and the EmployersAssociation for the creation of a consolidated employment fund.August 1: The Value Added Tax is increased by two points to 20.6percent.August 4: An emergency employment plan is presented, allowing forthe creation of the Contrat initiative-emploi (CIE) for those whohave been unemployed for over a year. More than 100,000 contractswere signed by the end of 1995.August 25: Economy and Finance Minister Alain Madelin resigns andis immediately replaced by former Minister of EconomicDevelopment and Planning Jean Arthuis.September 6: A zero interest loan is created for buyers of newlybuilt housing or housing undergoing major repairs. Over 120,000buyers are expected to benefit from it in 1996.September 11: The process for opening France's telecommunicationsmarket to competition by 1998 begins, as Michel Bon becomes headof France Telecom, the state-owned operator.October 31: Employers and labor unions achieved a breakthroughagreement on the reduction of work hours without decrease in pay.This accord is expected to create 300,000 jobs over the next twoyears.November 15: Parliament approves Prime Minister Alain Juppe'sdramatic and comprehensive proposal to reform the welfare system.The most extensive plan to recontruct the social security systemin 30 years is based on equity, responsibility and urgency. Juppedeclared that the system's deficit would be cut from $12.6billion in 1995 to $3.5 billion in 1996 and pledged to balance itin 1997 through measures such as downsizing the administration,amending the Constitution to allow Parliament to set overallceilings on costs and gradually aligning public sector pensionswith those in the private sector.November 27: Prime Minister Alain Juppe presents a plan for smalland medium-size businesses which includes tax reduction on grossearnings used for reinvestment and the creation of a developmentbank.December 13: The French Customs release figures showing anexpected record-breaking surplus of more than $100 billion francs($20 billion) for 1995--despite boycott threats.December 14: Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic, CroatianPresident Franjo Tudjman and Bosnian President Alija Izetbegovicsign the peace treaty on Bosnia-Herzegovina, before an assemblyof major powers in Paris. President Jacques Chirac, who hostedthe signing in the Elysee Palace, took the opportunity to affirmFrance's commitment to keeping the peace and providing part ofthe forces necessary to do so.December 15: The American FCC approves the the globaltelecommunications alliance between France Telecom, DeutscheTelekom and Sprint.December 31: Eco-nomic growth reaches 2.6 percent, inflation 2.1percent and unemployment is stabilized at an estimated 11.5percent of the workforce.Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996Where did all the farmers go?The farming workforce is six times smaller than 50 years ago,according to a study published by the National StatisticsInstitute.The report emphasizes the dramatic change in farming with thenormalization of French agriculture which moved closer to westernstandards through concentration, mechanization and education.Ten million people were dependent on agriculture for theirlivelihood in 1945. Farming households accounted for 2.5 millionin 1993. Young people and women in particular have left the farm.Hence the farming population has become older and more male.Thirty percent of the farmers aged 30 to 34 were bachelors in1993 compared with 18 percent in 1978.This decline in marriage is not offset by couples livingtogether, a situation that barely exists in the farmingpopulation. In the early 1960s, almost every spouse was workingon the farm; 40 percent now work outside.Concentration is the other major trend of the last 40 years, withthe average farming surface increasing from 34,500 acres to87,000 acres. This was made possible by mechanization. The numberof tractors increased from 100,000 in 1948 to 1.4 million in1993. Progress in productivity  also explains the fact that theamount of working hours have decreased three fold, compared with30 years ago.Half of farms are specialized in livestock farming, 18 percent ingeneral agriculture and 12 percent in viticulture. Themodernization of agriculture and the generalization of modernfarm machinery have made it necessary to restructure byregrouping parcels of land under cultivation, and mechanizationhas resulted in greatly increased productivity.The decline in the agricultural population has been encouraged bythe lowering of the farmers' retirement age to 60 in 1986,resulted in the rejuvenation of the sector. Older farmers used towork with their sons, who would subsequently take over from them.This is no longer the case as retired farmers tend to leave theland. Less than a third of retiring farmers arereplaced--generally by their sons--compared with half in the1960s. Meanwhile farmers have become more skilled and educated,as farming is now being considered a profession like any other.   French agricultural production represents approximately 23percent of E.U. production as a whole, making France Europe'snumber-one farm country. Agriculture accounted for 2.5 percent ofthe commercial GDP in 1993 and the added value of thefood-processing industry for 3.4 percent. The trade account inthe food-processing sector (raw materials and manufacturedproducts) hit 56.9 billion francs ($10.3 billion) in 1993,exceeding by 3.3 billion francs ($0.6 billion) its 1992 record.In addition, the trade surplus in food products reached 24.7billion francs ($4 billion) in 1993, 4.8 billion ($0.8 billion)more than in 1992. In value, France is the world's second biggestexporter of processed foods after the United States.Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996Corsican dialoguePrime Minister Alain Juppe set up last tuesday a new ministerialgroup to work out social and economic plans for the FrenchMediterranean island of Corsica but ruled out bowing tonationalist demands for autonomy.Juppe met parliamentarians from the island, rocked by 44 bombattacks so far in 1996 after 602 in 1995, and asserted that Pariswould reassert the rule of law in Corsica. The inter-ministerialworking group will submit proposals on Corsica's economic andsocial problems. The prime minister indicated that "amodification of the institutions of the island was not on theagenda."A few days beforehand, Interior Minister Jean-Louis Debre pavedthe way for dialogue between the state and Corsican nationalistsduring a two day visit to the island. Preceding the visit, thehardline "historic wing'' of the outlawed Corsican NationalLiberation Front (FLNC) called a three-month truce in bombings ata secretive news conference, with a show of force by about 600hooded and heavily-armed men.Following several meetings with elected officials of the island,Debre stated "the moment has come to move on to a positivedialogue." A dialogue should help "solve the three great chaptersof the Corsican problem ...The state will remain in Corsica justas Corsica will remain in France," he reminded his audience.Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996Societe en brefVigipirate scaled downFrom the implementation of the security plan "Vigipirate" onSeptember 7, to December 18, 70,500 people were taken in forquestioning where an eventual 21,540 people were charged withcrimes or misdemeanors, and some 2,324 were deported. Inaddition, increased border controls led to 19,972 people beingdenied entrance into France. The anti-terrorism plan "Vigipirate"was scaled down earlier this week.Ariane launches U.S. satelliteWestern Europe's 82nd Ariane rocket blasted off into space fromFrench Guiana last Friday, putting a U.S. and a Malaysiancommunications satellite into orbit. The launch capacity of theirnew Ariane-5 rocket will be increased by more than a ton in thenext five years, enabling it to put two heavy satellites intospace simultaneously and meet booming demand for commerciallaunches.BabiesThe birth rate continues to drop in metropolitan France, butcity-dwelling women (except those in Paris) have more childrenthan their counterparts living in the country, according to theNational Statitics Institute (INSEE). In rural areas, women arehaving fewer children--a recent evolution, since in 1975 thebirth rate in the country was five to ten percent above thenational average.Urban activismJust before the announcement of the prime minister's plan to aidthe suburbs, SOS-Racisme and the National Federation of YouthCenters (Maison des Potes) announced that a Conference onNeighborhoods will take place on February 3 and 4. More than 300urban activists will get together to try to find answers to theproblems confronting urban youths--juvenile delinquency, drugabuse, housing and unemployment.Denise Grey is deadDenise Grey, doyenne of the French acting world, whose careerspanned three-quarters of a century, died last Saturday at theage of 99.Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996From Minitel to InternetFrance Telecom announced last Friday its policy concerning theInternet and the evolution of the Minitel.France Telecom, which founded the world's first on-line servicewith the Minitel, is confronting the stagnation of this serviceand the arrival of the Internet which is rapidly becoming thestandard on-line service worldwide.The company announced that all French citizens will now haveaccess to the Internet at a local billing rate (8 to 25 centimesper minute) starting March 15 via their Transpac network. Theprovider will pay to have access to Transpac (13,200 francs permonth per 400 subscribers) and will then charge its subscribersthe nominal fee of 25 francs per month, according to FranceTelecom. Subscribers currently pay between 60 and 200 francs onaverage per month, plus communication costs.The service will offer e-mail, access to newsgroups, a navigationguide in French, Internet access to Minitel services, and acyberspace shopping site, Wanadoo. The company's decision toprovide its own Internet service follows in the footsteps ofLagardere, Europe on Line, and already well-established serviceslike the American firm CompuServe, which currently has 35,000subscribers in France.France Telecom's strategy is two-pronged--first, investing in theInternet, and second, improving available services on theMinitel, which has been a longtime fixture in many Frenchhouseholds. There are currently 6.5 million Minitel terminals and14 million users. Aiming at this market, France Telecom hasintroduced a new terminal, dubbed the Magis Club, which is eighttimes faster than current machines and permits credit cardpayments from home.Francois Beneviste, president of the provider Calvacom and theFrench Association of Internet Professionals, praised FranceTelecom's decision saying, "It's an excellent measure that willcompletely open up the market and make France unique in theworld."The public operator took to heart the wish expressed bytelecommunications minister Francois Fillon last October to seeFrench citizens have easy Internet access that would be billed atlocal rates. "We must make sure that new developments intechnology do not lead to a two-speed France and that our countryis not behind in the world development of the Internet," Fillonstated. He praised France Telecom's steps to make the informationsuperhighway more accessible to all French citizens.Back to Headline List CopyrightNEWS FROM FRANCE via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1996Coup d'OeilThe French government has enacted a new law to give Frenchrecording artists a chance against more heavily marketed U.S. andBritish songs. The law requires that 40 percent of songs playedbetween 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. be of French origin.Broadcasters risk fines or suspension from the air if they defythe quotas, which are to be supervised by the government'sbroadcasting watchdog. The law has drawn much criticism. Frenchsinger Charles Aznavour defended the quotas saying, "I think it'ssad that we've come to this, but it's something that's becomeinevitable, a question of cultural survival."Archeologists said this past Tuesday they have discovered signsof human civilization dating back 50,000 years in a cave insouthwestern France, making it the earliest evidence ofcave-dwelling humans. French government archeologists workedsecretly on the site in the town of Bruniquel for the last fiveyears. "Carbon-14 dating allowed us to scientifically establishthat a bone fragment dates back at least 47,000 years," statedarcheologist Francois Rouzaud. The cave is in the same corner ofFrance as the world-famous Lascaux caves, which house paintingsand engravings dating back to about 15,000 B.C.Back to Headline List WT03-B06-12IA087-000634-B042-50http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it39.html 205.156.212.5 19970122030944 text/html 27011HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:07:48 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:19 GMTContent-length: 26824Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it39.html Sample Issue Copyright NOTISUR - LATIN AM. POLITICAL AFFAIRS via NewsNet January 5, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Multilateral Issues REGION: SUMMIT ON REGIONAL SECURITY SKIRTS DEMILITARIZATION ISSUE (1336 words) Party politics & elections HAITI: RENE PREVAL WINS PRESIDENCY, NOW FACES SERIOUS DOMESTIC & INTERNATIONAL CHALLENGES (Part 1) (504 words) HAITI: RENE PREVAL WINS PRESIDENCY, NOW FACES SERIOUS DOMESTIC & INTERNATIONAL CHALLENGES (Part 2) (442 words) GUATEMALA: GAP BETWEEN PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES CLOSES SUBSTANTIALLY AS RUNOFF ELECTION NEARS (842 words) Human rights & legal issues COLOMBIA: CONGRESSIONAL INVESTIGATION OF PRESIDENT ERNESTO SAMPER SHELVED FOR LACK OF EVIDENCE (423 words) CopyrightNOTISUR - LATIN AM. POLITICAL AFFAIRS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996REGION: SUMMIT ON REGIONAL SECURITYSKIRTS DEMILITARIZATION ISSUE     The Central American presidential summit held in SanPedro Sula, Honduras, Dec. 13-15, 1995, ended with seriousdisagreement among the six nations represented.  Costa Ricaand Panama blocked or modified almost all proposals having todo with the military in the Treaty on Central AmericanDemocratic Security--the major agreement to come out of thesummit.     The signatories agreed on the principle of militarysubordination to civilian control, free elections, and respectfor human rights by the military, among other things.  Butdemilitarization of the region received scant attention.     Since 1986, Central American presidents have attended 16regional summits on such issues as economic integration,sustainable development, tourism, social spending, andcampaigns against crime, illiteracy, and drug trafficking.     The San Pedro Sula meeting was perhaps the mostcontentious, in part because there is a wider range ofnational policies on military matters than on social andeconomic problems.  The military aspects of the treaty wereperhaps doomed to failure because neither Costa Rica norPanama have military forces, while Guatemala, with the largestarmy in Central America, is still involved in a civil war.     The theme of the summit was regional security, whichincluded a regional approach to such problems as public safetyand collective security from aggressors.  However, objectionsfrom Costa Rica and Panama forced the elimination of someprovisions and considerable revision of others.     Both the Panamanian and Costa Rican delegates arrived atSan Pedro Sula to press for armed forces reduction, butresistance from Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, andNicaragua to anything more than a nonbinding commitment tofuture reductions irrevocably split the delegations into twocamps.  Costa Rica and Panama objected to 11 of the treaties78 articles and signed the treaty with reservations.     Panama's objections were similar to those of Costa Ricabut with an additional concern that the treaty couldcompromise its efforts to sign an agreement with the USpermitting US troops to remain in that country after thePanama Canal reverts to Panamanian control in the year 2000(see NotiSur, 12/08/95).  The draft treaty contained aprohibition against signatory countries permitting foreigntroops on their soil, but this was struck from the finalversion.     Instead of force reductions and the gradual eliminationof armed forces, the treaty as signed only calls for a"reasonable balance" among the military forces of the regionand a promise to work toward arms limitations and a "propercorrelation" between force size and national budgets.     Costa Rican sources said that Foreign Minister FernandoNaranjo objected to an article that calls for the creation ofa mutual defense mechanism to combat aggression within theregion.  The concern, said the sources, was that in makingclaims to sovereignty over Belize, Guatemala could define thatcountry as a possible aggressor.     "Costa Rica wants to be sure that the [treaty] content isnot...conditioned upon special issues that affect only somecountries," said Costa Rica's roving ambassador to CentralAmerica, Luis Solis.     Other objections were to articles that urged each nationto take its constitution into account when setting budgetlevels for the military, and to issue a report on the size,budget, and expenditures of its armed forces.  Observers atthe summit explained that Panama and Costa Rica raised generalobjections to these and other military articles because theydid not go far enough in requiring all nations in the regionto reduce the role of the military in national affairs.     What Costa Rica wanted instead, said Solis, was a treatythat emphasized nonmilitary aspects of Central Americansecurity--such as public safety--rather than national defense.Armed forces, he said, should be made smaller and policeforces given more training and a higher priority than themilitary.     Commenting on the lack of interest in demilitarization onthe part of his Central American colleagues, Naranjo said,"They would not accept [our proposal] and we were not able toendorse anything that had to do with military matters, unlessthey dealt with reductions."     Both sides on the force-reduction issue attempted to endthe summit on a note of harmony.  Costa Rican President JoseMaria Figueres promised to continue pushing for forcereductions, "but we will do it in a respectful manner withouttrying to impose our opinions and models on anyone," he said.     For his part, Honduran Foreign Minister Delmer Urbizosaid that the contentious military aspects of the treaty couldbe signed on another occasion without harming the San PedroSula summit, which he said focused on the broader definitionof security as a response to social problems.     "If the theme of military security is an obstacle tohaving a successful summit, we will simply cut it from theagenda and sign it later," he said.     However, the differences in policy views highlighted atthe summit suggest that the signing of a comprehensivemilitary accord may be a long way off.  Though Costa Rica'schief proposal was for the gradual reduction in the size ofarmies, a more fundamental aspect of the clash of policieslies in the differing concepts of the military's role in thepost-Cold War era.     Col. Francisco Bustillo of the Honduran armed forcesgeneral staff pointed out the changed historicalcircumstances.     "The role played by our countries was the one assigned byforeign interests, based on a political-military thesis," saidBustillo.  Now, "geoeconomics has been substituted forgeopolitics, and the political map is no longer drawn alongideological lines."  Bustillo added that the present dangersare not military but social and economic.     Bustillo was expressing the conceptual foundation for theargument that the military must be called upon to respond tothreats in the social and economic spheres.  By extending thedefinition of national and regional security beyondtraditional notions of national defense to include socialwell-being, military forces will continue to merit highpriority in national budgetary considerations.     Echoing Bustillo, Nicaragua's Foreign Minister ErnestoLeal argued that in this model for security, armies may bedeployed to fight against drugs, to support environmentalprotection efforts, to construct schools and clinics, and torespond to natural disasters.     "The most important thing," said Leal, "is that thetreaty confirms the subordination of military power tocivilian power."     Nevertheless, Costa Rican delegates were skeptical thatthis confirmation will guarantee effective control of themilitary precisely because the treaty "leaves the door openfor the armies to assume new roles."     The delegates had less difficulty agreeing to an accordproviding for common action against auto theft and mechanismsfor the return of stolen autos recovered outside their countryof origin.  They also announced that they had signed anagreement with the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) forassistance in building a regional electric-power grid.     But these accomplishments were not enough to head offsevere criticism of the summit.  The auxiliary bishop of SanSalvador, Gregorio Rosa Chavez, said, "The summit gave shortshrift to issues vital for true democratic security in CentralAmerica," and he faulted the presidents for a "lack ofaudacity."     Other critics of the summit pointed to the demonstrationsthat took place on Dec. 13 during the inauguration of thesummit as an example of heads of state turning a deaf ear tosocial issues.  Seven demonstrators were shot, one fatally, byunknown assailants.  The demonstration was organized to demandan investigation into the shooting deaths by the police ofthree campesinos taking part in a previous demonstration.     The advisory committee on Central American integration(Comite Consultivo del Sistema de Integracion Centroamericano(CC-SICA) faulted the summit for not including representativesocial participation in the formulation of the treaty.     The president of the Center for Social Training (Centrode Capacitacion Social) in Panama, Celia Sanjur, said that"the lack of participatory democracy and the inability ofgovernments to satisfy the needs of the population" directlyaffect regional security.  [Sources: Associated Press,12/10/95; Inter Press Service, 12/08/95, 12/09/95, 12/10/95,12/15/95; Agencia Centroamericana de Noticias--Spanish NewsService, 12/10/95, 12/12/95, 12/13/95, 12/15/95; CentralAmerica Update, Dec. 1-Dec.15, 1995; La Nacion (Costa Rica),12/16/95; Agence France-Presse, 12/11/95, 12/13/95, 12/14/95,12/17/95; Notimex, 12/27/95]Back to Headline List CopyrightNOTISUR - LATIN AM. POLITICAL AFFAIRS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HAITI: RENE PREVAL WINS PRESIDENCY, NOW FACESSERIOUS DOMESTIC & INTERNATIONAL CHALLENGES (Part 1)     In the Dec. 17 Haitian presidential elections,Organisation Politique Lavalas (OPL) candidate Rene Preval wona sweeping victory, taking 89% of the vote, according toofficial results from the Provisional Electoral Council (CEP).While voting was carried out without incident, turnout wasvery low, at just under 28%.     Although fourteen candidates participated in the electionto succeed President Jean Bertrand Aristide, the outcome wasnever in doubt.  From Nov. 15, when Lavalas announced thatPreval would be its candidate, his victory was practicallyassured, since an estimated 80% of the population are Lavalasloyalists.  However, winning the election will likely provemuch easier for the president-elect than resolving Haiti'ssocial and economic problems.     An agronomist who completed his higher education inBelgium, the 52-year-old Preval served as prime minister inAristide's first cabinet from February 1991 to September 1991,when Aristide was toppled ie been extended to make up forthe three years that he was forced to spend in exile.  Evenmany among the Haitian elite and business community said thenation's stability would have been better served by Aristide'scontinuation in office.     A wave of violence in the weeks preceding the electionshad raised questions about whether voting would actually takeplace on schedule.  In an emotional speech Nov. 11, followingthe execution-style killing of his cousin and newly electeddeputy Jean-Hubert Feuille, Aristide blasted the US and UN fornot disarming the country and urged the public to help do so.     "If those who have weapons, those who have big armoredtanks, those who have much power, wanted to help us, thedisarmament would have been done," Aristide said.     The president called on the public to collaborate withpolice by leading them to suspected arms caches.  During thefollowing week, at least seven people were killed indemonstrations and protests as people responded to Aristide'scall for public action.     It was the first time since Aristide returned that heveered from his message of reconciliation.  However, many ofhis backers contend that, in practice, reconciliation hasallowed the supporters of the coup to participate in publiclife and, in many cases, to remain armed.  Aristide's messageof reconciliation never had the support of the poor whosuffered the repression of the military and who sawreconciliation as a synonym for impunity and continuedinjustice.     When Preval assumes office, he, like Aristide, will findhimself in the difficult position of trying to balance thedemands of his supporters with those of the Haitian elite andthe international community, particularly the US.     "It is a great dilemma," said Harry Numa of the NationalPopular Assembly.  "When Aristide tries to please the people,the bourgeoisie and the US pressure him.  When he wants toplacate the bourgeoisie and Washington, the people tell himno."     The Clinton administration pushed hard for Aristide tofulfill his commitment to step down at the end of his term,since its portrayal of Haiti as a US foreign policy successwas riding on a smooth transfer of power.  (Cont.)Back to Headline List CopyrightNOTISUR - LATIN AM. POLITICAL AFFAIRS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996HAITI: RENE PREVAL WINS PRESIDENCY, NOW FACESSERIOUS DOMESTIC & INTERNATIONAL CHALLENGES (Part 2)     However, US policy toward Haiti has been ambivalent atbest.  Although the September 1994 US-led invasion allowedAristide to return to power, congressional Republicans haveopenly opposed the Haitian leader and Preval may face similardifficulties because of his closeness to his predecessor.     In November, the US Congress cut off US$4.5 million ineconomic aid to Haiti because the government had not movedforward with economic reforms, including several controversialprivatizations (see NotiSur, 11/10/95).  The World Bank andInternational Monetary Fund (IMF) have not disbursed anotherUS$45 million for the same reason.  Even if Preval startsnegotiations immediately after his inauguration, funds willstill not flow again before summer.     Sen. Jesse Helms, powerful head of the Senate ForeignRelations Committee, freed up previously blocked funds for theHaitian election only because it paved the way for theturnover to a new leader and the withdrawal of US troops,which make up a large part of the UN peacekeeping force.     However, according to an article in the Washington Postin mid-November, the US is considering staying in Haiti beyondits scheduled departure date, citing the "inexperience" of thenewly formed civilian police.  On Nov. 30, Adrain Rameau, headof the Haitian National Police, was fired following severalshootings that critics claim demonstrate the country's newofficers pull their guns too quickly.     Another issue that will likely carry over after Prevalassumes office centers on the return of more than 150,000pages of documents that were confiscated from the Front forthe Advancement and Progress of Haiti (FRAPH), a paramilitaryorganization.  US troops seized the documents after theinvasion and then took them to the US.     Haitian officials said that until now the US refused tohand over the papers because it feared the information wouldembarrass US intelligence agencies.  Washington does not wantto see leaders of paramilitary groups go on trial in Haiti and"have it emerge that they were paid and supported by Americanintelligence," explained one ves arrested by US soldiers.     The Nation article also contends that weapons wereshipped to FRAPH starting in June 1993 despite the US armsembargo.  The article says that US diplomats have used thealleged power of FRAPH to help pressure Aristide's governmenton broader political issues.     Meanwhile, Constant plans to sue the US for US$50 millionfor holding him in custody since April 1995.  Constant'sattorneys said he was seeking damages from the government for"wrongful incarceration."  (Sources: New York Times, 11/28/95;Washington Post, 12/06/95, 12/07/95; Deutsche Press Agentur,12/12/95; Agence France-Presse, 11/09/95, 11/14/95, 11/26/95,11/28/95, 12/03/95, 12/06/95, 12/18/95; Inter Press Service,12/05/95, 12/22/95; Reuter, 11/11/95, 11/16/95, 11/30/95,12/10/95, 12/11/95, 12/15/95, 12/23/95, 12/28/95)Back to Headline List CopyrightNOTISUR - LATIN AM. POLITICAL AFFAIRS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996GUATEMALA: GAP BETWEEN PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATESCLOSES SUBSTANTIALLY AS RUNOFF ELECTION NEARS     The latest opinion polls indicate that Guatemala's tworunoff presidential candidates will fight a close battle towin the second round of elections, scheduled for Jan. 7.  Mostlocal officials and politicians, however, predict thatabstention in the second round will climb to about 70% of theregistered electorate.     In late November, Guatemala's Supreme Electoral Tribunal(Tribunal Supremo Electoral, TSE) released the final resultsfor the Nov. 12 general elections (see NotiSur, 11/10/95 and11/17/95).  As indicated in the preliminary results reportedin mid-November, Alvaro Arzu--presidential candidate for thePartido de Avanzada Nacional (PAN)--took first place withnearly 37% of the votes (see table).  The Frente RepublicanoGuatemalteco (FRG) candidate, Alfonso Portillo, took secondplace with 22% of the votes.     The Alianza Nacional--which grouped the DemocraciaCristiana Guatemalteca (DCG), the Union del Centro Nacional(UCN), and the Partido Social Democrata (PSD) in a tripartitecoalition--took third place with nearly 13%.  The leftistFrente Democratico Nacional Guatemalteco (FDNG) took fourthplace with nearly 8% of the votes.     Of the remaining 17 parties that participated in theelections, only the Partido Libertador Popular (PLP) won morethan 4% of the votes, which is the minimum a party must obtainto retain its legal status after the elections.  TheMovimiento de Liberacion Nacional (MLN) and the UnionDemocratica (UD) managed to retain their legal status becausethey each won a seat in the National Congress.  But theremaining 14 parties will now be officially dissolved,reducing to nine Guatemala's recognized political parties.     PAN also swept the congressional elections, taking 43 ofthe unicameral legislature's 80 seats.  The FRG will form thesecond largest bloc in Congress with 21 seats.     Despite the Alianza Nacional's third place position inabsolute votes won in the elections, the coalition wasdissolved after the elections and the seven congressionalseats won by the Alianza were then divided between the DCG andthe UCN.  Thus, even though the FDNG took fourth place intotal votes, that party is now the third strongest politicalforce in the legislature, with six congressional seats.     Finally, PAN won eight of the 20 seats contested in theelections for the Central American Parliament (Parlacen).  TheFRG took five seats, and the remaining seven seats will befairly evenly divided among the Alianza parties, the FDNG, thePLP, and the UD.Final results for the Nov. 12 general elections:                   Total Valid        Legislative   ParlacenParty              Votes         %    Seats         SeatsPAN                565,393     36.5      43           8FRG                341,364     22.0      21           5Alianza Nacional   200,393     12.9                   3  DCG                                     4  UCN                                     3  PSDFDNG               119,305      7.7       6           2PLP                 80,761      5.2                   1UD                              3.6       2           1DIA                             2.5MLN                             2.3       1PP                              1.6FUN/PID                         1.2PREG                            1.1CAMHINA                         0.7PDP                             0.5PDG                             0.4AP-5                            0.4CAN                             0.4FDP                             0.4MD                              0.2PCN-MPL                         0.1Total valid votes           1,548,864Nulled ballots     111,074Blank ballots       77,095 into a referendum on the general.     Indeed, Rios Montt has accompanied Portillo throughoutthe campaign.  At most campaign rallies since November,Portillo has limited his speeches to just a few minutes,allowing the general to dominate the show.     Apparently, a wave of common and political violence thathas gripped the country since early December is contributingto Portillo's rise in the polls, since most voters who supportRios Montt approve of the general's hard-line approach tocrime.  In fact, speculation reigns in Guatemala that thesharp rise in violence since early December is a deliberatetactic by extreme-right groups that hope to sway votes infavor of the FRG, which promises to crack down on crime and"restore order" to the country.     Indeed, Francisco Reyes--an FRG congressional deputy whohelped found the party and is one of the organization'sprincipal leaders--stated in mid-December that if the FRG winsthe elections, Rios Montt will be given control over nationalsecurity.     "The decision has already been taken," said Reyes.  "Gen.Rios Montt will be made state secretary for nationalsecurity."      Meanwhile, regardless of the closeness of thepresidential race, most local observers expect abstention willgrow dramatically in the runoff election.  In the first roundof voting, only 46% of the registered 3.7 million voters wentto the polls.  The 53% abstention rate in the Novemberelections was significantly higher than that registered in thelast two presidential elections.  In the first round in 1985,only 31% of voters abstained from going to the polls, and inthe first round in the 1990 presidential elections, abstentiononly reached 44%.     In the second round on Jan. 7, spokespersons from theCivil Registry have predicted that at least 65% of registeredvoters will abstain.  Independent estimates place theabstention rate as high as 75%.  [Sources: Prensa Libre(Guatemala), 11/17/95; Inter Press Service, 11/16/95,11/18/95; Cerigua Weekly Briefs (Guatemala), 11/13/95,11/14/95, 11/16/95, 11/30/95; Central America Update(Guatemala), 11/15/95, 11/30/95; Central America Report(Guatemala), 11/17/95, 11/24/95, 12/01/95; InforpressCentroamericana (Guatemala), 11/16/95, 11/23/95, 11/30/95,12/07/95, 12/14/95; Agence France-Presse, 11/20/95, 11/26/95,11/30/95, 12/10/95, 12/12/95, 12/14/95, 12/17/95, 12/20/95,12/26/95; Agencia Centroamericana de Noticas-Spanish newsservice EFE, 11/17/95, 12/10/95, 12/26/95, 01/03/95; Reuter,12/06/95, 01/04/96]Back to Headline List CopyrightNOTISUR - LATIN AM. POLITICAL AFFAIRS via NewsNetJanuary 5, 1996COLOMBIA: CONGRESSIONAL INVESTIGATION OF PRESIDENTERNESTO SAMPER SHELVED FOR LACK OF EVIDENCE     On Dec. 14 the legislative commission examining linksbetween the Cali drug cartel and the 1994 election campaign ofPresident Ernesto Samper ruled there was insufficient evidenceto launch a full-scale investigation of the president.Nevertheless, the scandal continues to cast a shadow on theSamper administration and its relationship with the US.     The Accusations Commission announced that it had voted14-to-1 to shelve a preliminary probe into charges that Samperpersonally authorized the receipt of US$6 million in Calicartel drug money to win the election in 1994.  Eleven of thecommittee's 15 members belong to Samper's Partido Liberal.     Under Colombian law, the commission had three options:it could have definitely closed the case, meaning that Sampercould not have been investigated on the same charges again; itcould rule--as it did--that there was insufficient evidence tocharge the president, which allows the investigation to bereopened in the future; or it could have recommended that theSenate begin impeachment proceedings against the president.     Charges that drug money found its way into Samper'scampaign first erupted two days after Samper's election inJune 1994.  The investigation by the Accusations Commissionbegan last August (see NotiSur, 06/24/95, 04/04/95, and08/25/95).     The campaign finance scandal, which led to the arrests ofseveral of Samper's closest political associates--includingformer defense minister Fernando Botero and Santiago Medina,treasurer of Samper's campaign--has soured ties withWashington and intensified long-standing suspicions aboutColombia's underlying commitment to the anti-drug fight.  Thecommission's decision is unlikely to calm the troubled waters.     US Ambassador Myles Frechette has warned that the US mayremove Colombia's certification as a partner in the fightagainst drugs next year, withdrawing key aid and tradepreferences.  Conditional cer a growing numberof Colombians believed that not only Samper but hisconservative rival Andres Pastrana accepted drug moneycampaign contributions.  However, a poll published Nov. 19 bythe daily El Tiempo indicated that while 58.3% of Colombiansbelieved that the drug cartels contributed to Samper'scampaign, 61% said he should not resign.     After Samper's television appearance following thecommission's decision, his public approval ratings rose.  Apoll take by El Tiempo immediately after the program airedindicated that the president had convinced 65% of the audienceof his innocence, while 35% continued to believe him guilty.     In his public address, Samper insisted he would notresign, saying it would be an act of "cowardice" to abandonhis office in the midst of a crisis.  (Sources: Reuter,12/13/95, 12/14/95; Agence France-Presse, 12/15/95, 12/20/95;Inter Press Service, 12/14/95, 12/22/95)Back to Headline List WT03-B06-13IA087-000634-B042-70http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it54.html 205.156.212.5 19970122030956 text/html 13725HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:08:05 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:17 GMTContent-length: 13538Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it54.html Sample Issue Copyright PRS FORECASTS: ASIA & THE PACIFIC via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * THE BUSINESS CLIMATE IN NEW ZEALAND * NEW ZEALAND - HIGHLIGHTS, 18-MONTH & FIVE-YEAR FORECASTS, RISK FACTORS, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL DATA (1466 words) CopyrightPRS FORECASTS: ASIA & THE PACIFIC via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW ZEALAND - HIGHLIGHTS, 18-MONTH & FIVE-YEAR FORECASTS,RISK FACTORS, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL DATA                       NEW ZEALAND HIGHLIGHTS                          January 1, 1996MOST LIKELY REGIMES AND THEIR PROBABILITIES18-Month:   National Coalition 55%Five-Year:  National Coalition 50% (40%)FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS            Financial             Direct     Export            Turmoil               Transfer   Investment   Market18-Month:   Low                   A-         A-           A-Five-Year:  Moderate (Low)        A (A-)     A            A (A-)NATIONAL'S CHALLENGES DON'T THREATEN REFORMS     Prime Minister Jim Bolger and his National Party will have toovercome serious obstacles in order to remain in power over the nextfive years.  A new proportional voting system, which will givesmaller parties a larger number of seats in Parliament, and disarraywithin the National Party may result in a coalition government led byeither Labour or the Alliance Party, which is an amalgamation ofpoliticians who have left the two major parties.  Tensions overimmigrants and the rights of the Maori, members of the indigenouspopulation, could result in limited violence and also a voterbacklash against the party in power.  Despite the expected steadygrowth and low inflation, high unemployment will remain a problem andlittle improvement in living standards will be achieved.  A coalitiongovernment led by Labour or Alliance would carry out more fiscalexpansion than would a National government, but unless the mostextreme members of the Alliance dominated policy, would not reversemost of the market reforms that have been implemented since 1985.                     REAL GDP                       CURRENTYEARS               GROWTH (%)    INFLATION (%)  ACCOUNT ($bn)1991-1995(AVG)          2.8            1.8           -1.141996(F)                 3.8            2.1           -1.501997-2001(F)            3.1            2.0           -1.20 ( ) When present, indicates change in rating.  * When present, indicates forecast of a new regime.======================================================================                                  NEW ZEALAND                         SUMMARY OF 18-MONTH FORECAST                            National                        Labour-AllianceREGIMES & PROBABILITIES     Coalition 55%   National 35%    Coalition 10%****************************************************************************RISK FACTORS    CURRENTTurmoil         Low         Same            Same            SLIGHTLY MOREInvestment Equity         Moderate    Same            Same            Same Operations     Moderate    Same            Same            Same Taxation       Moderate    Same            Same            SLIGHTLY MORE Repatriation   Low         Same            Same            Same Exchange       Low         Same            Same            SameTrade Tariffs        Moderate    Same            Same            Same Other Barriers Moderate    Same            Same            Same Payment Delays Low         Same            Same            SameEconomic Policy Expansion      Moderate    Same            Same            SLIGHTLY MORE Labor Costs    Moderate    Same            Same            SLIGHTLY MORE Foreign Debt   High        SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY MORE                         SUMMARY OF FIVE-YEAR FORECAST                            National        Labour          AllianceREGIMES & PROBABILITIES     Coalition 50%   Coalition 30%   Coalition 20%**************************************************************************RISK FACTORS    BASETurmoil         Low         SLIGHTLY MORE   SLIGHTLY MORE   SLIGHTLY MORERestrictions Investment     Low         Same            Same            MORE Trade          Moderate    Same            Same            SLIGHTLY MOREEconomic Problems Domestic       Low         SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS   MORE International  Low         SLIGHTLY LESS   Same            SLIGHTLY MORE  * Indicates forecast of a new regime======================================================================FACT SHEET: NEW ZEALANDJANUARY 1,1996CAPITAL:             WellingtonPOPULATION:          1995, 3.52 millionAREA:                268,704 sq. km.OFFICIAL LANGUAGE:   EnglishCONSTITUTION:        UnwrittenHEAD OF STATE:       Queen Elizabeth II (1952), represented by                     Governor General Catherine Tizard (1991)HEAD OF GOVERNMENT:  Prime Minister Jim Bolger (1990)OFFICIALSDonald McKinnon . . . . . . Deputy Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs &                            Trade; Pacific Island AffairsJohn Falloon. . . . . . . . Agriculture; ForestryPaul East . . . . . . . . . Attorney General; State ServicesPhilip Burdon . . . . . . . Commerce; Industry; Trade NegotiationsKatherine O'Regan . . . . . Consumer AffairsLockwood Smith. . . . . . . EducationSimon Upton . . . . . . . . Environment; Research, Science &                            TechnologyWilliam Birch . . . . . . . FinanceJenny Shipley . . . . . . . Health; Women's AffairsMurray McCully. . . . . . . Housing; CustomsRoger Maxwell . . . . . . . Immigration; Business DevelopmentDoug Graham . . . . . . . . Justice; Cultural AffairsDoug Kidd . . . . . . . . . Labour; Fisheries; EnergyJohn Banks. . . . . . . . . Tourism; Local GovernmentMaurice Williamson. . . . . Transport; CommunicationsADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS:  96 counties, 4 districts, 3 towns,132 boroughsLEGISLATURE:  Unicameral; 99-member House of Representatives.Distribution of seats:  National Party, 43; Labour Party, 42;United New Zealand Party, 7; Conservative Party, 2; New ZealandFirst Party, 2; Alliance party, 2; Christian Democrats Party, 1.ELECTIONS:  The members of the House of Representatives areelected for three-year terms.  Last, November 6, 1993; next, byNovember 1996.STATUS OF PRESS:  freeSECTORS OF GOVERNMENT PARTICIPATION:  energy, transportation,communications, utilities, mining, forestryCURRENCY EXCHANGE SYSTEM:  free-floatingEXCHANGE RATE:  12/18/95  $1=1.42 New Zealand dollars======================================================================ECONOMIC INDICATORS:         1991    1992    1993    1994    1995JANUARY1,1996PRODUCTION, INFLATION, GROWTH GDP ($bn)                  42.23*  40.96*  43.72*  46.34x  47.73x Per Capita ($)             12495*  12010*  12635*  13280x  13560x Real Growth Rate (%)       -2.5*   1.4*    5.4*    6.0*    3.5x Inflation Rate (%)         2.6     1.0     1.4     1.7     2.2e Capital Investment ($bn)   6.74    6.76    8.03    9.72    10.86e Budget Balance ($bn)       0.82    -0.90   0.05    0.01    0.10eLABOR Change in Real Wages (%)   0       -0.1    1.5     1.1e    1.0e Unemployment Rate (%)      10.5    10.3    9.3     8.8     6.3eINTERNATIONAL Debt Service Ratio (%)     27.0    24.0    38.0    39.0    40.0e Current Account ($bn)      -0.66   -0.87   -0.93   -1.63   -1.60e Exports ($bn)              9.56    9.78    10.46   12.18   13.04e Imports ($bn)              7.48    8.11    8.75    10.98   12.19e Currency Change (%)        -3.0    -7.1    0.5     9.8     10.7ee = estimate             x = fiscal year estimate* = fiscal year beginning July 1 of the calendar year abovePRINCIPAL EXPORTS:  meat, fruit, fish, livestock, wool, dairy products, chemicals, forestry products, and manufactures; mainly to Australia, Japan, the US, the EU, South Korea, and ChinaPRINCIPAL IMPORTS:  petroleum, machinery, motor vehicles, manufactured goods, and animal and vegetable oils; mainly from Australia, the US, Japan, the EU, China, Taiwan, and Saudi ArabiaSOCIAL INDICATORS (1995 ESTIMATES)    ENERGY (KG. OIL EQUIVALENT)       Per Capita Consumption:  4284       Imports as Percent of Exports:  7    POPULATION       Annual Growth:  0.9%       Infant Deaths per Thousand:  9       Persons Under Age 15:  23%       Urban Population:  84%       Urban Growth:  0.8%       Literacy:  99%    WORK FORCE DISTRIBUTION       Agriculture:  10%       Industry-Commerce:  21%       Services:  69%       Union:  43%ETHNIC GROUPS  European (87%, mostly British), Maori (12%)LANGUAGES      English, MaoriRELIGIONS      Anglican (29%), Presbyterian (18%), Roman                Catholic (15%)======================================================================                     ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE PROFILE             Country's Ranking Relative to All Countries                  Covered by Political Risk Services                              1991-1995                                   BEST      NEXT      NEXT    WORST                                   25%       25%       25%     25% Indicator GDP PER CAPITA ($)      -------  12796 REAL GDP GROWTH (%)     ------------------  2.8 INFLATION (%)           -------  1.8 UNEMPLOYMENT (%)        ------------------  9.0 CAPITAL INVESTMENT      ----------------------------  18.9   (% OF GDP) BUDGET BALANCE          -------  0.0   (% OF GDP) CURRENT ACCOUNT         ----------------------------  -2.5   (% OF GDP) DEBT SERVICE RATIO      ------------------------------------- 33.6 CURRENCY CHANGE (%)     -------  2.2======================================================================CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS:  NEW ZEALANDJune 28, 1995     A new political party, United New Zealand (UNZ),                  was formed under the leadership of Clive                  Matthewson.July 17, 1995     The governor of the New Zealand Reserve Bank, Don                  Brash, was forced to warn the financial markets                  again of the dire consequences if they continued                  to challenge his anti-inflation campaign.July 20, 1995     The question of whether New Zealand needs a tough                  code to control corporate takeover activity caused                  serious dissension in the Cabinet and the business                  community.October 2, 1995   The new Zealand government announced plans to                  privatize one of the state~s last big assets, a                  large area of North Island State forests.======================================================================                                ECONOMIC FORECASTS REAL GDP GROWTH (%)       6.0|                        *6.0          |                *5.4          |          |                                        *3.8          |                                *3.5            *3.1      2.8a| - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -          |        *1.4          |          |          |          |          |      -2.5|*-2.5           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995    1996f   1997-2001f INFLATION (%)       2.6|*2.6          |          |          |                                *2.2          |                                        *2.1          |                                                *2.0      1.8a| - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -          |                        *1.7          |          |                *1.4          |          |       1.0|        *1.0           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f CURRENT ACCOUNT (US$ BILLIONS)     -0.66|*-0.66          |          |          |        *-0.87  *-0.93          |          |    -1.14a| - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -          |                                                *-1.20          |          |          |                                        *-1.50          |     -1.63|                        *-1.63  *-1.60           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f          a = 1991-1995 average     e = estimate     f = forecast===========================================================================PRS's forecasts are based on a quantitative model developed by thedirectors.  Each Country Report and Executive Report is the product of ateam of political and economic analysts, part of the world's largestprivate-sector network of country analysts.  PRS's monthly service,IT29--POLITICAL RISK LETTER, may include changes in these forecasts.Political or economic conditions sometimes require changes between annualrevisions of PRS's 100 reports.  Contact the publisher to order the fullCountry Report or Executive Report.===========================================================================Back to Headline List WT03-B06-14IA087-000634-B042-88http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it55.html 205.156.212.5 19970122031006 text/html 12662HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:08:15 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:16 GMTContent-length: 12475Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it55.html Sample Issue Copyright PRS FORECASTS: EUROPE via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * THE BUSINESS CLIMATE IN ROMANIA * ROMANIA - HIGHLIGHTS, 18-MONTH & FIVE-YEAR FORECASTS, RISK FACTORS, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL DATA (1351 words) CopyrightPRS FORECASTS: EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ROMANIA - HIGHLIGHTS, 18-MONTH & FIVE-YEAR FORECASTS,RISK FACTORS, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL DATA                         ROMANIA HIGHLIGHTS                          January  1, 1996MOST LIKELY REGIMES AND THEIR PROBABILITIES18-Month:   Iliescu 50%Five-Year:  Strong President 60%FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS            Financial             Direct     Export            Turmoil               Transfer   Investment   Market18-Month:   Moderate              C+         A-           B-Five-Year:  Low (Low)             C (C+)     B            C (C+)PRESIDENT FACES TOUGH ECONOMIC DECISIONSPresident Ion Iliescu is favored to win the September 1996presidential elections, but his supporters are unlikely to win amajority in Parliament.  Despite growing opposition from all sides,Iliescu will dominate the government as he tries to move the economytoward integration with the EU.  The privatization program under waywill have limited success.  Budget cutting and market reforms will beimplemented enough to qualify for assistance from the IMF and the EUbut not enough to greatly improve the business climate.  However, theeconomy is expected to grow over the next five years, and inflationwill be brought into more tolerable ranges.                     REAL GDP                       CURRENTYEARS               GROWTH (%)    INFLATION (%)  ACCOUNT ($bn)1991-1995(AVG)         -3.6          161.5           -0.871996(F)                 4.0           28.0           -1.801997-2001(F)            3.0           20.0           -1.60 ( ) When present, indicates change in rating.  * When present, indicates forecast of a new regime.======================================================================                                    ROMANIA                         SUMMARY OF 18-MONTH FORECAST                            Iliescu         Coalition       MilitaryREGIMES & PROBABILITIES     50%             30%             20%**********************************************************************RISK FACTORS    CURRENTTurmoil         Low         SLIGHTLY MORE   SLIGHTLY MORE   MOREInvestment Equity         Moderate    SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS   Same Operations     Moderate    SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS   Same Taxation       Low         Same            Same            Same Repatriation   Moderate    SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS   Same Exchange       High        SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS   SameTrade Tariffs        Moderate    SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS   Same Other Barriers High        SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS   Same Payment Delays High        SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY MOREEconomic Policy Expansion      Moderate    Same            Same            MORE Labor Costs    Low         MORE            MORE            SLIGHTLY MORE Foreign Debt   Moderate    MORE            MORE            SLIGHTLY MORE                         SUMMARY OF FIVE-YEAR FORECAST                            Strong          Authoritarian   CenterREGIMES & PROBABILITIES     President 60%   25%             Coalition 15%*************************************************************************RISK FACTORS    BASETurmoil         Low         Same            Same            SLIGHTLY MORERestrictions Investment     Very High   SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS Trade          Very High   SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESSEconomic Problems Domestic       High        SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS International  Very High   MORE            MORE            SLIGHTLY MORE  * When present, indicates forecast of a new regime======================================================================FACT SHEET: ROMANIAJANUARY 1,1996CAPITAL:             BucharestPOPULATION:          1995, 22.69 millionAREA:                237,500 sq. km.OFFICIAL LANGUAGE:   RomanianCONSTITUTION:        December 8, 1991HEAD OF STATE:       President Ion Iliescu (1989)HEAD OF GOVERNMENT:  Prime Minister Nicolae Vacaroiu (1992)OFFICIALSValeriu Tabara . . . . . . . . . Agriculture & Food IndustryAdrian Turicu. . . . . . . . . . CommunicationsGheorghe Tinca . . . . . . . . . DefenseMircea Cosea . . . . . . . . . . Economic ReformFlorin Georgescu . . . . . . . . FinanceTeodor Melescanu . . . . . . . . Foreign AffairsDumitru Popescu. . . . . . . . . IndustryIoan Doru Taracila . . . . . . . InteriorIosif Chiuzbaian . . . . . . . . JusticeDan Mircea Popescu . . . . . . . Labor & Social SecurityMarin Cristea. . . . . . . . . . Public WorksMatei Dan. . . . . . . . . . . . TourismPetru Crisan . . . . . . . . . . TradeAurel Novac. . . . . . . . . . . TransportationADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS:  40 countiesLEGISLATURE:  Bicameral:  341-member Assembly of Deputies and143-member Senate.  Distribution of seats in the Assembly andSenate:  Social Democracy Party of Romania (SDPR), 166; DemocraticConvention of Romania (DCR), 116; Democratic Party (DP), 61;Romanian National Unity Party (PUNR), 44; Hungarian DemocraticUnion (HDU), 39; Greater Romania Party (GRP), 22; Socialist Party ofLabor (PSM), 18; others, 18.ELECTIONS:  The president and legislators serve four-year terms.Last election and run-off elections were held in September andOctober 1992; next, scheduled September 1996.STATUS OF PRESS:  freeSECTORS OF GOVERNMENT PARTICIPATION:  Most economic enterprises arestate-owned; privatization is greatest in retail and agriculturalsectors.CURRENCY EXCHANGE SYSTEM:  free-floatingEXCHANGE RATE:  12/18/95  $1=2639.50 lei======================================================================ECONOMIC INDICATORS:         1991    1992    1993    1994    1995JANUARY1,1996PRODUCTION, INFLATION, GROWTH GDP ($bn)                  28.85   19.43   24.78   23.02   23.71e Per Capita ($)             1245    855     1090    1015    1045e Real Growth Rate (%)       -12.9   -13.5   1.0     3.4     4.0e Inflation Rate (%)         174.4   211.2   255.2   136.8   30.0e Capital Investment ($bn)   4.15    2.89    3.32    3.08    3.18e Budget Balance ($bn)       0.56    -0.92   -0.50   -0.88e  -0.76eLABOR Change in Real Wages (%)   -53.1   -41.2   -53.1   -39.0e  -14.1e Unemployment Rate (%)      2.7     8.4     9.2     10.9    10.0eINTERNATIONAL Debt Service Ratio (%)     55.5    60.1    65.0    71.6    76.0e Current Account ($bn)      -1.01   -1.51   -1.16   -0.26   -0.40e Exports ($bn)              4.27    4.36    4.89    6.00    6.58e Imports ($bn)              5.37    5.56    6.02    6.33    7.47e Currency Change (%)        -240.6  -303.1  -146.8  -117.8  -14.6ee = estimatePRINCIPAL EXPORTS:  machinery and equipment, fuels, minerals and metals, manufactured consumer goods, agricultural products, textiles, leather goods, and furniture; mainly to East Europe, the EU, the US, and ChinaPRINCIPAL IMPORTS:  fuels, minerals and metals, machinery and equipment, agricultural and forestry products, and manufactured consumer goods; mainly from Germany, Russia, Italy, France, and the USSOCIAL INDICATORS (1995 ESTIMATES)    ENERGY (KG. OIL EQUIVALENT)       Per Capita Consumption:  1958       Imports as Percent of Exports:  55    POPULATION       Annual Growth:  -0.1%       Infant Deaths per Thousand:  23       Persons Under Age 15:  22%       Urban Population:  55%       Urban Growth:  1.2%       Literacy:  98%    WORK FORCE DISTRIBUTION       Agriculture:  28%       Industry-Commerce:  38%       Services:  34%       Union:  5%ETHNIC GROUPS  Romanian (92%), Hungarian (7%), German (1%)LANGUAGES      Romanian, Hungarian, GermanRELIGIONS      Romanian Orthodox (80%), Roman Catholic (6%),                Lutheran======================================================================                     ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE PROFILE             Country's Ranking Relative to All Countries                  Covered by Political Risk Services                              1991-1995                                   BEST      NEXT      NEXT    WORST                                   25%       25%       25%     25% Indicator GDP PER CAPITA ($)      ----------------------------  1050 REAL GDP GROWTH (%)     ------------------------------------- -3.6 INFLATION (%)           ------------------------------------- 161.5 UNEMPLOYMENT (%)        ------------------  8.2 CAPITAL INVESTMENT      ------------------------------------- 13.9   (% OF GDP) BUDGET BALANCE          ------------------  -2.4   (% OF GDP) CURRENT ACCOUNT         ----------------------------  -3.8   (% OF GDP) DEBT SERVICE RATIO      ------------------------------------- 65.6 CURRENCY CHANGE (%)     ------------------------------------- -164.6======================================================================CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS:  ROMANIAMarch 1, 1995       The Romanian parliament adopted a tough 1995                    budget in line with a program agreed upon with                    the IMF.September 1, 1995   Iliescu met with President Clinton during his                    state visit to the US.October 1, 1995     The second stage of the privatization program                    began.======================================================================                                ECONOMIC FORECASTS REAL GDP GROWTH (%)       4.0|                        *3.4    *4.0    *4.0          |                                                *3.0          |                *1.0          |          |     -3.6a| - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -          |          |          |          |          |          |     -13.5|*-12.9  *-13.5           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f INFLATION (%)     255.2|                *255.2          |          |        *211.2          |          |*174.4    161.5a| - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -          |                        *136.8          |          |          |          |          |                                *30.0      20.0|                                        *28.0   *20.0           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f CURRENT ACCOUNT (US$ BILLIONS)     -0.26|                        *-0.26          |                                *-0.40          |          |          |    -0.87a| - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -          |*-1.01          |                *-1.16          |          |          |        *-1.51                                  *-1.60          |     -1.80|                                        *-1.80           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f          a = 1991-1995 average     e = estimate     f = forecast===========================================================================PRS's forecasts are based on a quantitative model developed by thedirectors.  Each Country Report and Executive Report is the product of ateam of political and economic analysts, part of the world's largestprivate-sector network of country analysts.  PRS's monthly service,IT29--POLITICAL RISK LETTER, may include changes in these forecasts.Political or economic conditions sometimes require changes between annualrevisions of PRS's 100 reports.  Contact the publisher to order the fullCountry Report or Executive Report.===========================================================================Back to Headline List WT03-B06-15IA087-000634-B042-105http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it56.html 205.156.212.5 19970122031017 text/html 13824HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:08:25 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:17 GMTContent-length: 13637Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it56.html Sample Issue Copyright PRS FORECASTS: MID-EAST & NORTH AFRICA via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * THE BUSINESS CLIMATE IN UNITED ARAB EMIRATES * UNITED ARAB EMIRATES - HIGHLIGHTS, 18-MONTH & FIVE-YEAR FORECASTS, RISK FACTORS, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL DATA (1460 words) CopyrightPRS FORECASTS: MID-EAST & NORTH AFRICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996UNITED ARAB EMIRATES - HIGHLIGHTS, 18-MONTH & FIVE-YEAR FORECASTS,RISK FACTORS, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL DATA                   UNITED ARAB EMIRATES HIGHLIGHTS                          January  1, 1996MOST LIKELY REGIMES AND THEIR PROBABILITIES18-Month:   Union 85%Five-Year:  Union 80%FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS            Financial             Direct     Export            Turmoil               Transfer   Investment   Market18-Month:   Low                   A          B- (B)       A+Five-Year:  Moderate (Low)        A- (A)     D+ (C+)      C+ (B+)STABILITY, BUT LIMITED OPPORTUNITYThe stable federal structure is buttressed by the support of the twodominant component emirates, Abu Dhabi and Dubai.  The federalgovernment will continue to be led by President Zayed bin Sultan al-Nahyan of Abu Dhabi; the prime ministership will be held by SheikMaktum bin Rashid al-Maktum, the current ruler of Dubai.  If eitherleader leaves office for reasons of health, he will be replaced by ayounger member of the respective family.  The pressure for democraticreform is weak.  Islamic fundamentalism will not seriously threatenthe government.  The economy will remain heavily dependent on oil,despite attempts at diversification.  As a result, growth will bemodest, at best, and inflation will show some upward movement.Opportunities for foreign business are expected to be limited,despite some modest attempts to attract foreign investment throughliberalization.                     REAL GDP                       CURRENTYEARS               GROWTH (%)    INFLATION (%)  ACCOUNT ($bn)1991-1995(AVG)          0.7            3.9           +0.511996(F)                 2.5            5.7           -0.801997-2001(F)            2.0            5.0           -0.50 ( ) When present, indicates change in rating.  * When present, indicates forecast of a new regime.======================================================================                             UNITED ARAB EMIRATES                         SUMMARY OF 18-MONTH FORECAST                                            Federal         FundamentalistsREGIMES & PROBABILITIES     Union 85%       Breakup 10%     5%*************************************************************************RISK FACTORS    CURRENTTurmoil         Low         Same            MORE            MUCH MOREInvestment Equity         High        SLIGHTLY MORE   Same            MUCH MORE Operations     High        Same            Same            MUCH MORE Taxation       Moderate    SLIGHTLY MORE   SLIGHTLY LESS   MUCH MORE Repatriation   Low         Same            SLIGHTLY LESS   MUCH MORE Exchange       Low         Same            Same            MUCH MORETrade Tariffs        Moderate    Same            LESS            MORE Other Barriers Low         SLIGHTLY LESS   Same            MORE Payment Delays Low         Same            Same            MOREEconomic Policy Expansion      Moderate    SLIGHTLY MORE   Same            Same Labor Costs    High        SLIGHTLY MORE   Same            MORE Foreign Debt   Low         Same            Same            Same                         SUMMARY OF FIVE-YEAR FORECAST                                            Federal         FundamentalistsREGIMES & PROBABILITIES     Union 80%       Breakup 15%     5%*************************************************************************RISK FACTORS    BASETurmoil         Moderate    Same            MUCH MORE       MUCH MORERestrictions Investment     Very High   Same            SLIGHTLY LESS   MUCH MORE Trade          Very High   SLIGHTLY LESS   LESS            MUCH MOREEconomic Problems Domestic       Very High   SLIGHTLY MORE   MORE            MUCH MORE International  Low         Same            MORE            MUCH MORE * When present, indicates forecast of a new regime======================================================================FACT SHEET: UNITED ARAB EMIRATESJANUARY 1,1996CAPITAL:             Abu DhabiPOPULATION:          1995, 1.29 millionAREA:                82,900 sq. km.OFFICIAL LANGUAGE:   ArabicCONSTITUTION:        December 2, 1971HEAD OF STATE:       President Zayed bin Sultan al-Nahyan (1971)HEAD OF GOVERNMENT:  Prime Minister Maktum bin Rashid al-Maktum                     (1990)OFFICIALSSultan bin Zayed al-Nahyan. . . . . Deputy Prime MinisterSaid al-Raqbani . . . . . . . . . . Agriculture & FisheriesMohammad Said al-Mulla. . . . . . . CommunicationsMohammad bin Rashid al-Maktum . . . DefenseSaid al-Ghubash . . . . . . . . . . Economy & TradeHamdan bin Rashid al-Maktum . . . . Finance & IndustryRashid Abdallah al-Nuaymi . . . . . Foreign AffairsKhalfan bin Muhammad al-Rumi. . . . Information & CultureMohammad Said al-Badi . . . . . . . InteriorMohammad bin Hasan al-Khazraji. . . Islamic Affairs & AwqafSayif al-Jarwan . . . . . . . . . . Labor & Social AffairsRaqad bin Salimal-Raqad . . . . . . Petroleum & Mineral ResourcesADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS:  7 sheikhdoms:  Abu Dhabi, Ajman, Dubai,Fujairah, Ras al-Khaimah, Sharjah, and Umm al-QaiwainLEGISLATURE:  Unicameral:  40-member Federal National Council.Delegates to this consultative assembly are appointed by thegovernments of the constituent emirates.  The Supreme Council ofRulers (seven members) elects the president from among its ownmembers.ELECTIONS:  noneSTATUS OF PRESS:  Partly controlled.  Criticism of officialpolicy appears in the press, but newspapers are occasionallysuspended for deviating too far from government policy.  Foreignnewspapers are censored at point of entry.SECTORS OF GOVERNMENT PARTICIPATION:  petroleum, aviation, communica-tions, housing, utilitiesCURRENCY EXCHANGE SYSTEM:  single currency showing limitedflexibility in terms of US dollarEXCHANGE RATE:  12/18/95  $1=3.67 dirhams======================================================================ECONOMIC INDICATORS:         1991    1992    1993    1994    1995JANUARY1,1996PRODUCTION, INFLATION, GROWTH GDP ($bn)                  33.91   34.98   35.80   36.71   37.08e Per Capita ($)             19715   19765   29585   29370   28745e Real Growth Rate (%)       0.8     2.7     -0.2    -1.0    1.0e Inflation Rate (%)         3.0     3.5     3.8     4.8     4.5e Capital Investment ($bn)   7.03    8.12    9.05    9.19e   9.38e Budget Balance ($bn)       -0.17   0.29    -0.09   0.08    0.07eLABOR Change in Real Wages (%)   -0.5    1.4     2.0     3.5     3.5e Unemployment Rate (%)      negligibleINTERNATIONAL Debt Service Ratio (%)     negligible Current Account ($bn)      2.04    2.60    0.18    -1.28   -1.00e Exports ($bn)              22.10   24.31   23.94   24.25   24.53e Imports ($bn)              12.45   17.44   18.19   20.75   20.53e Currency Change (%)        0       0       0       0       0ee = estimatePRINCIPAL EXPORTS:  petroleum and gas, refined products, ready-made garments, textiles, foodstuffs, aluminum ingots, fruits and vegetables, and fish; mainly to Japan, Oman Iran, and South KoreaPRINCIPAL IMPORTS:  food, machinery, building products, consumer goods, garments, electrical equipment, and transportation equipment; mainly from Japan, the UK, the US, Germany, and South KoreaSOCIAL INDICATORS (1995 ESTIMATES)    ENERGY (KG. OIL EQUIVALENT)       Per Capita Consumption:  14631       Imports as Percent of Exports:  5    POPULATION       Annual Growth:  2.9%       Infant Deaths per Thousand:  22       Persons Under Age 15:  31%       Urban Population:  82%       Urban Growth:  5.0%       Literacy:  68%    WORK FORCE DISTRIBUTION       Agriculture:  5%       Industry-Commerce:  85%       Services:  10%       Union:  no independent unionsETHNIC GROUPS  Arab (42%), Iranian, Pakistani, IndianLANGUAGES      Arabic, Farsi, English, Hindi, UrduRELIGIONS      Muslim (95%), Christian, Hindu======================================================================                      ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE PROFILE             Country's Ranking Relative to All Countries                  Covered by Political Risk Services                              1991-1995                                   BEST      NEXT      NEXT    WORST                                   25%       25%       25%     25% Indicator GDP PER CAPITA ($)      -------  25436 REAL GDP GROWTH (%)     ------------------------------------- 0.7 INFLATION (%)           -------  3.9 UNEMPLOYMENT (%)        Negligible CAPITAL INVESTMENT      -------  23.9   (% OF GDP) BUDGET BALANCE          -------  0.1   (% OF GDP) CURRENT ACCOUNT         -------  1.6   (% OF GDP) DEBT SERVICE RATIO      Negligible CURRENCY CHANGE (%)     -------  0.0======================================================================CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS:  UNITED ARAB EMIRATESJanuary 8, 1995     Sheik Mohammad bin Rashad al-Maktum was named                    crown prince of Dubai to ensure a smooth                    succession in the event of his father's death, a                    move that was welcomed by international business.January 31, 1995    In a keynote speech, Sheik Mohammad called for                    rehabilitation of Iraq by the Arab Gulf states.June 1995           UAE recognized Sheik Hamad as the new ruler of                    Qatar.  Hamad overthrew his father in a bloodless                    coup.June 1995           Business survey rated Dubai the world's largest                    container port.Mid-July, 1995      The Iranian government affirmed its claim to the                    Abu Musa and Tunb islands, saying the islands                    belong to Iran "eternally."  The UAE persisted                    with its efforts to refer the dispute to the                    International Court at The Hague.Mid-July, 1995      Sheik Abdel Munim al-Ali was arrested for                    "preaching subversion" and sentenced to                    deportation.October 1995        A Filipina maid's death sentence for murdering                    her employer was changed to 100 lashes and                    deportation by an Abu Dhabi court after the                    victim's family agreed to accept blood money.======================================================================                                ECONOMIC FORECASTS REAL GDP GROWTH (%)       2.7|        *2.7          |                                        *2.5          |                                                *2.0          |          |          |          |*0.8                            *1.0      0.7a| - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -          |          |                *-0.2          |          |      -1.0|                        *-1.0           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f INFLATION (%)       5.7|                                        *5.7          |          |          |                                                *5.0          |                        *4.8          |                                *4.5          |          |      3.9a| - - - - - - - -*3.8- - - - - - - - - -          |          |        *3.5          |       3.0|*3.0           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f CURRENT ACCOUNT (US$ BILLIONS)      2.60|        *2.60          |          |*2.04          |          |          |     0.51a| - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -          |                *0.18          |          |          |                                                *-0.50          |                                *-1.00  *-0.80     -1.28|                        *-1.28           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f          a = 1991-1995 average     e = estimate     f = forecast===========================================================================PRS's forecasts are based on a quantitative model developed by thedirectors.  Each Country Report and Executive Report is the product of ateam of political and economic analysts, part of the world's largestprivate-sector network of country analysts.  PRS's monthly service,IT29--POLITICAL RISK LETTER, may include changes in these forecasts.Political or economic conditions sometimes require changes between annualrevisions of PRS's 100 reports.  Contact the publisher to order the fullCountry Report or Executive Report.===========================================================================Back to Headline List WT03-B06-16IA087-000634-B042-125http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it57.html 205.156.212.5 19970122031033 text/html 13060HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:08:40 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:16 GMTContent-length: 12873Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it57.html Sample Issue Copyright PRS FORECASTS: NORTH & CENTRAL AMERICA via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * THE BUSINESS CLIMATE IN UNITED STATES * UNITED STATES - HIGHLIGHTS, 18-MONTH & FIVE-YEAR FORECASTS, RISK FACTORS, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL DATA (1369 words) CopyrightPRS FORECASTS: NORTH & CENTRAL AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996UNITED STATES - HIGHLIGHTS, 18-MONTH & FIVE-YEAR FORECASTS,RISK FACTORS, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL DATA                      UNITED STATES HIGHLIGHTS                          January  1, 1996MOST LIKELY REGIMES AND THEIR PROBABILITIES18-Month:   Democratic President 45%Five-Year:  Democratic President 45%FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS            Financial             Direct     Export            Turmoil               Transfer   Investment   Market18-Month:   Low                   A          A            A+Five-Year:  Low                   A- (A)     A            A- (A+)NO END TO DIVIDED GOVERNMENTThe struggle between President Bill Clinton and the Republic-controlled Congress over almost all issues will probably not producemuch budgetary reform.  The 1996 presidential and congressionalelections are also not likely to lead to changes in policy direction,even if the Republican challenger, probably Robert Dole wins thepresidential election.  The most likely result of the elections willbe a slim victory for Clinton and Republican control of both houses.Protectionist sentiment will increase at the grass roots level, butit is not likely to be translated into policy.  The economy willdrift while the politicians argue over spending and tax cuts.                     REAL GDP                       CURRENTYEARS               GROWTH (%)    INFLATION (%)  ACCOUNT ($bn)1991-1995(AVG)          2.4            3.0          -99.251996(F)                 2.5            2.2         -130.001997-2001(F)            2.8            2.4         -100.00 ( ) When present, indicates change in rating.  * When present, indicates forecast of a new regime.======================================================================                                 UNITED STATES                         SUMMARY OF 18-MONTH FORECAST                            Democratic      Republican      IndependentREGIMES & PROBABILITIES     President 45%   President 40%   15%*************************************************************************RISK FACTORS    CURRENTTurmoil         Low         Same            Same            SameInvestment Equity         Low         Same            Same            Same Operations     Low         Same            Same            Same Taxation       Moderate    Same            Same            Same Repatriation   Low         Same            Same            Same Exchange       Low         Same            Same            SameTrade Tariffs        Low         Same            Same            Same Other Barriers Low         Same            Same            Same Payment Delays Low         Same            Same            SameEconomic Policy Expansion      Moderate    Same            Same            Same Labor Costs    High        Same            Same            Same Foreign Debt   Moderate    Same            Same            Same                         SUMMARY OF FIVE-YEAR FORECAST                            Democratic      Republican      IndependentREGIMES & PROBABILITIES     President 45%   President 40%   15%*************************************************************************RISK FACTORS    BASETurmoil         Low         Same            Same            SameRestrictions Investment     Low         Same            Same            Same Trade          Low         Same            Same            SLIGHTLY MOREEconomic Problems Domestic       Moderate    Same            Same            Same International  High        SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS * When present, indicates forecast of a new regime======================================================================FACT SHEET: UNITED STATES OF AMERICAJANUARY 1,1996CAPITAL:             Washington, D.C.POPULATION:          1995, 262.77 millionAREA:                9,160,412 sq. km.OFFICIAL LANGUAGE:   EnglishCONSTITUTION:        September 17, 1787HEAD OF STATE:       President William J. Clinton (1993)HEAD OF GOVERNMENT:  President Clinton (1993)OFFICIALSAlbert Gore, Jr.. . . . . . . Vice PresidentDan Glickman. . . . . . . . . AgricultureRonald Brown. . . . . . . . . CommerceWilliam Perry . . . . . . . . DefenseRichard Riley . . . . . . . . EducationHazel O'Leary . . . . . . . . EnergyDonna Shalala . . . . . . . . Health & Human ServicesHenry Cisneros. . . . . . . . Housing & Urban DevelopmentBruce Babbitt . . . . . . . . InteriorRobert Reich. . . . . . . . . LaborWarren Christopher. . . . . . StateRobert Rubin. . . . . . . . . TreasuryMickey Kantor . . . . . . . . Trade RepresentativeFederico Pena . . . . . . . . TransportationADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS:  50 states, 1 federal district,3 territoriesLEGISLATURE:  Bicameral Congress; 100-member Senate and 435-memberHouse of Representatives.  Distribution of Senate seats:Republicans, 53; Democrats, 47.  Distribution of House seats:Republicans, 230; Democrats, 204; independents, 1.ELECTIONS:  Presidential election held every four years; thepresident may serve only two terms.  Last, November 3, 1992; next,scheduled November 5, 1996.  Senate:  one-third elected every twoyears for six-year terms.  House:  wholly elected every two years.Last congressional elections, November 8, 1994; next, scheduledNovember 5, 1996.STATUS OF PRESS:  freeSECTORS OF GOVERNMENT PARTICIPATION:  transportation, electricityCURRENCY EXCHANGE SYSTEM:  free-floatingEXCHANGE RATE:  12/18/95  $1=1.44 deutsche marks======================================================================ECONOMIC INDICATORS:         1991    1992    1993    1994    1995JANUARY1,1996PRODUCTION, INFLATION, GROWTH GDP ($bn)                  5722.90 6020.20 6343.30 6738.40 6927.08e Per Capita ($)             22695   23605   24625   25850   26360e Real Growth Rate (%)       -1.2    3.3     3.1     4.1     2.9e Inflation Rate (%)         4.2     3.1     3.0     2.5     2.2e Capital Investment ($bn)   736.90  788.30  882.00  1032.90 1059.84e Budget Balance ($bn)       -272.50 -289.30 -254.10 -203.20 -192.50eLABOR Change in Real Wages (%)   -0.9    -0.7    -0.4    0.2     0.1e Unemployment Rate (%)      6.8     7.4     6.8     6.1     5.7eINTERNATIONAL Debt Service Ratio (%)     27.0    27.0    28.0    29.0e   27.0e Current Account ($bn)      -7.72   -62.00  -99.69  -150.94 -175.90e Exports ($bn)              416.92  440.36  456.87  504.54  557.00e Imports ($bn)              490.98  536.46  590.10  668.87  757.80e Currency Change (%)        2.7     -5.9    5.9     -1.8    -11.4ee = estimatePRINCIPAL EXPORTS:  machinery, autos, aircraft, grains, chemicals, textiles, agricultural goods, and military supplies; mainly to Canada, Japan, Mexico, and the UKPRINCIPAL IMPORTS:  petroleum and petroleum products, non-ferrous base metals, fertilizers, agricultural products, machinery, automobiles, and various raw materials; mainly from Canada, Japan, and MexicoSOCIAL INDICATORS (1995 ESTIMATES)    ENERGY (KG. OIL EQUIVALENT)       Per Capita Consumption:  7622       Imports as Percent of Exports:  14    POPULATION       Annual Growth:  1.0%       Infant Deaths per Thousand:  9       Persons Under Age 15:  22%       Urban Population:  76%       Urban Growth:  1.2%       Literacy:  97%    WORK FORCE DISTRIBUTION       Agriculture:  3%       Industry-Commerce:  25%       Services:  72%       Union:  16%ETHNIC GROUPS  white (85%), black (12%), Hispanic, Asian, AmerindLANGUAGES      EnglishRELIGIONS      Protestant (61%), Roman Catholic (25%), Jewish (2%),                others (5%), none (7%)======================================================================                     ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE PROFILE             Country's Ranking Relative to All Countries                  Covered by Political Risk Services                              1991-1995                                   BEST      NEXT      NEXT    WORST                                   25%       25%       25%     25% Indicator GDP PER CAPITA ($)      -------  24627 REAL GDP GROWTH (%)     ------------------  2.4 INFLATION (%)           -------  3.0 UNEMPLOYMENT (%)        ------------------  6.6 CAPITAL INVESTMENT      ------------------------------------- 14.1   (% OF GDP) BUDGET BALANCE          ----------------------------  -3.9   (% OF GDP) CURRENT ACCOUNT         ------------------  -1.5   (% OF GDP) DEBT SERVICE RATIO      ----------------------------  27.6 CURRENCY CHANGE (%)     ------------------  -2.1======================================================================CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS:  United StatesApril 19, 1995      A huge car bomb devastated a federal building in                    Oklahoma City, killing at least 167 people.                    Timothy Mc Veigh and Terry Nichols were later                    charged with the bombing.June 2, 1995        Air Force Captain Scott O'Grady's F-16 was shot                    down over Bosnia, and he narrowly escaped Serb                    forces after fleeing his crippled plane.  He was                    rescued by the Marines six days later.June 29, 1995       The US Space shuttle Atlantis successfully docked                    with the Russian station Mir.November 5, 1995    In national elections, Republicans took control                    of both houses of Congress for the first time in                    40 years.December 1995       A Budget Impasse caused 260,000 federal employees                    to be temporarily out of work.December 1995       US troops were sent to Bosnia as part of a NATO                    mission.======================================================================                                ECONOMIC FORECASTS REAL GDP GROWTH (%)       4.1|                        *4.1          |          |        *3.3    *3.1          |                                *2.9            *2.8      2.4a| - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -  *2.5          |          |          |          |          |          |          |      -1.2|*-1.2           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f INFLATION (%)       4.2|*4.2          |          |          |          |          |          |      3.0a| - - - -*3.1- - *3.0 - - - - - - - - - -          |          |          |                        *2.5          |                                                *2.4       2.2|                                *2.2    *2.2           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f CURRENT ACCOUNT (US$ BILLIONS)     -7.72|*-7.72          |          |          |          |        *-62.00          |          |   -99.25a| - - - - - - - -*-99.69 - - - - - - - -         *-100.00          |          |                                        *-130.00          |                        *-150.94          |   -175.90|                                *-175.90           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f          a = 1991-1995 average     e = estimate     f = forecast===========================================================================PRS's forecasts are based on a quantitative model developed by thedirectors.  Each Country Report and Executive Report is the product of ateam of political and economic analysts, part of the world's largestprivate-sector network of country analysts.  PRS's monthly service,IT29--POLITICAL RISK LETTER, may include changes in these forecasts.Political or economic conditions sometimes require changes between annualrevisions of PRS's 100 reports.  Contact the publisher to order the fullCountry Report or Executive Report.===========================================================================Back to Headline List WT03-B06-17IA087-000634-B042-152http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it58.html 205.156.212.5 19970122031122 text/html 13715HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:08:54 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:16 GMTContent-length: 13528Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it58.html Sample Issue Copyright PRS FORECASTS: SOUTH AMERICA via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * THE BUSINESS CLIMATE IN BOLIVIA * BOLIVIA - HIGHLIGHTS, 18-MONTH & FIVE-YEAR FORECASTS, RISK FACTORS, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL DATA (1459 words) CopyrightPRS FORECASTS: SOUTH AMERICA via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BOLIVIA - HIGHLIGHTS, 18-MONTH & FIVE-YEAR FORECASTS,RISK FACTORS, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL DATA                         BOLIVIA HIGHLIGHTS                          January  1, 1996MOST LIKELY REGIMES AND THEIR PROBABILITIES18-Month:   MNR Coalition 65% (75)%Five-Year:  *Centrist Coalition 65%FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS                                  Financial  Direct       Export            Turmoil               Transfer   Investment   Market18-Month:   Moderate              B-         A            BFive-Year:  Moderate              C+         A-           C+ (B-)MOUNTING TENSIONSThe centrist government of President Sanchez de Lozada will facesignificant cross-pressures for the reminder of its term.  Thesuccessor after the June 1997 elections is likely to be anothercentrist regime led by someone from Sanchez de Lozada's NationalRevolutionary Movement (MNR), but a victory by a right wing populistis far from remote.  The commitment to free market policies thatcalls for partial privatization of major state-owned industries, andthe reduction of the budget deficit will continue.  However,pressures from labor and peasants will force more social spending.In addition, the large role played by coca leaf growers and dealersin the economy will prevent the strong action against the drug tradeencouraged by the US, which in turn could jeopardize aid andfinancial support from the international community.  A right-wingpopulist regime led by Carlos Palenque, a radio talk show host whohas significant support among the poor, would raise concerns amonginvestors about increased spending and a reversal of market reforms.                     REAL GDP                       CURRENTYEARS               GROWTH (%)    INFLATION (%)  ACCOUNT ($bn)1991-1995(AVG)          3.9           11.4           -0.391996(F)                 4.5            7.2           -0.401997-2001(F)            4.2            7.5           -0.30 ( ) When present, indicates change in rating.  * When present, indicates forecast of a new regime.======================================================================                                    BOLIVIA                         SUMMARY OF 18-MONTH FORECAST                            MNR             MNRREGIMES & PROBABILITIES     Coalition 65%   Minority 30%    ADN-MIR 5%************************************************************************RISK FACTORS    CURRENTTurmoil         Moderate    Same            SLIGHTLY MORE   MOREInvestment Equity         Low         LESS            Same            Same Operations     Low         Same            Same            Same Taxation       Low         Same            Same            Same Repatriation   Low         Same            Same            Same Exchange       Moderate    Same            Same            SameTrade Tariffs        Low         SLIGHTLY LESS   Same            Same Other Barriers Moderate    SLIGHTLY LESS   Same            SLIGHTLY LESS Payment Delays Moderate    Same            SLIGHTLY MORE   MOREEconomic Policy Expansion      Low         SLIGHTLY MORE   SLIGHTLY MORE   SLIGHTLY MORE Labor Costs    Low         SLIGHTLY MORE   SLIGHTLY MORE   SLIGHTLY MORE Foreign Debt   High        SLIGHTLY MORE   SLIGHTLY MORE   SLIGHTLY MORE                         SUMMARY OF FIVE-YEAR FORECAST                            *Centrist       Populist-REGIMES & PROBABILITIES     Coalition 55%   Right 25%       ADN 20%************************************************************************RISK FACTORS    BASETurmoil         Moderate    Same            Same            SLIGHTLY MORERestrictions Investment     Low         SLIGHTLY LESS   Same            Same Trade          Moderate    Same            MORE            SameEconomic Problems Domestic       High        SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY MORE   SLIGHTLY LESS International  Very High   SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY MORE   Same * When present, indicates forecast of a new regime======================================================================FACT SHEET: REPUBLIC OF BOLIVIAJANUARY 1,1996CAPITAL:             La PazPOPULATION:          1995, 8.52 millionAREA:                1,098,168 sq. km.OFFICIAL LANGUAGE:   Spanish, Quechua, AymaraCONSTITUTION:        February 2, 1967HEAD OF STATE:       President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada Bustamante                     (1993)HEAD OF GOVERNMENT:  President Sanchez de Lozada (1993)OFFICIALSVictor Hugo Cardenas Conde. . . . . . . Vice PresidentJaime Villalobos Sanjinez . . . . . . . Economic DevelopmentFernando Cossio . . . . . . . . . . . . FinanceAntonio Aranibar Quiroga. . . . . . . . Foreign Affairs & WorshipFreddy Teodovich Ortiz. . . . . . . . . Human DevelopmentCarlos Sanchez Berazain . . . . . . . . InteriorRene Blattman Bauer . . . . . . . . . . JusticeReynaldo Peters Arzabe. . . . . . . . . LaborJorge Otasevic Toledo . . . . . . . . . National DefenseMoises Jarmusz Levi . . . . . . . . . . Sustainable Development &                                        EnvironmentJose Guillermo Justiniano . . . . . . . Ministry of the PresidencyJuan Fernando Candia Castillo . . . . . President, Central BankOscar Crespo Soliz. . . . . . . . . . . Attorney GeneralADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS:  9 departments, 99 provincesLEGISLATURE:  Bicameral; 157-member Chamber of Deputies and27-member Senate.  Distribution of seats in the Chamber ofDeputies:  National Revolutionary Movement (MNR), 69; PatrioticAccord (AP), 43; Civic Solidarity Union (UCS), 21; PatrioticConscience (CONDEPA), 14; Bolivian Freedom Movement (MBL), 7;others, 3.  Distribution of seats in the Senate:  MNR, 17; AP, 8;Condepa, 1; USC, 1.ELECTIONS:  President and Congress elected every four years.  Lastelection, June 6, 1993; next, scheduled June 1997.STATUS OF PRESS:  freeSECTORS OF GOVERNMENT PARTICIPATION:  mining, communications, gas,petroleum, transportation, utilitiesCURRENCY EXCHANGE SYSTEM:  free-floatingEXCHANGE RATE:  12/18/95  $1=4.92 bolivianos======================================================================ECONOMIC INDICATORS:         1991    1992    1993    1994    1995JANUARY1,1996PRODUCTION, INFLATION, GROWTH GDP ($bn)                  6.06    6.37    6.53    6.57    6.87e Per Capita ($)             795     815     810     795     805e Real Growth Rate (%)       5.0     1.7     3.9     4.2     4.5e Inflation Rate (%)         21.4    12.1    8.5     7.9     7.0e Capital Investment ($bn)   0.72    0.72    0.75    0.76    0.79e Budget Balance ($bn)       0       -0.12   -0.11   -0.21   -0.23eLABOR Change in Real Wages (%)   4.2     2.1     1.5     1.0     1.2e Unemployment Rate (%)      13.0    11.5    8.0     5.0     5.0eINTERNATIONAL Debt Service Ratio (%)     34.0    38.0    33.0    41.0    39.0e Current Account ($bn)      -0.26   -0.53   -0.48   -0.18   -0.50e Exports ($bn)              0.76    0.61    0.71    0.97    1.03e Imports ($bn)              0.80    1.04    1.20    1.07    1.13e Currency Change (%)        -12.9   -8.9    -9.3    -8.3    -3.1ee = estimatePRINCIPAL EXPORTS:  natural gas, antimony, lead, tungsten, tin, gold, silver, zinc, coffee, soybeans, sugar, cotton, and timber; mainly to Argentina, the US, the UK, Belgium, Brazil, Germany, Chile, Peru, and SwitzerlandPRINCIPAL IMPORTS:  industrial raw materials and capital goods, transport equipment, food, petroleum, and consumer goods; mainly from the US, Brazil, Argentina, Japan, Germany, Chile, and PeruSOCIAL INDICATORS (1995 ESTIMATES)    ENERGY (KG. OIL EQUIVALENT)       Per Capita Consumption:  255       Imports as Percent of Exports:  5    POPULATION       Annual Growth:  2.9%       Infant Deaths per Thousand:  74       Persons Under Age 15:  42%       Urban Population:  41%       Urban Growth:  4.0%       Literacy:  78%    WORK FORCE DISTRIBUTION       Agriculture:  50%       Industry-Commerce:  17%       Services:  33%       Union:  13%ETHNIC GROUPS  Quechua, Mestizo, Aymara, EuropeanLANGUAGES      Spanish, Quechua, AymaraRELIGIONS      Roman Catholic (95%)======================================================================                     ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE PROFILE             Country's Ranking Relative to All Countries                  Covered by Political Risk Services                              1991-1995                                   BEST      NEXT      NEXT    WORST                                   25%       25%       25%     25% Indicator GDP PER CAPITA ($)      ------------------------------------- 804 REAL GDP GROWTH (%)     ------------------  3.9 INFLATION (%)           ----------------------------  11.4 UNEMPLOYMENT (%)        ------------------  8.5 CAPITAL INVESTMENT      ------------------------------------- 11.5   (% OF GDP) BUDGET BALANCE          ------------------  -2.0   (% OF GDP) CURRENT ACCOUNT         ------------------------------------- -6.0   (% OF GDP) DEBT SERVICE RATIO      ------------------------------------- 37.0 CURRENCY CHANGE (%)     ----------------------------  -8.5======================================================================CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS:  BOLIVIAApril 12, 1995      Hundreds of striking teachers and miners, some                    setting off dynamite and throwing rocks, fought                    police in La Paz, continuing protests that had                    left at least 30 people injured.  The strikers                    have been demanding higher wages and protesting                    educational and economic reforms. June 1995          Half-shares of Ende, the Bolivian state electric                    company, were sold to foreign investors as a                    first step in Sanchez de Lozadaas innovative                    capitalization plan for modernizing state                    enterprises and creating a pension fund for                    Bolivians.September-October 1995        Sanchez de Lozadaas capitalization plan continued                    as half-shares of LAB, the state airline, were                    sold to foreign investors.October 1995        State of siege resulting from spring strikes is                    lifted.December 1995       Max Fernandez dies in plane crash.======================================================================                                ECONOMIC FORECASTS REAL GDP GROWTH (%)       5.0|*5.0          |          |                                *4.5    *4.5          |                        *4.2                    *4.2      3.9a| - - - - - - - -*3.9- - - - - - - - - -          |          |          |          |          |          |          |       1.7|        *1.7           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f INFLATION (%)      21.4|*21.4          |          |          |          |          |          |          |     11.4a| - - - -*12.1 - - - - - - - - - - - - -          |          |          |                *8.5    *7.9       7.0|                                *7.0    *7.2    *7.5           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f CURRENT ACCOUNT (US$ BILLIONS)     -0.18|                        *-0.18          |          |          |*-0.26          |                                                *-0.30          |          |    -0.39a| - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -          |                                        *-0.40          |          |                *-0.48          |                                *-0.50     -0.53|        *-0.53           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f          a = 1991-1995 average     e = estimate     f = forecast===========================================================================PRS's forecasts are based on a quantitative model developed by thedirectors.  Each Country Report and Executive Report is the product of ateam of political and economic analysts, part of the world's largestprivate-sector network of country analysts.  PRS's monthly service,IT29--POLITICAL RISK LETTER, may include changes in these forecasts.Political or economic conditions sometimes require changes between annualrevisions of PRS's 100 reports.  Contact the publisher to order the fullCountry Report or Executive Report.===========================================================================Back to Headline List WT03-B06-18IA087-000634-B042-170http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it59.html 205.156.212.5 19970122031140 text/html 14088HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:09:49 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:15 GMTContent-length: 13901Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it59.html Sample Issue Copyright PRS FORECASTS: SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA via NewsNet February 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * THE BUSINESS CLIMATE IN GUINEA * GUINEA - HIGHLIGHTS, 18-MONTH & FIVE-YEAR FORECASTS, RISK FACTORS, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL DATA (1497 words) CopyrightPRS FORECASTS: SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996GUINEA - HIGHLIGHTS, 18-MONTH & FIVE-YEAR FORECASTS,RISK FACTORS, POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, AND SOCIAL DATA                          GUINEA HIGHLIGHTS                          February 1, 1996MOST LIKELY REGIMES AND THEIR PROBABILITIES18-Month:   Authoritarian Conte 65% (50%)Five-Year:  Conte or Successor 50%FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS                                  Financial  Direct       Export            Turmoil               Transfer   Investment   Market18-Month:   Moderate (Moderate)   C+         B            B-Five-Year:  Moderate (High)       B- (C)     C+ (C-)      B- (C)( ) Indicates change in rating. *  Indicates forecast of a new regime.CONTE AND HIS REFORMS LOOK SECURE     Allowing opposition parties and a partially free press,President Lansana Conte has engineered both his own presidentialelection in 1993 and a Parliament controlled by his party in June1995.  Despite the widespread opposition he has stimulated, none ofthe forces arrayed against him control enough resources to topplehim.  The most serious threats to his continuing in office are poorhealth or assassination.  In case of unexpected economic decline orif the opposition is able to put aside its differences and unite, anational conference could emerge that leads to a civilian regime.Despite past military involvement in politics, a coup is unlikely.Conte will continue to support limited austerity and liberalizationmeasures and the economy is expected to improve as a result of moreraw material exports, especially an improvement in the currentaccount.  A national conference regime would spend more but wouldliberalize the economy.  A military government would limitliberalization.                     REAL GDP                       CURRENTYEARS               GROWTH (%)    INFLATION (%)  ACCOUNT ($bn)1991-1995(AVG)          3.7           10.8           -0.221996(F)                 4.5            4.0           -0.201997-2001(F)            5.0            6.0           +0.10======================================================================                                    GUINEA                         SUMMARY OF 18-MONTH FORECAST                            Authoritarian   NationalREGIMES & PROBABILITIES     Conte 65%       Conference 20%  Military 15%*************************************************************************RISK FACTORS    CURRENTTurmoil         Moderate    Same            SLIGHTLY MORE   SLIGHTLY MOREInvestment Equity         Moderate    Same            SLIGHTLY MORE   MORE Operations     Moderate    Same            SLIGHTLY MORE   MORE Taxation       Low         Same            SLIGHTLY MORE   MORE Repatriation   Moderate    Same            SLIGHTLY MORE   SLIGHTLY MORE Exchange       High        Same            Same            MORETrade Tariffs        Moderate    Same            Same            MORE Other Barriers Moderate    Same            Same            SLIGHTLY MORE Payment Delays High        Same            Same            MOREEconomic Policy Expansion      Moderate    Same            SLIGHTLY MORE   MORE Labor Costs    Low         Same            MORE            MORE Foreign Debt   Moderate    Same            Same            Same                         SUMMARY OF FIVE-YEAR FORECAST                            Conte or        CivilianREGIMES & PROBABILITIES     Successor 50%   Pragmatists 30% Military 20%*************************************************************************RISK FACTORS    BASETurmoil         Moderate    Same            Same            MORERestrictions Investment     High        Same            Same            MORE Trade          High        SLIGHTLY LESS   LESS            MOREEconomic Problems Domestic       High        SLIGHTLY LESS   SLIGHTLY LESS   MORE International  High        SLIGHTLY LESS   LESS            MORE * Indicates forecast of a new regime======================================================================FACT SHEET: REPUBLIC OF GUINEAFEBRUARY 1,1996CAPITAL:             ConakryPOPULATION:          1995, 6.63 millionAREA:                246,000 sq. km.OFFICIAL LANGUAGE:   FrenchCONSTITUTION:        December 1990HEAD OF STATE:       President Lansana Conte (1984)HEAD OF GOVERNMENT:  President Conte (1984)OFFICIALSMakale Camara. . . . . . . . . AgricultureKazaliou Balde . . . . . . . . Economic & Financial ControlDorank Assifat Diasseny. . . . Energy & EnvironmentKozo Zomanigui . . . . . . . . Foreign AffairsAlsoni Rene Gomez. . . . . . . Interior & SecuritySalifou Sylla. . . . . . . . . JusticeFacinet Fofana . . . . . . . . Mines & GeologyAbdourahmane Diallo. . . . . . National DefenseCellou Diallo. . . . . . . . . Public WorksSeku Konate. . . . . . . . . . Trade & IndustryIbrahima Sylla . . . . . . . . TransportJean Traore. . . . . . . . . . Urbanism & HabitatADMINISTRATIVE SUBDIVISIONS:  33 districtsLEGISLATURE:  Unicameral; 114-seat National Assembly.  Distributionof seats:  Party for Unity and Progress (PUP), 71; Rally for theGuinean People (RPG), 19; Party for Renewal and Progress (PRP), 9;Union for a New Republic (UNR), 9; others, 6.ELECTIONS:  In April 1986, the first nationwide balloting sincethe 1984 coup resulted in the election of district councils.Last presidential election, December 19, 1993; next, not yetscheduled.  Last legislative elections, June 11, 1995; next, not yetscheduled.STATUS OF PRESS:  Partly controlled.  There is an active opposi-tion press; electronic media are under government control.SECTORS OF GOVERNMENT PARTICIPATION:  bauxite, diamonds, mining,energy, bankingCURRENCY EXCHANGE SYSTEM:  free-floatingEXCHANGE RATE:           $1=989.40 francs======================================================================ECONOMIC INDICATORS:         1991    1992    1993    1994    1995FEBRUARY1,1996PRODUCTION, INFLATION, GROWTH GDP ($bn)                  3.71    3.85    4.21    4.30    4.47e Per Capita ($)             625     630     665     660     675e Real Growth Rate (%)       2.4     3.0     4.5     4.5     4.0e Inflation Rate (%)         19.6    16.1    8.1     5.0     5.0e Capital Investment ($bn)   0.63    0.54    0.56    0.65    0.63e Budget Balance ($bn)       -0.10   -0.09   -0.16   -0.28   -0.25eLABOR Change in Real Wages (%)   -2.3    1.3     2.4     1.7     1.2e Unemployment Rate (%)      40.0    40.0    40.0    40.0    40.0eINTERNATIONAL Debt Service Ratio (%)     19.9    12.4    12.7    18.0    18.0e Current Account ($bn)      -0.29   -0.14   -0.28   -0.25   -0.15e Exports ($bn)              0.69    0.52    0.61    0.66    0.71e Imports ($bn)              0.69    0.61    0.73    0.81    0.90e Currency Change (%)        -14.2   -19.6   -5.9    -2.2    -1.4ee = estimatePRINCIPAL EXPORTS:  bauxite, alumina, diamonds, and agricultural commodities; mainly to the US, France, Germany, and CanadaPRINCIPAL IMPORTS:  petroleum, metals, machinery, transport equipment, food, and textiles; mainly from France, Belgium, the US, and the UKSOCIAL INDICATORS (1994 ESTIMATES)    ENERGY (KG. OIL EQUIVALENT)       Per Capita Consumption:  67       Imports as Percent of Exports:  4    POPULATION       Annual Growth:  2.5%       Infant Deaths per Thousand:  139       Persons Under Age 15:  47%       Urban Population:  27%       Urban Growth:  5.8%       Literacy:  35%    WORK FORCE DISTRIBUTION       Agriculture:  82%       Industry-Commerce:  11%       Services:  7%       Union:  20%ETHNIC GROUPS  Fulbe (40%), Malinke (25%), Soussou (10%),                15 smaller groupsLANGUAGES      French, indigenous languagesRELIGIONS      Muslim (85%), local religions (5%), Christian (2%)======================================================================                     ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE PROFILE             Country's Ranking Relative to All Countries                  Covered by Political Risk Services                              1991-1995                                   BEST      NEXT      NEXT    WORST                                   25%       25%       25%     25% Indicator GDP PER CAPITA ($)      ------------------------------------- 651 REAL GDP GROWTH (%)     ------------------  3.7 INFLATION (%)           ------------------  10.8 UNEMPLOYMENT (%)        ------------------------------------- 40.0 CAPITAL INVESTMENT      ------------------------------------- 14.7   (% OF GDP) BUDGET BALANCE          ----------------------------  -4.2   (% OF GDP) CURRENT ACCOUNT         ------------------------------------- -5.5   (% OF GDP) DEBT SERVICE RATIO      ------------------  16.2 CURRENCY CHANGE (%)     ----------------------------  -8.7======================================================================CHRONOLOGY:  GUINEAMarch 31, 1995      The Interior Ministry announced that the long-                    delayed parliamentary elections would take place                    on June 11.May 16, 1995        A monthly shipping service opened between Conakry                    and Lagos, Nigeria.June 2, 1995        Soldiers arrested approximately 100 members of                    Alpha Conde's RPG party.  The arrests took place                    in the north, near Mandiana, as RPG supporters                    headed to a rally.June 11, 1995       The ruling Party for Unity and Progress captured                    71 seats in legislative elections, while                    opposition parties won 38 seats.June 21, 1995       Employees of six private banks launched a strike                    for higher wages, training, and better working                    conditions.August 9, 1995      Five armed robbers were sentenced to death                    following a trial of more than 70 people                    broadcast on national television and radio.August 28, 1995     President Conte, during a broadcast in his native                    Soussou language, said there would be no                    extraparliamentary dialogue with the CODEM                    alliance of opposition parties.August 30, 1995     Opposition deputies of the CODEM alliance, formed                    in July, participated in the installation of the                    new National Assembly despite a boycott threat.                    Alpha Conde, however, was absent.September 15, 1995  Seven Guinea soldiers were killed in Sierra Leone                    by Sierra Leone rebels.  The deaths were the                    first in the Guinean deployment.======================================================================                                ECONOMIC FORECASTS REAL GDP GROWTH (%)       5.0|                                                *5.0          |          |                *4.5    *4.5            *4.5          |          |          |                                *4.0      3.7a| - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -          |          |          |        *3.0          |          |       2.4|*2.4           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f INFLATION (%)      19.6|*19.6          |          |          |        *16.1          |          |          |     10.8a| - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -          |          |                *8.1          |                                                *6.0          |                        *5.0    *5.0       4.0|                                        *4.0           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f CURRENT ACCOUNT (US$ BILLIONS)      0.10|                                                *0.10          |          |          |          |          |          |          |        *-0.14          |                                *-0.15          |                                        *-0.20    -0.22a| - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -          |                        *-0.25     -0.29|*-0.29          *-0.28           ----------------------------------------------------------           1991    1992    1993    1994    1995e   1996f   1997-2001f          a = 1991-1995 average     e = estimate     f = forecast===========================================================================PRS's forecasts are based on a quantitative model developed by thedirectors.  Each Country Report and Executive Report is the product of ateam of political and economic analysts, part of the world's largestprivate-sector network of country analysts.  PRS's monthly service,IT29--POLITICAL RISK LETTER, may include changes in these forecasts.Political or economic conditions sometimes require changes between annualrevisions of PRS's 100 reports.  Contact the publisher to order the fullCountry Report or Executive Report.===========================================================================Back to Headline List WT03-B06-19IA087-000634-B042-211http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it29.html 205.156.212.5 19970122031216 text/html 148085HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:10:00 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:20 GMTContent-length: 147897Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it29.html Sample Issue Copyright PRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * FOCUS COUNTRIES * BOLIVIA, NEW ZEALAND, ROMANIA, SINGAPORE, SPAIN, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, UNITED STATES, VENEZUELA (1470 words) * FORECAST UPDATES * BRIEF UPDATES TO COUNTRY FORECASTS (1687 words) * POLITICAL FORECASTS * CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For ALGERIA, ANGOLA, ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA, and AUSTRIA (94 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For BANGLADESH, BELGIUM, BOLIVIA, BOTSWANA, and BRAZIL (95 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For BULGARIA, BURMA, CAMEROON, CANADA, and CHILE (92 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For CHINA, COLOMBIA, CONGO, COSTA RICA, and COTE D'IVOIRE (91 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For CUBA, CZECH REPUBLIC, DENMARK, DOMINICAN REPUBLIC, and ECUADOR (96 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For EGYPT, EL SALVADOR, FINLAND, FRANCE, and GABON (91 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For GERMANY, GHANA, GREECE, GUATEMALA, and GUINEA (92 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For GUYANA, HAITI, HONDURAS, HONG KONG, and HUNGARY (95 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For INDIA, INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, and IRELAND (97 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For ISRAEL, ITALY, JAMAICA, JAPAN, and KENYA (93 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For KUWAIT, LIBYA, MALAYSIA, MEXICO, and MOROCCO (90 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For NETHERLANDS, NEW ZEALAND, NICARAGUA, NIGERIA, and NORWAY (98 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For OMAN, PAKISTAN, PANAMA, PAPUA NEW GUINEA, and PARAGUAY (96 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For PERU, PHILIPPINES, POLAND, PORTUGAL, and PUERTO RICO (98 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For QATAR, ROMANIA, RUSSIA, SAUDI ARABIA, and SINGAPORE (95 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For SOUTH AFRICA, SOUTH KOREA, SPAIN, SRI LANKA, and SUDAN (95 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For SURINAME, SWEDEN, SWITZERLAND, SYRIA, and TAIWAN (93 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For THAILAND, TRINIDAD & TOBAGO, TUNISIA, TURKEY, and UKRAINE (95 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, UNITED KINGDOM, UNITED STATES, URUGUAY, and VENEZUELA (95 words) CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES For VIETNAM, YEMEN, ZAIRE, ZAMBIA, and ZIMBABWE (95 words) * BUSINESS RISK RATINGS * CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For 100 Countries (51 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For ALGERIA, ANGOLA, ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA, and AUSTRIA (109 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For BANGLADESH, BELGIUM, BOLIVIA, BOTSWANA, and BRAZIL (108 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For BULGARIA, BURMA, CAMEROON, CANADA, and CHILE (106 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For CHINA, COLOMBIA, CONGO, COSTA RICA, and COTE D'IVOIRE (109 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For CUBA, CZECH REPUBLIC, DENMARK, DOMINICAN REPUBLIC, and ECUADOR (108 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For EGYPT, EL SALVADOR, FINLAND, FRANCE, and GABON (107 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For GERMANY, GHANA, GREECE, GUATEMALA, and GUINEA (106 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For GUYANA, HAITI, HONDURAS, HONG KONG, and HUNGARY (107 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For INDIA, INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, and IRELAND (107 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For ISRAEL, ITALY, JAMAICA, JAPAN, and KENYA (106 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For KUWAIT, LIBYA, MALAYSIA, MEXICO, and MOROCCO (106 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For NETHERLANDS, NEW ZEALAND, NICARAGUA, NIGERIA, and NORWAY (112 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For OMAN, PAKISTAN, PANAMA, PAPUA NEW GUINEA, and PARAGUAY (108 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For PERU, PHILIPPINES, POLAND, PORTUGAL, and PUERTO RICO (107 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For QATAR, ROMANIA, RUSSIA, SAUDI ARABIA, and SINGAPORE (109 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For SOUTH AFRICA, SOUTH KOREA, SPAIN, SRI LANKA, and SUDAN (113 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For SURINAME, SWEDEN, SWITZERLAND, SYRIA, and TAIWAN (107 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For THAILAND, TRINIDAD & TOBAGO, TUNISIA, TURKEY, and UKRAINE (108 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, UNITED KINGDOM, UNITED STATES, URUGUAY, and VENEZUELA (120 words) CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS For VIETNAM, YEMEN, ZAIRE, ZAMBIA, and ZIMBABWE (108 words) * ECONOMIC INDICATORS * CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For 100 Countries (94 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For ALGERIA, ANGOLA, ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA, and AUSTRIA (160 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For BANGLADESH, BELGIUM, BOLIVIA, BOTSWANA, and BRAZIL (160 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For BULGARIA, BURMA, CAMEROON, CANADA, and CHILE (160 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For CHINA, COLOMBIA, CONGO, COSTA RICA, and COTE D'IVOIRE (162 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For CUBA, CZECH REPUBLIC, DENMARK, DOMINICAN REPUBLIC, and ECUADOR (162 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For EGYPT, EL SALVADOR, FINLAND, FRANCE, and GABON (161 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For GERMANY, GHANA, GREECE, GUATEMALA, and GUINEA (160 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For GUYANA, HAITI, HONDURAS, HONG KONG, and HUNGARY (161 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For INDIA, INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, and IRELAND (160 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For ISRAEL, ITALY, JAMAICA, JAPAN, and KENYA (160 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For KUWAIT, LIBYA, MALAYSIA, MEXICO, and MOROCCO (161 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For NETHERLANDS, NEW ZEALAND, NICARAGUA, NIGERIA, and NORWAY (161 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For OMAN, PAKISTAN, PANAMA, PAPUA NEW GUINEA, and PARAGUAY (162 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For PERU, PHILIPPINES, POLAND, PORTUGAL, and PUERTO RICO (161 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For QATAR, ROMANIA, RUSSIA, SAUDI ARABIA, and SINGAPORE (161 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For SOUTH AFRICA, SOUTH KOREA, SPAIN, SRI LANKA, and SUDAN (163 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For SURINAME, SWEDEN, SWITZERLAND, SYRIA, and TAIWAN (160 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For THAILAND, TRINIDAD & TOBAGO, TUNISIA, TURKEY, and UKRAINE (162 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, UNITED KINGDOM, UNITED STATES, URUGUAY, and VENEZUELA (164 words) CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS For VIETNAM, YEMEN, ZAIRE, ZAMBIA, and ZIMBABWE (160 words) CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BOLIVIA, NEW ZEALAND, ROMANIA, SINGAPORE, SPAIN, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES,UNITED STATES, VENEZUELA==============================================================================The highlights contain Economic Performance Profiles for each report that hasbeen fully revised this month.  Each country is rated from * (worst) to ****(best) according to its rank among all the countries we monitor.  Rankings arebased on five-year averages.==============================================================================BOLIVIATensions are MountingThe centrist government of President Sanchez de Lozada will face significantcross-pressures for the remainder of its term.  The successor after the June1997 elections is likely to be another centrist regime led by someone fromSanchez de Lozada's National Revolutionary Movement (MNR), but a victory by aright-wing populist remains a serious risk.  The commitment will continue tofree market policies that call for partial privatization of major state-ownedindustries and the reduction of the budget deficit.  However, pressures fromlabor and peasants will result in more social spending.  In addition, the largeeconomic role played by coca leaf dealers will inhibit the strong actionagainst the drug trade encouraged by the US.  This, in turn, could jeopardizeaid and financial support from the international community.  A right-wingpopulist regime led by Carlos Palenque, a radio talk show host who attractssignificant support among the poor, is far from a remote possibility.  It wouldraise concerns among investors about increased spending and a reversal ofmarket reforms.Economic Performance Profile:Bolivia   * Per Capita GDP *** Growth *** Inflation *** Unemployment   * Investment *** Budget Balance   * Current Account   * Debt Service  ** Currency ChangeNEW ZEALANDNational's Challenges Don't Threaten ReformPrime Minister Jim Bolger and his National Party will have to overcome seriousobstacles in order to remain in power over the next five years.  A newproportional voting system, which will give smaller parties a larger number ofseats in Parliament, and disarray within the National Party may result in acoalition government led by either Labour or the Alliance Party, which is anamalgamation of politicians who have left the two major parties.  Tensions overimmigrants and the rights of the Maori, members of the indigenous population,could result in limited violence and also a voter backlash against the party inpower.  Despite the expected steady growth and low inflation high unemploymentwill remain a problem and little improvement in living standards will beachieved.  A coalition government led by Labour or Alliance would carry outmore fiscal expansion than would a National government, but unless the mostextreme members of the Alliance dominated policy, would not reverse most of themarket reforms that have been implemented since 1985.Economic Performance Profile:New Zealand**** Per Capita GDP *** Growth**** Inflation *** Unemployment  ** Investment**** Budget Balance  ** Current Account   * Debt Service**** Currency ChangeROMANIAPresident Faces Tough Economic DecisionsPresident Ion Iliescu is favored to win the September 1996 presidentialelections, but his supporters are unlikely to win a majority in Parliament.Despite growing opposition from all sides, Iliescu will dominate the governmentas he tries to move the economy toward integration with the EU.  Theprivatization program under way will have limited success.  Budget cutting andmarket reforms will be implemented enough to qualify for assistance from theIMF and the EU but not enough to greatly improve the business climate.However, the economy is expected to grow over the next five years, andinflation will be brought into more tolerable ranges.Economic Performance Profile:Romania  ** Per Capita GDP   * Growth   * Inflation *** Unemployment   * Investment *** Budget Balance  ** Current Account   * Debt Service   * Currency ChangeSINGAPOREGoh to ContinuePrime Minister Goh Chok Tong is building support for his leadership of theruling People's Action Party (PAP), although former Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yewremains in a strong position.  Elections that need to be held by August 1996are likely to result in nothing more than a slight decline in electoral supportfor PAP.   The government will manage the economy and will permit some tradeliberalization.  The biggest source of political uncertainty is the successorto Prime Minister Goh.  The front-runner, Lee Hsien Loong, who is Lee KuanYew's son, suffers from serious health problems.  If he were to becomeincapacitated, Deputy Prime Minister Tony Tan Keng Yam would replace Goh ifthere were a transition. The biggest challenge to international business willcontinue to be the shortage of labor and the strong position of the Singaporecurrency.  Nevertheless, inflation will remain under 4%.Economic Performance Profile:Singapore**** Per Capita GDP**** Growth**** Inflation**** Unemployment**** Investment**** Budget Balance**** Current Account  NG Debt Service**** Currency ChangeSPAINNew Government Won't Improve the EconomyElections in March 1996 are likely to result in a center-right governmentheaded by Jose Maria Aznar and his Popular Party (PP), depending on support ofone or both of the major regional parties, the Catalonian Convergence and Union(CiU) and the Basque Nationalist Party (PNV).  It is possible, but not likely,that the Socialists could gain the support of these two parties and retainenough electoral support to head a coalition government.  This likelihood wouldincrease if someone other than Prime Minister Gonzalez were to lead the party,and in the process create a united effort.  However, the Socialist WorkersParty (PSOE), which suffers from its long period of rule and several scandals,is split.  Economic policies are not likely to differ under either government,as Spain continues to be guided by EU regulations that require liberalization.Economic Performance Profile:Spain**** Per Capita GDP  ** Growth *** Inflation   * Unemployment *** Investment  ** Budget Balance  ** Current Account *** Debt Service *** Currency ChangeUNITED ARAB EMIRATESStability, but Limited OpportunityThe stable federal structure is buttressed by the support of the two dominantcomponent emirates, Abu Dhabi and Dubai.  The federal government will continueto be led by President Zayed bin Sultan al-Nahyan of Abu Dhabi; the primeministership will be held by Sheik Maktum bin Rashid al-Maktum, the currentruler of Dubai.  If either leader leaves office for reasons of health, he willbe replaced by a younger member of the respective family.  The pressure fordemocratic reform is weak.  Islamic fundamentalism will not seriously threatenthe government.  The economy will remain heavily dependent on oil, despiteattempts at diversification.  As a result, growth will be modest, at best, andinflation will show some upward movement.  Opportunities for foreign businessare expected to be limited, despite some modest attempts to attract foreigninvestment through liberalization.Economic Performance Profile:United Arab Emirates   * Per Capita GDP  ** Growth   * Inflation   * Unemployment  ** Investment *** Budget Balance *** Current Account   * Debt Service  ** Currency ChangeUNITED STATESNo End to Divided GovernmentThe struggle between President Bill Clinton and the Republican-controlledCongress will almost certainly thwart significant budgetary reform, leading toeconomic drift.  The November 1996 presidential and congressional elections arenot likely to affect policy direction, even if the Republican challenger,probably Sen. Robert Dole, wins the presidency.  The most likely result of theelections will be a slim victory for Clinton, and Republican control ofCongress.  Popular sentiment for protectionist measures will increase, but isnot likely to be translated into policy.Economic Performance Profile:United States**** Per Capita GDP *** Growth**** Inflation *** Unemployment   * Investment  ** Budget Balance  ** Current Account  ** Debt Service *** Currency ChangeVENEZUELANo Improvement in SightSluggish economic growth, high inflation, political vacillation, and outbreaksof turmoil will assure a bleak climate for international business at leastuntil the presidential election of 1998.  Even then, the climate will sufferfrom underlying structural problems, notably an overdependence on oil exportsand a lack of fiscal discipline.  Poor conditions are aggravated by thepopulist stance of President Rafael Caldera Rodriguez.  Caldera will implementlimited austerity measures, but only under pressure from the IMF.  In additionto his own ideologically-based distaste for such measures, he will be hamperedby opposition in Congress.  He faces an increased risk of political violence oreven a military coup if he accepts the IMF conditions.  Support for leftistparties, especially Causa R (whose candidate for president, Andres Velasquez,finished second in 1993), could produce a center-left government in 1998.Despite its leftist orientation, such a government could implement moresystematic economic reforms than Caldera.  No matter who becomes president,however, all businesses will suffer from the lack of government legitimacy andthe persistent conflict between the president and Congress.Economic Performance Profile:Venezuela *** Per Capita GDP  ** Growth   * Inflation *** Unemployment  ** Investment *** Budget Balance**** Current Account  ** Debt Service   * Currency ChangeBack to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BRIEF UPDATES TO COUNTRY FORECASTSBURMAGlacier-Like ReformDespite an announced privatization policy and a constitutional convention thatstarted at the end of November 1995, the military junta is inclined to permitonly the most limited reform.  The military leaders have made it clear that theconstitution must give the military a major role in the new government.  Inresponse, the opposition National League for Democracy (NLD) has threatened towalk out of the convention.  The NLD is not likely to back down.  More than 80%of the delegates are appointed by the government, and whatever legislative bodyis called for by the constitution will have a large number of delegatesappointed by the military.  Although the government has indicated that it plansto privatize 51 state-owned companies, only six have been sold.  The governmenthas put further privatization on hold until a stock exchange is established.Some of the privatization may include sale of stock to the public, but thegovernment will maintain control over management.  As a result, investors facepolitical tension over democratic reforms coming from the US and a governmentthat will not give up significant control over economic decisions.CHINABusiness Climate ThreatenedAgainst the background of uncertainty regarding the role of leaders as DengXiaoping's death nears, concern over the future business climate grows.  JiangZemin is consolidating his grip on power but he may actually be merely thepuppet of a small group of top leaders.  There is a clear commitment to foreigninvestment and some forms of private enterprise.  However, the struggle betweenthe regions and the central government is heightened by the weakness in thecenter.  State enterprises may be in retreat but they are not likely to closedown because the leadership is worried about the social consequences ofunemployment.  Some discussion has begun within government circles of removingtax on breaks given to foreign investors to compensate in part for a reductionin tariffs required for membership in the WTO. This has caused concern withininternational business.  Another worry arises from the growing importance andaggressiveness of the Chinese military, especially in the South China Sea.  Inaddition, tensions with Taiwan may increase.  Pressure from the US governmentover human rights issues, the status of Taiwan and Hong Kong, and trade policyhave already set off a nationalistic response that eventually could threatenbusinesses operating in China, including the withdrawal of MFN status by theUS.  As a result, the strong international payments balance may suffer adecline.ECUADORInvestors Worry for Good ReasonPolitical and economic uncertainties will likely deter investors over the nextyear.  President Sixto Duran Ballen is growing increasingly unpopular, becauseof a scandal and because of a sluggish economy.  He also faces a badly dividedand hostile congress.  There is little prospect that enough economic reformswill be implemented to stimulate the economy.  Consequently, the elections inMay 1996 are not likely to result in a regime any more capable of improving theeconomy than the current government.  The economy is at risk, because ofincreased violence and the threat of a military coup.EGYPTMubarak ConsolidatesPresident Hosni Mubarak has assured his control over the next five years.  Hehas cracked down on fundamentalists and in November 1995 engineered aparliamentary election that increased support for his government. Hiswillingness to use force, mixed with occasional and limited politicalliberalization, has kept the opposition off balance.  He is assured of USfinancial help by his support of the Arab-Israeli peace process, although hemanages to postpone implementing the structural economic reforms called for bythe international financial community.  Some progress has been made in reducingthe foreign debt, controlling inflation, and stimulating economic growth.However, the systematic privatizations that are essemtial to improvingprospects over the long term has yet to develop.  Because of fear that layoffs,resulting from privatization, could substantially increase social unrest, theprospects are not good for genuine reform.IRANWeakening EconomyLacking any consensus on the need for market reforms, and little chance of asubstantial increase in the price of oil, the economy shows no signs ofimproving, and inflation continues to be a danger.  President Akbar HasemiRafsanjani has tried to add his supporters to the government, but the moreradical fundamentalists continue to block both market reforms and accommodationwith non-Islamic foreign interests.  At the same time, the US government showsno signs whatsoever of normalizing economic relations.OMANDealing With Lower Oil RevenuesAlthough in firm control, Sultan Qaboos faces serious obstacles in reducing thecountry's debt.  The key problem is that the economy depends on oil revenueswhich are flat.  The need to develop non-oil exports has been met in part butnot enough to make a palpable difference.  Remittances by foreign workers inOman is also a problem that the government will try, probably unsuccessfully,to address by replacing these workers with Omani nationals.  Qaboos has giventhe Consultative Council more visibility, but will resist sharing of power.Some steps have been promised to increase foreign investment but they have yetto have much of an impact.PERUFujimori in Firm ControlDespite the defeat of many of the candidates he backed in mid-November 1995local elections, President Alberto Fujimori shows no signs of losing control.He stands high in public opinion polls and is not backing down from hisauthoritarian rule.  The economy is relatively healthy by South Americanstandards and significant progress has been made in reducing the hugeinternational debt that existed when Fujimori first came to power.  SinceFujimori will be in control until mid-2000, the biggest source of long-termuncertainty remains the lack of a successor if he were to be assassinated orleave office for reasons of health.RUSSIAParliamentary Elections Confirm TensionsThe December 1995 parliamentary elections affirmed the chaotic condition of thepolitical system.  Although the Communist Party received twice as many votes asthe Liberal Democratic party of nationalist extremist Vladimir Zhirinovsky, itsvictory was more a result of superior political organization than a yearningfor a return to the Communist system.  Moderates and those in favor of reformheld their own.  Because of the weakness of the Duma in relation to thepresidency, the results will have little direct impact on policy before thepresidential election in June 1996.  The results also suggest that Yeltsin mayhave trouble being re-elected if the Communists can unify behind their leader,Gennadi Zyuganov.  Over the long run, there is little prospect that agovernment will emerge that will make significant reforms in the largestate-controlled industries, but most of the market reforms will not bereversed.  The two biggest sources of risk to the business climate are the lackof a strong legal framework supporting business operations limiting arbitraryinterventions by the various government bodies and the emergence of anationalistic foreign policy that would threaten help from the internationalfinancial community.SAUDI ARABIAIsolated Incident no Cause for ConcernThe November 1995 bombing of a building in Riyadh used by Americans to trainthe Saudi military appears to have been an isolated incident directed more atthe US than at the Saudi government. However, tension remains over both thepresence of US forces in the kingdom and erosion of traditional Muslim values.There are, nevertheless, no signs that the current government is seriouslythreatened.  While the economy remains heavily influenced by oil prices andlevels of production, there has been some diversification.  There has also beensome belt-tightening which has yet to generate significant dissatisfaction withthe government.TAIWANElections Weaken Ruling PartyAlthough the ruling Nationalist party won 85 out of 164 seats in theparliament, it received 45% of the vote, the lowest percentage since 1945.This resulted in the loss of seven seats.  The biggest winner was the New Partywhich gained 21 seats.  Running on a platform of accommodation with China, theNew Party consists primarily of former Nationalist Party (KMT) officials wholeft, in part, because of disagreement over the government's apparent move toan independence position with respect to China.  However, New Party voters werenearly all mainlanders which, if continued, will limit the party's future vote.President Lee Teng-hui will encounter more difficulty in implementing newpolicy initiatives.  Because the economy is showing the effects of high laborcosts and the tendency of the Taiwanese to invest in China and elsewhere, thegovernment will be faced with growing electoral dissatisfaction.  PresidentLee, however, still enjoys approval ratings in the 70% range.  This makes him afavorite in the March 1996 presidential election.  If he wins a clear mandate,he may promote constitutional changes to increase Taiwanese influence in thegovernment.ZAMBIAChiluba Becomes More AuthoritarianAfter benefiting from pressures to democratize the political system, PresidentFrederick Chiluba has chosen his own political survival over democraticprocesses.  Because elections are scheduled for October 1996, and because ofthe growing political strength of former President Kenneth Kaunda, Chiluba hastried to eliminate Kaunda over legal technicalities concerning whether or notthe former president is in fact a citizen of Zambia.  Kaunda was arrested twicein 1995 for failing to receive proper authorization for public speeches.Chiluba's political problems stem from his inability to revive the economydespite initial market reforms.  A Kaunda government would likely halt or evenreverse the reforms.NOTE:  Risk ratings and economic forecasts for this country can be found undera headline in each of these departments:  POLITICAL FORECASTS, BUSINESS RISKRATINGS, and ECONOMIC INDICATORS.  Contact the publisher for the 50-pageCountry Report ($325), Executive Reports ($110), or read the Executive Summaryand Fact Sheet pages for this country in one of our regional services onNewsNet (IT54-IT60).NOTE:  Risk ratings and economic forecasts for this country can be found underthese headlines:  CHART: POLITICAL FORECASTS, CHART:  FORECASTS OF RISK TOINTERNATIONAL BUSINESS, and CHART:  ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS.  Contact thepublisher for the full 50-page Country Report ($325) or Executive Report($110).Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For ALGERIA, ANGOLA, ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA, and AUSTRIA===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------ALGERIA               12/95 Civilian-Military 50% Civilian-Military 45%------------------------------------ANGOLA                10/95 MPLA-led Coalition 60% MPLA-led Coalition 50%------------------------------------ARGENTINA             12/95 Menem Reformist 55%*Menem Reformist 50%------------------------------------AUSTRALIA             10/95 Keating 50% Keating 45%------------------------------------AUSTRIA               6/95 Grand Coalition 50% Grand Coalition 50%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For BANGLADESH, BELGIUM, BOLIVIA, BOTSWANA, and BRAZIL===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------BANGLADESH            11/95 BNP 50%*Military 45%------------------------------------BELGIUM               8/95 Center Left 45% Center Left 40%------------------------------------BOLIVIA               1/96 MNR Coalition 65% (75%)*Centrist Coalition 55%------------------------------------BOTSWANA              11/95 BDP 55% BDP 40%------------------------------------BRAZIL                12/95 Cardoso Coalition 50%*Cardoso Coalition 50%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For BULGARIA, BURMA, CAMEROON, CANADA, and CHILE===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------BULGARIA              11/95 Center Left 75% Center Left 65%------------------------------------BURMA                 1/96 SLORC 55% SLORC 45%------------------------------------CAMEROON              12/95 Biya 60% RDPC 45%------------------------------------CANADA                12/95 Liberals 75% Liberals 60%------------------------------------CHILE                 9/95 Center Left 75% Center Left 55%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For CHINA, COLOMBIA, CONGO, COSTA RICA, and COTE D'IVOIRE===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------CHINA                 1/96 Pragmatists 75% Pragmatists 65%------------------------------------COLOMBIA              11/95 Samper 55% Liberals 45%------------------------------------CONGO                 9/95 Lissouba 75% Lissouba 60%------------------------------------COSTA RICA            8/95 Figueres Coalition 55%*PUSC 55%------------------------------------COTE D'IVOIRE         12/95 Bedie-PDCI 75% Centrist 65%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For CUBA, CZECH REPUBLIC, DENMARK, DOMINICAN REPUBLIC,       and ECUADOR===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------CUBA                  12/95 Castro 60% Castro 40%------------------------------------CZECH REPUBLIC        11/95 Center Right 65% Center Right 50%------------------------------------DENMARK               7/95 SD-led Coalition 55% SD-led Coalition 45%------------------------------------DOMINICAN REPUBLIC    11/95*Opposition 50%*Opposition 50%------------------------------------ECUADOR               1/96 Divided Government 50% Divided Government 50%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For EGYPT, EL SALVADOR, FINLAND, FRANCE, and GABON===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------EGYPT                 1/96 Mubarak 60% Mubarak 45%------------------------------------EL SALVADOR           6/95 Center Right 75%*Center Right 65%------------------------------------FINLAND               6/95 SDP 70% SDP 55%------------------------------------FRANCE                11/95 Chirac-RPR 85%*Chirac-RPR 50%------------------------------------GABON                 10/95 Bongo 55% Bongo 50%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For GERMANY, GHANA, GREECE, GUATEMALA, and GUINEA===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------GERMANY               12/95*Grand Coalition 55%*Grand Coalition 55%------------------------------------GHANA                 8/95 Rawlings 60% Rawlings 60%------------------------------------GREECE                11/95 Pasok 55%*New Democracy 45%------------------------------------GUATEMALA             12/95*Arzu 60%*Arzu 55%------------------------------------GUINEA                9/95 Authoritarian Conte 50% Conte 40%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For GUYANA, HAITI, HONDURAS, HONG KONG, and HUNGARY===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------GUYANA                9/95 PPP 85% PPP 65%------------------------------------HAITI                 8/95 Pragmatic Populist 65% Pragmatic Populist 50%------------------------------------HONDURAS              10/95 Reina 70%*PL 45%------------------------------------HONG KONG             10/95 Orderly Transition 85%*Indirect Control 75%------------------------------------HUNGARY               12/95 Center Left 85%*Center Coalition 70%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For INDIA, INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, and IRELAND===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------INDIA                 12/95 Congress (I) Party 60% Congress (I) Party 50%------------------------------------INDONESIA             10/95 Suharto 85%*Senior Military 75%------------------------------------IRAN                  1/96 Rafsanjani-Khamenei 50%*Pragmatists 45%------------------------------------IRAQ                  9/95 Saddam 65%*Military 50%------------------------------------IRELAND               8/95 Fine Gael Coalition 55% Fine Gael Coalition 40%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For ISRAEL, ITALY, JAMAICA, JAPAN, and KENYA===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------ISRAEL                12/95 Labor Coalition 55% Labor Coalition 45%------------------------------------ITALY                 12/95 Center Right 45% Center Right 40%------------------------------------JAMAICA               11/95 Patterson 65% Patterson 50%------------------------------------JAPAN                 11/95*LDP 40%*Reformist Coalition 40%------------------------------------KENYA                 12/95 Moi 65%*Moi/KANU 50%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For KUWAIT, LIBYA, MALAYSIA, MEXICO, and MOROCCO===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------KUWAIT                10/95 Al-Sabah Family 75% Al-Sabah Family 60%------------------------------------LIBYA                 10/95 Qaddafi 70% Qaddafi 50%------------------------------------MALAYSIA              11/95 Mahathir 75% Mahathir 50%------------------------------------MEXICO                10/95 Zedillo 75% Zedillo-PRI 55%------------------------------------MOROCCO               12/95 Hassan 80% Hassan 65%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For NETHERLANDS, NEW ZEALAND, NICARAGUA, NIGERIA, and NORWAY===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------NETHERLANDS           7/95 Left-Right Coalition 60% Left-Right Coalition 45%------------------------------------NEW ZEALAND           1/96 National Coalition 55% National Coalition 50% (40%)------------------------------------NICARAGUA             8/95 Chamorro 60%*Center-Left 55%------------------------------------NIGERIA               9/95 Conservative Abacha 45%*Moderate Civilian 40%------------------------------------NORWAY                2/95 Minority Labor 50% Labor Minority 40%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For OMAN, PAKISTAN, PANAMA, PAPUA NEW GUINEA, and PARAGUAY===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------OMAN                  1/96 Qaboos 85% Qaboos 65%------------------------------------PAKISTAN              11/95 PPP 50%*Shifting Coalitions 45%------------------------------------PANAMA                9/95 PRD Coalition 75%*United PRD 50%------------------------------------PAPUA NEW GUINEA      12/95 Chan 75% Shifting Coalitions 70%------------------------------------PARAGUAY              5/95*Moderate Colorado 60%*Moderate Colorado 45%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For PERU, PHILIPPINES, POLAND, PORTUGAL, and PUERTO RICO===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------PERU                  1/96 Fujimori & Congress 75% Fujimori & Congress 65%------------------------------------PHILIPPINES           12/95 Ramos 80%*Centrist Successor 40%------------------------------------POLAND                12/95 Shared Power 65% Shared Power 55%------------------------------------PORTUGAL              11/95*PSD Minority 40%*PSD Minority 40%------------------------------------PUERTO RICO           2/95 Rossello 50% Rossello 50%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For QATAR, ROMANIA, RUSSIA, SAUDI ARABIA, and SINGAPORE===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------QATAR                 7/95 al-Thani 75% al-Thani 75%------------------------------------ROMANIA               1/96 Iliescu 50% Strong President 60%------------------------------------RUSSIA                1/96 Moderate Reform 50%*Conservatives 50%------------------------------------SAUDI ARABIA          1/96 Fahd 75% Fahd 65%------------------------------------SINGAPORE             1/96 Goh Chok Tong 75% Goh Chok Tong 55%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For SOUTH AFRICA, SOUTH KOREA, SPAIN, SRI LANKA, and SUDAN===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------SOUTH AFRICA          12/95 ANC-National Unity 80%*Pragmatic ANC 60%------------------------------------SOUTH KOREA           10/95 DLP 60%*Strong President 50%------------------------------------SPAIN                 1/96*PP 60%*PP 60% (50%)------------------------------------SRI LANKA             11/95 PA 70% PA 50%------------------------------------SUDAN                 10/95 Military-NIF 60% Military-NIF 45%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For SURINAME, SWEDEN, SWITZERLAND, SYRIA, and TAIWAN===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------SURINAME              6/95 Venetiaan 45% Venetiaan 40%------------------------------------SWEDEN                3/95 SAP 55% SAP 45%------------------------------------SWITZERLAND           2/95 Centrist Coalition 65% Centrist Coalition 65%------------------------------------SYRIA                 9/95 Assad 75% Assad 50%------------------------------------TAIWAN                1/96 Collective KMT 65% (85%) Collective KMT 50%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For THAILAND, TRINIDAD & TOBAGO, TUNISIA, TURKEY, and UKRAINE===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------THAILAND              11/95 Banharn 45%*Civilian-Military 50%------------------------------------TRINIDAD & TOBAGO     12/95 UNC-NAR 45% PNM 40%------------------------------------TUNISIA               10/95 Ben Ali 85% Ben Ali 75%------------------------------------TURKEY                11/95 Center Right 45%*Center Right 50%------------------------------------UKRAINE               11/95 Moderate Reformers 40%*Reformist 50%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, UNITED KINGDOM, UNITED STATES,       URUGUAY, and VENEZUELA===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------UNITED ARAB EMIRATES  1/96 Union 85% Union 80%------------------------------------UNITED KINGDOM        6/95 Conservatives 50%*Labour 55%------------------------------------UNITED STATES         1/96 Democratic President 45% Democratic President 45%------------------------------------URUGUAY               8/95 Colorado-Blanco 70% Colorado-Blanco 60%------------------------------------VENEZUELA             1/96 Caldera-Populist 50% (55%)*Populist 45%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: MOST LIKELY REGIMES & PROBABILITIES       For VIETNAM, YEMEN, ZAIRE, ZAMBIA, and ZIMBABWE===========================================================================For each country, the 1st line is the 18-month forecast, and the 2nd is thefive-year forecast.  Each line shows the REGIME most likely to hold power,the forecast PROBABILITY, and the date of our last update or full report.An * means a non-incumbent regime.===========================================================================COUNTRYREGIMES AND PROBABILITIES------------------------------------VIETNAM               10/95 CPV Mainstream 85% CPV Mainstream 70%------------------------------------YEMEN                 10/95 Saleh-GPC 85% Saleh-GPC 70%------------------------------------ZAIRE                 5/95*Unstable Transition 40%*Limited Democracy 40%------------------------------------ZAMBIA                1/96 Chiluba-MMD 55%*Liberal Democrat 55%------------------------------------ZIMBABWE              11/95 Authoritarian Mugabe 65% Liberal Mugabe 50%------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For 100 Countries==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For ALGERIA, ANGOLA, ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA, and AUSTRIA==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------ALGERIA               12/95                        High                B-     B      B-                        Very High           C-     C-     C-----------------------------------------------------------------ANGOLA                10/95                        Very High           D+     C      D                        Very High           D      C-     D+----------------------------------------------------------------ARGENTINA             12/95                        High                B      B+     B-                        Moderate            B-     A-     C+----------------------------------------------------------------AUSTRALIA             10/95                        Moderate            A      A-     A                        Low                 B      A      A-----------------------------------------------------------------AUSTRIA               6/95                        Low                 A+     A+     A+                        Low                 A+     A+     A+----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For BANGLADESH, BELGIUM, BOLIVIA, BOTSWANA, and BRAZIL==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------BANGLADESH            11/95                        Very High           C+     C+     C-                        Very High           C      C-     C-----------------------------------------------------------------BELGIUM               8/95                        Low                 A      A      A+                        Low                 A      A      A-----------------------------------------------------------------BOLIVIA               1/96                        Moderate            B-     A      B                        Moderate            C+     A-     C+(B-)----------------------------------------------------------------BOTSWANA              11/95                        High                A      A-     B                        Moderate            B+     B+     B-----------------------------------------------------------------BRAZIL                12/95                        Moderate            C      B-     B-                        Low                 B      A      B----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For BULGARIA, BURMA, CAMEROON, CANADA, and CHILE==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------BULGARIA              11/95                        Moderate            B      A-     B                        Low                 B      B-     C+----------------------------------------------------------------BURMA                 1/96                        Moderate            B-     B      B-                        Moderate            B+     B      B-----------------------------------------------------------------CAMEROON              12/95                        Moderate            C+     B+     C+                        Moderate            B-     C+     C----------------------------------------------------------------CANADA                12/95                        Low                 A-     A      A+                        Low                 A-     A-     A-----------------------------------------------------------------CHILE                 9/95                        Low                 A      A+     A+                        Low                 A      A+     A+----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For CHINA, COLOMBIA, CONGO, COSTA RICA, and COTE D'IVOIRE==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------CHINA                 1/96                        Low                 B+     A-     B+                        Low                 A-     B+     B----------------------------------------------------------------COLOMBIA              11/95                        High                B      B+     B+                        Very High           C      B-     B-----------------------------------------------------------------CONGO                 9/95                        High                C+     B      C+                        Moderate            C+     C+     C----------------------------------------------------------------COSTA RICA            8/95                        Low                 A      A      A                        Low                 B+     A      A-----------------------------------------------------------------COTE D'IVOIRE         12/95                        Moderate            B-     A-     B                        Moderate            C+     B+     B-----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For CUBA, CZECH REPUBLIC, DENMARK, DOMINICAN REPUBLIC,       and ECUADOR==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------CUBA                  12/95                        Moderate            B-     B+     B                        High                B      B+     B+----------------------------------------------------------------CZECH REPUBLIC        11/95                        Low                 A      A+     A+                        Low                 A      B+     B+----------------------------------------------------------------DENMARK               7/95                        Low                 A      A-     A+                        Low                 A+     A+     A+----------------------------------------------------------------DOMINICAN REPUBLIC    11/95                        Moderate            B-     A      B+                        Moderate            C+     B+     B-----------------------------------------------------------------ECUADOR               1/96                        Moderate            B-     A-     B-                        Moderate            C      A-     B----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For EGYPT, EL SALVADOR, FINLAND, FRANCE, and GABON==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------EGYPT                 1/96                        Moderate            B-     B      B-                        Moderate            B-     C      C----------------------------------------------------------------EL SALVADOR           6/95                        Moderate            B-     A-     A-                        Moderate            C+     B+     B----------------------------------------------------------------FINLAND               6/95                        Moderate            A      A-     A+                        Low                 A      A      A+----------------------------------------------------------------FRANCE                11/95                        Low                 A+     A+     A+                        Low                 A      A+     A----------------------------------------------------------------GABON                 10/95                        Moderate            B-     B      B                        Low                 B      A-     B+----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For GERMANY, GHANA, GREECE, GUATEMALA, and GUINEA==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------GERMANY               12/95                        Low                 A-     A-     A                        Low                 A-     A+     A----------------------------------------------------------------GHANA                 8/95                        Moderate            A-     B+     B+                        Moderate            B      B-     B-----------------------------------------------------------------GREECE                11/95                        Moderate            B-     B      B-                        Moderate            B-     B-     C+----------------------------------------------------------------GUATEMALA             12/95                        High                A-     A-     A-                        Moderate            B      B      B----------------------------------------------------------------GUINEA                9/95                        Moderate            C+     B      B-                        High                C      C-     C----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For GUYANA, HAITI, HONDURAS, HONG KONG, and HUNGARY==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------GUYANA                9/95                        Low                 B-     A      B-                        Moderate            C      B+     B-----------------------------------------------------------------HAITI                 8/95                        High                B-     B+     B-                        Moderate            B      C+     C+----------------------------------------------------------------HONDURAS              10/95                        High                C      B+     B                        Moderate            C      A      B----------------------------------------------------------------HONG KONG             10/95                        Low                 A      A      A+                        Moderate            A      A      A+----------------------------------------------------------------HUNGARY               12/95                        Low                 B      A+     B+                        Low                 B+     A      B+----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For INDIA, INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, and IRELAND==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------INDIA                 12/95                        Moderate            B-     B      B-                        Moderate            C+     B      B-----------------------------------------------------------------INDONESIA             10/95                        Low                 B      A-     B+                        Low                 B      B      B-----------------------------------------------------------------IRAN                  1/96                        Moderate            C-     C      C                        Moderate            B-     B-     B-----------------------------------------------------------------IRAQ                  9/95                        High                D      B-     C                        Very High           D+     C-     C-----------------------------------------------------------------IRELAND               8/95                        Low                 A+     A+     A+                        Low                 A+     A+     A+----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For ISRAEL, ITALY, JAMAICA, JAPAN, and KENYA==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------ISRAEL                12/95                        Moderate            B-     B+     B                        Moderate            B-     B      B-----------------------------------------------------------------ITALY                 12/95                        Moderate            A-     A-     A                        Low                 B+     A-     B+----------------------------------------------------------------JAMAICA               11/95                        Moderate            B+     A      B+                        Low                 B-     A-     B----------------------------------------------------------------JAPAN                 11/95                        Low                 A+     A-     A                        Low                 A+     A      A----------------------------------------------------------------KENYA                 12/95                        Moderate            B-     B+     B                        High                C      B+     B-----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For KUWAIT, LIBYA, MALAYSIA, MEXICO, and MOROCCO==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------KUWAIT                10/95                        Low                 A-     B-     A                        Moderate            B      C      C----------------------------------------------------------------LIBYA                 10/95                        Low                 C+     C+     C+                        High                B      C      C+----------------------------------------------------------------MALAYSIA              11/95                        Low                 A      A-     A                        Low                 A      B+     A-----------------------------------------------------------------MEXICO                10/95                        Moderate            A-     A-     A-                        Moderate            C+     B      B-----------------------------------------------------------------MOROCCO               12/95                        Low                 A-     A      A-                        Low                 B+     A      A-----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For NETHERLANDS, NEW ZEALAND, NICARAGUA, NIGERIA, and NORWAY==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------NETHERLANDS           7/95                        Low                 A+     A      A+                        Low                 A      A      A----------------------------------------------------------------NEW ZEALAND           1/96                        Low                 A-     A-     A-                        Moderate (Low)      A (A-) A      A (A-)----------------------------------------------------------------NICARAGUA             8/95                        Moderate            B-     B+     B-                        Moderate            B-     C      C----------------------------------------------------------------NIGERIA               9/95                        Very High           D+     B      C-                        Very High           D      D      D-----------------------------------------------------------------NORWAY                2/95                        Low                 A+     A-     A+                        Low                 A-     A      A-----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For OMAN, PAKISTAN, PANAMA, PAPUA NEW GUINEA, and PARAGUAY==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------OMAN                  1/96                        Low                 A+     B+     A+                        Low                 A      B      B----------------------------------------------------------------PAKISTAN              11/95                        Moderate            B+     A-     B+                        High                C      B-     C----------------------------------------------------------------PANAMA                9/95                        Moderate            A-     A      A-                        Moderate            B+     A-     A-----------------------------------------------------------------PAPUA NEW GUINEA      12/95                        High                A      B+     A-                        High                B-     B      B----------------------------------------------------------------PARAGUAY              5/95                        Moderate            A-     A+     A-                        Moderate            B-     B+     B-----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For PERU, PHILIPPINES, POLAND, PORTUGAL, and PUERTO RICO==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------PERU                  1/96                        Moderate            B-     A      B                        Moderate            B-     A      B+----------------------------------------------------------------PHILIPPINES           12/95                        High                B      A-     B+                        Moderate            B      B-     C+----------------------------------------------------------------POLAND                12/95                        Moderate            B-     A      B-                        Moderate            B      B      B-----------------------------------------------------------------PORTUGAL              11/95                        Low                 A      A+     A+                        Low                 A      A+     A+----------------------------------------------------------------PUERTO RICO           2/95                        Low                 A+     A      A+                        Low                 A      A      A----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For QATAR, ROMANIA, RUSSIA, SAUDI ARABIA, and SINGAPORE==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------QATAR                 7/95                        Low                 B      B      B+                        Low                 A-     B      B+----------------------------------------------------------------ROMANIA               1/96                        Moderate            C+     A-     B-                        Low                 C (C+) B      C (C+)----------------------------------------------------------------RUSSIA                1/96                        Moderate            C      C      C+                        Moderate            B-     C-     C----------------------------------------------------------------SAUDI ARABIA          1/96                        Low                 A-     B      A                        Moderate            A-     C+     B-----------------------------------------------------------------SINGAPORE             1/96                        Low                 A+     A+     A+                        Low                 A+     A+     A+----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For SOUTH AFRICA, SOUTH KOREA, SPAIN, SRI LANKA, and SUDAN==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------SOUTH AFRICA          12/95                        Very High           B+     B      B+                        Moderate            B+     B      B+----------------------------------------------------------------SOUTH KOREA           10/95                        Low                 A-     A-     A-                        Low                 A-     B+     B+----------------------------------------------------------------SPAIN                 1/96                        Low                 A+     A+     A+                        Low                 A      A (A+) A----------------------------------------------------------------SRI LANKA             11/95                        High                B      A-     B-                        Moderate            B+     B-     B-----------------------------------------------------------------SUDAN                 10/95                        Very High           C-     B+     C                        Very High           C-     C+     C+----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For SURINAME, SWEDEN, SWITZERLAND, SYRIA, and TAIWAN==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------SURINAME              6/95                        High                C+     C+     C                        High                B      C+     B-----------------------------------------------------------------SWEDEN                3/95                        Low                 A-     A-     A                        Low                 B+     A-     B+----------------------------------------------------------------SWITZERLAND           2/95                        Low                 A+     A      A+                        Low                 A-     A      A----------------------------------------------------------------SYRIA                 9/95                        Low                 C+     B-     C+                        Moderate            B      C+     B-----------------------------------------------------------------TAIWAN                1/96                        Low                 A      A+     A+                        Low                 A (A+) A+     A+----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For THAILAND, TRINIDAD & TOBAGO, TUNISIA, TURKEY, and UKRAINE==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------THAILAND              11/95                        Low                 A      A+     A                        Low                 A      B+     B+----------------------------------------------------------------TRINIDAD & TOBAGO     12/95                        Moderate            A-     B+     B+                        Low                 A      B+     B----------------------------------------------------------------TUNISIA               10/95                        Low                 A-     A+     A                        Moderate            B      B      B-----------------------------------------------------------------TURKEY                11/95                        Moderate            C+     B+     B                        Moderate            C+     C+     C----------------------------------------------------------------UKRAINE               11/95                        High                C      B      C                        Moderate            B-     C+     C----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, UNITED KINGDOM, UNITED STATES,       URUGUAY, and VENEZUELA==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------UNITED ARAB EMIRATES  1/96                        Low                 A      B-(B ) A+                        Moderate (Low)      A-(A ) D+(C+) C+(B+)----------------------------------------------------------------UNITED KINGDOM        6/95                        Low                 A+     A      A+                        Low                 A      A      A----------------------------------------------------------------UNITED STATES         1/96                        Low                 A      A      A+                        Low                 A-(A ) A      A-(A+)----------------------------------------------------------------URUGUAY               8/95                        Low                 B+     A+     A-                        Low                 B      B      B-----------------------------------------------------------------VENEZUELA             1/96                        High (Moderate)     C (C-) C+(B-) C+(B-)                        Low (Moderate)      C+(C ) C (C-) C (C-)----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: FORECASTS OF RISK TO INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS       For VIETNAM, YEMEN, ZAIRE, ZAMBIA, and ZIMBABWE==========================================================================For each country, the 1st line provices our 18-month ratings of risk forTURMOIL (low to very high); and for financial TRANSFER, direct INVESTMENT,and EXPORTS to the country (A+ the least, to D- the most).  Parenthesesindicate a changed forecast).==========================================================================COUNTRY                                     TRANS- INVEST-                        TURMOIL             FER    MENT   EXPORT----------------------------------------------------------------VIETNAM               10/95                        Low                 C      B      B-                        Low                 B      B      B----------------------------------------------------------------YEMEN                 10/95                        High                B-     B+     B                        Moderate            C+     C+     C----------------------------------------------------------------ZAIRE                 5/95                        Very High           D      C+     D                        Very High           D+     D      D----------------------------------------------------------------ZAMBIA                1/96                        Moderate            B      B+     B+                        Low                 C+     B-     C----------------------------------------------------------------ZIMBABWE              11/95                        Low                 C+     B+     B                        Moderate            B-     B+     C----------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For 100 Countries==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------PRL CHART C  01/01/96Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For ALGERIA, ANGOLA, ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA, and AUSTRIA==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------ALGERIA                 1991-1995        0.8       26.4       +0.56                        1996             2.5       12.0       -0.50                        1997-2001        3.5        8.0       +1.00-------------------------------------------------------------------ANGOLA                  1991-1995        0.9      622.0       -0.70                        1996             1.5      200.0       -0.50                        1997-2001        2.0       50.0       -0.60-------------------------------------------------------------------ARGENTINA               1991-1995        6.3       42.7       -5.70                        1996             3.0        2.8       -6.00                        1997-2001        4.5        3.2       -7.50-------------------------------------------------------------------AUSTRALIA               1991-1995        2.7        2.1       -5.45                        1996             4.0        3.2      -18.00                        1997-2001        3.8        3.5      -12.00-------------------------------------------------------------------AUSTRIA                 1991-1995        1.9        3.3       -1.32                        1996             2.8        2.3       -3.50                        1997-2001        2.5        2.5       -2.00-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For BANGLADESH, BELGIUM, BOLIVIA, BOTSWANA, and BRAZIL==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------BANGLADESH              1991-1995        4.4        4.1        0.00                        1996             4.5        9.0       -0.20                        1997-2001        4.0        7.0        0.00-------------------------------------------------------------------BELGIUM                 1991-1995        1.4        2.5      +10.20                        1996             2.8        2.2      +12.00                        1997-2001        2.3        2.8       +6.00-------------------------------------------------------------------BOLIVIA                 1991-1995        3.9       11.4       -0.39                        1996             4.5        7.2       -0.40                        1997-2001        4.2        7.5       -0.30-------------------------------------------------------------------BOTSWANA                1991-1995        6.7       13.2       +0.22                        1996             5.2       13.2       +0.07                        1997-2001        4.9       17.0       -0.02-------------------------------------------------------------------BRAZIL                  1991-1995        2.9     1268.7       -2.30                        1996             5.0       15.0      -10.00                        1997-2001        5.5       10.0       -5.00-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For BULGARIA, BURMA, CAMEROON, CANADA, and CHILE==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------BULGARIA                1991-1995       -3.9      130.8       -0.54                        1996             1.3       60.0       -0.65                        1997-2001        2.8       25.0       -0.55-------------------------------------------------------------------BURMA                   1991-1995        5.9       27.0       -0.26                        1996             7.8       22.0       -0.21                        1997-2001        6.8       18.0       -0.24-------------------------------------------------------------------CAMEROON                1991-1995       -4.0        7.5       -0.44                        1996             3.0        9.0       -0.20                        1997-2001        3.5        4.0       -0.15-------------------------------------------------------------------CANADA                  1991-1995        1.9        2.3      -20.19                        1996             3.0        2.0      -15.00                        1997-2001        2.8        2.5      -12.00-------------------------------------------------------------------CHILE                   1991-1995        7.0       13.9       -0.47                        1996             6.5        8.0        0.00                        1997-2001        5.5        7.0       +0.20-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For CHINA, COLOMBIA, CONGO, COSTA RICA, and COTE D'IVOIRE==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------CHINA                   1991-1995       11.4       13.9       +3.42                        1996            10.5       20.0       +3.00                        1997-2001       10.0       15.0       +2.00-------------------------------------------------------------------COLOMBIA                1991-1995        4.5       24.8       -0.90                        1996             6.0       20.0       +1.00                        1997-2001        5.5       18.0       +2.00-------------------------------------------------------------------CONGO                   1991-1995        0.2        5.6       -0.52                        1996             1.5        8.0       -0.30                        1997-2001        4.0        4.5       -0.25-------------------------------------------------------------------COSTA RICA              1991-1995        4.9       18.8       -0.41                        1996             3.8       20.0       -0.60                        1997-2001        3.3       18.0       -0.50-------------------------------------------------------------------COTE D'IVOIRE           1991-1995        0.4        9.5       -0.83                        1996             6.0        6.0       -0.11                        1997-2001        8.0        5.0       -0.90-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For CUBA, CZECH REPUBLIC, DENMARK, DOMINICAN REPUBLIC,       and ECUADOR==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------CUBA                    1991-1995       -6.8       11.2       +0.18                        1996             2.0       20.0       +0.50                        1997-2001        2.2       15.0       +0.80-------------------------------------------------------------------CZECH REPUBLIC          1991-1995       -2.8       21.7       +0.52                        1996             5.1       11.0       +0.28                        1997-2001        4.0        6.0       +0.40-------------------------------------------------------------------DENMARK                 1991-1995        2.4        2.0       +3.72                        1996             3.2        2.7       +4.20                        1997-2001        2.8        2.5       +3.50-------------------------------------------------------------------DOMINICAN REPUBLIC      1991-1995        4.0       16.8       -0.26                        1996             3.2       17.0       -0.35                        1997-2001        2.5       12.0       -0.40-------------------------------------------------------------------ECUADOR                 1991-1995        3.6       39.1       -0.42                        1996             1.8       18.0       -0.60                        1997-2001        3.0       12.0       -0.50-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For EGYPT, EL SALVADOR, FINLAND, FRANCE, and GABON==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------EGYPT                   1991-1995        3.2       12.7       +1.63                        1996             3.5        7.8       +1.50                        1997-2001        3.8        9.0       +2.00-------------------------------------------------------------------EL SALVADOR             1991-1995        6.3       12.3       -0.16                        1996             6.5        7.5       -0.25                        1997-2001        5.5       10.0       -0.25-------------------------------------------------------------------FINLAND                 1991-1995       -0.6        2.3       -1.69                        1996             5.0        2.6       +1.30                        1997-2001        4.5        3.0       +1.00-------------------------------------------------------------------FRANCE                  1991-1995        1.3        2.3       +4.92                        1996             2.8        2.0      +10.00                        1997-2001        2.8        2.2      +12.00-------------------------------------------------------------------GABON                   1991-1995        1.2        6.9       +0.05                        1996             1.7        5.0       +0.18                        1997-2001        2.5        6.0       +0.20-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For GERMANY, GHANA, GREECE, GUATEMALA, and GUINEA==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------GERMANY                 1991-1995        1.9        3.3      -11.94                        1996             2.8        2.2      +10.00                        1997-2001        3.0        2.5        0.00-------------------------------------------------------------------GHANA                   1991-1995        4.6       19.5       -0.43                        1996             4.8       27.0       -0.22                        1997-2001        5.0       24.0       -0.27-------------------------------------------------------------------GREECE                  1991-1995        1.3       13.7       -1.07                        1996             2.0        7.5       -1.00                        1997-2001        2.5       10.0       -1.20-------------------------------------------------------------------GUATEMALA               1991-1995        4.1       15.3       -0.60                        1996             4.0        9.0       -0.75                        1997-2001        4.0        8.0       -0.60-------------------------------------------------------------------GUINEA                  1991-1995        3.7        9.9       -0.19                        1996             4.0        5.0       -0.40                        1997-2001        4.5        7.5       -0.35-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For GUYANA, HAITI, HONDURAS, HONG KONG, and HUNGARY==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------GUYANA                  1991-1995        7.5        8.3       -0.19                        1996             6.5       12.0       -0.20                        1997-2001        6.0       16.0       -0.14-------------------------------------------------------------------HAITI                   1991-1995       -7.8       25.2       -0.09                        1996             1.0       26.0       -0.10                        1997-2001        2.0       12.0       -0.11-------------------------------------------------------------------HONDURAS                1991-1995        3.1       20.0       -0.27                        1996             2.0       25.0       -0.20                        1997-2001        3.0       15.0       -0.25-------------------------------------------------------------------HONG KONG               1991-1995        5.0        9.4       +4.87                        1996             4.8        9.8       +3.50                        1997-2001        4.0       10.0       +3.00-------------------------------------------------------------------HUNGARY                 1991-1995       -3.0       25.9       -2.11                        1996             2.0       25.0       -2.80                        1997-2001        4.0       16.0       -1.80-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For INDIA, INDONESIA, IRAN, IRAQ, and IRELAND==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------INDIA                   1991-1995        4.0       10.5       -2.62                        1996             6.0        8.0       -2.50                        1997-2001        5.5       10.0       -3.00-------------------------------------------------------------------INDONESIA               1991-1995        7.0        9.0       -3.59                        1996             7.2       10.0       -4.00                        1997-2001        6.7        7.0       -3.00-------------------------------------------------------------------IRAN                    1991-1995        4.3       29.1       -1.83                        1996             5.0       20.0       +1.00                        1997-2001        6.0       20.0       -1.00-------------------------------------------------------------------IRAQ                    1991-1995       -7.6      148.0       -3.20                        1996             1.0       50.0       -2.00                        1997-2001        1.5       40.0       -1.00-------------------------------------------------------------------IRELAND                 1991-1995        4.5        2.5       +2.85                        1996             5.2        2.3       +3.50                        1997-2001        4.5        2.5       +3.00-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For ISRAEL, ITALY, JAMAICA, JAPAN, and KENYA==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------ISRAEL                  1991-1995        5.8       12.9       -2.43                        1996             4.5       12.0       -3.50                        1997-2001        5.0       10.0       -2.00-------------------------------------------------------------------ITALY                   1991-1995        1.4        5.2       -3.38                        1996             3.2        5.0       +6.00                        1997-2001        2.8        4.0       -5.00-------------------------------------------------------------------JAMAICA                 1991-1995        1.4       42.1       -0.06                        1996             2.0       20.0        0.00                        1997-2001        2.8       15.0       -0.15-------------------------------------------------------------------JAPAN                   1991-1995        1.4        1.4     +113.34                        1996             2.0        0.5     +100.00                        1997-2001        2.5        1.5      +75.00-------------------------------------------------------------------KENYA                   1991-1995        1.8       28.0       -0.02                        1996             4.0       10.0       +0.20                        1997-2001        5.0       10.0       +0.30-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For KUWAIT, LIBYA, MALAYSIA, MEXICO, and MOROCCO==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------KUWAIT                  1991-1995        1.8        5.7       -3.34                        1996             5.0        2.0       +4.00                        1997-2001        3.0        2.5       +3.00-------------------------------------------------------------------LIBYA                   1991-1995       -1.1       18.4       -0.94                        1996             1.5       50.0       -0.50                        1997-2001        2.0       20.0       -0.80-------------------------------------------------------------------MALAYSIA                1991-1995        8.5        4.0       -3.39                        1996             8.9        3.5       -3.90                        1997-2001        8.0        4.8       -2.90-------------------------------------------------------------------MEXICO                  1991-1995        0.9       21.0      -18.90                        1996             2.0       30.0       -5.00                        1997-2001        3.5       12.0      -10.00-------------------------------------------------------------------MOROCCO                 1991-1995        1.4        6.0       -0.32                        1996             5.0        4.0       -0.60                        1997-2001        5.5        3.8       -0.50-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For NETHERLANDS, NEW ZEALAND, NICARAGUA, NIGERIA, and NORWAY==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------NETHERLANDS             1991-1995        2.0        2.7       +9.90                        1996             2.7        1.8      +13.00                        1997-2001        2.5        2.2      +10.50-------------------------------------------------------------------NEW ZEALAND             1991-1995        2.8        1.8       -1.14                        1996             3.8        2.1       -1.50                        1997-2001        3.1        2.0       -1.20-------------------------------------------------------------------NICARAGUA               1991-1995        1.1      560.0       -0.55                        1996             2.4       10.0       -0.40                        1997-2001        2.7       16.0       -0.46-------------------------------------------------------------------NIGERIA                 1991-1995        2.0       49.4       -0.32                        1996             0.0       70.0       -1.00                        1997-2001        2.5       35.0       +1.00-------------------------------------------------------------------NORWAY                  1991-1995        3.5        2.4       +3.70                        1996             3.5        2.6       +5.00                        1997-2001        3.0        2.5       +4.50-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For OMAN, PAKISTAN, PANAMA, PAPUA NEW GUINEA, and PARAGUAY==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------OMAN                    1991-1995        3.7        5.2       -0.79                        1996             4.0        4.8       -1.00                        1997-2001        5.0        5.8       -0.80-------------------------------------------------------------------PAKISTAN                1991-1995        4.8       11.2       -1.90                        1996             5.0       10.0       -2.70                        1997-2001        5.2       12.0       -2.20-------------------------------------------------------------------PANAMA                  1991-1995        6.6        1.4       -0.15                        1996             4.0        2.5       -0.15                        1997-2001        3.8        3.0       -0.10-------------------------------------------------------------------PAPUA NEW GUINEA        1991-1995        6.3        6.6       +0.18                        1996             3.0       20.0       +0.14                        1997-2001        5.0        8.0       +0.20-------------------------------------------------------------------PARAGUAY                1991-1995        3.2       19.2       -0.67                        1996             3.8       18.0       -1.20                        1997-2001        4.0       12.0       -1.40-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For PERU, PHILIPPINES, POLAND, PORTUGAL, and PUERTO RICO==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------PERU                    1991-1995        5.6      113.1       -2.13                        1996             7.0        8.0       -3.00                        1997-2001        5.0        6.0       -2.50-------------------------------------------------------------------PHILIPPINES             1991-1995        2.3       10.5       -2.41                        1996             6.0       10.0       -5.00                        1997-2001        6.0        7.0       -5.00-------------------------------------------------------------------POLAND                  1991-1995        2.1       42.8       -3.14                        1996             5.0       20.0       -2.50                        1997-2001        5.0       12.0       -2.00-------------------------------------------------------------------PORTUGAL                1991-1995        1.2        7.3       -0.21                        1996             3.0        3.8        0.00                        1997-2001        2.8        3.3       +1.00-------------------------------------------------------------------PUERTO RICO             1991-1995        2.2        3.7       +0.06                        1996             2.8        3.5       +0.06                        1997-2001        2.8        3.5       +0.05-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For QATAR, ROMANIA, RUSSIA, SAUDI ARABIA, and SINGAPORE==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------QATAR                   1991-1995       -0.7        3.5       -0.63                        1996            -2.0        3.7       -1.30                        1997-2001        3.0        3.0       -0.80-------------------------------------------------------------------ROMANIA                 1991-1995       -3.6      161.5       -0.87                        1996             4.0       28.0       -1.80                        1997-2001        3.0       20.0       -1.60-------------------------------------------------------------------RUSSIA                  1991-1995      -11.0      531.9       +5.26                        1996             1.0       60.0       +3.00                        1997-2001        2.0       30.0        0.00-------------------------------------------------------------------SAUDI ARABIA            1991-1995        2.5        1.6      -14.03                        1996             3.0        4.0        0.00                        1997-2001        2.5        3.0       -5.00-------------------------------------------------------------------SINGAPORE               1991-1995        8.3        2.7       +5.15                        1996             8.0        2.8       +3.60                        1997-2001        7.0        3.0       +3.00-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For SOUTH AFRICA, SOUTH KOREA, SPAIN, SRI LANKA, and SUDAN==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------SOUTH AFRICA            1991-1995        0.6       11.7       +0.40                        1996             3.5       10.0       -1.80                        1997-2001        5.0        9.0       -1.50-------------------------------------------------------------------SOUTH KOREA             1991-1995        7.5        6.3       -4.75                        1996             8.5        5.3       -8.00                        1997-2001        7.0        6.3       -4.00-------------------------------------------------------------------SPAIN                   1991-1995        1.4        5.1      -12.60                        1996             3.8        4.0       -9.00                        1997-2001        3.2        3.8      -10.00-------------------------------------------------------------------SRI LANKA               1991-1995        5.3       11.0       -0.51                        1996             5.3       11.0       -0.50                        1997-2001        5.6       14.0       -0.46-------------------------------------------------------------------SUDAN                   1991-1995       -1.7      104.5       -0.64                        1996             2.0       60.0       -0.50                        1997-2001        3.0       50.0       -0.40-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For SURINAME, SWEDEN, SWITZERLAND, SYRIA, and TAIWAN==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------SURINAME                1991-1995        1.3      176.4       +0.01                        1996             1.3       85.0       -0.01                        1997-2001        1.6       40.0       +0.03-------------------------------------------------------------------SWEDEN                  1991-1995       -0.2        4.4       -2.34                        1996             2.2        3.0       +5.00                        1997-2001        2.0        2.8       +5.00-------------------------------------------------------------------SWITZERLAND             1991-1995        0.5        3.2      +14.79                        1996             2.5        2.5       +8.00                        1997-2001        2.3        1.8       +5.00-------------------------------------------------------------------SYRIA                   1991-1995        7.5       13.2       -0.26                        1996             7.0       20.0       -0.60                        1997-2001        6.0       20.0       -0.42-------------------------------------------------------------------TAIWAN                  1991-1995        6.5        3.8       +8.23                        1996             6.8        4.1       +5.00                        1997-2001        6.3        4.5       +5.50-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For THAILAND, TRINIDAD & TOBAGO, TUNISIA, TURKEY, and UKRAINE==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------THAILAND                1991-1995        8.2        4.9       -7.75                        1996             8.1        5.3       -8.70                        1997-2001        7.4        4.8       -6.00-------------------------------------------------------------------TRINIDAD & TOBAGO       1991-1995        1.5        7.4       +0.13                        1996             3.6        7.0       +0.02                        1997-2001        3.0        5.8       +0.01-------------------------------------------------------------------TUNISIA                 1991-1995        4.1        5.9       -0.66                        1996             4.0        7.0       -0.50                        1997-2001        5.5        7.0       -0.30-------------------------------------------------------------------TURKEY                  1991-1995        2.6       76.7       -0.31                        1996             4.5       85.0       +1.50                        1997-2001        3.5       50.0       -1.50-------------------------------------------------------------------UKRAINE                 1991-1995      -13.8     1357.4       -1.31                        1996            -5.0      100.0       -1.50                        1997-2001        2.5       50.0       -1.50-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For UNITED ARAB EMIRATES, UNITED KINGDOM, UNITED STATES,       URUGUAY, and VENEZUELA==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------UNITED ARAB EMIRATES    1991-1995        0.7        3.9       +0.51                        1996             2.5        5.7       -0.80                        1997-2001        2.0        5.0       -0.50-------------------------------------------------------------------UNITED KINGDOM          1991-1995        1.3        3.3      -10.27                        1996             3.5        3.3       -1.00                        1997-2001        2.5        3.0       -5.00-------------------------------------------------------------------UNITED STATES           1991-1995        2.4        3.0      -99.25                        1996             2.5        2.2     -130.00                        1997-2001        2.8        2.4     -100.00-------------------------------------------------------------------URUGUAY                 1991-1995        3.9       62.8       -0.13                        1996             1.0       45.0       -0.20                        1997-2001        3.0       20.0       -0.15-------------------------------------------------------------------VENEZUELA               1991-1995        2.0       46.9       +0.19                        1996             0.0       75.0        0.00                        1997-2001        2.0       50.0       -1.00-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List CopyrightPRS'S POLITICAL RISK LETTER via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHART: ECONOMIC DATA & FORECASTS       For VIETNAM, YEMEN, ZAIRE, ZAMBIA, and ZIMBABWE==========================================================================For each country, Political Risk Services monitors and forecasts the keyeconomic indicators of real GDP growth and inflation (expressed as %),as well as current account balance (expressed as a surplus "+" ordeficit "-" in US$ billions).  The 1st line shows the average for themost recent five-year period, the second line gives a forecast orestimate for a one-year period, and the third line provides thefive-year forecast.  Our staff constantly monitors economic conditionsfor 100 countries.===========================================================================COUNTRY                             REAL GDP                CURRENT                                      GROWTH  INFLATION     ACCOUNT-------------------------------------------------------------------VIETNAM                 1991-1995        8.1       24.4       -0.78                        1996             9.0       15.0       -0.80                        1997-2001        9.2       13.0       -0.50-------------------------------------------------------------------YEMEN                   1991-1995        3.4      107.0       -0.15                        1996             4.0      120.0       -0.30                        1997-2001        5.0       80.0       -0.30-------------------------------------------------------------------ZAIRE                   1991-1995       -8.5     2870.5       -0.84                        1996           -10.0     2000.0       -0.50                        1997-2001        1.0      100.0       -0.40-------------------------------------------------------------------ZAMBIA                  1991-1995       -1.0      125.3       -0.32                        1996             3.0       30.0       -0.15                        1997-2001        4.0       20.0       -0.10-------------------------------------------------------------------ZIMBABWE                1991-1995        0.9       27.4       -0.35                        1996             5.0       25.0       -0.45                        1997-2001        6.3       20.0       -0.35-------------------------------------------------------------------Back to Headline List WT03-B06-20IA087-000634-B042-230http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it90.html 205.156.212.5 19970122031228 text/html 14953HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:10:37 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:11 GMTContent-length: 14766Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it90.html Sample Issue Copyright RUSSIA EXPRESS CONTRACTS via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CHEMICAL (GROUP 01) CHEMICAL & CHEMICAL PLANT (73 words) CONSTRUCTION (GROUP 02) PLANT MACHINERY & EQUIPMENT (167 words) MATERIALS, SUPPLIES & FITTINGS (59 words) ELECTRICAL/ELECTRONIC (GROUP 04) ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT (69 words) COMPUTERS (72 words) ENGINEERING (GROUP 03) GENERAL ENGINEERING (78 words) PRECISION ENGINEERING (95 words) FOOD & FARMING (GROUP 05) FOOD, DRINK & TOBACCO (173 words) AGRICULTURE (76 words) GENERAL (GROUP 11) CONSULTANCY (85 words) HEAVY INDUSTRY (GROUP 08) GAS, OIL & OFFSHORE INDUSTRIES (81 words) LIGHT INDUSTRY (GROUP 07) CONSUMER GOODS (133 words) SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (GROUP 06) SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (93 words) GARMENT PRODUCTION (120 words) CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS CONTRACTS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CHEMICAL & CHEMICAL PLANTPROJECT: (SU01010201)   Dela Investments is in the chemical trade.  They would like to hear from producers of rongalite,    sulphanol, sodium sulphate (which are used for  bleaching agents and detergents), high pressure polyethylene, and the following sulphaetoxylates: lutenzine, genapol, sipon, enpysol, elphane and empydene.  TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT:  Tatyana Sokolova, Import Manager.  Dela Investments, 10/12 Eveles Street, Riga LV-1013.  Tel: 00371 2 378456.  Fax: 00371 7 830279.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS CONTRACTS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996PLANT MACHINERY & EQUIPMENTPROJECT: (SU02010040)   Belavtodorservice is a state-owned company primarily involved in providing various road services:          construction and operation of gas and service stations,         motels, cafes, parking lots, etc.  Belavtodorservice    seeks partners that wish to invest in expanding the   presently available range of road services.  The company will seriously consider viable proposals from companies wishing to establish a joint venture or another form of mutually profitable cooperation.   TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT: Josef A. Yanushkevich, General Director.  Belarus      220643, Minsk, Myasnikova Street, 29, Belavtodorservice.  Tel:  (7-0172) 207-708 Fax:  (7-0172) 208-695  PROJECT: (SU02010041)   Karavani is a state-owned motor transport company slated for privatization.  Karavani wants to develop    motel, parking, and cargo storage services, as well as  cargo transshipping services using its own trucks.  The company seeks a foreign joint venture partner with    investment capability.   TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT:        Nugzar Dvali, Head of Department.  Georgia, 380062      Tbilisi, Chavchavadze Avenue 64, Georgian State         Property Ministry.  Tel:  (7-8832) 29-35-89 Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS CONTRACTS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996MATERIALS, SUPPLIES & FITTINGSPROJECT: (SU02020156)   Vashlijvari is a state-owned motor transport    enterprise slated for privatization.  The enterprise specializes primarily in transshipping building materials.  Vashlijvari seeks a foreign joint venture partner with investment capabilities.  TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT:        Nugzar Dvali, Head of Department.  Georgia, 380062      Tbilisi, Chavchavadze Avenue, 64, Georgian State        Property Ministry.  Tel:  (7-8832) 29-35-89 Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS CONTRACTS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENTPROJECT: (SU04010109)   TVT is a large manufacturer of color television sets and audio-visual equipment.  It would like to   purchase the following equipment and manufacturing components: Color television sets (14-30 inches); audio-video equipment; refrigerators; air conditioners (for the home and automobiles), and; laundry machines.  TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT: Michael Solonenko.  Moldova 277004, Chisinau 65,       Stefan Cel Mare St. TVT.  Tel: +373-2-548-576.  Fax: +373-2-260-498  Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS CONTRACTS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996COMPUTERSPROJECT: (SU04030129)   The Russian Federation has obtained a loan from the IBRD for modernization of the state tax service,       namely tax offices in Moscow and in two oblasts.  Modernization implies procurement of computer servers, workstations, network and peripheral  equipment, Software under a three-year warranty.  TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT: Anatoly Belugin.  Russia 103381, Moscow Neglinnaya     Street 13, State tax service of the Russian Federation. Fax: +7-095-200-4196.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS CONTRACTS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996GENERAL ENGINEERINGPROJECT: (SU03010310)   A project is offered jointly by Elektrokont Limited Partnership, Kvant Corporation, and Signal      Corporation for manufacture of electric power meters for industrial and household use.  The three companies offer available premises and utilities. TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT: N. I. Tsybulenko, Director, Russia, Stavropol Krai,    Nevinnomyssk, Elektrokont Limited Partnership. Tel:  (7-86554) 3-11-25 and Valery A. Masalov, Director. Russia, Stavropol Krai, Nevinnomyssk, ulitsa Gagarina 217, Kvant Corporation. Tel: (7-86554) 3-45-95Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS CONTRACTS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996PRECISION ENGINEERINGPROJECT: (SU03030042)   Tashstroitrans Production Amalgamation, the Motor Repair Service Plant is engaged in repair of engines and trucks, production of automobile trailers, and re-equipping engines for compressed gas.  The Motor Repair Service Plant would like to create a joint venture for production and repair of vehicles and spare parts.  The foreign partner is expected to   contribute financial investment and technology.   TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT:  Mirvasid V. Mirbabaev. Director, Uzbekistan, 700032   Tashkent, Skladskaya Street 32, The Motor Repair Service Plant of Tashstroitrans Production    Amalgamagtion Tel: (7-3712) 62-76-96 or 62-22-23 Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS CONTRACTS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996FOOD, DRINK & TOBACCOPROJECT: (SU05010162)   Travneve produces hybrid corn and has meat      processing production facilities which are 70%  complete.  Travneve has located more than 50 prospective customers (private and state farms) in Chernivtsi Oblast that want to purchase high quality corn seeds.  This company seeks a joint venture         partner to expand hybrid production and to equip the meat processing plant to begin production of sausages.  TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT:  Mr. V. Shrypnyk, Director.  Ukraine, Chernivetska     Oblast, Village of Kelmentsi, Travneve.  Tel:  (7-0373) 22-26-96.  Fax:  (7-0373) 22-18-44 PROJECT: (SU05010163)   Agroprod-ZPT is involved in food production and processing.  This company produces foodstuffs, dry  concentrated juices, soft drinks, and confectionary.    This company also possesses four hectares of land on which it plans to construct a brewery and creamery.  Agroprod-ZPT is searching for a joint venture partner for both beer and milk production.  TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT:  Mr. S. Kovalchuk, Chief Engineer.  Ukraine,   Yarmolyntsi, Khmelnytska Bl, 3 Khmelnytska Vul, Agroprod-ZPT.  Tel:  (7-0385) 32-13-98.  Fax: (7-0385) 32-19-56 Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS CONTRACTS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996AGRICULTUREPROJECT: (SU05020152)   Ukragrobusiness imports seeds, agricultural     chemicals, machinery, fuels, and lubricants as well as  exports agricultural products.  This company is currently developing a project on breeding elite and hybrid corn seeds.  Ukragrobusiness is searching for a joint venture partner to establish production facilities to breed corn seeds.  TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT:  Mr. L. Kozachenko, General Director.  Ukraine, 252001         Kiev, 4-B Trehsviatitelskaya Street, Ukragrobusiness Tel:  (7-0442) 28-77-38.  Fax:  (7-0442) 28-81-43 Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS CONTRACTS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CONSULTANCYPROJECT: (SU11030132)   Agropolis is an advertising agency with an interest in the agricultural sector.  This market both domestic and imported agricultural equipment on the Ukrainian    market.  Agropolis provides consulting services and implements technical assistance programs for farmers.  This company seeks to serve as a consulting partner for companies engaged in agribusiness and planning to invest in Ukraine.  TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT: Mr. L. Mykhaylov, Director.  Ukraine, 11 Zhytomyr,     6 Khlibna Street, Agropolis.  Tel:  (7-0412) 37-96-14 Fax:  (7-0412) 37-96-14 Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS CONTRACTS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996GAS, OIL & OFFSHORE INDUSTRIESPROJECT: (SU08020110)   The Oil-Chemical Plant produces a full range of petroleum-based chemicals.  The Oil-Chemical Plant is        seeking foreign partners to market the company's products, to pursue joint production ventures, and to investigate ways to employ western technology in the extraction of chemicals from petroleum.  TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT: Grigory Rutman, General Director.  Russia, Republic    of Bashkortostan, 453110 Sterlitamak, ulitsa    Technicheskaya 10, Oil-Chemical Plant.  Tel:  (7-34711)    3-62-34 or 9-42-60. Fax:  (7-34711) 4-03-80 or 3-37-43 Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS CONTRACTS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CONSUMER GOODSPROJECT: (SU07020289)   Lucas Ltd wishes to make contact with glass recycling companies and manufacturers of glass recycling equipment.  TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT:  Tomas Vasiliauskas, Director of Lucas, POB 90, 5800   Klaipeda, Lithuania.  Tel: 010 370 6211676/292455. Fax: 010 370 6 218677/213950.PROJECT: (SU07020290)   Terra Nova imports and distributes office equipment.      The company sells calculators, telephones,      stationeries, clocks.   The company has a distribution  network throughout Ukraine.  Terra Nova prepared and conducted wide advertising campaign in Ukrainian media.  Due to market research and direct contacts with producers, the company offers lowest  prices in Ukraine.  TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT: Volodymyr Pavliuk, President. 270020 Ukraine, Odesa,   P.O. Box 74, Terra Nova.  Tel.: (011-380-482) 21-81-96  Fax : (011-380-482) 25-69-46 Tlx: 680-709296 nova ru. Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS CONTRACTS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGYPROJECT: (SU06010103)   Spektr manufactures agricultural processing     machines.  Spektr designs, produces, and installs equipment as well as provide a full range of after-sale services.  The main customers are both state and private farms.  Spektr is searching for a joint venture partner to provide new technology and know-how to  expand production of processing equipment.  This        company's input will be assets, productions facilities, and experienced personnel.   TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT:  Mykola Zhytnyk, Deputy Director.  Ukraine, 254080     Kiev, 40 Frunze Street, Spektr.  Tel:  (7-0444) 17-56-22 Fax:  (7-0444) 17-52-39 Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS CONTRACTS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996GARMENT PRODUCTIONPROJECT: (SU10030119)   Khustup Shoe Company produce men's, women's     and children's shoes.  The company also makes   children's clothes from the recycled leather scrap it produces.  The company would like to find a partner  for co-manufacture of quality shoes and apparel.  They  need sewing machines and automated machines for         production of stockings.  TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT: Samvel Danelyan, Director.  Armenia, 377810 Kapan,     Shinararnery Street 10, Khustup Shoe Company.  Tel: (7374-92) 6-79-47.PROJECT: (SU10030120)   AS Cristi produces socks, jerseys, pullovers, mittens, both hand- and machine-knitted garments.TERMS OFFERED:  Joint venture, Cash or Compensation TradeCONTACT:  Mrs Sirje Rist, Veski Str 1, Abja-Paluoja, Viljandi   County, EE-2950.  Tel: 010 372-43 61 131.  Fax: 010 372 2422 279.Back to Headline List WT03-B06-21IA087-000634-B042-285http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it80.html 205.156.212.5 19970122031310 text/html 177009HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:10:48 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:12 GMTContent-length: 176821Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it80.html Sample Issue Copyright RUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNet JANUARY 15, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES LEADING THE WEEK The Anglo-Saxon model for Russia (777 words) TRADING CLIMATE ASIAN LINKS: Japan remains Maritime Territory's biggest trading partner (386 words) AVIATION - Russia sets up air market protection commission (307 words) AVIATION - New air route opened between Russia and USA (119 words) AVIATION - New airline launched in Far East (105 words) ENERGY - Kaliningrad offshore oil and gas company joins LUKoil (107 words) ENERGY -Expansion programme brings 180 new oilfields on stream (78 words) ENERGY -Polar oil and gas survey company set up (60 words) ENERGY -First 11 months see shift to West in oil and gas exports (270 words) LIGHT INDUSTRY - Premier Collections Moscow - First European fashion exhibition for Russia and CIS (448 words) PRECIOUS METALS - Russia plans jewels exchange (214 words) STATE ECONOMIC POLICY & STATISTICS - Yeltsin lifts export duties on petroleum and timber products (149 words) STATE ECONOMIC POLICY & STATISTICS - Russia to usher in trading in precious metals and stones (175 words) STATE ECONOMIC POLICY & STATISTICS - Russia's trade up by one-fifth on 1994 (123 words) STATE ECONOMIC POLICY & STATISTICS - CIS to standardise patents from January (99 words) TRANSPORT - Roads of Russia presidential programme launched (121 words) TRANSPORT - Black Sea port reopens following storm closure (103 words) TRANSPORT - Vladivostok shipyard to service foreign ships from next year (101 words) TRANSPORT - St Petersburg port goes ahead with upgrade plans (156 words) REPUBLICAN ROUNDUP BATLIC STATES - Estonia signs up to join EU (521 words) BATLIC STATES - Lithuania approves privatisation programme (181 words) GEORGIA - Georgia gets German loan to develop power engineering, agriculture (214 words) RUSSIA - Moscow pledges tough line on economy (633 words) RUSSIA - Coke aims to double Russian investment (434 words) RUSSIA - Daily bread (212 words) RUSSIA - Problems of comparatively prosperous sectors (318 words) RUSSIA - Sakhalin oilmen lay 7-km underwater pipeline and boost oil extraction (151 words) RUSSIA - Many Russian oilfields have high water conten (151 words) RUSSIA - Kabardino-Balkaria becomes oil republic (327 words) RUSSIA - Power industry (140 words) RUSSIA - Coal industry (455 words) RUSSIA - Amur Region produced 12 tonnes of gold this year (90 words) RUSSIA - Privatisation: Facts and Figures (326 words) UKRAINE - Social pressures prevent closure of Ukraine's inefficient coal mines (674 words) UKRAINE - Opportunity knocks for Kiev (442 words) UKRAINE - Gas found in Ukraine's Lugansk Region (69 words) UZBEKISTAN -New railway link inaugurated in Southern Uzbekistan (135 words) DEALS AGRICULTURE & COMMODITIES - Minsk factory to sell 12,000 tractors to Pakistan (96 words) AUTOMOBILES - General Motors sets up car plant joint venture (120 words) AUTOMOBILES - Chelyabinsk trailer plant expects to receive Pentagon order (93 words) AUTOMOBILES - Ford planning car plant near Minsk (92 words) AVIATION - Defence Ministry stalls on rocket engine export deal (429 words) AVIATION - Russia to repay debt to Finland in surface to air missiles (223 words) AVIATION - South Korea and Ukraine sign air transport agreement (86 words) AVIATION - Union Engineering to upgrade Chelyabinsk airport (118 words) AVIATION - Omsk to supply 60 airships to India in exchange for foodstuffs (80 words) BROADCASTING & TELECOMMUNICATIONS - Italian group denies Russian telecom deal is off (659 words) BROADCASTING & TELECOMMUNICATIONS - Siemens to help upgrade Moscow telephone system (215 words) BROADCASTING & TELECOMMUNICATIONS - Tajikistan, Afghanistan and Pakistan join international fibre-optic project (203 words) ENERGY - Tender for 12 oil and gas fields in Udmurtia to be held in 1996 (180 words) ENERGY -Winners of LUKoil investment tender announced (324 words) ENERGY - Russia,Total heading for oil and gas co-operation project (166 words) ENERGY - Iran rejects Azeri proposal to develop Caspian oil and gas field (281 words) ENERGY - Azerbaijani-US-Norwegian joint venture wins tender to lay Caspian pipeline (106 words) ENERGY -Consortium set up to build Siberia-Pacific gas pipeline (103 words) ENERGY - Russia helps build Beijing power station (347 words) MINERALS & METALS - Karaganda steelworks sold off to British-based firm (123 words) MINERALS & METALS - Japanese management boosts chrome output (142 words) MINERALS & METALS - Belgian firm to buy uranium from Kazakhstan (117 words) SPACE - Russian and US companies sign contract on space technology (185 words) SPACE - Georgia joins Russia in developing new space system (110 words) TRANSPORT - Kraysnoye Sormovo shipyard allowed to sell submarine abroad (160 words) INVESTMENT & FINANCE AUTOMOBILE & AVIATION - Japanese bank to sign US$150m loan agreement with Kamaz (103 words) AUTOMOBILE & AVIATION - Company formed to modernise Moscow's airports; foreign investors needed (270 words) BANKING - Latvian Universal Bank signs agreement with EBRD (241 words) BROADCASTING & TELECOMMUNICATIONS - Russia to draw more foreign investment into telecommunications (118 words) CREDIT & DEBIT - EBRD helps Russian-Spanish joint venture (339 words) CREDIT & DEBIT - Spanish-Moldovan footwear joint venture (260 words) CREDIT & DEBIT - IMF grant extends US$48m loan (146 words) CREDIT & DEBIT - Belarus to receive a loan from European Union (89 words) CREDIT & DEBIT - World Bank grants US$24m loan to Russia (116 words) CURRENCIES -Fixed exchange rate band for Belarus (102 words) ENERGY - LUKoil awarded five per cent of own stock in shares-for-loan sale (125 words) ENERGY -Yukos postpones sale of 8 per cent stake till next year (287 words) ENERGY -World Bank prolongs loan terms for oil company (123 words) ENERGY -Ukraine's gas debt to Russia threatens IMF loan (229 words) MINING - Shares in Kazakh ferroalloy monopolist up for sale (156 words) MINING - World Bank becomes co-owner of Buryatzoloto gold company (128 words) RATES OF EXCHANGE - Central Bank of Russia exchange rates for 27th December 1995 (53 words) STOCKS & SHARES - The state short-term bond market (314 words) STOCKS & SHARES - St Petersburg lures the West with bonds (490 words) STOCKS & SHARES - Lithuania makes international debut in dollars (328 words) STOCKS & SHARES - The size of Russia's state short-term bond market (40 words) NEW IDEAS IN SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY AUTOMOBILES & AVIATION - Kamaz begins manufacture of clean engines (111 words) AUTOMOBILES & AVIATION - GAZ lorry factory output up, new models planned (404 words) ECOLOGY - Pure water emerald (341 words) ENERGY - Subsoil nuclear power plant (600 words) ENERGY - A warm future (921 words) INSIDE TRACK Russia rejoins the Space Race; Intersputnik (2206 words) CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996The Anglo-Saxon model for RussiaForeign direct investment is increasingly taking over from bank leverage, as in Germany, or state  influence, as in France and Japan, as the desirable means to overhaul an ailing economy or industrial sector.  Industries losing out in world competition, such as the UK and US car sectors fifteen years ago, are either taken over entirely, as in the UK, or respond to the prospect by  restructuring themselves, as in the US.  Either way a country finds itself with a new modern industry.The US and the UK, indeed, are not only the world's largest exporters of direct capital (with Japan), but by far its largest hosts to such investment, accumulating US$400bn in the US and US$200bn in the UK by 1993.  They have also had the most dynamic economies in the capitalist world of late.The key point is that foreign firms can bring not just capital, but fresh management and new ideas of how to produce and market goods and what to produce.  Business executives switching jobs around the world are better able to discern new global marketing and technical opporunities than even the best trained bankers and bureaucrats can at home, as Germany and France are finding to their cost. The Russians and other FSU economies are peculiarly suitable to host multinational enterprise of the sort that began to develop the US and Canada (whose railroads and canals were largely built by British capital and engineers)  over a century ago.  For they possess scant populations, yet abundant raw materials and energy, whose efficient exploitation by multinationals has made primary-producing countries, such as Australia and Canada, amongst the richest in the world.The Baltic states and Kazakhstan have already set up fiscal and legal regimes highly favourable to foreign investment as well as open stock exchanges.  While the former are becoming entrepot port beneficiaries of the trade from a resource-rich hinterland, the Kazakhs are in its heart, with some 60 per cent of the FSU's mineral reserves, attractive to foreign investors.  Japan Chromium Corp., for instance, has taken over three Kazakh chrome firms, boosting the sales of two of them by 140 per cent over the previous year and profits by 182 per cent.  One of them has raised monthly output by 2,000 per cent and began selling for hard currency (see page 18). Kazakhstan has attracted some US$4bn of the US$100m committed by foreign investors in the entire former Soviet zone, including Central Europe.  Sandwiched between Russia and China, Kazakhstan has geopolitical as well as economic reasons to raise its international profile.  But Russia itself could only benefit, as already has China, from encouraging an inflow of foreign investment to renovate its ossified industries.The cash-strapped military firms striving to convert to civilian production and the hard-pressed Russian Space Agency (see Inside Track) are doing their utmost to attract foreign capital and custom.  But the still profitable oil and gas sector, which accounts for over US$25bn in hard currency export revenues per annum,is convinced that it can overcome its problems on its own.  Its Soviet-trained bureaucrats are almost certainly wrong about this, ignorant of the extent to which say even the UK; despite BP and Shell, would have been unable to develop its sector of the North Sea without the help of US firms experienced in Alaska.Russian Premier, Chernomyrdin, ex-head of Gazprom, has learnt a great deal from mixing with his Western counterparts and is pushing for foreigners to have a better share in the oil industry, whose present managers he, along with many gas managers, holds in low esteem; Gazprom, unlike the oil industry, has by and large sustained levels of production.  Under his advice, Yeltsin signed a long-awaited law on 1st January, allowing foreign oil and gas firms to enter into production-sharing agreements with the government.  But the law, which allows the government to change tax rates at will and unilaterally to re-negotiate a foreign production-sharing agreement, does not go far enough to allay the fears of Western energy companies and to unlock the multibillion dollar deals that have been on hold for years.  The law needs to be amended before they will take the plunge.Behind the reluctance of the oil men in Russia to open up to their foreign equivalents is a lingering suspicion that their investment is the engine of Western imperialism, as Lenin declared in Imperialism; the Last Stage of Capitalism.  They, along with the Duma politicians should be sent back to study the history of the US, Canada and Australia, resource-rich giants, comparable to Russia, where foreign investment was the presiding genius of the first stage of advanced capitalism and a chief reason for their pre-eminence today.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ASIAN LINKS: Japan remains Maritime Territory's biggest trading partnerJapan, already by far the biggest trading partner of Russia's Far Eastern Maritime Territory, is set to increase its share in the Territory's foreign trade turnover even further this year, the Russian news agency, ITAR-TASS, reported on 2nd December from Vladivostok, quoting the head of the Far Eastern office of Japan's Sumitomo Corporation.The businessman said that in 1994 Japan accounted for 57.2 per cent of Maritime Territory's exports and 25.6 per cent of its imports.  Japan was followed by China with 13.6 per cent of exports and 15.4 per cent of imports and South Korea with 13 and 16 per cent respectively.Sumitomo Corporation, which co-operates with local companies in the Russian Far East in such diverse fields as the timber and coal industries, delivery of building equipment, trucks and cars, and the laying of telecommunication lines, accounts for over 10 per cent of the entire trade turnover between Maritime Territory and Japan.Korea Tcould open northern Asia to Russian natural gasUSouth Korea could play a critical role in opening northern Asian energy markets to Russian natural gas exports, according to a new study.A report by ING Barings Bank suggests that Korea, rather than Japan, could play the pivotal role in unlocking Russian gas reserves in Eastern Siberia.  It says Korea, which is currently seen as one of the main targets for liquefied natural gas exports from South-East Asian and Middle.  Eastern gas producers, is keen to diversify its sources of gas supply.Any deal involving Korean purchases of Russian gas would have a strong regional political dimension, says Mr Alex Stewart, the report's author.  Seoul has been keen to improve relations with both Russia and China, and a natural gas pipeline to Korea via the latter would be a potent political symbol of regional co-operation.The study says Japan's hopes to tap gas from fields of the Russian island of Sakhalin remain frustrated because of continuing uncertainly over the fate of production-sharing legislation in Moscow.  It says the 'lingering territorial dispute with Russia over the Kurile islands' is an added impediment.Mr Stewart said Korean companies had undertaken detailed studies to determine the viability of projects based on gas from Eastern Russia.  But any announcement of further progress might be affected by the political scandals that have recently embroiled the Seoul government.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AVIATION - Russia sets up air market protection commissionThe Russian government is to set up a special commission to look at ways of protecting Russia's traditional markets in aircraft construction and air transport, Interfax news agency reported on 5th December.  The commission is to be headed by the chairman of the CIS (Commonwealth of Independent States) Interstate Aviation Committee, Tatyana Anodina.Interfax quoted the head of the Russian Transport Ministry's Air Transport Department, Vadim Zamotin, as saying that lack of airline purchasing power has led to a situation where domestic manufacturers of aircraft and spares are at a standstill or are cutting back production.  He said the domestic market had a requirement of 1,250 aeroplanes and helicopters by the year 2000, by which time passenger air movements will have doubled to 51m a year.There are currently 418 air companies operating in Russia, but 37 per cent of them account for 80 per cent of all air movements.Moscow airports to meet international standards by year 2000The Russian Transport Ministry and the Moscow city government have drawn up a comprehensive reconstruction programme designed to turn the Russian capital's airports into a major world transport centre by the year 2000, Moscow 2x2 TV has reported.At the first stage of the programme, which is to be carried out over the next two years at an estimated cost of at least R1,176bn, runways, freight and passenger terminals and technical equipment at Moscow's four airports are to be brought up to international standards.  At the next stage, a convenient system for getting air passengers quickly to and from the city and between airports is to be introduced, 2x2 said.The television station quoted Vadim Zamotin, director of the Russian Transport Ministry's Air Transport Department, as saying that at present Moscow's airports did not meet either international or domestic standards on a number of counts, including safety provisions.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AVIATION - New air route opened between Russia and USAKrasnoyarsk Airlines has begun regular weekly flights from its Siberian home city of Krasnoyarsk to New York and Los Angeles, ITAR-TASS news agency reported on 28th November.The route is covered by newly purchased DC-10 passenger planes and the Siberian pilots will be accompanied on their first 10 flights by experienced US pilots.Lufthansa to launch new Russian service in April 1996Lufthansa has decided to begin a twice-weekly Boeing-737 service from Frankfurt to Nizhniy Novgorod and Samara starting next April, the Russian news agency Interfax reported on 7th December, quoting the director of the company's CIS division.Lufthansa will also increase the number of flights to St Petersburg from 11 to 23 per week in April 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AVIATION - New airline launched in Far EastA new airline, Knapo, has been set up in the Russian Far East, providing a regular freight and passenger service, AEN news agency reported on 8th December.Long-term contracts for freight transport have been concluded with enterprises and organisations in Magadan and Sakhalin Regions and elsewhere.  The director of the airline has said the Knapo guarantees lower freight charges than its competitors.Knapo includes Ilyushin Il-76s and Antonov An-26s and An-12s amongst its fleet of aircraft and is also using helicopters.  Passenger flights will be on Tupolev Tu-134s from Komsomolsk-na-Amure to Moscow. It did not say how many aircraft the airline had at its disposal.  Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY - Kaliningrad offshore oil and gas company joins LUKoilAn emergency meeting of shareholders in the oil and gas producing company, Kaliningradmorneftegaz, has approved its incorporation into Russian oil major, LUKoil, Interfax news agency reported on 30th November, quoting a LUKoil executive.According to the executive, the meeting voted almost unanimously in favour of changing the name of the company to LUKoil-Kaliningradmorneftegaz, Valeriy Petrakov  was elected director general of the new corporation.The meeting also endorsed a plan to set up a joint venture to operate in British and Norwegian waters.Kaliningradmorneftegaz, which specialises in offshore fields, extracted 654,000t of oil and 18m cubic metres of natural gas in the first nine months of 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY -Expansion programme brings 180 new oilfields on streamRussia has put 180 new oilfields with explored recoverable reserves of 2.8bn tonnes on stream since 1992 under a government programme of incentives for developing new deposits, Interfax news agency reported on 20th December, quoting "a source close to the Russian government."Annual production at the new fields is estimated at 55-60m tonnes.Incentives for opening new fields include permission to export 60 per cent of the oil extracted from them and five-year export duty and excise exemptions.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY -Polar oil and gas survey company set upA new oil and gas survey company for the Russian north is to be set up under a decree issued by President Boris Yeltsin, ITAR-TASS news agency reported on 21st December.The Polar Geology and Extraction Company will be based in the Taymyr and formed by pooling state-owned shareholdings in several survey companies operating in Western Siberia and polar regions.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY -First 11 months see shift to West in oil and gas exportsRussia exported more than 112.9m tonnes of oil worth around US$11.2bn in the first 11 months of last year, Interfax news agency reported, quoting State Statistics Committee figures, on 15th December.The amount sold fell by 3.3 per cent by comparison with the same period in 1994 but the price per tonne of oil rose 12 per cent to average US$99.80.  Of the 11-month oil-export total, 87.8m tonnes went to countries outside the former Soviet Union, an increase of 2.6 per cent on 1994.  During the same period, exports to members to the CIS and to the Baltic States were 19.5 per cent down on last year, at 25m tonnes.In November alone, Russia exported 7.2m tonnes of oil to countries outside the former Soviet Union and 3.9m tonnes of oil to the former union republics.Exports of natural gas rose 2.5 per cent year on year during the period under review, with Russia exporting 173bn cubic metres, worth a total of US$12.1bn.  Countries outside the former Soviet Union received 109.9bn cubic metres of gas, a 10.5 per cent rise in January-November 1994.  The CIS and Baltic States received 63bn cubic metres, down 9.1 per cent on last year.  In November, Europe received 11.1bn cubic metres of Russian gas and the CIS and Baltic states 8.6bn cubic metres.Russia's exports of petroleum products amounted to 43.9m tonnes in January-November, about the same as last year.  Of that total, countries outside the former Soviet Union received 40.6m tonnes, 11.8 per cent up on last year's figure, and the CIS and Baltics received 3.2m tonnes, less than half the figure for 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996LIGHT INDUSTRY - Premier Collections Moscow - First European fashion exhibition for Russia and CISBlenheim group PLC, ITE Exhibitions & Conferences Ltd, and Gessellschaft Fur Internationale Messen & Ausstellungen G.M.B.H. (GIMA) have joined forces to organise Premier Collections Moscow, the European fashion exhibition for Russia, the CIS and the Baltic states, 28th February to 2nd March 1996.  They expect 150 to 200 companies from all over the world, of which approximately 10 per cent are going to be from the US, will participate in the show.ITE, the largest and most successful exhibition organiser in Russia and the CIS, has a complete Russian database of fashion buyers, maintains personal contacts in many of the principal trading companies, and has ready access to all Russian trade associations.ITE holds 30 specialised exhibitions in Russia and the CIS, including the Moscow International Travel & Tourism Show (912 exhibitors, 92,000 visitors), Moscow International Motor Show (300 exhibitors, 500,000 visitors), Moscow International Sport & Leisure Show (225 exhibitors, 15,000 visitors), and Moscow International Healthcare Exhibition (200 exhibitors,40,000 visitors).  Bleinheim is a leading exhibition company in Europe, with 250 trade shows worldwide.  It is the organiser of premier collections in the United Kingdom with 1,200 exhibitors from 26 countries and Mode Infantile in France with 250 exhibitors.  The company has well-established relations with major clothing producers in Russia and worldwide. GIMA is the fastest growing exhibition organiser in Germany specialising in the Russian market, having substantial experience in organising exhibitions in Russia and the CIS.Premier Collections Moscow will take place in Manezh international exhibition hall, which is located alongside the Kremlin and Red Square not far from a selection of the best international hotels in Moscow, offering excellent entertainment and sightseeing, providing easy access to visitors.  Manezh international exhibition hall is the perfect location for a fashion exhibition located close to Moscow fashion boutiques, clothing shops and department stores.  Novy Arbat and Tverskaya Street, the most fashionable streets in Moscow, are located close to Manezh.The products to be exhibited at Premier Collections Moscow include womenswear (designer, eveningwear, dresses, leather, outwear, skirts, suits, jackets, lingerie, hosiery, bridal, accessories), menswear (eveningwear, dress, formal suits, shirts, jeans, knitwear, underwear, leather outwear, nursery equipment, accessories), and footwear (men's, women's, cnildren's, sports footwear), handbags, etc.  Premier Collections Moscow will enable the participating companies to reach 20,000 boutique owners, retail buyers, apparel distributors, trading companies and entrepreneurs.  Participating companies will be able to establish direct links and  an infrastructure that will lead to effective sales throughout Russia.Russian apparel manufacturing has declined by 55 per cent since 1992, causing significant shortages of clothing.  Although much of this demand has been filled by US$2bn of imports annually, there is still unfulfilled demand for Western styles and medium to high quality products.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996PRECIOUS METALS - Russia plans jewels exchangeRussian authorities will launch an exchange in January for uncut and polished diamonds, according to the head of the Russian association of diamond producers, the Interfax news agency reported.De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. is under consideration as a possible co-founder, Ararat Evoyan said, with other likely co-founders being the Finance Ministry and the State Committee on Precious Metals.De Beers and the Russian diamond factory adjourned talks without agreement.  The discussions will resume in early January, De Beers said in a statement released in London.The company said the parties had agreed to extend the five-year sales agreement between Russia and De Beers until 1st February.  Buoyed by the comments from both sides, analysts expressed optimism that De Beers and Russia would reach a marketing agreement, but many said negotiations would probably drag on past 1st February.James Allen of the stock brokerage concern, Anderson Wilson, said that the extension was positive, demonstrating that neither side wanted to walk away from a deal."I would personally expect the contract to be extended again before they reach a final agreement," he said.Under the current deal, Russia sells 95 per cent of its rough gems through De Beers's Central Selling Organisation.Russia has argued that it should be allowed to sell more stones independently.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996STATE ECONOMIC POLICY & STATISTICS -Yeltsin lifts export duties on petroleum and timber productsAleksandr Livshits, economic aide to President Yeltsin, confirmed that from 1st December export duties levied on most petroleum and timber products would be lifted and numerous other duties halved, Interfax news agency reported on 20th November.Speaking at a briefing in the Kremlin on 30th November, Livshits said that the president had signed a decree to that effect.The decree also imposes a ceiling on the prices of products sold by "natural monopolists" during the first six months of 1996.  The price rise will not exceed the monthly inflation rate, which is continuously falling, Livshits said, adding that the president had also issued an order for a programme of state support for exporters to be drawn up before 15th December.  The president was said to be concerned over non-raw material exports from Russia.  Livshits said he expected the structures of exports to change as a result of the decree.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996STATE ECONOMIC POLICY & STATISTICS -Russia to usher in trading in precious metals and stonesThe Russian government has adopted a resolution which takes the country nearer to a deregulated market in precious metals and stones, Interfax news agency reported on 1st December, quoting the Union of Russian Prospectors.The Committee for Precious Metals and Stones and the Central Bank will have priority access to government-determined quotas of precious metals and stones, and prospectors will sell the remainder to authorised banks.  Under the government resolution, private individuals may then purchase and trade gold, silver and plutonium ingots and gemstones, mainly through exchange dealings.The rules governing exchange dealings are to be submitted by the Finance Ministry, Committee for Precious Metals and Stones and Central Bank within a month, with a view to trading starting up in the first quarter of 1996.In addition, the Committee for Precious Metals and Stones is to issue certified ingots of gold, silver and plutonium, weighing between one and 500g.In a further move, the government has also permitted authorised banks to take gold and silver ingots abroad for security operations to attract foreign loans.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996STATE ECONOMIC POLICY & STATISTICS -Russia's trade up by one-fifth on 1994Russian exports in January-November in 1995 totalled US$71.7bn, up 20.6 per cent on the same period in 1994, while imports rose by 19.2 per cent to US$40.8bn, Interfax news agency reported, quoting sources at the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations on 20th December.  The country's positive trade balance reached US$30.9bn, up from US$25bn in January-November 1994.While Russia's exports to fellow members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) fell by 3.5 per cent to US$12.4bn, exports outside the former Soviet Union went up by 28.3 per cent to US$59.2bn, largely because of increased oil and gas supplies.  Imports from the CIS rose by 24.2 per cent to US$11.5bn and imports from the "Far Abroad" went up by 17.3 per cent to US$29.3bn.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996STATE ECONOMIC POLICY & STATISTICS -CIS to standardise patents from JanuaryCountries of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) are to issue common scientific patents from January 1996, Belarusian radio reported on 13th December.The decision was taken at a Moscow meeting of the administrative council of the Eurasian Patent Organisation, a body set up following the signing of an Eurasian patent convention by CIS heads of government in September 1994.  The patents will be valid throughout the CIS.The radio station said Belarus, Russia, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan have already joined the organisation, with Ukraine, Armenia and Georgia intending to become members in the near future.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996TRANSPORT - Roads of Russia presidential programme launchedRussian President Boris Yeltsin, has issued a decree "On the 'Roads of Russia' presidential programme," ITAR-TASS news agency reported on 6th December.Among other provisions, the decree instructs the government to ensure the completion of the upgrading of the Russian stretch of the Moscow - Berlin Highway (the so-called Belarus Highway) and the highways stretching from Moscow via St Petersburg to the Finnish border (Russia and Scandinavia highways).  The government is also instructed to ensure that sections of the Chita, Khabarovsk and Omsk - Novosibirsk highways are commissioned on time.The programme also includes provision for improving the road infrastructure, stepping up research into new technologies and materials for road construction, and creating a new generation of road-building machines and equipment.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996TRANSPORT - Black Sea port reopens following storm closureThe Russian port of Novorossiysk on the Black Sea, which handles about 25 per cent of the country's oil exports, began loading oil into tankers again on the night of 10th December, Interfax news agency reported on 11th December.Officials at the port said that stormy weather, with wind speeds of up to 30 m per second and waves as high as 2.5m, had closed the port on 4th December. By the evening of the 10th, there were eight tankers waiting to be loaded and with a good weather forecast for the next few days, and port facilities reported all moorings in use.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996TRANSPORT - Vladivostok shipyard to service foreign ships from next yearThe Dalzavod company in Vladivostok is to start servicing foreign ships from January 1996 following a decision by the Russian Federal Border Service to allow vessels under foreign flags to call at its port, Interfax news agency reported on 12th December.Dalzavod, described as the biggest shipyard in the Russian Far East, will continue ship-building operations given that it has a new modern loading facility allowing it to compete with other ports in the area.Servicing foreign ships could erase Dalzabvod's acute financial problems which have been caused by the Russian government's failure to pay for orders placed with the shipyard.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996TRANSPORT - St Petersburg port goes ahead with upgrade plansThe St Petersburg Seaport is to press ahead with plans for expansion despite financial losses this year of between R20bn and R25bn, Interfax news agency reported on 10th December, quoting the general director of the port, Anatoliy Bilichenko.Bilichenko attributed this year's losses to poor tax, customs and privatisation laws and said expansion would be carried out without government help.  Interfax said that the port had still to receive tax  concessions promised by St Petersburg mayor, Anatoliy Sobchak.Bilichenko said that in 1996 the port would use its own money and investment from partners to continue the construction of a terminal with a final capacity of 150,000 containers a year.  It is also designing a terminal to handle 1m tonnes of sugar a year.  Bilichenko put the cost of the entire complex at between US$50m and US$55m.  He said that capacity at the port was expected to increase by 2m tonnes to 11m tonnes in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996BATLIC STATES - Estonia signs up to join EUEstonia, which was part of the Soviet Union only four years ago, could qualify to join the single European currency in two year's time.  The Estonian government, which formally applied to join the European Union in Brussels on 4th December, has told EU countries that it has gone a long way to meeting the stringent single-currency conditions set out in the Maastricht Treaty.Speaking to a news conference in Brussels, the foreign minister, Siim Kallas, said his country was unusual in the Baltic region in having achieved a balanced budget and having its currency, the kroon, tied by law to the value of the Deutschmark.  "Estonia has no budget deficit, we have achieved a remarkably rapid growth and our inflation is falling very rapidly indeed," he said.  "On present trends we could meet all the criteria set by the Maastricht Treaty for joining the single currency in two years' time."Estonia is the fifth former Eastern bloc country to apply for EU membership, joining Poland, Hungary, Slovakia and Latvia.  Applications from the former Yugoslav republic of Slovenia and the Czech Republic are expected in the next few weeks.  Both are judged by the EU as economically successful and possible candidates for the single currency.Negotiations to enlarge the EU will not begin until the conclusion of the conference to review the Maastricht Treaty, which begins next year.  Although it may not end until 1997, there is growing pressure in the EU for accession negotiations to start by the beginning of 1998, which would make it possible for some countries to join by the year 2000.EU governments are worried about Russia's reaction to their accepting the Baltic states into full membership. But although Moscow has warned of a crisis if Nato accepted the Baltic states, it has made no such threat about EU enlargement."Our policy on security is very clear: Estonia wants to join Nato and our other security commitments in Europe will follow on that development," Mr Kallas said.  Estonian officials insist that Russian fears about their integration in Western Europe are exaggerated.EU leaders have to decide when to begin negotiations on enlargement, how quickly they can be concluded and at what cost.  The likely outcome is an agreement to start talks no later than six months after the conclusion of the Maastricht Treaty review conference.  Negotiations will be held with about 10 countries from central and eastern Europe.Estonian parliament fails to approve central bank's annual reportThe Riigikogu parliament on 7th December failed to endorse the Bank of Estonia's 1994 financial report.  Instead, it suspended the draft resolution's passage because of the loss of 170m kroons (US$13) on the bank's books.  Finance Commission chairman, Olev Raju, said that the Riigikogu cannot endorse the central bank's report as it stands because this would be in conflict with the laws.  Under a law regulating the Bank of Estonia, the Riigikogu must endorse the bank's annual report every year, including its balance sheet and revenue and expense accounts.  The balance must also show any losses as well as the method of making up for them and sources for this.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996BATLIC STATES - Lithuania approves privatisation programmeThe Lithuanian cabinet has endorsed the country's privatisation strategy for the next five years, Lithuanian Radio reported on 6th December.Under the second stage of privatisation, set to begin in early 1996, shares will be available for cash only, not vouchers.  The value of unsold state capital after the first stage of privatisation stands at about 7.5-8bn litas (US$1.9-2bn) and property worth 2bn litas could be disposed of by the year 2000, with priority being given to enterprises already earmarked for privatisation under the first phase of sell-offs."The government pledges not to sell property hastily or give it out.  The main criteria will be economic and social results.  The Cabinet of Ministers will aspire to legalise privatisation of land not for agricultural use. Corporate bodies would be able to purchase the land together with other property," the radio station said.The government has also pledged not to sell off strategic installations whose privatisation parliament has opposed.  These are mainly power engineering, transport and communications facilities.  The government is also to take steps to encourage share dealing on the stock exchange.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996GEORGIA - Georgia gets German loan to develop power engineering, agricultureThe German government has granted Georgia a long-term loan of DM50m (US$36m), the Russian news agency, ITAR-TASS reported from Tbilisi on 27th November, quoting sources at the German embassy.Of this amount, DM40m is earmarked for the development of the country's power engineering sector and 10m for agriculture.  The loan is for 40 years, with the first 10 years interest-free.  Georgia is to start repaying the loan in 10 years.Georgia to extract gas from newly-found deposit in TbilisiGeorgia is to start commercial exploitation of a natural gas deposit found in Tbilisi by a team of Georgian and Swiss geologists, the Russian news agency, ITAR-TASS, reported from the Georgian capital on 2nd December.Gas extraction from the deposit in Tbilisi's Varketili district is to begin in January 1996 and initial yield is expected to be 300 cu.m. a day, adding that this amount would provide enough natural gas for Tbilisi's industrial enterprises during the winter period.  From May 1996, when extraction is expected to increase, some gas will also be supplied to household consumers in Tbilisi.Georgia currently buys natural gas from Turkmenistan, Russia and other countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States, adding that in the past two years household and industrial consumers in Georgia had experienced great shortages in gas supplies. Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996RUSSIA - Moscow pledges tough line on economyRussia's economics ministry has pledged it would continue to pursue a harsh monetary policy designed to stabilise the economy and cut the monthly rate of inflation to below 2 per cent, despite the strong anti-government protest vote in last month's parliamentary elections.However, the ministry's tough stance, continued in an annual economic forecast, was seemingly at odds with the softer rhetoric employed by President Boris Yeltsin in his address to the nation on New Year's Eve."The main task for 1996 is that those in Russia who are poor should begin to live better," he said, promising the government would rectify the problem of delayed wage and pension payments which has caused great social distress.Mr Yeltsin also lashed out at the corruption in finanical circles which was responsible for diverting money intended for social spending.Mr Yeltsin criticised the economics ministry, employing rhetoric reminiscent of the Stalinist era to denounce "saboteurs" who were responsible for undermining the reform programme.He promised to increase payments to pensioners by compensating them for savings eroded by the hyper-inflation of the early reform years.Mr Yeltsin's pledges have led some economists to fear that the government may consider loosening its monetary policy pushing up inflation early this year.  The government may come under intense pressure to increase spending on social protection to curry electoral favour before the presidential election in June.But ministers have repeatedly argued that there is no contradication between tight monetary policies and a rise in the standard of living.Russia confirmed that it had missed the New Year deadline for destroying thousands of tanks and other military hardware beyond the Ural Mountains and said Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan had also failed to meet the treaty commitment, Reuter reports from  Moscow.General Dmitry Kharchenko said Moscow wanted to push the 31st December 1995 deadline pledged by the Soviet Union in 1991 back to the end of 1998.  The pledge had cleared the way for ratification of the Conventional Forces in Europe treaty.Economy at year-endIn comparison with the same period last year, Russia's Gross Domestic Product has declined by 3 per cent and industrial performance by 2 per cent.  As before, agriculture is still in dire straits: the decline in gross farming output was 12 per cent, or 3 per cent higher.  Inflation, which was 18 per cent in January, subsided to 4.9 per cent by early November, which might be viewed as a success but for the fact that it was artificially held back.  Specifically, inflation dynamics have been affected by international compression of the money supply - wage defaults and belated inflationary compensations; payment defaults by the state and by enterprises for work performed, orders filled and products supplied.  No growth in production as the basis for financial stabilsiation was observed, although certain sectors, such as steel and chemical production, are showing signs of recovery, reports ECONews.The social situation is such that real incomes of the population have slipped by another 12 per cent.  Debts in the payment of wages by the state and enterprises now total over 8 trillion roubles (US$1.8bn), or 12 per cent more than last year.  The decreasing standard of living of the population, the slump in the caloric value and nutritiional balance of the Russians' diet and other factors have led to the present lower birth and higher mortality rates.  The size of the country's population may fall by over 1 million this year.  Unemployment has risen sizeably: according to the International Labour Organisation, it is 7.8 per cent of the employable population (approximately 5.7m people); the Federal Employment Service has officially registered 2.8 million jobless on the dole.  The superfluous manpower potential is estimated to rise to 10 per cent or more (9 to 10 million people) in the near future.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996RUSSIA - Coke aims to double Russian investmentCoca-Cola, the world's largest soft drinks producer, is planning to double its investment in Russia to US$500m by the end of 1997.  The US group is seeking to wrest market leadership in Russia from PepsiCo, its rival which established a strong presence in the former Soviet Union through a series of barter deals during the communist era.Coca-Cola began to invest heavily in central and Eastern Europe following the collapse of communism and, along with its bottling partners, is planning to spend about US$2bn in the region by the end of 1997.Mr Douglas Ivester, Coca-Cola president and chief operating officer, said the group was rapidly closing the gap on PepsiCo in Russia.  Coca-Cola sales almost tripled in Moscow last year and overall in Russia had doubled in 1994.  It had quadrupled its sales volume in the country since it began to invest in 1991.  The group was being out-sold by PepsiCo by a margin of 4 to 1 in Russia two years ago, but the gap had fallen this year to less than 2 to 1, and Mr Ivester said that the "margin is now near parity."Coca-Cola has opened a US$40m plant in St Petersburg to serve a market of more than 9m people in North-Western Russia.  On 1st December, it opened the extension of its US$65m plant in Moscow, where it has more than doubled capacity since it opened in April last year.The US$500m investment in Russia is being made by Coca-Cola, along with some of its international bottling partners including Inchcape, the UK trading group, the Anadolu group of Turkey, and Leventis, which already has Coca-Cola bottling plants elsewhere, including Greece, Nigeria, Ireland, Bulgaria and Romania.  In late November, Coca-Cola opened a regional office in Istanbul, as a springboard for expansion into Central Asia, where it is planning to invest more than US$100m in the next two years.  Anadolu, Turkey's largest brewer, has the Coca-Cola bottling rights for Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan and parts of Southern Russia.Inchape announced in September that it was doubling its investment in Coca-Cola bottling plants in Russia to US$80m by the end of 1997.The Coca-Cola system now has a workforce of more than 3,000 in Russia, and the US group claims that it supports a further 30,000 jobs indirectly in local suppliers and services.  It sources locally around 70 per cent of the supplies and services needed for the production and marketing of its products in Russia.Having trailed PepsiCo in Eastern Europe during the communist era, Coca-Cola claims that it now outsells its rival by 2 to 1 throughout the region. Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996RUSSIA - Daily breadToday in Russia a loaf of bread costs twice as much as it did a year before.  Tomorrow it may cost even more, certain experts forecast, reports ECONews.Their predictions are based on this year's extremely low harvest of grain, primarily wheat.  Twenty three per cent less of it has been harvested in hopper weight.  The explanations for the lean harvest include unfavourable weather, the general farming crisis and inadequate financial support from the state.Public pronouncements that Russia will not import grain any more are now being corrected.  Grains (primarily food) will have to be imported because, in addition to crop failure, the main Russian producers - Kuban and the Stavropol Territory - have gathered in disease-stricken wheat which is unfit for baking good bread.  For this reason Russia's bread-basket, the Don region, has to buy wheat abroad, particularly from Hungary, with which it has signed an agreement.  In all, 50,000 tonnes of American wheat will be supplied to the Voronezh Region, which has also signed a wheat agreement. To carry over till next harvest Russia needs at least 10 to 12 million tonnes of imported grains, mostly food.  Owing to the unfavourable situation on the world grain market, the price of grain is fluctuating between US$200 and 400 per tonne.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996RUSSIA - Problems of comparatively prosperous sectorsOne of the most well-off sectors of Russia's economy, the oil industry, has of late been facing the same problems as other sectors - production fall, default, lack of resources for settlements with the budget and wage settlements.  Over nine months the production of oil has declined by 4 per cent due to a 6 per cent drop in development drilling; the installation of new wells has decreased by 11 per cent, reports ECONews.Experts from the Oil and Gas Industrialists' Union are of the same mind, though they look deeper into the situation:  "The lack of a nominal pricing policy in general, and particularly regarding fuel and energy resources; the failure of debtors to pay for fuel supplies, including those to CIS countries; the default crisis and the tough tax pressures - all this leads, and has already led, to the fall of oil production in Russia.  Today tax repayments take more than 70 per cent of the profits of oilmen and up to 75 per cent of those of gas producers.  Over one-third of the nation's oil wells are currently idle, and more than half of all hardware components have substantially deteriorated."Looking into possible sources of financing for the 1996 budget deficit, oil and gas industrialists note that much weight has been given to receipts from monetary privatisation, above all the auctioning of state-held controlling blocks of shares of enterprises which are still afloat, including some in the oil and gas complexes.It is intriguing that the fall in the production of oil and the general crisis in the sector are taking place against the background of increasing exports of crude oil and products of oil refining.  So far, specialists cannot say what the abolition of export taxes and quotas of oil and oil products will mean for Russia.  Additional billions of dollars for exporters are involved and no-one knows where they will end up.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996RUSSIA - Sakhalin oilmen lay 7-km underwater pipeline and boost oil extractionA 7-km underwater oil pipeline has been laid linking Sakhalin Island to mainland Russia, Russian Public TV has reported. The pipeline, under the Tatarskiy Proliv strait, is the third stage of a link between the oil town of Okha, in northern Sakhalin, and the town of Komsomolsk-na-Amure on the far Eastern mainland.  The underwater section was laid by a team from the Sakhalinmorneftemontazh, or Sakhalin offshore oil assembly, company and a floating crane from the far Eastern port of Nakhodka.Oil and gas extraction on Sakhalin are up 13 per cent on last year's figures, despite a devastating earthquake in May which damaged over 500km of main pipeline, power transmission lines, roads, railways and dozens of oil and gas wells, to a total cost of R652bn.  Following the earthquake, Sakhalin oil companies were permitted to sell 500,000 tonnes of crude oil abroad free of export duty in order to finance reconstruction.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996RUSSIA - Many Russian oilfields have high water contenExperts of the Infotek financial company have concluded that currently Russia's recovered oil deposits are flooded by 71.54 per cent on average, having analysed data on producing oil fields presented by 30 of the largest oil companies in Russia.The water content in the recovered liquid is the most important characteristic of the recovered deposit.  At the beginning of the development, oil is almost pure.  As the oil content decreases with further extraction, the water content increases both during the use of correct and incorrect technology.  As a rule, when the water content exceeds 90 per cent, the deposit becomes unprofitable. This signifies the beginning of the deposit's end.Nizhevartovskneftegaz's (nearly 94 per cent) and Bashneft's (over 92 per cent) fields have the highest water content.  Another nine of Russia's largest oil companies are on the verge with 80 per cent water content, such as Kondpetroleum, Meginneftegaz, Sakhalin-morneftegaz, and Tatneft.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996RUSSIA - Kabardino-Balkaria becomes oil republicRussia's southern constituent republic of Kabardino-Balkaria has begun commercial production of oil, ITAR-TASS news agency reported on 1st December.Quoting a republican government source, the agency said an oil well which it named as Kharbizhenskaya had "excellent" prospects and that Kabardino-Balkaria "is becoming an oil producing republic."Initially oil will be carried by tankers for refining in neighbouring Ingushetia.  Later, refining equipment, paid for out of federal funds, is to be imported from abroad for assembly in the republic.Groznyy oil refinery covering most of Chechnya's fuel requirementsThe Groznyy oil refinery is currently producing 1,500 tonnes of petroleum products a day, oil refinery director, Ramzan Zakayev, told Interfax on 11th November.  After the restoration operation is completed next year the oil refinery will be capable of annuallyproducing about 10m tonnes of petroleum products, Zakayev said.The Groznyy oil refinery nearly fully meets Chechnya's needs in kerosene, diesel fuel and fuel oil, he said.  After the restoration operation is completed, the oil refinery will also meet Chechnya's need in high-octance petrol, Zakayev said.The Groznyy oil refinery's performance was suspended in December 1994 after military actions were launched in Chechnya.  The oil refinery resumed work several months ago, Zakayev said.  Oil storages were almost fully destroyed and equipment from pump stations was stolen during the military actions, Zakayev told Interfax..Zakayev said 7,500 employees were currently working at the oil refinery, or 1,000 people fewer than before the armed conflict.  He said about 3,000 employees had to take forced leave because the restoration operation had not so far been completed.  Zakayev said the average wage at the oil refinery was about R500,000, reports Interfax.  With regard to wage arrears, Zakayev said the debt on wages for the last year and seven months of 1995 had been paid off with the assistance from the Russian Fuel and Energy Ministry and the state commission for rebuilding the Chechen economy, led by Russian First Deputy Prime Minister, Oleg Soskovets.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996RUSSIA - Power industryAccording to the forecasts made by experts of the industry, the aggregate capacity of the Russian power plants will amount to about 200 gigawatts by the year 2000, a decrease of 12 gigawatts compared to the present level, reports ECONews.The exhaustion of the service life of many thermal power plants, which now account for 70 per cent of the total output of electricity, and meet nearly half of the country's requirements for heat, is the root cause of the expected drop.  To prevent such a decline, it is necessary to put annually into operation facilities able to generate 8-9 gigawatts of electricity, in order to compensate for the closure of worn-out ones.  It is noteworthy that, despite the decline, the sector remains a major exporter of electricity, supplying up to twenty billion kilowatt-hours per annum to Western Europe alone.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996RUSSIA - Coal industryIf nothing unforeseen happens, the coal industry should become profitable within the next five-seven years.  This forecast was made by general director of the Rosugol state company, Yuri Malyshev.  The progressive movement in this direction has been achieved through the shut-down of the loss-making coal mines - 34 collieries have ceased to exist over the past eighteen months, reports ECONews.The wage-payment arrears, which now total nearly one-trillon roubles, are the most pressing problem in the industry at the present time.  Approximately 70 per cent of them stem from non-payments by coal consumers, and 30 per cent from sluggish federal budget financing. During the past three months alone, the deficit of the budget financing of the coal sector reached 116 trillion roubles.The government views regional and inter-regional mutual settlements, as well as the introduction of a market mechanism for charging overdue debts towards debtors' property, as a way to resolve the non-payments problem.  Such tough sanctions will not affect enterprises of the munitions industry and higher education establishments. Vladimir Gusev, the chairman of the State Duma committee for industry, construction, transport and energy, believes that the "coal crisis" can be ended through immediate payment of the federal debts to the coal workers.  This can be done by working out and fulfilling a state programme of restructuring the industry, with due account taken of the specific economic and social features of the country's coal fields, and by ensuring the spending of the subsidies from the federal budget mainly on the development of production, restructuring of enterprises, and material support to miners who lose their jobs as a result of the shut-down of coal production units.Russia expected to produce 122 tonnes of gold in 1995Russia is expected to extract 122 tonnes of gold by the end of 1995, down from 131  last year, Interfax news agency reported on 29th November, quoting an unnamed official from the Russian Federation Committee for Precious Metals and Stones.The official said the country's total gold production for 1995, including gold obtained from mine tailings and waste, could reach 129t, compared with 142.6t in 1994.  Up to November, gold-extracting enterprises have produced over 100t.The committee official was also quoted as saying advance payments to gold-producing enterprises, which were due to begin in November, had to be postponed after the president ordered the government to sell part of Russia's gold reserves to pay pensions.  He said, however, that the money was coming "in the very near future."  Gold producers are expected to receive in prepayments 25 per cent of the value of their 130t quota for 1996.  Those operating "in particularly hard conditions" could get as much as 50 per cent, compared with 35 per cent in 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996RUSSIA - Amur Region produced 12 tonnes of gold this yearAbout 12 tonnes of gold have been produced by the mines in Amur Region in the Russian Far East since the beginning of the year, Interfax news agency reported from the regional capital, Blagoveshchensk, on 4th December.The agency quoted the deputy head of the regional administration as saying, Amur Region was Russia's third-largest gold producer, behind Yakutia, and Magadan Region.  The Russian government is currently considering extending a credit to the Region to develop the Pokrovskoy gold mine and began jewellery production in co-operation with Italian and Indian companies.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996RUSSIA - Privatisation: Facts and FiguresThe share of the private (privatised) sector of the Russian economy in the creation of the Gross Domestic Product of the Russian Federation has exceeded the share of the state sector, and keeps growing steadily.  The income from the privatisation stage of 1992, amounted to 56.2bn roubles (14.6bn were transferred to the federal budget); in 1993, some 355bn was earned (71.1bn); in 1994, 984bn (117.4bn); and in 1995 the total income from the privatisation is expected to be around 24 trillion roubles (US$4.8bn), of which 9.3 per cent are destined for the national treasury.  As of 1st October 1995, a mere 162bn roubles had been received.  A sum total of revenues from privatisation, amounting to 11.4 trillion roubles, has been included in calculations for the draft budget for 1996, reports ECONews.According to the calculations by the Institute for Economic Analysis, the nominal income from privatisation, taking the inflation index into account, i.e, its real value, has dropped by 34 per cent, and the federal budget revenues by 49 per cent as against 1992.  The figures were down by 13 and 48 per cent respectively in 1994 (compared to the previous year), and this trend is expected to persist in 1995.  Approximately 20 per cent of all receipts are spent on financing the privatisation process itself, and on the maintenance of the agencies which carry it out.Of the enterprises privatised in 1995, 38 per cent were in the industrial sector, 18 in construction, 11 in trade, 6.2 in transport, and 4.5 per cent in science; 34 per cent of the 279 million shares issued in the country of "privatisation-95," were bought by the personnel of those enterprises, and 6 per cent were sold to trust and holding companies.  Approximately 84m shares were sold on the free market, and 40m of them have not been sold yet.  The controlling blocks of shares, owned by the state, comprises 67m shares with a nominal value of 51.3bn roubles.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996UKRAINE - Social pressures prevent closure of Ukraine's inefficient coal minesUkraine's coal production will be down another 11.1 per cent this year at 83.9m tonnes, according to the latest government estimate.  The continuing slide - from 179m tonnes in 1990 - will force the once mighty coal producer to raise imports next year to 20m tonnes at an estimated cost of US$500m, the Kiev parliament's budget committee chairman has announced.  Russia and Poland are to supply the bulk of the coal, as in the past two years.However, Ukraine also plans to export 3m tonnes of coal next year, mostly to Western countries, which pay with much-needed hard currency.  Imports are usually paid for by barter and domestic prices are regulated.  The country imported an estimated 12.3m tonnes in the first nine months of this year and exported 1.7m tonnes, worth US$51m.Exhausted pits and antiquated technology are at the root of the crisis in the mining sector, which mirrors the broader economic downturn in Ukraine.The government this year cut all support, after propping up inefficient producers with monthly US$50m subsidies in 1994.But the cabinet's decision in May to close 15 pits and a coal mining strip by the new year - emergency measures designed to push ahead economic reform - was not backed by the necessary political will.  Mr Oleksandr Kolosok, spokesman for the coal ministry, has said the closure had been indefinitely postponed.  "The main problem is people: the mines can't be closed because entire towns completely depend on them," he said.  RIf you close the mine, everyone will be left without jobs or support.  The young can find other work but what about the older pensioners?"He added that the government lacked funding to close the mines properly, and continuing to operate them was cheaper.  The World Bank is considering a loan of up to US$80m to cover all closure costs.All the 257 mines remain open.  But with wages falling and often left unpaid, the number of miners this year fell 9.3 per cent to 426,017, down from 529,000 in 1992, according to coal ministry statistics.  Ukrainian Coal Industry                 Output          Number of                (million tonnes)        miners 1995*             83.97         246,0171994              94.44         469,6901993            115.74          509,3571992            133.36          529,0181991            135.62          481,4891990            164.81          492,2701989            179.21          n/a*estimatedThe political fear centres around labour unrest and unemployment, which could destabilise the government.  In December, Kiev agreed to pay US$270m in back pay - a potentially inflation-stoking settlement - after a large walkout in the coal-rich eastern Donbass region.  Most Ukrainians live in the eastern regions, which spent the longest time under communism and may be most open to Russian revanchism.Some miners support closures to concentrate resources in the better pits and compete with Russian mines, where many Ukrainians now work.  But Mr Kolosok argued that Ukraine could not compete with Russia, whose mines are mechanised and more efficient.The mining sector also has been hurt by the government's reluctance to liberalise domestic energy prices.  In a recent interview, Mr Evhen Marchuk, Ukraine's prime minister, said household tariffs, now at 60 per cent cost recovery, will cover 80 per cent next year and full cost by 1997.  He added full liberalisation, expected by the new year, had to be postponed.  Industrial users are charged the market price, but payment discipline among the largely unprofitable state sector remains poor.As the government slows painful restructuring the mines are taking a heavy environmental and health toll.  The pits contribute 3 per cent of the world's emissions of methane, a greenhouse gas associated with global warming.Gas de France, Charbonnages de France, and Hunosa, a Spanish coal mining company, this year started to look at developing coal gas methane in a project funded by the European Union.  But the gas is not trapped and sold at present.In December, two miners died in separate accidents in Donetsk, the capital of the Donbass region.  By this year, the fatality rate among Ukrainian miners rose to five per 1m tonnes of coal produced, the highest in the world, according to Mr Kolosok.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996UKRAINE - Opportunity knocks for KievImagine a capital city in Europe where there is such a storage of office space that embassies are run from hotels rooms and multinational subsidiaries work from suburban houses.  That city is Kiev, capital of Ukraine. which is one of the largest countries in Europe.Property consultant, Aldon Ferguson, believes opportunities in Kiev are enormous "since there are hardly any quality office buildings and only one good hotel: the 25-room Domus, refurbished by an Italian company"SMore foreign companies are opening up in the city, joining the growing list of blue chip concerns that include Philip Morris, Motorola, Siemens and large,  international accountancy practices.  Ferguson, who pioneered Western property consultancies in Moscow and St Petersburg before selling out to DTZ Debenham Zadelhoff, said:  "Kiev is the capital of a large country and will need to build all the facilities that suit that position"SCanadians are further down the road than most in investing in Kiev because of a large expatriate Ukrainian population in their country, although Austrian and Dutch banks are also ready to put money into the city; but as with anywhere else in the former communist bloc, the route to successful investing is strewn with pitfalls, not least by the conflicting views of the local authority and national government in Kiev.The result is that although Western companies are desperate for accommodation, they are reluctant to own buildings, a difficult enough task in any case.  A developer, or occupier, needs a refurbishment certificate to obtain a 49-year lease which is automatically renewable.Ferguson calculates that a developer would need to spend US$2,000 a square metre on buying an interest and refurbishing it to a high standard.An example of the potential for developers is that refurbishing a 1-000 square metre for US$25m will bring in an annual rent of US$720,000 on a five year lease, with the first five year's rent in advance.While this is an attractive proposition, the difficulty is to persuade companies to pre-let a building before construction starts.Another aspect of the economic situation in Ukraine is that successful local entrepreneurs tend to move their money out of the country rather than spending it locally.But, Ferguson believes that, potentially, Ukraine is a rich country.  For centuries it has been referred to as the breadbasket of Europe because of its high grain production.  The Black Sea ports should become successful with the expansion of trade with Russia and other countries in the region.  And, while it may not be politically correct to mention it, Ukrainians are such heavy smokers that the large tobacco companies, Philip Morris and BAT, see a sizeable market for their products.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996UKRAINE - Gas found in Ukraine's Lugansk RegionGas deposits have been found in Lugansk Region in Eastern Ukraine, Russia's Economic news agency reported on 4th December.The Region now plans to develop a total of 30 gas fields.  The Lisichansk deposit with reserves of 7bn cubic metres of gas is considered the most promising, the agency adding that the development would help solve the problem of gas supplies to villages, mines and enterprises in the area.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996UZBEKISTAN -New railway link inaugurated in Southern Uzbekistanthe towns of Guzar, Baysun and Kumkurgan in the south of Uzbekistan, Uzbek TV reported on 11th December.Addressing a ceremony in Guzar on 11th December to mark the launching of the project, Uzbek First Deputy Prime Minister, Ismail Jurabekov, spoke of its "incomparable significance," the television said.  Deputy Prime Minister, Qayum Haqqulov, and Rustam Yunosov were also present at the ceremony.The Tashkent newspaper, Narodnoye Slovo, reported in August that President Islam Karimov had ordered the completion of the railway by the end of the century.  The presidential decree said that the railway was being built Rwith the aim of comprehensive development of mineral deposits, improving rail transport provision, solving production and social tasks in the new areas of Kashadarya and Surkhandarya Regions, and forming a single rail network in the Republic of Uzbekistan."Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AGRICULTURE & COMMODITIES -Minsk factory to sell 12,000 tractors to PakistanMTZ-50 tractors to Pakistan, Russia Interfax news agency reported from Minsk on 6th December.MTZ, a major manufacturer of agricultural tractors in the former Soviet Union and a major Belarusian exporter, won the tender for the supply of tractors to Pakistan last January.  It is currently negotiating to supply another 30,000 in 1996.  The average price of the machines it exports is about US$5,000.The Minsk plant, which has an annual capacity of 120,000 tractors, expects to produce about 50,000 by the end of 1995, the same as in 1994 and 25,000 less than in 1993.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AUTOMOBILES - General Motors sets up car plant joint ventureRussia and the General Motors Corporation have signed an agreement to set up a joint venture to make cars in the town of Yelabuga in Tatarstan, Russia's Interfax reported on 7th December.Russia and Tatarstan will each own 25 per cent and General Motors 50 per cent of the stock of the new enterprise, to be known as Yelabuga Motor Works - General Motors.  The factory will initially manufacture 50,000 Chevrolet Blazer four-wheel drive cars a year, and will start producing other car models and minibuses later.Russian Prime Minister, Viktor Chernomyrdin, who attended the signing of the agreement, welcomed the arrangement, under which 60-66 per cent of all the components for the vehicles are to be made in Russia.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AUTOMOBILES - Chelyabinsk trailer plant expects to receive Pentagon orderUralavtopritsep, a major Russian producer of trailers based in Chelyabinsk, expects to receive a larger order from the US Defence Department, the Russian news agency reported on 21st November.Interfax quoted the company's technical director, Eduard Net, as saying that Uralavtopritsep, had signed a contract with a US company, identified as TRII, for the production of an experimental model of a 65-tonne semi-trailer worth US$100,000.  After testing the vehicle in various climatic zones in the USA, the Pentagon was expected to place a US$13m order for 130 such lorries for the US Army.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AUTOMOBILES - Ford planning car plant near MinskFord Motors intends to build a car plant in Belarus, Russia's Interfax news agency reported on 6th December from Minsk, quoting sources in the Belarusian government.Deputy Prime minister, Valeryy Kokaraw, will visit Detroit in mid-December, where he may sign an agreement on the plant with the company management.It is planned to build a plant to produce Ford Escort cars and Ford Transit vans near Minsk.  The plant is to manufacture 200,000 vehicles a year, with production due to begin in 1997.  The investment in the project will total US$200m.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AVIATION - Defence Ministry stalls on rocket engine export dealUS and manufacture them there under licence are on hold following calls from Russia's Defence Ministry, to examine the economic and military implications of the deal, Interfax news agency reported on 6th December.  The contract was concluded between Aerojet of the US and Samara-based Dvigateli NK.A senior Defence Ministry official explained that although the original Lockheed Martin tender to find the best engine for the Atlas booster had envisaged only commercial launches "the US side changed the competition terms in November 1995S and there are now concerns that boosters with Russian engines could be used for military purposes.  The Defence Ministry has urged further examination of the contract since it has no authority to grant or deny export permission, which is the government's prerogative.In addition, he said that the contractual price of an NK-33 engine, estimated at US$1.1m, not only failed to meet production costs but was much lower than world prices for analogous products, while US$5m for a licence to produce NK-33 engines in the US was simply Rabsurd."  "Equipment of such a high level costs at least from US$100m to US$150m."The official questioned whether the NK-33 project was the most economically-advantageous option.  He claimed that the contract to sell NK-33s in the US would bring Russia only US$100m, whereas Pratt & Whitney, also of the US, was willing to invest US$150m in the the state-run Energomnash company in the initial phase of co-operation, with a view to joint production of a new generation engine.  Under this alternative scheme, RProduction of RD-180 engines in Russia will allow Russia to receive orders worth over US$1bn within 20 years."In a separate report, Interfax quoted the head of Aerojet's advanced research department, Mark Constantine, as telling a news conference in Sacramento, California, that he acknowledged Russian concerns but did not agree with them.  "Fifty per cent of modernised Atlas, Delta and Titan boosters with Russian engines are to be used for commercial flights and the remainder, for the sounding and photographing of the Earth, launch of cartographic satellites and monitoring the launches of ballistic missiles in third countries," he said.Interfax said that Russia could lose more than US$350m unless permission to move the engines out of Russia and the licence for their manufacture in the US were forthcoming in the near future.  The NK-33, a reusable engine, was developed 25 years ago for the N-1 booster which was to be used in the Soviet lunar programme.On 9th December, Interfax said that the Aerojet contract to export 72 NK-33 engines to the US was worth US$350m.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AVIATION - Russia to repay debt to Finland in surface to air missilesRussia is to export air defence missile systems to Finland to clear part of a debt owed by the former Soviet Union, Russia's ITAR-TASS news agency reported on 30th November from Helsinki.An agreement was reached at the end of a three-day conference of Russian and Finnish defence experts to export 1bn Finnish markka (US$230m) worth of Buk M1 missiles, known in the West as SA-11, to provide air defence around Helsinki.  The terms of the export contract have not yet been set, but deliveries are likely to start in 1996.The agency quoted Finnish Minister of Defence, Anneli Taina, as saying that the agreement was a major step towards resolving the issue of Russia's debt to Finland, which has been impeding trade between the two countries.  The debt owed by the former Soviet Union and taken on by Russia totals 5.5bn Finnish markka (US$1.25bn).RIA news agency said the new missiles would replace the current Pechora (SA-3) air defence system around Helsinki by the year 2000.  RIA quoted the chief of the Finnish defence forces, Gustav Heglund, as saying Finland relied on missile defences and not on aviation to ward off air attack, and that Finnish specialists had assessed the SA-11 as being best suited to the task.  "The high technical characteristics and quality of the system determined our choice," Heglund said.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AVIATION - South Korea and Ukraine sign air transport agreementSouth Korea and Ukraine concluded an agreement on the opening of direct air routes between the two countries on 30th November, the South Korean news agency, Yonhap, reported on 30th November, quoting a South Korean Foreign Ministry spokesman.The accord allows "two or more" national flag carriers of each nation to operate cargo or passenger flights to the other's territory, and provides for full repatriation of profits and tax exemptions for aircraft parts, fuel and lubricants, aviation equipment and other goods required to operate the flights.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AVIATION -   Union Engineering to upgrade Chelyabinsk airportUnion Engineering, a construction firm from the rump Yugoslavia, has signed a US$35m contract with Chelyabinsk Airlines (CHELAL) to upgrade the international sector of Chelyabinsk Airport and to build a runway to accept all types of aircraft.CHELAL told Interfax that Aeroproyekt, a scientific research institute, had designed the new 3,250-m ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organisation) category one runway.  The existing runway has been in use for over 20 years and will be completely overhauled after the opening of the new runway, which Chelyabinsk regional authorities, who are pumping US$27m from the regional budget into the project, will lease CHELAL for 20 years.  The international sector will incorporate a new US$8m and visa free zone for transit passengers.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AVIATION -   Omsk to supply 60 airships to India in exchange for foodstuffsA total of 60 airships are to be supplied by Russia's Civil Aviation Plant No 41 and the Krylo factory in Omsk to India in 1997-1999 under a barter deal, the Russian news agency reported from Omsk on 26th November.The airships are to be supplied in exchange for  food and other goods.  Another 15 airships are to be bought by Russia's Gazprom gas company for pipeline monitoring.  The first models have already been tested and praised by the customers. Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996BROADCASTING & TELECOMMUNICATIONS -Italian group denies Russian telecom deal is offStet was still interested in acquiring a 25 per cent stake in Sviazinvest, the Russian telephone company due for privatisation, despite an official Russian notice that the deal was off.In a statement issued on 26th December, the Italian group also denied that the recent Russian parliamentary elections had contributed to the failure to secure a deal planned by 22nd December.The statement said complex legal considerations and the need for adequate guarantees had helped to postpone the purchase, which would cost Stet US$640m, with a commitment to invest a further US$770m.Despite the Italian insistence on pressing ahead with the operation, Mr Maxim Boyko, head of the Russian Privatisation Centre, said that Stet would no longer be investing in Sviazinvest.  He said:  "Although it was a difficult decision to reject the final conditions offered by Stet it was the right decision and I do not regret it."Mr Boyko went on to describe Stet's behaviour as "impossible to understand" and he expressed confidence that the shares would be sold next year on terms considerably more favourable than those offered by Stet.He discounted the political risk in delaying the tender until next year:  "I don't think that in the short run the political constraints would prevent the tender from happening."The Russians objected to the recent demand by Stet that an escrow account be set up to hold the funds for investment until all the conditions sought by the Italians had been met.  Officials argued that the request showed an inappropriate distrust of the Russian government and unfairly went beyond the terms of the initial tender.A Russian statement issued on 25th December said:  "Despite the desire of the Russian government to find a compromise, Stet insisted upon forms of payment that went beyond the conditions of the tender."But Stet has said that the company had to be prudent and the escrow account was intended to demonstrate such prudence.  Stet's shares rose 2.2 per cent at  the news on the Milan bourse.  Analysts said the markets had regarded the Russian attempt to cancel the deal with scepticism, as Stet's offer was some US$200m above the nearest bid.Stet has set five conditions for the completion of the acquisition.  The most important of these centres on a clarification of the relationship between Sviazinvest and Rostelecom, the main Russian telecommunications company.Sviazinvest is now a holding company for 85 regional telecoms firms in a so far ill-defined role.  Stet has not yet been satisfied regarding the role of those regional companies or future tariff structure.  These are also questions about long distance traffic within Russia and the valuable international telecoms business.Until now Stet has tried and failed to break into large international telecoms contracts and business.  In Eastern Europe it has twice been passed over despite higher bids in Hungary and the Czech Republic in privatisation programmes.It has been left to pick business in Latin American privatisations, being present in Argentina and latterly Bolivia.  Thus, the Russian deal was seen as an important opportunity.From Russia's perspective, the reformist camp in the government has been anxious to make the telecoms sector a model for state divestment. This was particularly important for Mr Anatoly Chubais, the deputy prime minister and architect of Russian reforms, who was the main force behind telecoms privatisation.The bond mass privatisation programme which Mr Chubais launched in 1992 earned Russia praise for its swift reforms:  But last year, the country's privatisation record was marked by the second stage of privatisation which many observers have criticised as a secretive process, arranged to benefit government insiders.For the Russian government, the telecoms privatisation was envisioned as an important source of budgetary revenue in 1995.  Moscow's urgent need to cover the deficit was one reason the government sought to push through the deal rapidly.  However, the government may prefer to proceed at a more leisurely pace now that the urgency which drove the tender has evaporated.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996BROADCASTING & TELECOMMUNICATIONS -Siemens to help upgrade Moscow telephone systemGermany's Siemens AG is to provide DM50m (US$36m) in credit to the Moscow City Telephone Exchange (MGTS) in 1996-1999 to help upgrade the city's telephone network, Interfax news agency reported. Under a framework agreement signed on 23rd November, Siemens will supply advanced telecoms equipment with a total capacity of 500,000 lines for 12 Moscow exchanges, to be commissioned in the next four years.  The Siemens credit line will be realised through individual contracts, the first of which - for the delivery of equipment to handle 90,000 lines - is set to be signed in February or March.Latvia and Belarus arrange direct fibre-optic telephone linkThe Lattelekom company has concluded an agreement with its Belarusian counterpart, Beltelecom, on a fibreoptic cable link between the national telecommunication networks of the two countries.The connection is expected greatly to improve the quality of communications.  The agreement also provides for transition to digital networks.  Currently, Latvia and Belarus are connected by 120 analogue lines, two-thirds of which run through Lithuania, while the rest go via Russia.  After the new system is introduced, Latvia and Belarus will no longer have to use the services of third countries.The agreement is effective from 1996, after Lattelekom has an optical cable in place up to the country's eastern town of Kraslava.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996BROADCASTING & TELECOMMUNICATIONS -Tajikistan, Afghanistan and Pakistan join international fibre-optic projectTajikistan, Afghanistan and Pakistan have decided to join an international project to lay a transcontinental fibre-optic communications line between Europe and Asia, Russia's Interfax news agency reported on 1st December.  The decision followed a two-day conference on the project, which ended in the Azerbaijani capital, Baku, on 30th November.The 24,000-km-long communications line will connect Frankfurt-am-Main in Germany with Shanghai in China and will pass through Austria, Romania, Hungary, Poland, Ukraine, Belarus, Turkey, Georgia, Armenia, Iran, Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan and Pakistan.  It is due for completion by April 1997.According to an official from Azerbaijan's Ministry of Communications, the republic is holding negotiations with several firms about financing Azerbaijan's section of the cable, which it hopes to complete by late 1996.  All the states involved in the project have undertaken to lay a reserve communications cable in parallel with the main one so as to guarantee a stable signal.Greek-Georgian joint venture to produce phonecard telephonesThe Georgian Communications Ministry is to set up a joint venture with Intracom, a Greek telecommunications company, to manufacture public telephones which use phonecards, Georgian radio reported on 23rd November.  A letter of intent on the joint venture was signed on 23rd November.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY - Tender for 12 oil and gas fields in Udmurtia to be held in 1996An open international tender for the right to develop 12 oil and gas fields in Udmurtia is to be held in 1996 by the government of this Russian constituent republic and the Russian Committee on Geology and the Use of Mineral Resources, Interfax news agency reported on 19th December.The winner of the tender will have to sign a production-sharing agreement with the Russian federal government, the government of Udmurtia and a consortium to be set up to implement the project.  The consortium will be led by the winner of the tender and include Udmurtgeologiya and Udmuttort companies, and possibly some other Russian companies.  Each company's share will be set separately for each of the 12 fields.The winner needs to offer effective technical solutions and the most lucrative plan for the project, prove its ability to finance it and buy a full package of geological data.  Also, it will have to arrange a US$250m loan to fund a programme aimed at upgrading Udmutia's Izhmash vehicle works.  The government's share of Izhmash's profits will serve as security for the loan.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY -Winners of LUKoil investment tender announcedThe Russian investment company, Nikoil, has won an investment auction for a 16.07 per cent stake in LUkoil, Russia's biggest oil company, Interfax news agency reported on 28th December.Nikoil won the auction with a pledge to invest R800bn, outbidding the only other contender, Yedinstvo-94, which offered R799bn.  Interfax quoted LUKoil officials as saying the investment programme for 1996-1997 aimed to upgrade the company's refineries in Perm in the Urals and in Volgorad in Southern Russia, increasing the depth of refining there to 86-88 per cent, bringing quality in line with international standards and reducing production costs.ITAR-TASS news agency said Nikoil had pledged to invest R160bn in the programme in January 1996, another R291bn before the end of 1996 and R349bn in 1997.  The implementation of the programme is expected to increase LUKoil's total annual output of oil products by 4m tonnes, including petrol output by 2m.LUKoil incorporates seven oil producers and two oil refineries, Interfax recalled, adding that its annual output exceeded 50m tonnes of crude. Oil companies sign deal to develop new Caspian fieldOil companies from Azerbaijan, Russia the United States and Italy signed a contract on 10th November to develop the Karabakh oilfield in Azerbaijan's sector of the Caspian Sea, ITAR-TASS news agency reported from the Azerbaijani capital, Baku.Interfax news agency reported on the same day that the Russian company, LUKoil, the Italian company, Agip, the US corporation, Pennzoil, and the Azerbaijani State Oil Company (SOCAR) have formed a consortium to develop the Karabakh field.It said LUKoil is to control 32.5 per cent of the consortium's capital, with Agip and Pennzoil each controlling 30 per cent and SOCAR the remaining 7.5 per cent.  The cost of the project to develop the Karabakh field, estimated to contain between 65 and 70m tonnes of oil, is put at US$1.7-1.8bn.The Karabakh field lies approximately 100km north of the Apsheron peninsula on which the capital Baku is located.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY - Russia,Total heading for oil and gas co-operation projectRussia plans to sign an agreement with France's Total to launch a joint oil and gas project in northern Russia, Interfax  reports.The project, recently given the go-ahead by the Russian government,  needs the approval of the administratation of the Nenets Autonomous Area, where the development work is to be launched to extact oil and gas condensate from the Kharyaginskoye desposit, which has estimated reserves of 160.4m tonnes.  Total is to invest US$1bn in the project.Interfax quoted sources in the Nenets administration as saying approval for the agreements could prove difficult, since its opponents believed it did not allow the Russian side to seek greater participation in the project.  Meanwhile the Russian government's Expert Council said after studying the project that  a high content of hydrogen sulphide (up to 4 per cent) and parafinn (up to 20-25 per cent) in casing-head gas would necessitate the use of special anti-corrosion equipment and technologies, which made the participation of Russian construction companies in the project doubtful.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY - Iran rejects Azeri proposal to develop Caspian oil and gas fieldIran has rejected an Azerbaijani offer of a share in the development of the Shakhdeniz oil and gas field in Azerbaijan's sector of the Caspian Sea, the Russian news agency reported from Tehran on 9th December.The agency quoted an unnamed official at the Iranian Oil Ministry as saying that until "the question of the Caspian legal status and division of oil and gas field zones between the coastal states" was settled, Iranian participation in the development of Azerbaijani and other Caspian fields was "problematic."The official said Iran was interested in joint oil development projects with Russia, and added that Tehran had submitted proposals to the Russian oil company, LUKoil, on 10 projects in the Gulf with costs ranging between US$1bn and US$4.5bn.French-Norwegian alliance wins tender for operations in CaspianA French-Norwegian alliance has won a tender to form a joint venture for offshore diving and underwater operations in the Caspian Sea, Interfax news agency reported on 27th November from the Azerbaijani capital, Baku.The partners that won the tender, launched last July, are the French company, Comex, which produces diving equipment and underwater structures and develops underwater technologies, and a Norweigan company, identified as Stolp Komex Seaways, which constructs, inspects and repairs underwater pipelines.Pyotr Gurtovenko of the Azerbaijani State Oil Company, told Interfax that the joint venture would be formed on the basis of the underwater and rescue operations department of his company.He added that the involvement of such a strong alliance would help the new venture obtain an international certificate for underwater operations and take part in tenders announced by Azerbaijan's International Operational Company to co-ordinate the developmetn of the Azeri, Chirag and Guneshli oilfields.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY - Azerbaijani-US-Norwegian joint venture wins tender to lay Caspian pipelineAn Azerbaijani-US-Norwegian joint venture has won an international tender to lay a new underwater oil pipeline in the Azerbaijani sector of the Caspian Sea, ITAR-TASS news agency reported recently.It said the joint venure, founded by Azerbaijan's state oil company (SOCAR) and the US McDermott and Norwegian Kvaerner firms, would start construction of the new pipeline in April 1996 and that it should be operational in the autumn.The pipeline will consist of two sections, each 180km long.  It will carry Azerbaijani oil from the Chirag field through the coastal terminal of Sangachaly, 40km south of Baku, and then onto world markets via Russia and Georgia.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY -Consortium set up to build Siberia-Pacific gas pipelineMajor Russian banks, joint-stock companies and fuel and energy enterprises have set up a consortium to build a gas pipeline from Siberia to the Pacific Ocean, the Economic News Agency reported on 1st December, quoting the Fuel and Power Engineering Ministry.The Proyekt-100 consortium wants to complete the 4,600-km pipeline, running from Angarsk near Lake Baykal to the Nakhodka free economic zone, by the year 2015.  The 14bn rouble (US$3m) project will supply gas to towns in Siberia, the Russian Far East and China.Consortium founders include Bank Imperial, the administrative committee of the Nakhodka free economic zone and the Neftegazstroy joint-stock company.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY - Russia helps build Beijing power stationRussia is to help China construct a heat and power station in the east of Beijing, which, when operational, will supply the whole of the east of the city with electricity and hot water,  reports the ITAR-TASS news agency.The Huaneng-Beijing heat and power plant will have four power units and a total capacity of 654MW.A spokesman for the Russian company, Energomasheksport, said that Russian organisations had completed design work on the plant and 40 per cent of material and equipment had been delivered to the site.  Given the "serious lack of demand" in the Russian economy, the project was supplying many Russian companies with major orders, the spokesman said, noting that more than 120 Russian enterprises were involved in the project.  In addition, for the first time in a Russian-Chinese projects accounts in the US$127.8m contract would be settled in convertible currencywhich was an "excellent opportunity" for Russian firms, he said.Energomasheksport is contracted to carry out assembly work, supervise construction and train Chinese specialists.Russia to resume Iranian nuclear plant construction early next yearRussia is likely to resume the construction of the Bushehr nuclear power plant in Southern Iran in January or February 1996, the Russian news agency ITAR-TASS  news agency  reports from Tehran, quoting Valentin Rumyantsev, head of the Russian trade mission there.  Rumyantsev said, however, that a lot depended on the timely transfer of Iranian payments to the accounts of Russian organisations.  Under the terms of the US$800m contract, Iran must transfer to the Rusisan side at least 10 per cent of the project's cost, or about US$58m, in hard currency.  Other payments are to be made in Iranian currency, the rial, and in goods.The contract to complete the construction of the Bushehr nuclear power plant by Russia was signed in Teheran in January 1995 and comes into force at the end of the year.  It said a delegation of experts from the Russian organisations involved in the project was to arrive in Tehran on 24th November to discuss a number of finanical and technical issues and to sign documents.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996MINERALS & METALS - Karaganda steelworks sold off to British-based firm(Karmet) to the British-based company, Ispat International, ITAR-TASS news agency reported on 21st November from Alma-Ata.It said Ispat International had won the right to take over the Karaganda works in a four-company tender.  "On 17th November, the Kazakh government signed with Ispat the privatisation deal which places Karmet under the company's management, together with responsibility for the steelwork's further performance."Under the managment, Ispat International is to cover Karmet's debts worth US$50m and pay wage arrears of more than US$10m.  "Ispat managers sound confident that the company would be able to pull Karmet out of its crisis."The deal follows two earlier attempts by foreign groups to manage the debt-ridden steelworks, which ended in failure when they did not meet financial targets.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996MINERALS & METALS - Japanese management boosts chrome outputTwo of the three firms in Kazakhstan's chromium sector that have been managed by the Japan Chromium Corporation for the last five months have seen a sharp rise in their output and profits, Kazakh radio reported on 11th December.The Don Ore-Enrichment Combine joint-stock company and the Ferrokhrom joint-stock company are located in the Aktyubinsk Region of northwest Kazakhstan.  In the last five months, sales volume at the former has been 141.2 per cent of the level achieved in the five months immediately prior to Japanese involvement, while profits increased 182 per cent over the same period.The Ferrokhrom joint stock company, also witnessed positive changes, Kazakh radio noted.  In the five months since the Japanese took over management of the company, Ferrokhrom has increased its monthly output by 2,000 per cent and begun to market its final product at world prices.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996MINERALS & METALS - Belgian firm to buy uranium from KazakhstanKazakhstan is to sell uranium to the Belgian firm, Tractebel, in exchange for financial assistance in building an electric power station in Western Kazakhstan, Russia's ITAR-TASS news agency reported. The agreement was announced at the end of the "Kazakhstan-95" exhibition which closed in the US town of San Diego on 1st December.  It envisages capital investments of about US$500m to build the power station in the Kazakh town of Uralsk, which lies close to the Russian border in the far west of Kazakhstan.The project is the first in Kazakhstan to be fully financed from foreign funds.  "According to the agreement, the full financing of the project will be carried out by the Belgian firm," it said.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996SPACE - Russian and US companies sign contract on space technologyRussian and US companies have signed their first ever contract in Russia on the provision of space photographs of the Earth's surface taken by Russia's military communications satellites.  Yuriy Milov, Deputy Director-General of the Russian Space Agency, said the work under the contract would be carried out by  the intersectoral association, Sovinformsputnik, in Russia and by the companies, Central Trading Systems, Lambda Tech International and Aerial Images, in the US.According to Yuriy Milov, photographs of some areas in the American states of Florida, South and North Carolina and Alabama, as well as in some countries in the Asian Pacific region will be taken by the well-known Kosmos satellite which the machine-building works in Samara has been producing for over 15 years.  The task of the US companies will be to process and sell the photographs.  Their exact price has not yet been fixed but according to Yuriy Milov, it will be without consumer research.  The joint venture will start operating in the middle of 1996.  Both the Russian and the American side preferred to keep silent on the subject of the contract's overall value.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996SPACE - Georgia joins Russia in developing new space systemGeorgia has become Russia's partner in creating a new-generating space system.  According to an agreement with the Russian Kometa central scientfiic production association, the local space consturction instutute will be manufacturing a folding antenna for the new system.An ITAR-TASS correspondent was told on recently that the implementation of this project will provide an additional 12,500 radiotelephonic communications channels, which will be run by means of two satellites.  First reports say that Georgian specialists will have to meet up to 15% of the budget costs of the whole project. Foreign investors have shown interest in this concept and representatives of banking circles in Switzerland and Liechtenstein have already visited Georgia.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996TRANSPORT - Kraysnoye Sormovo shipyard allowed to sell submarine abroadThe Russian defence Ministry, has allowed the Krasnoye Sormovo shipyard in Nizhniy Novgorod to complete the construction of a Varshavyanka-class diesel-powered submarine begun in 1992, and sell it abroad, Interfax news agency reported on 12th December, from the city, quoting a source in the shipyard's management.The ministry said, however, that it could not provide the plant with the necessary funding for the project.  Krasnoye Sormovo is now looking for a buyer for the submarine and for a creditor to provide funds to complete its construction.Two Varshavyanka submarines were sold to the Chinese Navy earlier in the year for an estimated US$200-250m.  The shipyard has also held sales negotiations with Indonesia, India and Malaysia.The volume of production at Krasnoye Sormovo fell by 27 per cent this year, largely because of the lack of solvent demand for its civilian output and the state's failure to order submarines.  The plant's only profit-yielding project is the production of river-sea cargo vessels.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AUTOMOBILE & AVIATION -Japanese bank to sign US$150m loan agreement with KamazThe Export-Import Bank of Japan is to grant Russia a US$150m loan to upgrade the Kamaz vehicle works in Tolyatti, ITAR-TASS news agency reported recently.The agreement was described by the agency as "the last step in the creation of a legal framework for granting Russia a package of industrial loans" worth a total of US$400m.Documents signed earlier in the year granted the Impuls works in St Petersburg a loan of US$50m and the Yaroslavl oil refinery US$200m.  Money from the US$400m loan package is to be spent on purchasing plant for the Russian firms from Japan, via the Kanematsu trading company.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AUTOMOBILE & AVIATION -Company formed to modernise Moscow's airports; foreign investors neededTransport on 28th November, decided to set up a new company, Aero-Moskva, to gradually modernise the four airports - Sheremetyevo, Vnukovo, Domodedovo and Bykovo - that make up the hub of Russia's airways.Vadim Zamotin, director of the Department of Air Transport of the Russian Transport Ministry, said the company would be made up of federal government shares of 50 per cent in Sheremetyevo, 50 per cent in Domodedovo, 25.5 per cent of Bykovo-Avia and 15.5 per cent of Vnukovo.  Overall, Moscow plans to borrow US$300m from the World Bank to modernise the hub, money that should be supplemented by the government, airlines, the airports themselves and foreign and domestic investors.  The airports, moreover, will be exempt from local and federal taxes.  So will anybody who invests in them.There has not been any real capital investment in airports for the last five years, Zamotin said.  Problems with capacity and flight safety could emerge by the end of the century if something is not done now, he said.  Passenger service, he admitted, falls well below international standards.  The whole system of flight control needs to be renovated.  The Ministry of Transport, Zamotin said, has drawn up a US$5bn investment programme to take the hub to the year 2025.  Immediate problems should be solved by 1997, (when Moscow is due to mark its 850th anniversary) at a cost of R1,276bn.The four Moscow airports account for 27 per cent and 17 per cent of all domestic passenger and freight turnover and 74 per cent of international passenger traffic.  Over 70 airlines are based in the city and region of Moscow.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996BANKING - Latvian Universal Bank signs agreement with EBRDcredit agreement with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), Latvia radio reported on 7th December.Unibanka will receive US$20m over six years as loan capital for various  projects.  The EBRD already has credit lines to Latvia's Zemes Banka (Land Bank) and the Vacijas-Latvijas Banka (German-Latvian Bank).Bank of Latvia revokes licences of six commercial banksThe Bank of Latvia has revoked the licences of the Latvian Deposit Bank (LDB), Central Bank, the Liepaja commercial bank, the Alejas commercial bank, Olti-Bank and the Lettika commercial bank, Baltic News Service reported from Riga on 6th December, quoting Centre Bank's press centre.The Latvian Commercial Court declared Centre Bank insolvent on 6th June, LDB on 12th June, Liepaja commercial bank on 14th June, the Alejas commercial bank on 10th July, and the Olti-Bank on 15th November.  A decision to liquidate Olti-Bank was taken on 15th December.Explaining the reasons for the revocation of the licences, Baltic News Service said that the capital of LDB, Central Bank and the Liepaja and Alejas commercial banks was smaller than the minimum shareholding capital set out in banking legislation.  LDB, Liepaja and Alejas banks had also failed to observe the rules on short-term liquidity.  Lettika's licence was revoked because it had not undertaken the work required to put it finances in order after Bank of Latvia President, Einars Repse had banned it from performing any banking transactions with effect from 30th August of last year. Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996BROADCASTING & TELECOMMUNICATIONS -Russia to draw more foreign investment into telecommunications Russia to draw more foreigin investments into telecommunications in 1996, Interfax news agency reported on 28th November, quoting Communications Minister, Vladimir Bulgak.Bulgak said the emphasis would be on attracting major companies, which are expected to contribute 41.5 per cent of total investment.  This year foreign businesses have invested US$520m in Russian telecommunications.  According to Bulgak, this shows that they regard the section as attractive.The agency quoted Bulgak as saying foreign investment was particularly important now that government support for telecommunications had almost ceased.  Other sources of extra funding for the sector, the minister said, will include the circulation of "telephone bonds," a more effective tariff policy and the introduction of charges for local calls in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996CREDIT & DEBIT - EBRD helps Russian-Spanish joint ventureThe European Bank for Reconstruction and Development  (EBRD) will provide a US$11m (ECU9.1m) loan to the Russian-Spanish Joint venture AO Bashkortostan-Kelme.  The company is located in Meleuz (Repubic of Bashkortostan), Russian Federation, approximately 1,200-kilometres south-east of Moscow and 200km north of Ufa, reported a recent EBRD press release. AO Bashkortostan-Kelme will manufacture a large variety of high-quality sports and leisure shoes, primarily for the Russian domestic market.  Given the strong historical tradition of the former Soviet Union in the area of athletics, the project sponsors expect the domestic market for such shoes to grow substantially over the coming years.  The joint venture will also manufacture all necessary components for the sports and leisure shoes and will assume the role of supplier of such components to the other Kelme joint venture in Eastern Europe (in Moldova and Belarus).The joint venture will be equipped with modern shoe production equipment, sourced primarily from Spain, Italy and Japan.  EBRD financing will be used to a large extent for the acquisition of such equipment as well as for working capital purposes.  In addition to the technology transfer benefit associated with the project, over 700 new skilled jobs will be created in the region of Bashkortostan over the next years.  The project is also expected to stimulate local suppliers of leather and other materials required for the production of shoes.  An additional beneficial effect for the country is the substitution of domestic production for hard currency imports. The loan has seven  years maturity including a grace period of 1.5 years, and amounts to US$11 million.  Its spread is LIBOR-based plus a credit margin.The project will be co-financed to the amount of US$11.4m by Banco Bilbao Vizcaya (BBV) and Instituto de Crdito Official (IOC), with export credit coverage provided by Companola de Crdito a la Exportacion del Desarrollo (COFIDES), a Spanish governmental agency specialised in the promotion of Spanish investments abroad that will provide a subordinated loan to the joint venture.  For further information, please contact:  Rebecca Hill.  Tel:  +44 171 338 6255.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996CREDIT & DEBIT - Spanish-Moldovan footwear joint ventureUS$7.3m (ECU 6.0 million) loan will go to the Spanish-Moldovan joint venture, Ascom-Kelme S.A., to partially finance equipment and working capital needs for a shoe production facility in Orhei, Republic of Moldova, reported The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development  (EBRD) on 31st October.  The creation of a local production and distribution capacity for high-quality sports and leisure shoes will serve the needs of the markets of Moldova, Russia and other countries of the former Soviet Union, and Romania.  Once full production capacity is reached, the joint venture will produce three million sports and leisure shoes per year.The investment will create 1,200 jobs in a district with high unemployment and is expected to generate significant hard currency earnings for Moldova.  The joint venture will benefit from state-of the-art Western machinery and will have full technological and training support by the Spanish partner.  In addition the project is designed to rely primarily on production inputs from the Russian Federation and other countries of the former Soviet Union and is therefore expected to create significant backward linkages with suppliers of the shoes industry of the region, used to finance shoe production machinery and working capital needs.Five years' maturity includes a grace period; interest on the US$7.3 million loan is LIBOR-based plus a credit margin.  The project will be co-financed to the amount of US$7.2m (ECU5.9m) by Banco Bilbao Vizcaya and Instituto de Crdito Official, with export coverage provided by Compania Espanola de Seguros de Crdito a la Exportacion. For further information, please contact:  Vronique Cassegrain.  Tel: +44 171 338 7237.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996CREDIT & DEBIT - IMF grant extends US$48m loanThe board of the International Monetary Fund has approved an extended loan to Kyrgyzstan of US$48m within the framework of an agreed three-year credit programme, the Russian news agency ITAR-TASS reported from Washington.  The funds are being allocated to support a programme of economic and structural reforms being carried out by the Kyrgyz government.The three-year programme for Kyrgyzstan was approved by the IMF in May 1994 and originally provided for a total of US$105m.  However, taking account of the country's "considerable progress" in implanting reforms the Fund decided to increase the loan to US$131m.The aim of the programme is to achieve by the end of 1996 a 2.5 per cent growth in GDP, a reduction in the annual rate of inflation to 15 per cent and a cut in the budget deficit from the current 11.3 per cent of GDP to 5.5 per cent.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996CREDIT & DEBIT - Belarus to receive a loan from European UnionThe European Union has granted Belarus a loan of 55m ECU (US$70m) to support the country's balance of payments and ensure the stability of the national currency, Belarusian Radio reported on 27th November.The radio station quoted the Belarusian president's press service as saying the credit agreement was signed by President Alyaksandr Lukashenka on 27th November.  Under the terms of the agreement, a sum of 30m ECU is to be provided for ten years with a five year grace period, with an annual interest rate of 5.65 per cent.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996CREDIT & DEBIT - World Bank grants US$24m loan to RussiaThe World Bank has approved a loan of US$24m to Russia as part of a programme to bring production standards and product quality in the country up to the international level, the Russian news agency ITAR-TASS reported from Washington on 1st December.The loan is granted for 17 years, with no payments due in the first five years.The US$34m programme, designed for the period until the year 2001, is aimed at helping Russia join the World Trade Organisation.  Canada has pledged to donate US$0.8m, and the remaining US$9.2m are to be provided by the Russian government.  The Russian Federation Committee for Standardisation, Metrology and Certification has been put in charge of implementating the programme.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996CURRENCIES -Fixed exchange rate band for BelarusBelarus could introduce a fixed exchange rate band for its natural currency, the Belarusian rouble, in 1996,  Russian newspaper 'Kommersant Daily' said on the 9th December, citing Tamara Vinnikava, chairman of Savings Bank - Belarusbank.Vinnikava said all the necessary calculations had been completed and a draft presidential decree drawn up.  Many economists in the country support the introduction of the so-called "hard-currency corridor" as an alternative to a rapid devaluation of the Belarusian rouble.According to Vinnikava, the lower limit of the fixed band is to be set initially at the current exchange rate of 11,000 Belarusian roubles to the dollar.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY - LUKoil awarded five per cent of own stock in shares-for-loan saleThe right to manage a 5 per cent package of state-owned shares in Russian oil major, LUKoil, has been won by a consortium made up of LUKoil itself and Bank Imperial, Interfax news agency reported, quoting the chairman of the State Committee for the Management of State Property and head of the commission organising the auction, Alfred Kokh.The consortium offered the Russian government a loan of US$35.10m for the shares, US$0.1m more than the asking price of US$35m, which was offered by rival bidder, the National Reserves Bank. Under the terms of the shares-for-loans auction, the winner is to pay off debts of up to R500bn run by the LUKoil subsidiaries.LUKoil extracted 45.1m tonnes of crude oil in 1994 and refined 19.7m tonnes.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY -Yukos postpones sale of 8 per cent stake till next yearRussia's Federal Property Fund has postponed the sale of 7.96 per cent of shares in the Yukos oil company to prevent its being overshadowed by the shares-for-loans auction and investment tender under which a 78 per cent holding in the company which was to be sold on 8th December, Interfax news agency reported.A Yukos spokesman said that the decision had been made at the request of the company management, which was worried that shares might be undervalued if sold too soon after the larger block.  The cash auction is now likely to be held in the first quarter of 1996.Under plans for privatising Yukos, 45 per cent of company shares are to remain state property for three years.  Investment bids will be invited for 33 per cent of shares on 8th December, at the same time as 78 per cent of state-owned shares are sold in a shares-for loans auction.  Of the remaining 22 per cent, 14 per cent are to be distributed amongst Yukos staff and management and the remainder will now be sold at cash auction next year.Russian coal industry could get US$500m loan from World BankThe World Bank is likely to grant Russia a loan of US$500m  to back reforms in its coal industry, Interfax news agency reported on 27th October, quoting the bank's president, James Wolfensohn.According to Wolfensohn, reforms to be developed jointly with the Russian side in 1996-97 will aim to provide more social guarantees for miners, including retraining and employment of redundant workers.  Before this, however, the Russian government should start a systemic transformation of the coal industry, reducing state subsidies, ensuring higher profits from coal production under market conditions and closing the most inefficient pits.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY -World Bank prolongs loan terms for oil companyThe World Bank has extended the term of its 1993 loan of US$168m to Russian oil company, Purneftegaz, to purchase oilfield equipment for another 12 months, Interfax news agency reported on 6th December, quoting a source within the company management.The extension has been granted because Purneftegaz has so far purchased equipment worth only US$40m, the source said.  Moreover, in the summer, the company had to suspend the loan when duty exemptions initially envisaged in the agreement between the World Bank and the Russian government were abolished by the State Customs Committee.Purneftegaz, a subsidiary of the Rosneft oil company, is developing the Gubinskoye, Severo-Tarasovskoye and Kharampurskoye oilfields in the north of Tyumen Region.  The company produced 8.5m tonnes of oil in 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY -Ukraine's gas debt to Russia threatens IMF loanUkraine risks promised International Monetary Fund (IMF) funds if it fails to pay US$92m of its gas debt to Russia for supplies in 1994, Russian Public TV reported on 6th December, quoting Ukrainian Deputy Finance Minister, Borys Sobolev.The credit under threat is the next tranche of a multi-stage IMF loan.  The first stages have already been received by Ukraine and have been placed in the foreign currency reserves of the Bank of Ukraine, leaving the IMF "surprised" at the country's failure to pay the gas debt.  Ukraine's total gas debt to Russia now stands at US$240m.The television report said Ukraine cannot pay off its external debt before its collects it internal debt.  In November the state gas supplier, Ukrgaz, cut off about 400 debtor enterprises, and a further 300 will soon follow: this has not boosted income, but merely reduced expenditure.Ukrainian First Deputy Prime Minister, Pavel Lazarenko was quoted as saying he hoped Ukraine would clear the debt by the start of the new year, repaying a quarter of the US$92m in raw materials and metals.Failure to do so will result in the withholding of the IMF money.  "Moreover, it is quite possible that the IMF will demand the result of its latest credit, as it was allocated, precisely to pay off the foreign debt for gas used in 1994," Lazarenko was quoted as saying.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996MINING - Shares in Kazakh ferroalloy monopolist up for saleThe Kazkhrom transnational company, the monopoly producer of ferroalloys in Kazakhstan, is to sell 3.2 per cent of its shares at the Central Asian Stock Exchange, the Russian news agency, Interfax, reported from Alma-Ata on 4th December.The state-owned shares, valued at 341.92m tenge (about US$3.8m) are to be sold in a series of tenders starting on 5th December, Kazkhrom's charter capital is 7.56bn tenge, the equivalent of US$118.5m, the agency said, adding that according to exchange experts foreign investors might be interested in purchasing the shares.Kazkhrom was formed in June 1995, when three Kazakh chrome enterprises - an ore-dressing plant, the Ferrochrome joint-stock company in Aktyubinsk Region, and the Yermak ferroalloy plant in Pavlodar Region - passed under the control of the Japan Chrome Corporation for five years.  Under the terms of the agreement, the Japanese receive 2 per cent of  revenues from product sales and hold a 25 per cent stake in Kazkhrom.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996MINING - World Bank becomes co-owner of Buryatzoloto gold companyOver 30 per cent of shares in the Russian gold company, Buryatzoloto, are now controlled by the World Bank as a result of a cash auction held in Ulan-Ude, the capital of the Russian constituent republic of Buryatia, ITAR-TASS news agency reported on 4th December from the city.Over 134,000 shares in Buryatzoloto, consisting of a 28 per cent holding in this, the biggest company in Buryatia, were put up for sale at the auction.  They were bought for over R15bn by Proyekt-Finans-Konsalt, a Moscow-based company established by the World Bank.  The agency recalled that the company had already bought just over 2 per cent of shares in Buryatzoloto last year.Proyekt-Finans-Konsalt now intends to make considerable investments in the development of the gold industry in Buryatia.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996RATES OF EXCHANGE -Central Bank of Russia exchange rates for 27th December 1995Currency                RoublesUS dollar               4,648.00German mark             3,235.87Armenian dram              11.57Azerbaijani manat           1.0310 Belarusian rouble        3.98Estonian kroon            404.48Georgian lari           3,733.33Kazakh tenge               78.00Kyrgyz tenge              424.47Latvian lats            8,687.85Lithuanian litas        1,162.00Moldovan leu            1,023.951,000 Ukrainian karbovantsi                              25.90Uzbek som                 134.34Source: ITAR-TASS news agency on 26th December.         Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996STOCKS & SHARES - The state short-term bond marketThe market for state securities is one of the most powerful non-inflationary tools for financing the budget deficit, and the state pins serious hopes on it.  There are now more than 50 trillion roubles worth of state securities in circulation.  They are above all state short-term bonds (GKO).  These bonds are highly profitable, which is somewhat disquieting since the higher their profitability, the lower their reliability and vice versa, according to the laws of the securities markets in advanced countries, reports ECONews.According to the 1996 draft budget, two-thirds of the 3.9 per cent deficit of the Gross Domestic Product will be covered by issuing domestic loans.  This will call for issuing and placing an even larger volume of GKOs, whose annual turnover on the state securities market has topped US$200m, or 3 times more than in the beginning of the year.The high profitability of and, hence, the high demand for and high turnover of GKO securities has, on the one hand, led to the flow of investments and financial resources to the GKO sphere.  On the other hand, as the state lacks resources to buy out payment-due GKO bonds from previous issues, it has to direct towards these ends practically all the receipts from new state security tranches.  This was the case in September and October and may be replicated later on.  Specialists view this way of combating inflation as another financial pyramid of the MMM type (MMM is a notorious company which engaged in this practice), though done at the initiative and on the scope of the state.  The GKO does not resolve the central issue, for which an entire mechanism of state securities was put in operation: state short-term bonds do not restrain, but instead spur inflation, believes Mikhail Delyagin, in charge of the group for economic problems of the Analytical Department under the President of the Russian Federation.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996STOCKS & SHARES - St Petersburg lures the West with bondsSt Petersburg plans to issue bonds aimed at overseas investors for the first time since the 1917 Russian Revolution.  But fund managers say a combination of high risks and market restrictions will make it difficult to attract foreigners, reports The European.City mayor Anatoly Sobchak said at a presenation in early December in London that St Petersburg will issue US$500m worth of bonds, denominated in roubles, in 1996.  The city recently received permission to issue bonds with a life of more than a year, which foreginers could buy.It has already issued three, six and nine month bonds, worth US$370m, but they are only sold domestically because, under Russian law bonds with a life of less than a year cannot be converted into a foreign currency.Emerging market fund managers say they would like to buy the short-term municipal bonds and GKOs (Russian treasury bills), because of their very high yeilds, which average more than 100 per cent.The fund managers went to the presentation hoping the St Petersburg short-term bonds would offer a loophole, allowing the repatriation of proceeds, one said.  He said the risk of a devaluation of the rouble made longer-term bonds unattractive.  "Eighteen months is a long time in Russia," he said. Political worries focus on parliamentary elections in December, in which  communists did well, and on the presidential election next June.Fund managers will now wait in the hope that the Russian govenrment will relax its rules on repatriating funds some time next year, allowing foreigners into the short-term GKO and municipal bond markets.St Petersburg needs the municipal bond funds to help with its budget deficit and to finance development projects.  Andrew Dobson, a consultant on Russian financial projects, said the city wanted to gauge Western investors' interest in longer-term bonds.Leading bank plans big share issueShareholders in Gazbank, a leading commercial bank in Turkmenistan, have decided to increase its authorised capital from 25m to 100m manats by launching a second issue, Turkmen press agency reported on 9th December.The new 75m-manat issue is expected to be in the form of ordinary shares with a par value of 100,000 manats each.  The dividend forecast is for no less than 70 per cent per annum, the agency said, adding that applications to purchase over 70 per cent of the new shares had already been registered.  The Russian bank, Rossiyskiy Kredit, which already holds a 5 per cent stake in Gazbank's authorised capital, is among those interested in buying some of the new shares.Gazbank's shareholders intend to increase its authorised capital further to 300m manats in 1996.  Foreign investors will be encouraged to acquire stakes, but the bank's Turkmen founders are to retain a controlling block of shares.Gazbank issues short and medium-term credits to large private commercial structures in Turkmenistan, the agency recalled, adding that the proposed increase in the bank's authorised capital would enable it to "expand its lending volume significantly."Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996STOCKS & SHARES - Lithuania makes international debut in dollarsThe Republic of Lithuania on 11th December made its international bond market debut, issuing US$60m of 10 per cent, two-year bonds via Nomura International."Our entry into the international capital markets provides valuable diversification of Lithuania's funding sources and confirms international confidence in the progress of Lithuania's rapid economic transformation," said Algimantas Krizinauskas, deputy minister for finance.With the Litas, the national currency, pegged to the US dollar, the country's decision to tap the dollar sector seemed a natural one.  Moreover, "the dollar market will provide them with the best opportunity to establish the name of Lithuania among a wide range of investors," said one banker.At the re-offer price of 99.90, the bonds yield 444.8 basis points over the corresponding US Treasury note.  The proceeds will be used by Lithuania for general financing purposes.The deal was said to have been heavily pre-marketed ahead of launch, and was reported to have met a good response, especially from emerging-market fund managers in the US.LG Semicon, a South Korean semiconductor maker, issued US$100m of 6.375 per cent five-year bonds yielding 80 basis points over the US benchmark at the 99.68 re-offer price.  The deal was also led by Nomura, which reported a positive response from fund managers in Asia and Europe, especially Germany.The Republic of Colombia issued Y15bn of 3 per cent five-year bonds via Merill Lynch and Kokusai Europe.  Yielding about 100 basis points over yen Libor, the bonds were considerably more tightly priced than Colombia's recent D-Mark offering priced at around 170 basic points over Libor.However, like other issuers in recent months, Colombia was able to exploit Japanese retail investors' hunger for assets that offer a significant yield pick-up over domestic products.  "Japanese retail investors don't look at comparative value - they just look for higher yields," said one dealer.Crdit Local de France issued FFr5bn of four-year bonds via CDC and Socit Gnrale, yielding 20.5 basis points over the corresponding French government bond.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996STOCKS & SHARES - The size of Russia's state short-term bond marketThe market for state securities is one of the most powerful non-inflationary tools for financing the budget deficit, and the state pins serious hopes on it.  There are now more than 50 trillion roubles (US$11bn) worth of state securitiesBack to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AUTOMOBILES & AVIATION -Kamaz begins manufacture of clean enginesRussian heavy-truck maker, Kamaz, based in Naberezhnyye Chelny in the constituent republic of Tatarstan, has produced the first batch of a new series of ecologically-clean engines following modernisation of its engine plant, gutted by fire two years ago, ITAR-TASS news agency reported on 2nd December.The fully upgraded plant is now making advanced engines for trucks and buses.  Three models received certification in September, confirming compliance with European rules on exhaust smoke density and toxicity.Kamaz is to make 150 trucks fitted with the new engines by the end of the year.  In 1996, the company is to begin making 260 hp engines, 20 hp more powerful than its prescent range.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996AUTOMOBILES & AVIATION - GAZ lorry factory output up, new models plannedGAZ of Nizhniy Novgorod, arguably Russia's best-performing car and truck maker, has posted better output for almost all of its models in January-October 1995 and is scheduling the launch of a new range of Gazelle light truck modifications and negotiating joint manufacturing deals with foreign firms.The company said it made 169,760 automobiles in January-October, 10.2 per cent more than in the same period of last year, including 100,570 cars (up 3.1 per cent) and 69,190 trucks (up 22.4 per cent).GAZ has practially monoplised the Russian market for light urban trucks with its nippy Gazelle.  It turned out 48,346 of them in the first 10 months of this year, mostly the basic tarpaulin model.  It made 14,000 of the trucks from its launch to the end of 1994.  The company started making a whole-metal body modification on 15th December.  The company, meanwhile, last November struck a deal with the rest of Russia's main car and truck makers not to raise prices for at least three months.  GAZ has held its prices steady since August.Geenadiy Suvorov, who advises the company's President Nikolay Pugin, said the company turned out its 15-millionth automobile on 4th December.  It was a six-seat Gazelle developed in conjunction with Sokol, a Nizhniy Novgorod fighter aircraft factory, as part of a local defence conversion programme, Nizhniy Novgorod Automobiles.Executives from both Daewoo of South Korea and the Ford Motor Company of the US visited the plant in October for talks on possible manufacturing ventures.  Vladimir Churagev, GAZ's top manufacturing executive, held similar negotiations with BMW in Germany.  However, most manufacturers are only offering GAZ the right to make outdated models.  Talks, however, have made headway with Zahnrad Fabrik of Germany on a joint project to make five-gear transmissions.GAZ in 1994 made 190,000 units, including 118,000 cars and 72,000 trucks.Orenburg defence factory to produce civilian helicoptersThe Strela production  assocation, a former defence industry engineering works in the Urals town of Orenburg, is to start production of Kamov Ka-126 light helicopters for civilian use, the Economic News Agency reported on 6th December.The helicopter is to be produced in two modifications, for cargo, with a maximum payload of 1,000kg, and for passengers, with a pod accommodating 6 people.  The company has already  received orders from several customers, including the Russian Ministry of Civil Defence, Emergencies and Natural Disasters. Israel, Taiwan and the Central Asian states have also expressed interest. Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ECOLOGY - Pure water emeraldIn the West, ecologically-clean products indicate that people care for their own health and seek a lifestyle to which food producers quickly react.  The latest fad is a litre of drinking water bought which costs US$1 at your local food stores.  It costs, doesn't it?  It is nobody's secret that the quality of water in many Russian cities leaves much to be desired.  Foreign and Russian gadgets for household and neighbourhood water treatment are costly to use because their filters have to be replaced.  This is the explanation for the high cost of drinking water, reports Know-How from Russia/95 of RIA - Novosti.The water treatment unit, Emerald, for household use, created by specialists at the Moscow-based scientific-technical joint venture which bears that name, is unprecedented, a forerunner of a world ecological revolution, specialists maintain.  Its operational principle is as simple as it is original.  Electrochemical activation occurs in a light plastic cylinder.  Anode oxidation destroys pathogenic micro-organisms.  Active chlorine compounds are decomposed and ions of heavy metals are restored on the cathode to become isolated in precipitation. Meanwhile, the water preserves the health valuable elements - fluorine, calcium and magnesium salts.  The pot in which such water is boiled accumulates no scale whatsoever.Clinical tests show that Emerald-treated water improves immunity and makes people less prone to allergic diseases.  Especially in the case of kidney ailments.  its principle of operation can be used for disinfecting water in swimming pools and even municipal water treatment plants, replacing costly and environmently-hazardous chemical forms of treatment.At the request of livestock breeders, experts from Emerald JV have also developed a method for raising calves, using water processed by their unit.  The method improves the stock, hence the beef quality.  Ecologically-speaking, the beef is cleaner.Most importantly, the new water-treatment method is economical.  No expendable materials are needed.  It calls for only electricity, though less than that used by an electric bulb, to produce up to 350 litres of pure water ran hour.  That costs about 20 kopecks, instead of a dollar, per litre.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY - Subsoil nuclear power plantRussia's Minatom (Ministry for Nuclear Energy), Goskomoboronprom (State Committee for the Defence Industry) and Mintopenergo (Ministry for Fuel and Energy) have brought their heads together to build the country's first Subterranean Atomic Heat and Electricity Station (PATES) in the Murmansk Region, reports Know-How from Russia/95 of RIA - Novosti.The idea of building a subterranean nuclear power plant (PATES) was put forward in his time by Academician Andrei Sakharov.  Now it is implemented by the Academician A Krylov Central Research Institute.  In a competition of small-capacity units for subsoil power facilities the well-reputed KLT-40 reactor used in nuclear-powered iceboats was picked out.The capacity of the subterranean nuclear power plant will be 300 megawatts (six 50-mWt units).  It is enough to supply heat and electricity for a large naval base, which is currently engaged in destroying nuclear-powered submarines under treaties on arms reduction.  The developers of the Shtokman natural gas field are also interested in the building of the station.  Gas will be pumped along ferroconcrete pipes, whose manufacture calls for heavy power inputs.Is it really advantageous to build subterranean nuclear power stations?  Hard rocks protect not only against radiation but represent an exceptionally reliable envelope which can withstand loads by several degrees of ten larger than any ferroconcrete or metal structures.  Air-tight locking contraptions will ensure protection against possible external effects, including even acts of subversion.  Located underground, nuclear reactors call for less anti-seismic measures.Specialists hope that the first step towards safe subsoil technology in nuclear electricity generation will be a success.Nuclear submarine plant begins construction of drilling platformA nuclear submarine plant in the northern Russian town of Severodvinsk has for the first time started the construction of an offshore oil drilling platform, ITAR-TASS news agency reported on 4th December, from Severodvinsk.The plant, which builds nuclear-powered submarines for the Russian Navy, is expected to take several years to complete the project.  The platform, designed by specialists from St Petersburg and Severodvinsk, is to be used to develop an oilfield in the Arctic shelf of the Barents Sea, 60km from the shore.  The oilfield has estimated reserves exceeding 100m tonnes.Lithuania installs new network of radiation monitoring stationsDanish experts have completed the assembly of an automated station to monitor gamma radiation at the Lithuanian Ministry of Environmental Protection in Vilnius, the Baltic News Service reported from the Lithuanian capital, on 28th November.The construction of similar stations has began in the towns of Turmantas, Visaginas, Rimse and Gaide, all located "a dozen kilometres" from Lithuania's Ignalina nuclear power plant.  The agency quoted a press spokeman for the Ministry of Environment Protection as saying a network incorporating eight such stations was to be built in the country with Danish help, under an agreement between the Lithuanian ministry and Denmark's Ministry of Internal Affairs. Work on the project was started by Sweden and was later taken over by the Danes, BNS said.Although minor accidents occur quite often at the Ignalina plant, official sources have always maintained that there have been no changes in background radiation around it.  The new network of monitoring stations, the agency said, would make it possible to observe any changes, discover their cause and issue prompt warnings to people in the country, to neighbouring states and to international organisations.  The main drawback of the existing radiation monitoring facilities, which include a small system inside the Ignalina plant, several automated monitoring points within 30km and equipment for measuring gamma radiation at various weather stations throughout Lithuania, is that information collected there cannot be conveyed promptly to any central control station, BNS said.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996ENERGY - A warm futureTartu in Estonia is being fast-forwarded to an environmentally friendly future by Western technology- and its residents are getting better heating systems for the long, cold winter into the bargain.Extensive programmes, to cut heat loss, reduce energy consumption and convert boilers from fossil fuel to bio-fuels mean the town has a cheaper cleaner, more efficient and more reliable heating system than before."We feel we have joined the 21st Century," says Enn Pernam, director of Tatu's Aardla boiler plant - new fed by wood chips instead of oil - after the inefficiencies and waste of the Soviet era.Aardla is one of more than 40 Baltic regional projects relying on financial and technical assistance from Nutek, a Swedish public-sector organisation promoting technology and energy efficiency.Nutek's aim is to improve energy efficiency in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania (and, to a more limited extent, Russia and Poland) by working with municipalities and local companies to convert boilers and improve heat distribution and building standards.The idea is to try to bolster environmental protection by reconstructing boiler houses to operate wholly on local fuel, and reducing energy loss in residential houses and heating systems.Other Western organisations involved in similar projects include the World Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.Among Swedish companies involved in the work, Energiakonsult has provided technical skills, and KMW Energi has supplied equipment.  Local companies have participated in the reconstruction of the boiler houses.The two sides have contrasting motives.  The Baltic states have an obvious financial interest in cheaper fuel after a surge in prices since their independence from the Soviet Union (where heating was supplied at completely uncommercial rates) four years ago.  An average Estonian can spend up to a third of his salary on heating.The Swedes are more interested in helping the Baltic States cut their output of carbon dioxide as part of joint implementation arrangements, where one country can gain a credit for lowering the CO2 output of another.  Both sides seem to be achieving their objectives.  Using wood chips instead of oil has cut the fuel bills of some Baltic boiler plants by up to 50 per cent.Pername says the Aardla conversion is cutting fuel costs by 2.1m Estonian crowns a year.  Nutek, meanwhile, says its projects will cut CO2 production by as much as 250,000 tonnes a year, as well as reducing output of sulphur dioxide and nitrous oxide.The main idea is to use the savings from lower fuel costs to repay the loans advanced by Nutek to finance the improvements. But that means that, initially at least, end-users are not generally getting lower heating bills."This is essentially a commercial operation," says Hans Nilsson, the head of Nutek's energy efficiency unit.  Loans are granted by Nutek to plant owners at Stockholm Interbank Offered Rates (currently about 8.65 per cent) and are repayable over 10 years, with a two-year period of grace.  As security, Nutek gets guarantees from local municipalities and real estate as collateral.  In one case in Latvia, the security is a municipal cinema.Where Nutek believes its concept scores is in the wider benefits it offers.  Residents might not be getting lower fuel bills, but they are getting better value for money - longer heating seasons, higher average room temperatures and hot water during summer.Benefits also include reduced wastage, better heat regulation and heating systems that last longer."We are aiming for better all-round quality.  In the past, the way people cooled down was simply by opening the window," says Gudrun Knutsson, the programme's project leader.Nutek's priorities are speed, affordability and reliability.  It emphasises simple, tried-and-tested technology and cuts through red tape by keeping involvement with national governments to a minimum.It also provides a consultant to assist the local project leader with implementation.  Significantly, there is no "buy Swedish" requirements attached to the loans, which not only benefits other international suppliers but also companies in the Baltic region, where costs are lower.  Swedish companies are, nevertheless, winning a substantial number of contracts and are linking up with Baltic companies to boost business.Nutek has committed Skr227.5m to its Baltic energy projects and has recently been promised a further SKr50m from the Swedish government.  The idea is that, as loan and interest are repaid, funds are recycled to new projects.  However, Nutek does not expect to fully recoup its outlays, partly because its anticipates some defaults.Not  everything has gone smoothly.  Some residents are not paying their fuel bills - because they are so high - meaning that plant owners are also finding the going tough.  There are also questions to access to wood chips and prices.  In Lithuania, for example, the state has a strong hand because it owns much of the forest.  Middle men have also tried to drive up prices by cornering supplies.  Finally, there are continuing political and legal uncertainties which could undermine the value of the securities and guarantees pledged.Nutek says its model works particularly well in Baltic states because they have already access to wood and a strong desire to be more self-sufficient in energy and cut costly imports.  It works less well in Poland, which is keen to support a substantial domestic coal industry.But the Swedish organisation is not discouraged.  Nilsson says there are many more projects needing to be financed.  Indeed, he is trying to promote a clearing house system that will bring potential financiers together with municipalities and local companies in Eastern Europe to drive the process further.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIA EXPRESS EXECUTIVE BRIEFING via NewsNetJANUARY 15, 1996Russia rejoins the Space Race; IntersputnikIn the early 1980s, when the first European satellite televisionentrepreneurs wanted to show off the capabilities of their big, expensive dishes, as often as not they tuned into signals from a Russian Gorizont satellite; here was a technology which could leap the Iron Curtain and do no end of good for East-West relations.Now, 15 years on, the Iron Curtain's gone, the Soviet empire has disintegrated, and those same Gorizonts are part of a large - if largely ageing - Russian satellite fleet which still plays a big role in the international broadcasting industry.  It may not be quite the leading role envisaged by those who saw a potentially world-beating space industry, liberated from the dead hand of Soviet bureaucracy.  But the latest signals out of Moscow and St Petersburg suggest that, after five years of false dawns and unrealised dreams, a renaissance is at last under way.This might surprise those Western operators whose belief in the 'new' Russia has been stretched by recent repeated launch delays and unexplained changes of plan, harking back to the worst days of the old regime.  Like every other sector in the Russian economy, the satellite industry has been hit by economic chaos, which is far from resolved; in some sectors, such as the TV industry, the point has been reached where some stations can't even pay their electricity bills for transmission.  The chief impact on the hybrid state/private sector satellite industry has been an inability to keep to its replacement (Express) satellite launch schedule - a vital process which virtually ground to a halt in early 1995, ostensibly as a direct result of the Rimsat debacle (see below).And so, far from becoming a powerful rival to Western satellite operators, Russia has been losing clients to them, even those early 'breakthrough' clients, CNNI and TV5.  A further blow was former Soviet republic Kazakhstan's recent decision to switch all TV distribution from Russian satellites to the Intelsats at 57 and 66 degrees East.  This, according to Intelsat regional director CIS, Central and Eastern Europe, Yuli Wexler, was partly due to the ageing Russian fleet - "Their schedule for replacement has been falling behind," partly to Intelsat technical support services.  For similar reasons Intelsat has been picking up significantly more Russian  business both in telecoms (it has recently set up its first intra-Russian network with RussTelecom and Teleport TP) and in TV and SNG traffic --"TASS, for example, has become a large user of Intelsat globally."Now, as so often in the past five years, the industry is making all the right noises about co-operation, openness and technological upgrading - but will it happen?Two recent deals indicate that serious progress has been made in parts of the industry already.  SES's decision last year to use the Russo-American Lockheed-Krunichev-Energia International consortium to launch Astra 1F atop a Russian Proton rocket underlined the West's new-found confidence in Russian space technology.  A further boost came in July, when Eutelsat decided to order its first made-in-Russia spacecraft, SESAT, from manufacturer NPO-PM of Krasnoyarsk, again using Proton for its slated early 1998 launch.  The 18-transponder payload for this craft will, however, be built by Alcatel-Espace in France.  And Intelsat, which has yet to make direct use of Russian expertise, is looking closely at Proton:  "We've talked to the owners, seen the launches at Baikonur, and it's entirely possible that we can use it at some stage; we're not excluding the possibility," Wexler says.But while the launch and construction side of the industry is alive and kicking, what of the long-awaited boom in attracting Russian satellite capacity?  Ironically, the very success of Proton could be affecting progress in this area:  "The elevation of launch costs is ripping the heart out of the industry," one foreign ex-client notes:  "In 1992 a launch was under US$5m, now it's US$70m; it means they can no longer be so competitive."Currently there are 17 geostationary Russian satellites providing feeds for broadcasters around the world - though the concentration of active orbital positions is in the Far Eastern and Central Asian regions contingent on former Soviet territories.  Between them, the elderly Gorizont and Radugas and the new Expresses are carrying customers as varied as Portugal's RTP Internacional, Business India TV and others - on top of their primary function of distributing television, radio, telephony and data services across the six times zones of the massive former Soviet empire.In theory, the old Gorizonts are to be replaced by Express Satellites, the third of which is due for launch "early in 1996" to the popular 80 degrees East slot.  Although still some way behind the West in terms of payload (offering 12 transporters, 10 at C-Band and two Ku-Band) and longevity (five to seven years as against 10 to 12 for US designs), Express is a much-needed enhancement of the Gorizont design, notably in having full north-south spin stabilisation.  The older satellites' notorious tendency to drift by as much as five degrees out of their nominal orbital position should become a thing of the past.Unfortunately, as a spokesman for InformcosmosConsult, the legal and consulting agency for the Russian Space Agency confirms, the Gorizont replacement scheme was largely dependent on revenues from the now bankrupt Asia-Pacific satellite venture, Rimsat.  When Rimsat's payments stopped in 1994, the RSA provided "emergency funding" to complete the first Express, launched in October 1994.  Informcosmos says it is "doing its best trying to find funding for the Express programme... We hope it will be kept alive and we will have some successful launches in the future."Financial problems have also plagued Russia's first DBS programme: the original 'Gelikon' scheme from 1989 proposed up to 10 satellites to cover the whole of the former USSR by 1995.  In fact it was not until 1994 that the first DBS satellite - Gals 1 - was launched, with a second to follow by the end of 1995.  The name 'Gelikon' seems to have been dropped: no domestic DBS customers have emerged, and two of the three high-power (90W/57dBW EIRP) Ku-Band transporters on Gals 1 were leased to a Chinese broadcaster.  Gals was even moved 71 degrees East to serve this client's needs, but no regular services have been detected.  As for Gals 2, even an Intersputnik official responsible for marketing the capacity was unable to confirm its eventual orbital slot - "This has not yet been decided, it will depend on negotiations with users."He adds that "some requests" had come from European broadcasters: one of the DBS slots to which the RSA has rights, 23 degrees East, would in theory allow a DTH service to dishes as small as 50cm in most of Europe.  Gals could also be used for digital services: the first tests using MPEG-2 signals on a Russian satellite were carried out successfully by the sixth channel of St Petersburg and the Scientific Research Institute for Television, Moscow last summer, using Scientific Atlanta encoding.  Should the Gals programme take off, more capacious, more powerful advanced Gals R designs are ready and waiting; on the other hand, observers of past Russian DBS schemes would advise against holding of breath.At least three similar projects have come and gone within the past decade: after Gorizon there was the TRomantis' scheme, a Ku-Band joint Russian-German joint venture; this, like a C-Band co-operative venture with Canada, SovCanstar, came to nothing.  Then in 1993 there was GIS Globostar with its scheme to launch up to five 'Coupon' satellites offering massive datacoms capacity for Russian banks, and steerable, highly flexible Ku-F and spot-beams for any interested broadcasters across Asia, Africa and the Middle East.  This, which would have been Russia's first privately-owned satellite system, was backed by banks which have since pulled back; and though the company still exists, the Coupons remain 'paper satellites' only.The inside agentFor broadcasters outside the Russian Federation, the gateway to low-cost capacity on Russian satellites is provided by Intersputnik, the Moscow based 22-nation satellite communications organisation which has handled the transition from state agency to outward-looking commercial operators more successfully than some.Intersputnik - which its marketing manager, Hernedo Rodriguez, emphasises "is not a Russian organisation, but an international intergovernmental organisation" - goes to lengths to make the process as painless as possible for its customers, who are, of course, useful sources of hard currency.According to Rodriguez, Intersputnik now handles five times the voice traffic it did in 1990, with a 30 per cent year-on-year growth during 1995.  Television traffic, accounting for 80 per cent of Intersputnik's business, fared better still, with an 80 per cent growth in 1995.  Overall revenues were 40 per cent up this year as a result, he adds:  "We have more than 100 state and private companies as users, among them companies from the US, UK, Japan, Canada, France, Portugal, China, India, etc."He cites Intersputnik's "democratic entry procedure and terms and conditions of operation, rather low tariffs, a simple and efficient system of mutual settlements," and "a sufficiently high percentage of the annual guaranteed profit share" as factors which have attracted many PTTs and broadcasters to join the group as either full members or users.According to one former Western customer, Intersputnik can even be easier to deal with than some of its Western counterparts:  "It was pleasantly straightforward,"  says Jim Hodgetts of the Francophobe international broadcaster, TV5, which leased a transponder on the Statsionar 12 Gorizont in 1992 to reach the former French territories of southeast Asia.  "Each year we'd get their typed bill for US$1.25m, and so long as we kept paying, any problems we had we could put directly to their engineers - it was not at all politically secretive."The give-away here, of course, is the price: as another Gorizont user puts it. "You get an awful lot of coverage for your money."  A berth on an Express or Gorizont at the most popular positions, 11/14 degrees West and those around 80 degrees East, can take your signal to virtually the whole of the Third World and most of the First and Second World too, as Bombay/London-based Asian channel, Apna TV, has discovered to its advantage.  Apna is also breaking ground by taking the single Ku-Band transponder on the 11 degrees West Gorizont 26, giving it enough signal strength to market Apna and its add-on Sunrise TV as a DTH service to Asian viewers in the UK and northwest Europe, though viewers will need 1.2 metre dishes.One of Intersputnik's star European clients is RTP Interna ional, whose transponder on Express 2 at 14 degrees West gives it remarkably good coverage of territories in Africa and Latin America in one swoop:  "It's a question of coverage," says Jos Banha Nunes of Marconi SA, Lisbon, lessee of space segment for the state broadcaster's international service, "but also a matter of price and power.  Using the global beam gives them coverage of all of Africa, as well as South America and East Coast USA markets.  Downlinks can use TVROs of 2.5 metres in the islands off the African coast, and 3/4 metres elsewhere."And, as Alexandre Fernandes, RTPi's international operations manager, adds, "This price is good - about half the price of the equivalent coverage by any other satellite, and the quality is good."  RTPi's Express signal is particularly in demand in the former Portuguese African colonies, with terrestrial relays, for example, in Mozambique, So Tom and the Cape Verde Islands.No complaints, either, about drifting satellites - but as Hodgetts maintains, the Gorizonts' reputation for unreliability had been overplayed in the past, perhaps due to anti-Russian prejudice.  "They're as good as anyone's, they might look primitive, but once they're up and made to work, they're very, very solid."So why, after three years, did TV5 jump from Gorizont to Intelsat 702?  "We were obliged to move because the new Express would not have covered the same area," Hodgetts says: and here he puts his finger on the real reason for Westerners' disinclination to use what for the most part are hugely cost-effective services:  "The satellites are operated to Russian criteria, for the benefit of Russian broadcasters."Intersputnik, in fact, has at its disposal only a small, if strategically-important, part of the Russian fleet.  Currently, it controls 29 transponders on eight Gorizont and Express satellites in Indian and Atlantic Ocean slots, plus the Gals DBS capacity.  Tariffs, Rodriguez says, are "lower than those offered by similar organisations," based on "world average prices," but also on occupied capacity rather than number of channels, with discounts for long leases. and "preferential tarrifs" for new services.Back in 1993, Intersputnik's board voted to develop its own satellite, Intersputnik VIII, a 24-C-Band, 16-Ku-Band transponder craft which it intends to have in operation "1997-98."  With C-Band EIRPs of 37-40dBW, and Ku-Band powers of 48-53dBW, the new craft will allow use of much smaller dishes for both Earth station and DTH reception.  New Intersputnik orbital positions have also been notified to the ITU for co-ordination: 97, 83, 32, 23, 16, six and three degrees West; and 17, 27, 59, 64, 67, 75, 114 and 153 degrees East.As Rodriguez points out, these "could be of interest for developing regional and global projects on a joint stake basis."Back to Headline List WT03-B06-22IA087-000634-B042-314http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it115.html 205.156.212.5 19970122031357 text/html 40860HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:11:40 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:46 GMTContent-length: 40673Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it115.html Sample Issue Copyright RUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FINANCE & ECONOMY STATISTICS (96 words) 1995 AT FIRST GLANCE (100 words) STRIKES WIDEN (269 words) CBR TO HELP BANKS (125 words) PRODUCTION SHARING LAW PASSED (182 words) RUBLE CORRIDOR COULD END (68 words) ECONOMIC NOTES (581 words) PRIVATIZATION: STET DEAL OFF (288 words) DEBT/EQUITY SWAP PROPOSED (187 words) BANK PRIVATIZATION DELAYED (64 words) OIL STAKES SOLD (92 words) RYBINSK MOTORS SALE DELAYED (91 words) LEGISLATION: CURRENCY CONTROLS (76 words) EXPORT DUTIES CUT (67 words) ENERGY BODY CREATED (65 words) REGIONAL LAWS (90 words) REPORTING LAW (78 words) TAX LAW UPDATE: IMPORT CONTROLS (77 words) VAT TAX CHANGES (100 words) PROFITS TAX CHANGES (91 words) [NOTE: Tax law updates are furnished by Coopers & Lybrand Russia. Please (24 words) MARKETS: GRAIN IMPORTS BEGIN (223 words) REFINERIES TO BE REVAMPED (156 words) TIMBER EXPORTS SLUMP (100 words) COMPANY BRIEFS: COMPANY BRIEFS (525 words) RESOURCES: Major trade fairs and exhibitions in 1996: (223 words) SPECIAL REPORT: THE DUMA ELECTIONS by Josh Zander (1370 words) CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996STATISTICSNovember's inflation rate dropped to 4.5%, after rising to 4.7% in October.Preliminary data show that December's rate may be as low as3%.The ruble lost 1.4% of its value against the dollar.  It opened at 4,580 to$1 on 12/1 and closed at 4,645 on 12/29.  It is likely that the ruble willdecline sharply in early January as new ruble corridor trading limits gointo effect.The RINACO Plus RESI index of Russian stocks fell during the month byseveral percent.  (Technical difficulties prevent inclusion offull data for the month.)Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 19961995 AT FIRST GLANCEAlthough the results of the Duma elections on December 17 showed widespreaddissatisfaction with the government's economic policies, (see "Duma ElectionResults,") there can be little doubt that they produced substantive changesin economic performance in 1995.Preliminary data indicates that in many respects the economy improvedmarkedly over 1994;  in other respects, the rate of overall decline hasslowed considerably.In the opinion of many economists, the country stands on edge of an up-turnin 1996:                             1994      1995GDP (%change)                -15%     -4%Industrial output            -21%     -3%Inflation                    226%     140%Deficit (%of GDP)            10%      4%Unemployment                 6%       8%Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996STRIKES WIDENStrikes began to hit widespread sectors of the economy, prompted primarilyby the enormous backlog of unpaid wages and rising unemployment.The Federation of Independent Trade Unions (FNPR) called for a nationwide"Day of Action" on November 30, which brought out thousands of workers.Demonstrations were held in some cities, but not Moscow, St. Petersburg orNovgorod.The FNPR has claimed that workers are owed a total of 13.6 trillion rubles(about $2.9 bln).  In addition, although by ILO criteria the country'sunemployment rate is 8%, organized labor has charged that the actual rate,including "hidden unemployment," is 15%.Trains between St. Petersburg and Moscow, one of the primary freight andpassenger rail corridors in the country, were halted on December 7 when theOktyabrskaya Railway said it had no money to pay two months' salaries.Coal miners, who continue to hold labor actions, have demanded another Rb500 bln in arrears.  Although the government had just allocated Rb 500 blnfor this purpose, union leaders said the amount was insufficient and wantedit doubled, to a total of Rb 1 trillion.Oil workers in Komi and miners in Tula were staging hunger strikes toprotest working conditions as well as unpaid wages.   As the month progressed, school teachers nationwide went out on strike aswell as air traffic controllers in some areas.  On many occasions in 1995, President Yeltsin and other government spokesmenissued calls for wage arrears to be paid, particularly during the run-up tothe Duma elections.  Almost all the back salaries are owed by stateenterprises and agencies.  Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CBR TO HELP BANKSThe Central Bank of Russia (CBR) may be abandoning credit auctions as ameans of pumping cash into the country's commercial banking system.A draft document indicates that the CBR is considering allowing banks to usetreasury bills as collateral for repurchase funds.  This is a method widelyused in the West.The CBR said it would also make special credits available for banks whichare experiencing short-term financial problems.The number of private banks has declined in the last year, due mainly tomergers and bankruptcies, and the country's commercial banking systemremains fragile.  With the decline of inflation and the implementation ofthe ruble trading corridor, banks have lost the opportunity to earn thelarge profits they did in 1992-1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996PRODUCTION SHARING LAW PASSEDAfter months of often acrimonious debate, the Federation Council, the upperhouse of the parliament, has finally passed a law regulating oil productionsharing agreements with foreign firms.The law, which was passed by the Duma some time ago, was rejected by theCouncil last month, and was heavily amended before final passage.The revised law requires the Duma to approve each production sharingagreement reached between foreign and domestic oil companies, limits thelegal recourse of foreign investors to international courts, and givesRussia a unilateral right of renegotiation should world oil prices change.A number of pending major deals are awaiting passage of the law, includingExxon's $10 bln Sakhalin-1 project. Reportedly, tens of billions of dollarsin other investments are also on hold.Opponents of the Council's version, which was influenced by nationalistdemands, believe that it creates an unfavorable climate fordesperately-needed foreign investments.  There was some speculation thatPresident Yeltsin would veto it.Western oil firms declined public comment on the new law, although theirreaction has been reported as being negative.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996RUBLE CORRIDOR COULD ENDSergei Alekhashenko, the new first deputy chairman of the CBR, said that theruble corridor could end in mid-1996.  Alekhashenko said he was speaking onhis own, and not expressing bank policy.  Prior to his appointment, he was the head of a think tank associated withthe Russian Union of Industrialists and Entrepreneurs.Alekhashenko's views have been supported by President Yeltsin's top economicadvisor, Aleksandr Livshits.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ECONOMIC NOTESAgriculture Minister Aleksandr Nazarchuk, said that reforms are necessary torescue large, inefficient former collective and state farms. He said that asmany as 40% of these farms are "incapable of working efficiently" and thaturgent action, including land privatization, is required to ease the situation.+++At present, 136 foreign banks are operating in Russia.  Of these, 10 arefully-owned by foreign banks, and 50 have mixed capital.Russian banks have not been as successful in opening offices in the US.Promstroibank,Incombank and Credit-Moscow have thus far been unable toobtain permission from the Treasury Department to open offices in New York.The only Russian bank with US representation is Vnesheconombank.+++A study conducted by the Leontiev Center and the Russian MarketingAssociation has shown that the country's private sector is performingmuch better than the state sector.Private enterprises recorded production increases of 2.3% in 1995, comparedto a drop of 10% in the state sector.  In addition, afterbeing adjusted for inflation, salaries in the private sector rose by anaverage of 9.8%, while state salaries fell 6.6%.+++In the first 11 months of 1995, Russia's foreign trade increased 21%, to$113 bln, over the same period in 1994.  The trade surplus was $31 bln.Exports to non-CIS countries rose 28% while those to the CIS fell by 4%.+++A survey compiled by the Corporate Resources Group in Switzerland shows thatMoscow is the world's most expensive city outside Japan.  On a scale inwhich New York City is 100 points, Moscow ranked 142, just ahead of Zurichand Geneva.+++Russia will impose quotas on the import of textiles from the EuropeanCommunity to protect its domestic textile industry.Data released show that textile imports to Russia exceeded exports by $563 mln.+++The Ministry of Economics said that it expected investments to grow by 4% in1996 and rise to Rb 310 trillion ($67 bln).  It expects Rb 50trillion of this total to come from Russian banks, a figure the Associationof Russian Banks disputes.  The group noted that commercial banks were ableto raise less than Rb 5 trillion to participate in the last round of stockauctions.+++The agreement by which DeBeers sells 95% of Russia's diamonds through itsCentral Selling Organization has been extended until February 1, givingnegotiators a chance to reach agreement on a new deal.  It had been reportedthat the talks were at an impasse, and that no new arrangement would bepossible before the December 31 expiration.+++Russia, Azerbaijan and an international oil consortium have signed aagreement to transport Caspian Sea oil through a Russian pipeline tothe port of Novorossisk.The pipeline, owned by the state-owned monopoly Transneft, will go intooperation in the second half of 1996.+++Russian computer companies may be experiencing difficulties owing toconsolidations in the banking sector.  This may result in sales andproduction slowdowns for the first time since 1988.  For some time, theprimary markets for Russian-made computers has been the bankingindustry and state organizations.+++Reaction to the Duma elections and uncertainty about June's presidentialelections sent the value of Russian stocks down in trading on exchangesacross the country.  By the end of the month, shares were trading 30% belowtheir 1995 highs.Russian and foreign brokers said that they believed buying opportunitiesexisted, and that stocks could be bought at bargain prices.  Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996STET DEAL OFFRussia's single largest privatization deal collapsed when Italy's STETdeclined to make an initial payment for the 25% stake in Svyazinvest it hadsuccessfully won at auction.The auction, held on December 1, was expected to raise $430 mln in cash plusa commitment for an investment of $400 per share over the next 2 years.STET's winning bid was $630 mln plus the investment promise.After some initial confusion, during which the State Property Committeeclaimed the deal was off and STET insisted it was on, it wasannounced on the 26th that the offer was dead.The committee issued a statement saying, "In spite of the Russiangovernment's desire to compromise, STET insisted on a form of paymentwhich went totally beyond the tender conditions."There were suggestions, which were discounted by outside observers and theRussian government, that STET pulled out because of the results of the Dumaelections.  Sources close to STET's board of directors said that the companyhad reconsidered its bid because it would be unable to realize a return onits investment until the year 2000.  A more likely cause of the collapse was STET's reluctance to make itsinitial payment until all the details of the transaction had been clarifiedby the Property Committee and until the future of Svyazinvest'srelationships with the 85 regional telephone companies it controls werecompletely spelled out.The government announced that it would reschedule the auction of the 25%stake in Svyazinvest, perhaps as early as January, and would continue plansto sell a further 24% share in the telephone company.  At present, it isimpossible to say whether the deal's collapse will affect the overallprivatization effort.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996DEBT/EQUITY SWAP PROPOSEDThe head of the State Property Committee, Alfred Kokh, said that the agencywas beginning work on a plan which would allow creditors to swap theirRussian debt for shares in Russian companies.Kokh indicated that state-owned shares would continue to be sold in 1996,including stakes in a dozen major companies, including the insurance giant,Rosgosstrakh.At a minimum, market capitalization would have to be raised 10 times in1996, to at least $60 bln for Kokh's proposal to work.  Kokh said that hisagency's preliminary goal was to raise market capitalization, currentlyabout $7 bln, some 15 to 20 times, in 1996, allowing the debt/equity swap tobegin in late 1996 or early 1997.Russian stock prices, due to political uncertainties and charges that theprivatization process has allowed well-placed companies to buy shares atrock-bottom prices, are currently depressed, and it remains to be seenwhether the government's ambitious privatization goals for 1996 can beachieved.  It was hoped to raise $1.9 bln in 1995, but with the collapse of the STEToffer, this goal will probably not be met.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996BANK PRIVATIZATION DELAYEDThe State Duma passed a law on December 10 postponing the privatization offormer Soviet foreign and other banks.  Under the terms of existinglegislation, these banks were to have been privatized by January 1, 1996,but the Duma has pushed the target date back to January 1, 2000.Among the banks affected are the nationwide savings bank, Sberbank, andVnesheconombank, formerly Vneshtorgbank.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996OIL STAKES SOLDStakes in major oil producing companies were sold in December, mostly togroups of banks.Stolichny Bank Sberizhni and the unknown Neftyanaya Finansovaya Kompaniyasuccessfully acquired 51% of Sibneft for $100.3 mln.  The banks' bid wasguaranteed by Bank Menatep, which is a major participant in the acquisitionof 78% of the YUKOS oil group.NIKoil, a financial consulting firm, bought 16% of the oil giant,  LUKoil.NIKoil was already acting as a broker for LUKoil, adding to charges that theauctions were controlled by a small group of insiders.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996RYBINSK MOTORS SALE DELAYEDAn auction for 37% of the aircraft engine manufacturer Rybinsk Motors wasput back until February because of court challenges to the sale.Company executives have brought suit disputing the authority of the StateProperty Committee to hold the sale, to the declaration of the company'sbankruptcy, and to the inclusion in the company's assets of a fund designedto benefit the workforce.The auction may be held as early as February.  Gazprom, the producer ofnatural gas, has indicated that it will try to acquire the engine manufacturer.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CURRENCY CONTROLS A decree establishing currency controls on the import-export trade is beingconsidered,according to a report in Nezvisimaya Gazeta.The decree will require that payments to resident importers be made throughtheir Russian accounts and that importers will have to produce goods andrecords to show that the value of payments and goods imported is equivalent.This is being done as much to curb tax evasion as it is to reduce hardcurrency flight.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996EXPORT DUTIES CUTPresident Yeltsin signed a decree banning export duties on refined oilproducts and lumber products as of December 1, 1995.  Effective January 1, 1996, export duties on crude oil, natural gas andindustrial goods will be reduced by 50%.Oil exports, one of the country's major sources of export earnings, fell by5% in the first 10 months of 1995 largely because of high duties.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ENERGY BODY CREATEDThe President also signed a decree establishing the Federal EnergyCommission, which will have the authority to regulate pricing of thecountry's "natural monopolies."The new body will set prices for oil products,natural gas, pipelines, heatand electricity. As of January 1, energy producers will be ableto raise prices only in line with actual inflation and with the permissionof the Energy Commission.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996REGIONAL LAWSRegional (oblast) authorities in many parts of the country have passed lawsand regulations designed to fill holes in national laws.At a meeting of regional officials in Volgograd, various measures werediscussed. The Volgograd Oblast Duma Budget Committee head, AleksandrMorozov, said that his body had passed laws concerning non-state pensionfunds, the activities of credit unions, and the issuance of promissory notes.Regional officials complained that federal courts and procurators' officeswere unclear on what to do about such legislation and have notadapted to it.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996REPORTING LAWUnder current law, companies are required to pay their employees' salariesthrough a single account, registered with local tax boards andthe state pension fund.Since a large number of companies have been avoiding pension fund and othernon-budgetary fund payments, the CBR has recommended newregulations.The proposed law will require banks to report all new accounts opened bycompanies to the CBR within 5 days. Included are budget, credit, loan andhard currency accounts.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996IMPORT CONTROLSInstructions No. 30 of the CBR and No. 01-20/10538 of the Customs Committeeintroduce Import Passports, which are similar to theExport Passports already in use.Import Passports will be required for all imports to be customs cleared asof January 1,1996 in which payment was, or is to be, made in full or in partin any currency other than rubles.  Goods which are imported free of chargeor from other CIS countries are exempt.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996VAT TAX CHANGESWidespread changes to the VAT regulations have been implemented, and arecontained in Instruction No. 39.  Major amendments to the law have beenadopted, including:1. Exemption of some transactions between branches and head office from VAT.2. Toll-processing charges may be treated as exempt exports. 3. VAT documentation and disclosure requirements are detailed.4. New rules on how the place of provision of services will be determinedfor VAT purposes.Further changes to the VAT laws were adopted by the Duma and FederationCouncil, and are due to go into effect on January 1.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996PROFITS TAX CHANGESIn addition to major changes in the VAT law,the parliament adopted manyrevisions to the profits tax law.  These are also due to becomeeffective January 1.  Among the most important are the following exemptionsfrom profits tax:1. Some financial transactions between parent and daughter companies.2. Some funds donated by foreign states and organizations, especially forpurposes of culture, education and science.3. Investments received by privatized companies as the result of investmenttenders.4. Funds transferred within a company for the development of infrastructure.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996[NOTE:  Tax law updates are furnished by Coopers & Lybrand Russia.  Please[NOTE:  Tax law updates are furnished by Coopers & Lybrand Russia.  Pleasecontact their Moscow (+7-095-288-98-01) or St. Petersburg(+7-812-325-69-69) offices for complete details.]Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996GRAIN IMPORTS BEGINIt has been speculated for months that Russia's poor grain harvests in 1995would force it to begin importing large quantities of Westerngrain, , as much as 6 mln metric tons. Grain prices, which are near 15-yearrecord high levels, gained on European and American exchanges amid reportsthat Russia had obtained $800 mln in credits to buy 2.5 mln tonnes of wheat.The reports were later found to be untrue.The Agriculture Ministry reported that a private company, Roskhleboprodukt,had purchased $300 mln of wheat from Austria,Hungary and the US.  The company is said to be linked with one of thecountry's major banks, Oneksimbank.Two other leading banks, Menatep and Inkombank,said that they were "talkingabout buying a large amount" of grain, but that no specificedeals had yet been reached.The Economy Ministry reported that regions in the Far East had madearrangements to import 400,000 tonnes of grain through commercialcompanies.  These deals, according to the Ministry, were made at theregional level and did not involve the central government.While current stocks and reserves will be exhausted by June, estimates arethat the 1996 harvest will recover, and could be as high as 80 mln tonnes.In the meantime, grain prices on Russian exchanges has remained relativelystable, at about Rb 850,000/tonne.  Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996REFINERIES TO BE REVAMPEDThe Fuel and Energy Ministry will implement a program to modernize itsrefineries, but said that unprofitable units will not be improved and mayeven be allowed to close.The Ministry said that the program had been developed in conjunction withthe Ministries of Economy and Finance, the State Property Committee and theFederal Bankruptcy Agency.Russia's refineries are in poor physical condition and require massiveinfusions of technology and money.  Production fell 17% last year, and hasdropped 38% since 1990.  The average refinery is operating at 65% of capacity.The Ministry did not say how much money would be made available, but didindicate that it would come from private and state sources.  It also saidthat tax breaks and other "privileges" for refineries would be adopted aspart of the plan.Refineries who wished to participate in the program are expected to producebusiness and technical plans for review.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996TIMBER EXPORTS SLUMPDeclining world prices for timber, pulp and paper and the ruble tradingcorridor have resulting in a substantial decrease in Russian timber exports.  It has been reported that in some regions, export enterprises are sitting onmillions of dollars worth of product for which buyers can not be found.Although the government has tried to help the situation by reducing exportduties on wood and wood products, industry spokesmen have said thatsuccessful timber trade needs an exchange rate of Rb 7,000 to $1, well abovethe level of Rb 4,500 - 5,000 which has been maintained since June.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996COMPANY BRIEFSAvtoVAZ, producer of the Lada, has signed agreements to assemble its carsabroad.  The Samara (VAZ-2109) will be assembled in Finland, Colombia andUruguay.  Finnish production will begin in late 1996, but no date was setfor the start of  South American production.     +++Announcements from Compaq and Novell said both companies had substantiallyincreased their sales in Russia in 1995.  Because of sales agreements signedwith state institutions, Compaq's sales increased 350% in the last half ofthe year.Novell, producer of networking software, said that its sales had doubled,from $7.5 to $15 mln in 1995.     +++VINAP, a large soft-drink bottler in Siberia, has become a strategic partnerof Pepsi-Cola.  Its plant can  produce 1 mln liters of soft drinks eachmonth.  Coca-Cola, Pepsi's main competitor in the Russian market, plans toopen a plant in Krasnoyarsk.     +++The Defense Ministry is blocking export permits for the sale of $100 mlndollars worth of NV-33 rocket motors produced by Samara Dvigateli toAerojet.  It is reported that the Ministry favors the development of theRD-180 motor in a joint venture between Energomash and Pratt & Whitney.     +++AvtoGAZ has concluded a licensing agreement with Steyr of Austria to produceM1 diesel engines.AvtoGAZ also said that its production of vehicles increased 10% in the first10 months of 1995 over the same period in 1994.     +++International Economic Cooperation, a Russian company, has purchasedcontrolling interests in three Hungarian agricultural processing firms.  TheHungarian companies formerly produced food products for the Soviet market.     +++GM announced that it had reached agreement on a $250 mln joint venture withYelAZ in Tatarstan to assemble Chevrolet Blazer vehicles.Initially, the YelAZ plant could produce 50,000 vehicles a year, with 25% ofthe parts made in Russia.  Production could begin as early as1998.     +++Two Italian companies, SOFIPA and IRITEX, have won the rights to manage a$50 mln investment fund for small business development in Vologda,Novgorod, Tver and Pskov oblasts.     +++ Voronezh Aviation has produced the last IL-86 passenger jet, which wasintroduced in 1980. The company plans to produce the IL-96, and toincrease its capacity from 300 to 500 passengers.     +++Volgotanker, one of the country's largest shipping companies, beganstreamlining its fleet in preparation for concluding a $70 mln loanagreement with the EBRD.  The loan will be used to help the companymodernize its fleet,maintaining its competitive position in theinternational cargo shipping market.     +++The Moscow City Telephone Network and Siemens AG signed contracts for theprovision of digital switching equipment.  Siemens will extend credits of DM50 mln.     +++The Chelyabinsk regional administration will conduct a tender offer for theright to build a new type power station which will use mining wastes asfuel.  At least six companies are expected to bid, including Babcock &Wilcox, ABB, and KAB.     +++After being idle for 2 years, the SK-Premier synthetic rubber plant inYaroslavl has re-opened, and plans to produce 50,000 tonnes of isoprene in1996.  The company hopes that it can revive its export trade with Poland,Hungary and the Czech Republic.Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Major trade fairs and exhibitions in 1996:"INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY '96"Yekaterinurg, MarchComputers Software, and Information systems Organizer: Uralexpocentre18 Komsomolskaya Ul.GSP 166, Yekaterinburg, Russia 620219Phone: (3432) 49-30-17Fax: (3432) 49-30-19"MODA '96" Moscow, MarchInternational Fashion ShowOrganizer: Comtek International43 Danbury RoadWilton, Connecticut 06897Phone: (203) 834-1122Fax: (203) 762-0773"COMTEK '96" Moscow, AprilInternational trade fair for computer systems,peripherals and software;Organizer: Comtek International43 Danbury RoadWilton, Connecticut 06897Phone: (203) 834-1122Fax: (203) 762-0773"DALPHARM '96"Vladivostok, April 18-22 Drugs and pharmaceuticalsOrganizer: VLADEXPOVLADEXPO Exhibition Hall19, Okeansky ProspectVladivostok, Russia 690600Phone: 7-4232-22-20-25, 26-76-46Fax: 7-4232-22-72-26"SVYAZ/EXPOCOMM '96"  Moscow, MayInternational Trade Fair for Telecommunications Organizer: EXPOCENTR andE.J. Krause & Associates, Inc.7315 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 420 Bethesda, MD20814Phone: 301-986-7800Fax: 301-986-4538Telex: 4944944 EJK EXPO"INTERNATIONAL COMPU-TER FORUM"Moscow, JuneConference and Trade Show for ComputersOrganizer: International ComputerClubOffice 506A, Entrance 312, Krasnopresnenskaya Nab.Moscow Russia 123610Phone: 7-095-253-9123, 253-9124Fax: 7-095-253-9102"NEFTEGAZ '96" Moscow, June 17-226th International Fair for equipment for theoil and gas industryOrganizers: Nowea International GmbHP.O. Box 101006D-40001 DusseldorfGermanyPhone: (211) 45-60-02Fax: (211) 45-60-740"AUTOMOBILE SHOW '96" Yekaterinburg, JuneOrganizer: Uralexpocentre18 Komsomolskaya Ul.GSP 166, Yekaterinburg, Russia 620219Phone: (3432) 49-30-17Fax: (3432) 49-30-19Back to Headline List CopyrightRUSSIAN BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996THE DUMA ELECTIONS by Josh ZanderDepending the source, the results of last month's Duma elections presumablyshow that either nothing or everything has changed with regard to the reformprocess in Russia.Western news media and, to some degree, the business community, have giventhe impression that the strong showing of the Communists means that thereform process has come to a halt.  Other observers, reinforced by thegovernment, believe that nothing has really changed and that the processwill continue at an accelerated pace.Who is correct?THE VOTEIn summary, the Communists were the strong showers, gaining 112 seats in thenew Duma.  However, the extreme left bloc of parties, including theCommunists, Agrarians, Women of Russia and Working Russia, gained only 58seats, rising from 100 to 178.  Both Women of Russia and the Agrarians lostheavily.The far right parties, primarily the Liberal Democrats and  the  Congress ofRussian Communities (KRO), had a net loss of 7 seats.   KRO, under theleadership of General Lebed, had been expected to do much better in thepolls, and he is expected to run in the presidential campaign in June.Most disappointing were the results for the democratic, pro-reform parties:Our Home is Russia, Yabloko and Democratic Choice.  As a whole, they wereable to gain only 8 seats.  Democratic Choice, which had 76 seats in the oldDuma, will have 9 in the new one.The election results can hardly be said to contain a ringing endorsement ofthe government's policies but neither can they be interpreted as being awholesale rejection of those policies.Undoubtedly, there will be much speculation about the political impact ofthe results in the months to come, culminating with June's presidentialelections.  Rather than trying to gauge the political impact, what can theDuma elections tell us about Russia's business climate in at least the firsthalf of 1996?POSITIVES...The single most important factor is that neither of the two blocs mostopposed to the reform process, the Communists and the extreme nationalists,have a majority in the new Duma.  Even allied, which they have not thus far been able to do, the two groupsare far short of the 2/3 majority required to overturn presidential vetoes.A simple majority of the Duma can pass a no-confidence measure or blockappointments by the prime minister.  It is not likely that the extremistscan muster sufficient votes to do the former.  The Duma's refusal to confirmthe head of the Central Bank for 13 months did nothing to hinder theadoption of effective tight money policies.The constitutionally weak Duma can be a thorn in the side of the currentgovernment, but it does not appear that it do it any serious harm.It must be remembered that 1996 has begun with a budget already in place, astabilized ruble, and inflation at the lowest levels since 1991. The countryappears to be poised at the beginning of a period of economic growth.AND NEGATIVESThe fact that the center bloc of parties did not do better at the polls isthe single most negative factor of the elections.  The vote clearly shows that a substantial portion, perhaps a majority, ofthe electorate do not believe they have materially benefitted from thereform process.  While the totals may be skewed by the elements of thepopulation who actually voted and may reflect a nostalgia for the "good olddays," the reform process has been dealt a psychological, if not a material,blow.Stock market averages are at depressed levels, down some 30% from their 1995highs.  Investor confidence, shaken by the vote, is further upset by thefailure of the STET-Svyazinvest deal.  Many potential investors are taking await-and-see attitude, pending the outcome of the June elections.This will make it more difficult to raise sufficient capital to accomplishthe government's privatization goals.  These goals are not only critical forthe budget, but are the primary means of  modernizing Russia's economy. Added to this will be pressures brought by Communists and nationalists todelay or suspend the privatization of "strategic" industries and that highprices, perhaps unreasonably, are gotten for what enterprises are sold off.There will be a greater effort to prevent the kind of "sweetheart" dealswhich have characterized many of the major privatizations last year, andthere will be more resistance to privatizing, especially with Westerninvestment, the military-industrial complex.At the same time, the Communists will probably make an effort to expand thesocial safety net.  Friction between the Duma and the government may impedeenaction of  necessary legislation.  It is safe to say that this frictionwill preclude any major legislative actions until after June's elections, atthe earliest.THE NEXT 6 MONTHS...To some extent, business in Russia will slow until June, especially as faras major private investments are concerned.  In light of the STET deal'scollapse, there will be much more hesitancy to invest in Russia.Russian stocks will probably remain at low levels, if only for psychologicalreasons.  While they afford some investors long term gains, it will make itmore difficult for companies to raise capital.Both President Yeltsin and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin have stated that thegovernment's course will not change despite the election results, but theresults themselves will compel the government to, if not slow the pace ofreform, moderate its worst effects.Increasing pensions and minimum wages, reimbursing investors of failedenterprises, and similar measures may be popular and may win votes in June,but could return the country to high inflation rates and destabilization ofthe ruble.Some of the pressures from within the Duma may result in actions positivefrom a business point of view.  General Lebed, the KRO leader, has struck avery popular chord with his attacks on bureaucratic and official corruption. The government has not been deaf to this message.   Any substantivereduction in Russia's endemic problem of corruption can only benefitbusiness at every level.Continued reductions in export duties will benefit exporters and theincreasing number of Russian producers engaging in export trade.  Thegovernment will also be compelled to address the issue of unpaid wages.This is one of the primary causes of mass discontent. Although payment maybring inflationary pressure and worsen the deficit, the economy, at leastfor the short term, will benefit from the payment of workers in rublesinstead of cigarettes, coal, paper or even tampons.It is likely that the government will release billions of dollars inpayments for various programs in the defense, lawenforcement, agricultureand social sectors.  It did this in the weeks before the Duma elections.While this will exacerbate the deficit, it may help stimulate the economy inthe short term, and some industries will benefit.It is widely expected  that economic growth will begin in the second half of1996;  statistics indicate that it has already begun in some industries.The government will do all it can to accelerate this process, so that morepeople perceive a tangible benefit prior to the presidential elections.AND BEYOND Do the Duma elections mean that Russia's economic reform process is inserious trouble or even dead?  At this point, the answer is no.It is not in the interest of any of the major parties, with the possibleexception of the Liberal Democrats, to drastically slow, let alone, reversethe general course on which the country has been since 1992.In the wake of the elections, it will probably be a tendency of the businesscommunity, both Russian and foreign, to do nothing new;  to wait until afterthe presidential elections in June.  The next six months will be a critical period in the course of Russia'sdevelopment.  If the economy can be seen to have turned the corner, ifaverage citizen can see if he or she is beginning to materially benefit fromthe reform process, it will continue at an accelerated pace.Josh Zander is editor of Russian Business NewsBack to Headline List WT03-B06-23IA087-000634-B042-347http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it143.html 205.156.212.5 19970122031420 text/html 64733HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:12:19 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:36 GMTContent-length: 64546Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it143.html Sample Issue Copyright THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY via NewsNet September 25, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Vietnam: Nation line: Binh Thuan Province actively seeks foreign investors (111 words) Nation line: Chinese mechanical exhibitors in Hanoi (90 words) Vietnam: Nation line: British consultants target technical advisory services (113 words) Vietnam: One-year-old duty-free goods entitled to re-export (170 words) Vietnam: City taxi expands into Mekong Delta (141 words) Vietnam: Promotion week for 116-year-old French style hotel and international services (101 words) Vietnam: Perfect recovery of footballer Hong Son's knee impossible (240 words) Vietnam: September consumer goods and service price index: +0.51% (93 words) Vietnam: VND10 billion in urgent need to save Oceanography Institute (131 words) World briefs, September 25, 1996 (352 words) Saigon Ta Ngan complex project licensed (139 words) Vietnam: New Taiwanese leather factory (134 words) Vietnam: Memoir: A visit to the U.S. (Continued from yesterday) (540 words) Oil paintings on show at Ho Chi Minh City Art Association (197 words) Shostakovich's 90th birthday in HCMC (235 words) Vietnam: New book: "My death begins a new life" (188 words) Vietnam: Events (200 words) Life in brief: HCMC Neurological Association set up (77 words) from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996 (61 words) Vietnam: Life in brief: Results of the "Suai Toac Xanh" Contest (102 words) Vietnam: Life in brief: 700 Nam Dinh students and pupils tidy up Vi Xuyen Lake (83 words) from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996 (105 words) Vietnam: Company News: Woodprodex in search of investment capital (391 words) Vietnam: Enterprise line: Haiphong Enameled Iron Aluminum Co. modernizes equipment (82 words) Vietnam: Enterprise line: Nha Trang: Oresol production line comes into operation (80 words) Enterprise line: HCMC: Bong Sen Port becomes operational (82 words) Foreign direct investment in Hanoi: a sweet fruit with sharp thorns (463 words) Current situation of Vietnamese roads (416 words) Vietnamese timepieces gain ground (168 words) Vietnam: Reviewing the works on fire prevention (289 words) Vietnam: New Licenses (Continued from yesterday) (211 words) Int'l seminar discusses public administration reform in Vietnam (183 words) UNDP and Dutch government to fund administration projects (160 words) Vietnam: Anzoil continues to explore oil in Red River Delta next year (158 words) Vietnam: Increasing rice export quota (164 words) Vietnam to exploit one million cubic meters of wood (181 words) Vietnam: Beta Mekong Limited invests in hotel sector (210 words) Vietnam: City waterway violations decrease 14% (89 words) Vietnam: Stop press, September 25, 1996 (270 words) from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996 (504 words) Vietnam: Stricter measures for import-export debtors (195 words) Vietnam, UNDP join to prevent HIV/AIDS in nationwide project (246 words) CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Nation line: Binh Thuan Province actively seeks foreign investorsfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996The central coastal province of Binh Thuan is making a number of feasibilitystudies to call for foreign-direct investment (FDI), aiming to attractUS$120-US$130 million FDI between now and the year 2000, according to Mr.Dang Van Hai, Chairman of Binh Thuan Province People's Committee.The projects include processing cassava starch and maritime products,breeding cows and producing dairy products and upgrading Phan Thiet Airport.Binh Thuan now has 10 licensed FDI projects with a total capital of US$44.3million. Most of the projects are in the fields of tourism and marineproducts.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Nation line: Chinese mechanical exhibitors in Hanoifrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996Vietnam Chamber of Commerce and Industry on Monday opened an exhibition inHanoi to introduce vehicles and machinery made by manufacturers in theChinese province of Sichuan.Exhibits include two- and three-wheeled motorbikes, motorbike spare parts,industrial machinery, water spraying trucks, garbage trucks and otheressential consumer goods.In addition to introducing their commodities, Chinese exhibitors came to seekbusiness opportunities in Vietnam. The exhibition is scheduled to last untilSeptember 26.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Nation line: British consultants target technical advisoryservicesfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996A conference entitled "The Role of British Consultants in Publicly andPrivately-Financed Initiatives" is to be held on October 4 at New World Hotelin HCMC, according to Vietnam Chamber of Commerce and Industry (VCCI).The conference, co-organized by the VCCI and British Consultant Bureau, willrefer to matters relating to financed initiatives and provide technicalconsultancy services to projects in the fields of seaports, airports,construction works and energy.Participants can register at the Industrial and Commercial Transaction Officeat 171 Vo Thi Sau Street, District 3, HCMC. Tel: 8230301 - 8231499.(SGT)Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: One-year-old duty-free goods entitled to re-exportfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HANOI) All duty-free goods imported into Vietnam will have to bere-exported if they are not sold within one year, according to a recentdecision of the General Customs Department which is valid as of September 20.However, if the owner of the goods wishes to sell one-year-old duty-freecommodities in the Vietnamese territory, a permission from the Trade Ministrywill be required, and then all import procedures and import tariffs must beobliged.Those duty-free commodities that have perished or are broken will not bere-exported, but the clearance of those goods must be certified by a councilcomprising representatives from the related customs office, the goods owner,and the related finance agency.The regulation also states that duty-free goods may be sold only to visitorsupon their entry into or exit out of the country. After purchasing duty-freegoods exit passengers are required to export all their purchased commodities.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: City taxi expands into Mekong Deltafrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HCMC) HCMC-based taxi firm Davi is the first in the country to haveopened a branch to provide services in the Mekong Delta province of Can Tho,said Mr. Nguyen Van Toan, vice director of Davi Taxi Co., Ltd.The fare for the first kilometer is VND5,000 and VND1,300 for each successive200 meters. After the 11th kilometer, passengers will pay only VND4,000 foreach additional kilometer.Davi now operates 12 taxis in Can Tho and later on the company is expectedto raise the number to 30. Those who want to take a Davi taxi in thislocality just call 826826.Davi also opened another taxi service branch in Song Be Province on September6 and the telephone number is 828282.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Promotion week for 116-year-old French style hotel andinternational servicesfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HCMC) A Vietnamese culinary week with over 60 dishes will be held onSeptember 28 to celebrate the 116th anniversary of the Continental Hotel at132-134 Dong Khoi Street, District 1, HCMC.The Continental Hotel was constructed in 1880 by an Italian named Frassetto.In 1925, it was purchased by Mathieu Franchini, a Corsican teacher, till thelate 1950's. The hotel was then run by his son Philippe until 1964.The Continental now has 83 rooms with prices ranging from US$99-US$165 perday.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Perfect recovery of footballer Hong Son's knee impossiblefrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HCMC) Following an examination by a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)device, Ho Chi Minh City Medical Diagnostic Center (Medic) yesterday said theinjured left knee of footballer Hong Son will never be perfectly recovered.Doctor Nguyen Thi Anh Hong, in charge of the MRI unit, said that there is abruise between the kneecap and the thigh bone and that the vastus medialiswas torn apart.Son, the hero in the Vietnam-Indonesia match for the bronze at the firstASEAN Tiger Cup in Singapore, will have to undergo a surgical operation tohave his vastus medialis re-connected, Doctor Hong noted.She added that he will possibly have surgery on his knee to take out bruisedclotted blood if the bruise is critical.The date to treat his injured knee has not yet been determined but his brokenvastus medialis will certainly affect his ability to maneuver on the pitch,Doctor Hong commented.She noted: "Even if the knee operation is done well, Son's knee will probablynot be completely returned to its previous condition."If Hong Son cannot recover his health, this will be a big loss for theVietnamese football squad in forthcoming tournaments such as the thirdIndependence Cup in January 1997, Malaysia Open in February 1997 and theWorld Cup 1998 qualifying round in March.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: September consumer goods and service price index: +0.51%from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996The consumer goods and service price index in September is 100.51% comparedwith last month and 106.88% compared with the same period last year.The consumer goods price index increased by 0.5123% and the service priceindex by 0.4915%.The price index of items excluding food increased by 1.95%, includinggarments (+1.27%), fuel (+3.6) and electricity and water (+7.69%).Gold and U.S. dollar price indexes show a decrease of 0.16% and 0.01%.(SGT)Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: VND10 billion in urgent need to save Oceanography Institutefrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HCMC) Thousands of documents archived at the Nha Trang Institute forOceanography, many of them dated back to the 17th and 18th century, havedeteriorated, and Vietnam needs an urgent sum of VND10 billion to save theseprecious materials.According to a survey team comprising representatives of central agencies,many of these printed resources have become decayed and perished due tounsuitable preservation conditions. They include scientific reports publishedbetween the 17th and early 19th centuries, historical reports onoceanography, and other valuable documents.The survey team is proposing a project worth some VND10 billion to save thesematerials, but measures have yet to be disclosed, according to an officialwith the institute.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996World briefs, September 25, 1996from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996* MOSCOW - Interfax news agency quoted top cardiologist Michael DeBakey assaying doctors would meet on Wednesday to decide when and whether to operateon the 65-year-old Russian president.* LONDON - Police questioned five Irish Republican Army suspects after dawnraids netted the biggest seizure of arms ever made in Britain. Detectives,who believe they swooped just in time to stop the IRA wreaking havoc acrossBritain, are trying to identify a sixth suspect shot dead in Monday's raids.* BEIJING - China urged Japan not to provoked any new incidents in a row overa group of disputed islands in the East China Sea. Japan must be"rational...and halt activities that infringe on China's sovereignty" overthe islands - known as the Diaoyus in Chinese and the Senkakus in Japanese,Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Shen Guofang said.* NEW DELHI - India's sickly Congress party has tapped Sitaram Kesri, adisciple of Mahatma Gandhi, as a stop-gap chief to replace former primeminister P.V. Narasimha Rao. But a fierce struggle now looms as the nation'soldest party looks for a leader to take it into the 21st century.* COLOMBO - Sri Lankan forces halted a push into the Tamil Tiger rebels'northern stronghold amid fierce guerrilla resistance on the third day of arenewed battle, military officials said.* CANBERRA - Australian Prime Minister John Howard, defying Chinese threatsof trade retaliation, has agreed to meet exiled Tibetan spiritual leader theDalai Lama later this week in Sydney, Howard's office said.* PARIS - Iraq will stick to its decision to cease firing at U.S. and alliedairplanes patrolling no-fly zones in the south of the country "for areasonable period", Deputy Prime Minister Tareq Aziz has said.* BONN - A German court, overturning a precious court ruling, said that PeterGraf, father of tennis star Steffi Graf, must stay in jail during the courseof his trial for tax evasion, his lawyer said.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Saigon Ta Ngan complex project licensedfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HANOI) Saigon Advertising Company and Singaporean Financiere Rive GaucheAsia Pacific have been licensed by the Vietnamese Ministry of Planning andInvestment to construct an officetel and housing complex in HCMC.The joint venture (JV), named Saigon Ta Ngan, with a legal capital of US$32.2million and an operational duration of 43 years, will locate the complex at164 Dong Khoi Street, District 1.Between now and 1999, the two sides will invest US$85 million to form afive-star hotel, a trading center, an office building and a residential blockon a 7,000-square-meter site to serve foreign expatriates in the city.When the period of the venture expires, the whole complex will be transferredto the local side without refunding.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: New Taiwanese leather factoryfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HCMC) Today Freetrend Industrial (Vietnam) Ltd. starts construction ofits factory on 42,508 sq.m of land in Linh Trung EPZ. The Design andConstruction Company No. 1 (Decofi) has won a bid for the construction ofthis plant. The 100 percent Taiwanese-invested company will manufacture andexport shoes, bags and accessories. Its total investment capital is US$10million including US$7 million of legal capital. The operational period is50 years.According to Freetrend's project implementation schedule, the installationof equipment will begin in May 1997 and operations will start up in July ofthe same year. This factory will require 2,500 employees and the projectedproduction for the first year is about 400,000 pairs of leather shoes.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Memoir: A visit to the U.S. (Continued from yesterday)from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996By Late Gen. Tran Van TraNew York is a big city, with high-rise buildings, wide streetsand busy traffic. Nights there are wonderful, with bright lights flooding thestreets. However, it looks commonplace in daytime and is not so clean. Thecity is said to contain both the good and the bad things of the entire UnitedStates of America. On my visit there, I saw a lot of homeless, jobless andvagabond people. It snowed on some days but sunshine still dominated ourstay. On the streets, in the universities and at conferences I met many menand women in casual clothes behaving in a sincere manner and devotingthemselves to their work. Even at the conference where we were the onlysponsored guests, the remainder arrived in their own cars and paid all theirexpenses themselves. After the conference, people flocked to a nearbyrestaurant for a party. When it ended, everybody except us pooled their moneyto pay the bill. At all the parties I attended, they often drank fruit juicerather than beer or spirits. I do not know whether this is the best way tolead a civilized and economical life. To be honest, I could not findluxuriousness, snobbishness, and wastefulness of time and money here, atleast not among the intellectuals I met. Is it because of this that they havebecome rich? One day, the Veterans' Association for Peace invited us to aVietnamese restaurant for a party which was attended by dozens of people. Thechairman gave a warm welcome to the veterans taking part who later reminiscedwith each other about battlefields such as Hau Nghia, Tay Ninh, Binh Duongand the Central Highlands and military units such as Division 25, AirborneBrigade 173, Airborne Division 101, and so on. Some American veteransapologized to the Vietnamese for the crimes they had committed during thewar. A number of others cried in the most sincere and moving fashion.It is regrettable that due to limited time and the strictly-organizedprogram, I failed to meet a number of Americans and Vietnamese who phoned ourdelegation to the United Nations and to Ms. Jayne, the conference organizer.I left the country as happy as when I arrived there. The scientists andintellectuals I met in the U.S. impressed me strongly but much of the countrywas still unknown to me. Likewise, I felt so small when I stood by the river,in the shadow of high-rises, admiring the Statue of Liberty far off-shore.I could not approach the statue. I still remember sincere friends such asProf. Jayne of Long Island and Columbia universities, Prof. Kit of CornellUniversity, Prof. Gabriel Kolko and his wife, who drove from Canada to IthacaCity to meet me and gave me a set of data about the South Vietnam NationalLiberation Front. It has the front's flag printed on both sides and wascompiled in London in 1968. Then an American from Canada gave it to me andI, in my turn, took it to Saigon, now called HCMC. This was a small butmeaningful event.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Oil paintings on show at Ho Chi Minh City Art Associationfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996* An exhibition of 30 oil paintings by Nguyen Thi Bich Nguyet will open onSeptember 26 at the HCMC Art Association, 218 Pasteur Street, District 1.It is still too early to talk about the works but their creativity is likelyto take viewers by surprise. If you are interested, go there. The exhibitionwill last for about one week.* Between September 15-25, at the Labor Cultural House, a silk paintingexhibition by Nguyen Phi Long, Nguyen Thi Nha Phuong and Nguyen Thi Ngoc Maiattracted a large number of viewers.Nguyen Phi Long was born in 1956 in Tay Ninh Province. He was a student offamous painter Nguyen Thi Tam and began to paint in 1992.Rural life is always his chief inspiration. After touring the Mekong Deltaand the outskirts of HCMC, he painted around 100 works with simple subjectssuch as lotus flowers, Hoa Binh Falls, a country market, and houseboats whichhave been displayed at the HCMC Art Association, HCMC Art Museum,Reunification Palace and the District 5 Cultural House.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Shostakovich's 90th birthday in HCMCfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996By Dan Vi - HCMCD.D. Shostakovich, one of the leading "birds" of Soviet music, was acomposer, teacher, pianist, social worker and people's artiste of the formerSoviet Union. From 1947, he was a member of the Supreme Soviet of the RussianRepublic and the former Soviet Union. He was awarded many domestic andinternational prizes. He was recognized as a Working Hero of the former USSRin 1966 and recognized as an artistic academician in Germany (1955), Italyand the U.K. (1958).D.D. Shostakovich died on August 9, 1975. He gave the world a preciousmusical heritage including  many operas, ballets and compositions ofdifferent genres, the most famous being the opera "The Nose" (based on astory by Gogol) and Concert No.7 (written at the time the city of Leningrad,now Petersburg, was under siege).This year, his birthday was celebrated not only in Moscow, Paris and London,but in HCMC as well. His life story and a film of his ballet entitled "TheGolden Era" were presented at the Russian Scientific and Cultural House (2bisTran Cao Van Street, District 1) on September 22. Tomorrow night, September25, at HCMC Conservatory, a program of Shostakovich's works will beperformed. This program is co-organized by HCMC and the Russian Scientificand Cultural House.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: New book: "My death begins a new life"from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996Those who died for this country, if there are souls in existence, must bemoved with happiness. They must not feel lonely and sorrowful once they knowthat their comrades are still quietly searching the countryside for theirremains. Writer and journalist Nguyen Thi Ngoc Hai reports the stories ofmilitary doctors and nurses and groups of people who have spent decadeslooking for their comrades who sacrificed their lives for the good of thecountry. People can buy anything with money, except this love, which isreserved for fellow country people and revolutionary comrades.The book, entitled "Toi chiet, buat aeiu moat thie giuai soeng" (My DeathBegins a New Life) is evidence of Dr. Tran Van Ban's love for his comrades.The book tells the story of his long years doing this work and has anappendix of war martyrs whose remains Dr. Ban has found and returned to thefamilies.The book was just published this year by the Tre (Youth) and Haiphongpublishing houses, costing VND12,500.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Eventsfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996* "Unplugged Party", a pop-rock program performed by student musical groups,will be held at 7 p.m. on September 27, 28 and 29 at Ben Thanh Theater, 6 MacDinh Chi Street, HCMC.Musical groups such as Thie Hia Muai (The New Generation) Trio (Foreign TradeCollege), Tueen Khanh Group (HCMC Conservatory) and Brutal Society (Socialand Human Sciences College) will perform many songs favorite with youngaudiences, for example "That's Why You Go Away", "More", "Rain", "All WillBe Bright", "I Swear", "Love", "What's Up", "Don't Know Why" and "To LoveSomebody".The program will be organized monthly beginning in September. Tickets are nowavailable at the theater.* Popular cabaret artiste Lyne Lebrun and her piano accompanist Guy Rocheleauhave been entertaining patrons of the New World Hotel's Saxophone Bar (HCMC)since July.Due to popular demand, their season has been extended through the end ofNovember. Lyne's rich, mellow voice is the perfect backdrop for a relaxingevening drink with friends or perhaps a dance in the "new look" SaxophoneBar. Come by if you are interested.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Life in brief: HCMC Neurological Association set upfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996The HCMC Neurological Association, the 32nd association of the Vietnam HealthCare and Medical Union, was established on September 20, aiming at improvingthe professional skills of Vietnamese neurological doctors, as well asexchanging experiences in training and education with foreign organizationsand hospitals. This voluntary organization now has 150 members who aredoctors at hospitals and universities in the South.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996The 1996 Architectural Awards will be announced by the end of this year.Entries submitted since 1990 and not considered for the first "ArchitecturalAwards" in 1994 are eligible. This year's awards includes a first prize worthVND30 million and separate prizes for each domain.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Life in brief: Results of the "Suai Toac Xanh" Contestfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996The essay contest entitled "Suai Toac Xanh" (The Black Hair) held by NguoiCao Tuoi (The Old) newspaper for the past 13 months has now ended. Afterselecting 500 essays at the eliminating round, the board of examiners pickedout 90 essays for the final round. Two of the final 25 essays won the firstprize and three won the second prize. The award ceremony will be held onSeptember 30 at the Friendship Cultural Palace to celebrate this year's Dayfor the Old (October 1).Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Life in brief: 700 Nam Dinh students and pupils tidy up Vi XuyenLakefrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996On September 22, more than 700 students and pupils in Nam Dinh City took partin a movement to tidy up Vi Xuyen Lake. This was part of a campaign entitled"Cleaning the World" held by the Australian Embassy, in coordination with theWorld Environmental Organization. In 1995, this campaign was attended by 850Hanoian students and pupils who tidied up three main lakes in the capital.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996To celebrate the 66th anniversary of the founding of the Vietnam Women'sAssociation, the District 10 Cultural House, in coordination with theDistrict Women's Union, is organizing the seventh District 10 lullaby andfolk-song festival from October 10-18. This aims to protect and developtraditional lullabies and folk-songs in the national treasury. Contestantsare required to perform both traditional and modern lullabies and folk-songsof the three regions of the country. The contest is open to all over the ageof 16. The deadline for registration is October 5.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Company News: Woodprodex in search of investment capitalfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996By Thien Nhan - HCMCThe Wood Products for Export Enterprise (Woodprodex) under the HCMC Serviceof Agriculture currently has three production workshops in District 3 andBinh Thanh District and a showroom at 194 Nguyen Cong Tru St., Dist. 1, HCMC.Founded in March 1978, Woodprodex specializes in producing high-qualityhousehold wooden products for domestic consumption as well as for export toDenmark, the Netherlands, Germany, Spain, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Thailand. TheEuropean market accounts for 70% of the enterprise's output.The products of Woodprodex include tables and chairs for outdoor use,cupboards, wardrobes, carved and plain shelves, etc. They are made fromvarious kinds of wood such as bung lung, deiu gioa and choa according tocustomers' requests.In 1989 Woodprodex formed a joint venture with a French partner to producesophisticated products designed to appeal to the French market. This 20-yearterm joint venture has a total investment capital of US$40,000, withVietnamese side holding a 20% stake.A second joint venture was formed in 1992 between Woodprodex and the ScansiaCo. of Malaysia with a total investment capital of US$500,000, with theforeign side holding a 60% stake. This joint venture focuses on producinghousehold products. Its duration is 15 years.These two joint ventures have created 900 jobs for local residents. In 1995alone, the joint ventures achieved a turnover of US$5 million, 80% of whichcame from the second joint venture thanks to its mass production.In the first eight months of this year, excluding the above two jointventures, Woodprodex signed six contracts worth US$430,000 and achieved aturnover of US$260,000. It is expected that the enterprise's turnover thisyear will be double that of last year, and will increase by 50% again nextyear.Director of Woodprodex, Mr. Nguyen Ngoc Tam, said that over the next fouryears, in addition to designing new models, the enterprise will pay closeattention to the local market as well as expand its exports to the NorthAmerican markets. Woodprodex will also buy some state-of-the-art equipmentand machinery to raise the productivity. At present, to assist it indeveloping production, Woodprodex is calling for investment cooperation fromboth local and foreign entities.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Enterprise line: Haiphong Enameled Iron Aluminum Co. modernizesequipmentfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996In the first eight months of 1996, Haiphong Enameled Iron Aluminum Companyspent billions of dong on modernizing its equipment which had been in use forover 30 years. With the new equipment, the company is producing 60-70 literaluminum saucepans which are selling well. It has achieved a turnover ofabout VND30 billion and aims to reach VND45 billion by the end of the year.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Enterprise line: Nha Trang: Oresol production line comes intooperationfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996The Vaccine Institute and Biophar Company Limited in Nha Trang have put anOresol production line into operation to serve the nationwide diarrheaprevention program. The line, costing millions of U.S. dollars, was suppliedby the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). The institute plans toproduce two million packets of Oresol in 1996, five million packets in 1997and 5-10 million packets annually thereafter.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Enterprise line: HCMC: Bong Sen Port becomes operationalfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996On September 12 Bong Sen Port came into operation in Phu My Commune, Nha BeDistrict, HCMC. This is a joint venture between two Vietnamese companies,Viettrans and Vosa, and Ukraine Blasco and U.S. Stevedoring Services America.The JV has spent over US$10 million on constructing a 150-m pier which canreceive 16,000-ton ships, a 3,000-sq.m warehouse, 8,000 sq.m of containerfacilities, and other infrastructure works.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Foreign direct investment in Hanoi: a sweet fruit with sharp thornsfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996By Phan Ngoc - Hanoi"Between now and the end of the year, Hanoi may receive an additional 20investment licenses with a total registered capital of US$2.4 billion," saidMr. Nguyen Do Khue, vice director of the Service of Planning and Investmentof Hanoi. These projects, including the US$2.1 billion construction of anurban area in South Thang Long, have been submitted to the authorized bodiesfor approval.However, they are only prospects for the future as Hanoi is facingdifficulties in attracting foreign direct investment (FDI).When the State Committee for Cooperation and Investment (SCCI) and the StatePlanning Committee merged to become the Ministry of Planning and Investment(MPI), as in other provinces, FDI flow in Hanoi came to a standstill as manyfeasibility studies were delayed by the administrative restructuring. Inaddition, some recent changes in Vietnamese investment policy have greatlyaffected the flow of FDI in the city.Around the time of the 8th Party Congress, investors seemed hesitant sincethey were afraid that there might be many changes in investment policy. Thisindirectly contributed to the reduction of FDI flow in Hanoi, especially inthe first six months of 1996.So far this year, Hanoi has received 20 licensed projects with a totalinvestment capital of over US$400 million. Meanwhile, in the first six monthsof last year, Hanoi received 30 projects worth US$600 million. Statisticsshow that FDI capital in the first half of 1996 amounted to only 20% of thatfigure.Despite great efforts to provide better conditions for investors, theinvestment environment in Hanoi is still "very bad", an official of HanoiPeople's Committee commented recently. Site clearing is still one of themajor problems of concerned bodies in the capital.A number of projects, such as a joint venture hotel between SAS Group andHanoi Tourist Service Company, have been held up for four years due toincomplete site clearing. Another project for the construction of anexpressway linking South Thang Long and Hung Vuong in the Cau Giay area inHanoi is at a standstill although Hanoi People's Committee offered acompensation price of VND9 million/sq.m.In February the Government suggested that the construction of multi-storybuildings in the urban area should be banned so a large number of hotel andofficetel projects are now blocked.Hanoi is in an unfavorable position as regards foreign investment; however,we are still trying our best, said Mr. Khue, adding that further cooperationwith other authorized bodies is required. The target of US$2.4 billion FDIcapital this year is an attractive fruit but one which is surrounded by sharpthorns.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Current situation of Vietnamese roadsfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996By Nguyen Loc - HCMCAccording to foreign investors, the bad road system is one of the thingsrestricting the flow of foreign investment in Vietnam. However, this is alsoan element which attracts foreign investors since it can bring benefit forthose who dare to put money into road construction.Vietnam has 148,000 km of road network including 14,673 km of nationalhighways and 14,503 km of provincial roads, the remainder being rural roads.Only 13.1% of the total network is asphalted. Over half of the nationalhighways are asphalted but they can withstand only 50%-70% of the requiredpressure.Narrow bridges with a maximum load-bearing capacity of 43 tons and temporarybridges make up 20% of all bridges crossing the national highways.In general, bad roads account for 40% of the Vietnamese road and one-thirdof these are seriously damaged. This is the major difficulty of thecommunications and transport sector.According to the Ministry of Communications and Transport, a sum of VND33trillion will be required to upgrade existing roads and build new onesbetween now and the year 2000.Priority will be given to upgrading the 2,289-km National Highway No.1 withcapital mainly borrowed from overseas organizations. In addition, the 25-kmroad on Hai Van Pass in the central region and the bridges of Song Gianh, MyThuan, Can Tho and others are now being constructed.In the North, the 106-km National Road No. 5 linking Hanoi and Haiphong isbeing upgraded and widened to four lanes and is expected to be completed in1999. The construction of the 40-km Lang-Hoa Lac Expressway has been startedand is part of the infrastructure development program of the capital.In the central region, work on National Highway No. 14 and National HighwayNo. 14B linking Danang and the Central Highlands is also under way. Inaddition, investors are now interested in the construction of a Trans-Asiaroute linking North Thailand and Vietnam via National Highway No. 9.Meanwhile, in the South, National Highways No. 51 and No. 52 stretching 83km from Ho Chi Minh City to Vung Tau are being upgraded and will have fourlanes. Moreover, the construction of a road leading to Phnom Penh and Bangkokvia Moc Bai Border Gate, financed by the Asian Development Bank (ADB), isexpected to start in the near future.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnamese timepieces gain groundfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996In addition to 60 kinds of clocks selling well domestically and abroad,Gimiko Clock Company has introduced ten models of alarm clocks witheye-catching designs.Gimiko plans to cooperate with an American company to produce watcheslocally, according to Director Le Trung Hieu, who said the company aims toproduce high-quality and attractive watches with reasonable prices. Inaddition, the company plans to produce alarm clocks with covers made fromrubber and conifer wood for export.Mr. Hieu also revealed that Gimiko clocks with components from Japanese SeikoCompany are one of the ten most popular products in Vietnam during recentyears and have been exported to France, Russia, Poland and Thailand.Gimiko now has 16 sales and service agencies nationwide including three inHCMC. On September 20 the company inaugurated a shop selling Gimiko clocksand well-known foreign watches at 34 Vo Van Tan Street, District 3, HCMC.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Reviewing the works on fire preventionfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996The HCMC Fire Prevention and Fighting Department last Friday held a meetingat the City Hall for  briefing on the implementation of Instruction 175/CTdated May 31,1991 issued by Chairman of the Ministerial Board, (currently thePrime Minister) concerning fire prevention works during the past five years.That five-year period has witnessed 1,024 fires killing 65, injuring 124 andcausing damages of about VND52 billion. There was a reduction of  24 cases(2.12%) but an increase of VND29.88 billion in damages (135.15%) incomparison with the previous five-year period.Also in that period, the concerned authorities have made great efforts tostrengthen the fire-fighting force including the 3,405 training classes aswell as the investment of over VND88 billion to equip fire-fightingfacilities.With the above results, the People's Committee of HCMC, People's PoliceBureau, the Prime Minister and the Interior Minister awarded many medals andletters of commendation to units and individuals that have contribution tothe fire-prevention and fighting work.On September 20 the Fire Brigade of the HCMC Police organized a preliminaryreview of five years of implementation of Government Instruction 175/CPissued on May 31, 1991 on strengthening fire prevention nationwide.The Police Department awarded congratulatory certificates to the fire brigadesector and the HCMC People's Committee awarded congratulatory certificatesto organizations and individuals who have made achievements in the fireprevention movement.Participating in the event were Mr. Vo Hung Viet, Vice-Chairman of the HCMCPeople's Committee, Mr. Vo Thai Hoa, Deputy Minister of Interior, Mr. BuiQuoc Huy, Director of HCMC Police and other representatives of the districtsand neighboring provinces.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: New Licenses (Continued from yesterday)from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996* Ben Tre ProvinceConstructing a resort in Con Tien:- Con Tien Victoria Resort.- Joint venture.- Investors:  - Vietnamese: Ben Tre Tourism Company (33%).  - Foreign: EAlectricitea et Eaux de Madagascar (France - 67%).- Investment: US$4 million.- Legal capital: US$1.2 million.- Duration: 25 years.* HanoiProducing circuit-breakers, transformers, fuses and lightning conductors;repairing and installing electrical equipment:- Skoda - Isovina Co. Ltd.- Joint venture.- Investors:  - Vietnamese: Electrical Insulating Material Factory (35%).  - Foreign: Skoda Etd Plzen, S.R.O. (The Czech Republic - 65%).- Investment: US$4.57 million.- Legal capital: US$3.13 million.- Duration: 20 years.* Lam Dong ProvinceCultivating and processing vegetables, fruit and agricultural products forexport:- Dai Phat Co. Ltd.- Joint venture.- Investors:  - Vietnamese: Viet Phat Co. Ltd. (30%).  - Foreign:    - Chibaken Shokuhin Ryutsu Center Co. Ltd. (Japan - 20%).    - Tokyo Maruka Trading Co. Ltd. (Japan - 20%).    - Daietsu Shoji Co. Ltd. (Japan - 30%).- Investment: US$5 million.- Legal capital: US$5 million.- Duration: 30 years.(Source: The Ministry of Planning and Investment)Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Int'l seminar discusses public administration reform in Vietnamfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HANOI) The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) and the Governmentof Vietnam are holding the country's first-ever international colloquium onpublic administration reform on September 24-26 at the Daewoo Hotel in Hanoi.The colloquium has brought together 30 Vietnamese senior officials and 22representatives from 18 different countries to discuss strategies, approachesand experiences relating to public administration reform in differentsocio-political settings, focusing on countries in transition to a marketeconomy.The conference will serve as a forum for Vietnam's leaders to discuss withand learn from other countries about the successes and mistakes in the areaof public administration reform.This colloquium is an activity of the UNDP-funded Public AdministrationReform Program which has helped the Government to improve its reforms whilein transition to a market economy.This week, it is expected that the Government will approve a pilot project,co-funded by UNDP and the government of the Netherlands, to help Quang BinhProvince speed up its public administration reform process.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996UNDP and Dutch government to fund administration projectsfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996UNDP and the Dutch government will provide more than US$3 million to help theprovince strengthen its public administration system to better meet the needsof the people. The pilot project - a follow-up to the UNDP-funded PublicAdministration Reform Program - will directly support the development of theGovernment's national public administration reform program in otherprovinces."Reforms and governments exist to make  life better for the people ," saidMr. Morey head of UNDP in Vietnam. "Reforms should not only  be efficient butthere also needs to be elements of integrity, justice,fairness and honesty.Reforms are  not just about changing and standardizing the rules. It's alsoimportant to  change the   behaviors of those in government to better servethe people. This conference is a positive  sign from the Government that itis committed to improving the public administration system in Vietnam."Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Anzoil continues to explore oil in Red River Delta next yearfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HANOI) The Australian corporation Anzoil will continue to explore foroil and gas in provinces of the Red River Delta and next year's plan will bediscussed at a meeting between Anzoil and PetroVietnam September 26-27 inSingapore, a source from PetroVietnam said.Anzoil will conclude the third test-drill at a depth of 1,100 meters in ThuyTruong, Thai Binh Province on September 25, said Mr. Do Van Dao, director ofPetroVietnam PSC Supervising Company.The first drill in Thai Tho and the second in Bac Son of the northernprovince of Thai Binh showed good results, said Mr. Dao.Anzoil has spent about VND20 million for the three test drills which startedon March 6 this year. Next year its test-drills are expected to be locatedin Nam Ha, Hai Hung, Thai Binh, Haiphong and Tonkin Gulf areas.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Increasing rice export quotafrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HANOI) Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet has officially decided to increasethis year's rice export quota to 2.2 million tons, revealed a source from theMinistry of Trade.This is an opportunity for commercial banks to pump more capital intocirculation as some VND2,000 billion is still stockpiled at commercial banksin the country.State commercial banks loaned VND2,395 billion to rice traders to buy paddyfrom farmers in the first eight months of this year, raising total loans forrice trading businesses to VND4,200 billion, said a source from the StateBank.The same source noted that commercial banks are authorized to lend money tothose enterprises which are in need of capital to purchase rice for exportwithout being restricted by credit ceilings.It is expected that Vietnam will have exported 2.15 million tons of rice bythe end of this month.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam to exploit one million cubic meters of woodfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HANOI) Vietnam plans to exploit some one million cubic meters of woodnext year, of which 650,000 cubic meters come from natural forests and theremainder from cultivated forests, an official source said.Mr. Le Dinh Loan, an official with the Ministry of Agriculture and RuralDevelopment, said that the country will also plant an additional 500,000hectares of forests.The Forestry Development Division of the ministry, Mr. Loan added, has setout plans to manage and protect 9.3 million hectares for the period betweennow until the year 2000.Vietnam's total area of forests was 9.3 million hectares by the end of lastyear. Of the figure, natural forests were 8.2 million hectares and cultivatedforests 1.04 million hectares.The total area of natural forests is becoming smaller all the time; Vietnamhad 11 million hectares in 1976, but only 10 million hectares in 1980, 9.3million hectares in 1985, 8.4 million hectares in 1990 and 8.25 million lastyear.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Beta Mekong Limited invests in hotel sectorfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HCMC) Beta Mekong Fund Limited (BMF) announces the completion, in August1996, of an investment of US$3 million in Indotel Limited, a companyincorporated in Singapore. BMF is a founder shareholder of Indotel  with AAPCAsia Pte. Ltd., the Vietnam Investment Fund (Singapore) Limited, Beta VietnamFund Limited and Luculia International Limited, according to a press release.Indotel has been established to develop, operate and invest in hotels andrelated hospitality interests in Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and Myanmar.Borrowings in respect of the Sofitel Metropole, Novotel Danang and IbisHaiphong have been or will be provided by the International FinanceCorporation. Borrowing in respect of the Novotel Haiphong will be providedby Banque Indosuez with support from COFACE.Indotel has raised US$23 million in equity from its founding shareholders andis presently raising  a further US$23 million by way of a private placementarranged by WI Carr (Far East) Limited.The Directors of BMF believe that the prospects for tourism in the fourcountries where Indotel is investing are particularly promising and that theregional spread of Indotel's properties within Vietnam make this investmentan attractive addition to BMF's portfolio.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: City waterway violations decrease 14%from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HCMC) Waterway safety violation cases found in the first two weeks ofimplementing Government Decree 40/CP have decreased by 14% compared with thepast weeks.The Waterway Police have fined 336 violators VND74 million. Waterway safetyorder on the main routes such as Doi, Te and Tau Hu canals has improved.The Waterway Police are cooperating with the HCMC Waterway Management Boardto clear the houses encroaching Te and Doi canals.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Stop press, September 25, 1996from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996* Hanoi: A seminar on mechanisms to develop the micro-financial system inVietnam was held yesterday by the Agricultural Bank, the Association ofAgricultural and Rural Credit Organization in Asia-Pacific Region andGermany's Technical Project Development Organization.(VOV)* The ministerial conference on forestry in the five countries in thecontinental region of Southeast Asia - Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, Thailand andVietnam - started here yesterday. FAO's representatives in Hanoi and NewZealand's Ambassador to Vietnam also took part in this two-day conference.* HCMC: A joint venture in the breeder pig raising sector between France'sFragro Asie Company and HCMC's Pig Raising Factory 3/2 has just receivedapproval to operate for 20 years.* Tien Giang: The province has brought stable jobs to over 150,000 localpeople during the past five years. Eighty projects to improve family economyare also being developed with a total investment capital of VND15.5 billion.* Tay Ninh: Tay Ninh Sugarcane Company has invested VND9 billion in the1996-1997 sugarcane crop, including the cultivation of 70ha more in additionto the existing 3,031 ha.* Lam Dong: Vegetable growers in Dalat are facing a big loss estimated atbillions of dongs due to a serious price slump in the vegetable market.(TTXVN)* Hai Phong: A modern passenger train equipped with high-standard facilitiesis being built locally by Gia Lam and Di An locomotive factories and HaiPhong Carriage factory for the Hanoi - Kunming international route.(Thanh Nien)Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996from THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HCMC) Enhancement of export-oriented industries and other foreignearners are among major resolutions that Deputy Prime Minister Phan Van Khaisuggested to HCMC after his recent fact-finding tour to this southern city.In a notice just issued by the Government Office last Saturday, the DeputyPrime Minister urged HCMC to restructure its economy by strengthening exportindustries and foreign-earning service sectors.To do so, the city should encourage projects to produce goods for export, andto expand its overseas markets. Production firms should be supported inseeking export markets for their own products, according to Deputy PM Khai.Urban management is another vital task for the city, Khai insisted. He calledfor the city authority to speed up the development of new urban centers andnew industrial zones to ease the over-populated situation in the inner city."Concentrated industrial zones must be built outside of the city in line withthe general master plan of the city ... to attract people into newresidential areas," according to the notice of the Government Office.Relating to the pollution issue, Deputy PM Khai allowed the city to use moneyfrom selling state-owned houses to remove houses along the Nhieu Loc-Thi NgheCanal. He also asked the Ministry of Planning and Investment to earmark moneyfrom official development assistance sources to improve the city'senvironment.Other issues that the city needs to tackle are traffic congestion,uncontrolled inflow of immigrants, and loose management over land and housesin the city.Deputy PM Khai also urged the city to mobilize all resources to accelerateits economic growth rate. In the first eight months of this year, HCMC hasmade good economic growth, but signals of economic recession and stagnationin production have appeared.* Deputy Prime Minister Nguyen Khanh said here yesterday the Governmentencourages all people to contribute capital for acquisition of new medicalequipment and for developing new clinics in the country.Khanh, speaking during a visit to the HCMC Medical Center (Medic), reiteratedthat the Government supports this form of investment to upgrade the country'shealth care system. "There needs to be a statute governing the operation ofa public-funded system of clinics where all people can offer their financialcontribution," the Deputy Prime Minister said.The six-year-old Medic has developed robustly since its establishment thanksto financial support from workers of the center itself (accounting for 70%of the assets of the center). Some 30% of the center's stake is owned byother individuals, said Mr. Phan Thanh Hai, director of Medic.Hai, addressing the Deputy Prime Minister, said that his clinic is providinghealth care services to some 1,000 people per day. With higher demands fromthe people, Medic's equipment and facilities are becoming obsolete, and needto be upgraded. "We want to turn Medic into a people-funded medical center,"Hai proposed to the Government leader.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam: Stricter measures for import-export debtorsfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HANOI) Five measures to deal with evasion of import-export taxes in 1996and 1997 will be applied in the near future, according to Circular No. 56TT/LB issued on September 17 by the Ministry of  Finance and GeneralDepartment of Customs.The measure for strengthening the collection of import-export debt will beimplemented under the form of forcing debtors to pledge to pay stagnant debtsbefore September 30 or asking the Debt Settlement Board to either collect thedebt or erase it for disbanded enterprises.The measure of collecting unpaid taxes from bank accounts of enterprises willbe imposed on import-export enterprises unwilling to pay taxes as of October1, 1996.Import and export goods will be confiscated when the above two measures fail.The measure of putting assets equivalent to unpaid taxes as collateral willbe imposed on enterprises which have not paid overdue import-export taxes dueto acceptable difficulties.The measure of suspending import-export operations will be imposed onenterprises which have long overdue taxes or have ignored all the abovemeasures.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES DAILY                        via NewsNetSeptember 25, 1996Vietnam, UNDP join to prevent HIV/AIDS in nationwide projectfrom THE SAIGON TIMES DAILY, September 25, 1996(SGT-HCMC) At present, a two-year UNDP (United Nations Development Program)project worth US$1 million launched in early 1996 is providing technicalassistance to the Vietnam National AIDS Committee, the National Women's Unionand the Youth Union, provincial AIDS committees and non-governmentalorganizations to enhance Vietnam's capacity to mobilize, plan and coordinateits policies and programs in prevention and care.According to statistics from the Vietnam AIDS Prevention Committee, as ofSept. 7, the number of virus-infected cases reached 4,316 including 80foreigners and 4,239 locals.Dr.Roy Morey, UN Resident Coordinator and UNDP Resident Representative saidthat the conference on HIV/AIDS  organized in Vietnam on Sept. 23 and 24highlights the need to put a special emphasis on today's youth in and out ofschool to protect them from this deadly disease.Since 1991, the Vietnamese Government has disbursed funding for AIDSprevention operations every year. In 1991, the budget earmarked about VND300million and increased to VND45 billion in 1995. It is estimated that from1996 to 2000, annual disbursement from the Government for the AIDS preventionprograms will reach over VND50 billion.Today, worldwide, more than 50% of those newly infected by HIV are betweenthe ages of 15-24, and the number of virus-infected cases every day is 8,500.In many places, among 15-19 year-olds, two girls are infected with the virusfor every boy.Copyright 1996 Saigon Times DailyBack to Headline List WT03-B06-24IA087-000634-B043-43http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it144.html 205.156.212.5 19970122031452 text/html 100139HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:12:44 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:26 GMTContent-length: 99952Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it144.html Sample Issue Copyright THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNet September 20, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Vietnam: World Bank pledges more loan commitments (262 words) Vietnam: Largest BOT investment in power sector (181 words) Vietnam: Preferential tariff for EU imports (275 words) Vietnam: A proper dose for beer production (258 words) Vietnam: Trade review after a decade of doi moi (363 words) The Saigon Times Weekly: Point and click (356 words) Vietnam: Press Highlights, September 13-20, 1996 (554 words) Vietnam: Investment Environment Remains Attractive (841 words) Vietnam's post & telecom updates (292 words) Vietnam: Boosting Telecom Service Competitiveness (444 words) Vietnam: Health Care Equality (835 words) Vietnam: PM approves HCMC municipal development fund (281 words) Vietnam: Gov't takes strong measures against tax debtors (206 words) When Will Vietnam Have a Well-Built Generation? (1001 words) Vietnam: Tales of Mollusks (686 words) Vietnam: Where to Go for Weekends? Hanoi needs more entertainment venues (688 words) Vietnam: Equity Definition (540 words) Vietnam: Reaching higher (153 words) Vietnam: Essentials of the Decree on the Statute of Tender (1004 words) Vietnamese Income Survey (457 words) Vietnam: Gourds Reach Foreign Markets (532 words) Vietnam: Stone Handicrafts on Show Abroad (336 words) Vietnam: Dong or U.S. dollar? (154 words) Vietnam: Compensation for Labor Accidents (145 words) Vietnam: Largest shipbuilding JV licensed (311 words) Vietnam: Privileges offered to workers in equitized SOEs (523 words) Vietnam: Business Briefs, September 13-20, 1996 (1823 words) Vietnam: The Path of AIDS (1048 words) Vietnam: Art Lovers Enjoy Abstract Chinese-ink Paintings and "Autumn Wind" Silk Works (179 words) CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: World Bank pledges more loan commitmentsfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996The World Bank plans to offer Vietnam loans of US$1.5 billion overthe three financial years 1997-1999 in the second capitalsupplementation from its agency, the International DevelopmentAssociation (IDA).The good news was announced by the director of the Asia-PacificDepartment of the World Bank, Javad Khalilzadeh Shirazi, during hisvisit to Vietnam last week to review two years of implementation ofthe IDA-funded projects and discuss preparations for the 4thconsulting conference of international donors for Vietnam in Hanoilate this year. During talks with Deputy PM Phan Van Khai, Shiraziexpressed good impressions of Vietnam's economic reform andpromised that the World Bank will continue to help Vietnam settledebts through the London Club.According to the International Relations Department of the StateBank, the World Bank has announced the list of projects expected toreceive its funding in the financial years 1997-1998-1999 withrespective amounts of US$641 million, US$458 million and US$345million. The projects are related to rural and urban transport,tertiary education, power transmission, agriculture, energy, waterresources and other fields.In financial years 1993-1996, the WB approved loans for 12 projectstotalling US$1,275 million with 11 projects already signed,excluding a rural transport project worth US$54 million undernegotiation. Since October 1993, it has organized three conferencesof international donors for Vietnam with the total loans committedamounting to US$1.7-US$2 billion each year. Vietnam is now thesecond largest recipient of WB loans after India.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Largest BOT investment in power sectorfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996The U.S. energy company Oxbow International has been selected asinvestor of the Hoanh Bo Thermopower Plant (300MW), Vietnam's firstBOT (build-operate-transfer) project in the power sector.The project, to be built in Hoanh Bo District, Quang Ninh Provincewith an investment captal of US$300 million, will use the world'smost modern technology in thermopower production and all the lowenergy coal available in Quang Ninh (about 1.2 million tons/year)as fuel. It will supply power to factories and industrial zones inHanoi, Haiphong and Quang Ninh and possibly to southern provincesof China.The project is due to start operation in 1999 and will betransferred to Vietnam after 20 years.At present, another BOT project in the power sector is under theGovernment's consideration. The project, to be located in BaRia-Vung Tau Province, is a diesel-powered plant with a capacity of120 MW, which will be invested by the Finnish company Wartsila.Total investment capital is US$110 million.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Preferential tariff for EU importsfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996The General Department of Customs has issued detailed guidelines toimplement the tariff reduction for goods imported from the EuropeanUnion (EU) in the two years of 1996 and 1997.According to Circular 2610/TCHQ-KTTT dated Aug.14, goods from theEU can enjoy import tax reduction if they meet the followingrequirements: stated in the nomenclature issued in conjunction withDecree 18/CP on the list of goods and tariffs to implement theimport tax reduction program for goods imported from the EU,ensuring the standard on origin in accordance with the generalstipulations of the Agreement on Textiles and Garments of the EU,and possession of the certificate of origin, form A issued bycompetent authorities from the EU.Goods recognized to originate from the EU must meet one of thefollowing requirements:-Wholly produced or exploited in an EU country,-Produced in an EU country with part or all of the materials, partsor components completely processed in this country. Textiles andgarments in this case must undergo at least two stages ofprocessing.- The final product made in an EU country, in which productsmeeting the EU origin requirement have been used.The circular also states that goods imported from the EU can onlyenjoy preferential tariff if they are transported to Vietnamdirectly from an EU country or via the ports of a number of EUcountries. The goods can also be transported via the ports ofnon-EU countries but the transit is necessary due to geographicalreasons or transport demand.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: A proper dose for beer productionfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996Deputy PM Phan Van Khai requested the Ministry of Industry and theVietnam Beer, Liquor and Beverage Corporation (Vinabeco) tore-organize the chaos in beer and wine production.During his recent working session with the corporation, Khaicomplained that beer factories have been built in many localitieswithout proper planning and market study. At present, 46 out of 53provinces in Vietnam have beer enterprises, many of which,including joint ventures, suffer losses and become a burden for theState budget. Khai warned that Vietnamese partners must carefullyselect foreign partners to establish beer JVs and increase theirstakes in the JVs. He instructed the Ministry and concernedauthorities to prepare  a plan for the development of beer, liquorand beverage production and to reorganize existing factories,adding that small and ineffective companies should be dissolvedbefore licenses are granted to new businesses.Vinabeco produced 103 million liters of beer, 10.5 million litersof beverages and 740,000 liters of liquor in the first half of thisyear. Compared with the same period of 1995, the beer productionincreased by 17 million liters and beverages by 22.1 million litersbut liquor decreased by 97,000 liters. To increase competiveness,Vinabeco will establish a trading company to distribute all theproducts of its affiliated units. It now has 2,091 sale agentsnation-wide with sales reaching over VND1 trillion in the firsthalf of this year, accounting for 51% of its yearly target.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Trade review after a decade of doi moifrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996A conference to review trade activities during the ten years of doimoi and discuss measures to increase the effectiveness of tradingenterprises and set goals and directions for the period 1996-2000was held in HCMC recently by the Ministry of Trade.According to reports at the conference, by the end of 1995, therewere 1,900 State enterprises, 6,000 private enterprises, over 2,000limited liability companies, 35 joint stock companies and onemillion households engaged in trade. However, only 30% of theenterprises operate at a profit; 40% have normal operations butwith little profit and face capital shortage and debts and 30%suffer losses. On average, 10 enterprises suffered losses annuallyin the past five years.The goals of the trade sector for the 1996-2000 five-year plan areto increase sales by 2.5 times compared with 1995 with an averagegrowth rate of 20%/year, export turnover by 28-32%/year to reachUS$18-20 billion by 2000, and import turnover by 24-28%/year toreach US$22-25 billion by 2000.Measures to reach these goals include re-organizing Stateenterprises with modern business methods, equitizing part or all ofthe assets of these enterprises, defining the mechanism,responsibility and authority of the State ownership for theenterprise and upgrading the qualification of sales personnel.In the first eight months of this year, domestic trade developedwell thanks to an abundant supply of goods which could meet 95% ofdomestic consumers' demand. Along with this, price fevers due toshortage of goods did not occur and inflation was curbed at 2.2%.However, there are signs of a surplus of goods due to over-importsand increased domestic production while purchasing power roseslowly. The trade sector expects to reach total sales of VND180trillion this year.According to the Ministry of Trade, Vietnam has trading relationswith 105 countries and territories and has signed trade agreementswith over 60 countries. Trading activities attract over two millionpeople, contribute to 34% of total budget revenues (excludingrevenues from JVs with foreign partners) and account for 14% of theGDP.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996The Saigon Times Weekly: Point and clickfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996A set of floppy disks or a CD-ROM entitled "Saigon Times Weekly,Jan. '95-June '96" recording the whole contents of the Saigon TimesWeekly issues of 1995 and the first six months of 1996 will bemarketed in early October on the occasion of the fifth birthdaycelebration of the Saigon Times Weekly (Oct. 1991-Oct. 1996). Inthe future, the complete Saigon Times Weekly issues (publishedsince 1991) and Saigon Times Daily (published since 1995) will alsobe available.This is the first product under a cooperation program between theSaigon Times Group and the Scientific & Technological Services andConsulting Company (Scitec).Distributors:1. Scitec Co., 52 Bui Thi Xuan St., Dist.1, HCMC; Tel: 83303782. Saigon Times Group, 35 Nam Ky Khoi Nghia St., Dist.1, HCMC; Tel:8295936Specifications of "Saigon Times Weekly, Jan '95-June '96"1. Functions of the program:- Permit users to search for any information by inserting searchingrequirements which may be the issue number, date of publishing,author, subject or a group of words in the heading or the body ofan article. The requirements can also be combined with one anotherby "AND" or "OR" logic.- After the results of the search are obtained, a list of articlesmeeting the requirements will appear with full information. Theuser can look at the list of articles as well as the original textof each article on the screen or print it out.- When the content of an article appears on the screen, the usercan order the computer to seek a word or a certain group of words.- The user can record searching requirements on the disk for lateruse if necessary.- Produce statistics of titles, authors, or issues which meet thesearching requirements.- Function as a "Help" according to the context.The "Saigon Times Weekly, Jan. '95-June '96" provides users,especially businesspeople, quick and easy reference to aconsiderable amount of information contained in 78 issues.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Press Highlights, September 13-20, 1996from THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996A weekly review of issues featured in the local pressBy TRAN TRONG THUC - HCMCThe first ASEAN Football Cup, Tiger Cup 96, obscured other eventslast week as it dominated the front pages of major newspapers.Readers not only closely read the comments on the Cup by sportswriters but also put football on top of their discussions inschools and offices, especially the glory and gloom of theVietnamese team playing on Singapore grounds.HCMC-based newspapers, such as Sai Gon Giai Phong (SaigonLiberation), Tuoi Tre (Youth), Nguoi Lao Dong (Laborer) and ThanhNien (Youngsters), seemed to put more emphasis on this sportingtournament than their centrally run and northern counterparts. TheTuoi Tre ran the headline "50 Minutes of Collapse, 40 Minutes ofRevival" for its report on the semi-final match in which Vietnamlost to Thailand 2-4. The Tuoi Tre Sunday featured a cogentcommentary affirming Vietnamese football has attained regional highranking status.The Sai Gon Giai Phong also reported the Vietnamese team's matcheson its front page but printed no comments. Lao Dong's (Labor)sports section highlighted a long article concluding that theVietnamese team showed better performance than it did in the 18thSea Games last year. Tiger Cup '96 came to an end on September 15with Vietnam ranking third after Thailand and Malaysia.However, the Vietnamese press has made some spontaneous remarks ina few articles on this sports event. The national team and,particularly, chief coach Karl Weigang were extolled when winningbut disparaged every time they suffered losses. The Tuoi Trepublished an interview with an indecent query, "Mr. Weigang, whendo you think you will be dismissed?" On that day, the newspaperreceived many phone calls from readers in response to the question."Weigang has both merits and problems," was the Tuoi Tre answer.This explanation complies with the contents of a book to bemarketed late this month entitled, "The Unknowns of VietnameseFootball."Meanwhile, the lead economic story of the week was an interviewwith an official from the Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI)covered by the Nguoi Lao Dong. Headlined "Revised Bill on ForeignInvestment: More Attractive and Reasonable," the interview showedthat Vietnam's law on foreign investment will be amended so that itwill create more favorable conditions for investors. Some examplesof new advantages are: reduced time for investment evaluation,permission to pool in capital in Vietnamese currency, expansion ofthe joint venture form, and elongation of the tax holiday period.More than one month ago, a Tuoi Tre investigative report onVietnam-ese women marrying Taiwanese men aroused public attention.Last week, the HCMC-based Phu Nu (Women) showed even more of thebitter reality by publishing an article quoting sources from theTaiwanese press. This women's newspaper contended that theTaiwanese story on the service of marrying Vietnamese, andTaiwanese stipulations on marriages with foreigners are ahumiliation to Vietnamese women. The Phu Nu went as far asproposing that the law should rule that only foreign men withadequate health, education and income, and without handicaps arequalified to marry Vietnamese women. Of course, these are onlyproposals for consideration.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Investment Environment Remains Attractivefrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996Many people have been concerned about the fact that foreign-directinvestment (FDI) has fallen into a decline as the investmentenvironment has proven problematic while the pressure ofcompetition from other regional countries has strongly increased.Deputy Minister of Planning and Investment Nguyen Nhac talks aboutthis issue.Could you talk about the situation of FDI since early this year?By August 20 this year, the Ministry of Planning and Investment(MPI) had licensed 186 projects, worth some US$4.35 billion. Ofthis sum, the build-operate-transfer project for the internationalseaport Sao Mai-Ben Dinh in Vung Tau makes up US$637 million, andthe float glass plant of Japanese Asahi in Song Be Province US$125million. In the same period last year, total registered capital oflicensed projects was over US$4.57 billion.So this indicates a slight decline in FDI?In my opinion, we should first examine whether or not foreigninvestors are still interested in seeking business opportunities orinvestment projects in the country once the tempo of FDI influx ismentioned. Between the beginning of the year and August 20, theministry received 237 projects, with total registered capitalreaching US$7.25 billion compared with US$4.94 billion in the sameperiod last year. Currently, many projects have not yet beenlicensed as they are big and important; therefore, it takes time toconsider them carefully.Between now and the end of the year, it is certain that thegovernment will license a number of large projects such as DungQuat Oil Refinery No.1 (US$1.5 billion), Quang Ninh 300 MWthermo-power plant and a Vietnam-Hyundai ship-building yard. Inaddition, Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet has assigned the relevantState agencies to map out policies and regulations regardingseveral pilot urban development projects with the involvement offoreign investors such as those in An Khanh, Thu Duc District,HCMC, and on the outskirts of Hanoi.I often follow the foreign press and see that some say the tempo ofFDI influx into Vietnam has stayed constant. However, they usedfigures of a particular week or month as proof. Several foreignnews agencies have even tried to assert that we plan to reduce theamount of FDI into the country by inventing statistics which wehave not ever seen before.Some people are worried that the country's investment environmentis not attractive and is discouraging foreign investors. They referto a number of cases including the recent inspection offoreign-invested projects and the withdrawal of investmentlicenses.It is necessary for functional State agencies to carry outinspections periodically to find whether foreign-investedenterprises need any assistance in resolving unexpected problems orabiding by stipulations in their licenses and Vietnamese laws. Thisis ordinary State management work, which foreign businesses arewilling to agree on and cooperate. Foreign newspapers havementioned a number of projects whose licenses have been pulled backbefore expiry in an attempt to prove that the country's investmentenvironment has become worse. There is nothing abnormal inwithdrawing licenses from unfeasible and unprofitable projectsprior to expiry. I was very interested in the opinion of anAustralian high trade commissioner in Vietnam; when asked about thewithdrawal of Australian BHP from an oil exploitation project, thiscommissioner noted that this is very common everywhere around theworld.Vietnam's potential rivals from regional countries concern manypeople. Could you please analyze the advantages which the countryhas in attracting FDI?Competition has always existed, therefore, we have to accept thechallenges. I think that, at present, the competitive edges whichplay the most important role in luring FDI are Vietnam'sdevelopment requirements, stability on a macro-scale, andparticipation in the ASEAN Free Trade Area. Some foreignconglomerates, such as Japanese Sanyo and South Korean Daewoo, tendto set foot in the country as a stepping-stone to expand theirmarkets to the whole region. They are planning to move their plantsto Vietnam and to export products back to their countries. Vietnamalso has other advantages including low-cost labor and land.In the future, what measures will the Government adopt to raise theFDI influx to a higher level?We are designing policies to attract FDI not only with higherquantity, but also higher quality. To actualize these policies, theamended Foreign Investment Law will be presented to the NationalAssembly for approval in October this year. This amended law willcontain articles intended to provide preferential treatment for theState-promoted areas, accelerate administrative reforms, andimprove the investment environment and the efficiency of Statemanagement in FDI activities. In addition, there may be some otherarticles stipulating that investors can file complaints andlitigate if Government officials process formalities slowly orintentionally cause difficulties. I believe that the country'seconomic development strategies, legal framework, improvedinvestment environment, and comparative advantages will certainlyattract the FDI influx into Vietnam.Reported by Nguyen TranCopyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam's post & telecom updatesfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996* According to the International Telecommunications Union (ITU),Vietnam ranks second in the world in telecom development with agrowth rate of 70%/year. The statement was made after the ITUcompleted a comprehensive study of the telecom developmentworldwide.The ITU also reported that Vietnam is the 60th out of 205 countrieswhich has one million telephones and uses 95% of digital electronicexchanges.* According to Vietnamese experts in the post and telecom sector,to meet increasing demands in the future, Vietnam must expandoperations by fivefold from the present level. Mai Liem Truc,general director of Vietnam Post and Telecom Corporation (VNPT),said that the telecom sector must invest over VND3,000 billion toreach the goal of 5-6 telephones/100 people by the year 2000.By late August, VNPT had reached one million telephone subscribers,a milestone marking the rapid development of the telecom sector.This has made Vietnam an attractive market for internationaltelecom companies. At present, over 30 of the world's telecomgiants are operating  in Vietnam and US$750 million in FDI havebeen poured into this sector.* At present, there are over one million telephones in Vietnam ormore than one set/100 people. Post and telecom authorities haveplans to increase the telephone ratio to 5-6 sets/100 people by theyear 2000, raising the number of phone lines to 4.1 million by 2000(in particular HCMC and Hanoi: 20 sets/100 people). Also, in thisperiod, the fiber optic cable linking Vietnam, China, Laos,Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand will be built and satellitecommunications will be expanded with the launch of a telecomsatellite expected in 1999.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Boosting Telecom Service Competitivenessfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996The Saigon Postel Corp. held a shareholders' meeting to set up thecorporation on August 17, 1996 in accordance with a license grantedby the Ho Chi Minh City People's Committee on December 27, 1995.The corporation's establishment has been given a green light by theGovernment, and its regulations on organization and operation havebeen approved by the Directorate General of Post &Telecommunications.By Minh TrangThe corporation will operate in line with the Company and StateEnterprise Laws, and in the form of a joint-stock company with achartered capital of VND50 billion contributed by 11 member units.Referring to the corporation's trading program in the initial stage(1996-2000), General Director Trinh Dinh Khuong said that it willimplement post and telecom activities in the first year (1996): TheCo Giang Post Center will be put into operation with such servicesas parcel and package delivery and remittance; the corporation willact as an agent introducing and trading in input-output equipment(two to three outlets in the city) and as an agent for other postalservices.The Saigon Postel Corp. will also prepare a design to construct atelecom-informatics-electronics hi-tech park on a 40-ha area in ThuDuc District. Later, the corporation will develop two to threecenters with 10-20 branches in cities and provinces nationwide. Atthe same time, the corporation will carry out, step by step,cordless and mobile phone services from Tay Ninh, Dong Nai and VungTau to the Mekong Delta, Hanoi and Haiphong.In addition, by the year 2000 the corporation will put a jointventure into operation which will manufacture and assembletelecommunication equipment with an estimated capacity averaging200,000-250,000 items per annum, of which 50 percent will be forexport.The corporation will also take preparatory steps to participate, ifpermitted, in the national satellite program and project ofinvesting in and operating services via satellite.This is the third entity specializing in the post and telecom areafollowing the Vietnam Post and Telecom Corp. (VNPT) and theMilitary Telecom Co.The Saigon Postel Corp.Add: 45 Le Duan St., Dist. 1, HCMCTel: 8220119 - 8220120Fax: 84.8.8220124Chairwoman of the Management Board: Tran Ngoc BinhGeneral Director: Trinh Dinh KhuongMember units       Contribution                    (VND bil.)1. Ben Thanh Tourist     112. TNT Co.                2.53. Fimexco                54. Sunimex                2.55. Saigon Petro           2.56. Lisado                 57. Treco                  2.58. Savico                 59. Resco 1                2.510. Binh Minh Co.         2.511. VNPT                  9Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Health Care Equalityfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996The living standards of the people have been increasing constantlywith the improvement of socio-economic conditions, and so has thedemand for medical care. However, can people from different strataof the population receive equal treatment in health care?By Phuong AnhUpgrading medical careThe document "Oriented strategies of medical care and healthprotection for the population by the years 2000 and 2020," preparedby the Health Ministry clearly stated, "To invest in thepopulation's health is actually to invest in the nationalsocio-economic development, and we must strive to improve ourpeople's health to the average level of the nations in the region."Health Minister Do Nguyen Phuong predicted: In 2000 there will be419 doctors for every one million people, 700 general hospitals atprovincial level and 10,000 fully equipped dispensaries forordinary medical care nationwide, and each person will spend US$8per year on average for medicine. Meanwhile, the Ministry willgradually diversify the forms of medical care and treatment withvarious types of hospitals: State-run, joint venture and private,but State-run health care will play the leading role. The creationof these forms of health care must meet the actual demand of thepopulation and by no means should health care be commercialized.At present, there is one private hospital charging low fees inQuang Nam - Da Nang Province. In the future, there will be morehospitals of this type to meet the demands of the population. Inthe meantime, the Health Ministry is focusing on building twospecialized medical centers in Hanoi and HCM City by decision ofthe Prime Minister in July 1995 with the objective to elevatemedical service to the level of hospitals in some countries of theregion.The specialized medical center in Hanoi, the first to be built,will be operating late this year. It will receive technical supportfrom four hospitals and a college; the Bach Mai Hospital forinstance, will assist with laboratory tests, emergency and recoveryand endoscopy.The specialized medical center in HCM City is also underconstruction. At the moment, partner hospitals and colleges arebeing selected. Other specialized medical centers will be builtthereafter in Central Vietnam and other economic zones. Yet, thedevelopment of Vietnam's medical system is still inadequate sinceit cannot cover every part of the country and big differences incare and treatment exist between urban and rural areas, the poorand the rich.Equality in medical servicesImplementing the policy of equality of the Party and Government,the Ministry of Health maintains three systems of medical coverage:medical insurance, free of charge, and payable service.Medical insurance covers only public servants and people working insome non-State enterprises. Free services are available to certaingroups of people: those having contributed to the nationalsalvation, and those living in the highlands or certified as havingserious difficulties. Thus, only a limited number of persons canenjoy State subsidies for medical care and the majority of thecountry's 75 million people - most of them are farmers - must paydoctor's bills. Generally, patients have to pay large fees forspecial treatment; for instance, VND 1 million for a liter of bloodtransfused during an operation. There are areas reserved for richpatients in one hospital with good physicians and plenty ofmedicines. Poorer patients receive little care at low cost or freeof charge.From the economic viewpoint, this mode of treatment is fair since,"the more you pay, the better service you get." This concept,however, is not fair from a humane point of view so it was decidedto build hospitals for the poor. And the Health Ministry promisedthat each hospital will have various forms of treatment but atleast 21% of the patients will be treated free of charge.Vietnam's medical care must be improved both qualitatively andquantitatively to meet the increasing demand of the population, thegreat majority of which are poor. Since the gap between rich andpoor is widening, small groups of richer people can enjoy moreprivileges while the poor especially those in the hinterlands andthe mountains suffer from lack of medical care.Should medical care be commercialized?Prof. Nguyen Nguyen Khoi, head of the Artificial Kidney Section,Bach Mai Hospital remarked: "Medical care must have some economiccharacteristics since all modern treatment is expensive and thepatient must pay for the amortization of equipment and materialsconsumed. The hospital can recover the capital invested after fiveyears and the State no longer has to invest in it. However, not allpatients can afford such costly treatment. Therefore, we have toconsider some way to help those who cannot pay. Perhaps, a healthinsurance policy is propitious, but it must be suitable to meet thecosts." Therefore, we still have to wait.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: PM approves HCMC municipal development fundfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996The Prime Minister has approved a proposal to establish a municipaldevelopment fund for HCMC submitted by the Ministry of Finance.The fund is a State-owned financial entity with chartered capitalof VND500 billion, which will be mobilized from revenues from thesales of State-owned houses, lotteries and land use, electricityand water surcharges, telephone charges, local budget andcontributions and loans from local and foreign individuals.The fund will make investments in socio-economic infrastructuredevelopment projects in HCMC and engage in other operations such asinvestment consulting services, equitization of State-ownedenterprises and stock exchange. Its lending rates will be set bythe HCMC People's Committee but they must not exceed the lendingrates for medium and long term loans stipulated by the State Bank.The fund will enjoy tax reduction and exemption in accordance withthe law.This year, HCMC expects to mobilize VND17,000-18,000 billion, up by33.7-41% from 1995 and accounting for 36% of the local GDP. Theamount, to come from different sources, including the local budget,land fund, bond sales, lottery revenues, foreign investment, loansand foreign aid, will be used for socio-economic development,especially infrastructure development, which is estimated atVND3,500 billion. Key infrastructure projects include the Bac NhaBe-Nam Binh Chanh Road, Nguyen Tri Phuong Bridge and Road, the roadfrom Ong Lanh Bridge to Hiep Phuoc Industrial Park, the belthighway over Saigon River to Bac Nha Be-Nam Binh Chanh Road, thenorth-south artery, Ton Duc Thang Road and Bridge, and industrialparks such as Tan Thoi Hiep, Cu Chi and others.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Gov't takes strong measures against tax debtorsfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996The Prime Minister has issued an instructive allowing concernedauthorities to take strong measures to settle the import-export taxarrears, which has seriously affected collections for the Statebudget.Instructive 575/TTg dated Aug.24 has assigned the GeneralDepartment of Customs and the Ministry of Finance to consider taxexemption or reduction of fines for late payment of taxes forbusinesses which have paid the taxes due before Sept.30, 1996.Regarding tax debt incurred before April 1, 1992 which businessesare unable to pay (due to dissolution, bankruptcy or losses), thetwo authorities must investigate the situation and recommend to theGovernment to cancel the debts.Beginning October 1, 1996, the General Department of Customs willcoordinate with the Finance Ministry and the State Bank to deductthe balance in the bank account of import-export businesses thatfail to pay overdue import-export taxes after Sept.30 or to seizetheir goods for auctions to recover the overdue taxes.In addition, long debtors of import-export taxes may be subject tosuspension of business licenses, and depending on the seriousnessof violations, may be fined or prosecuted for criminalresponsibility.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996When Will Vietnam Have a Well-Built Generation?from THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996Investment in improving the health of school-age children is a bigconcern of every country, with a view to bettering its people'sphysical fitness, as well as to having stable human resources toserve the country's development process. Here are excerpts from aninterview with Nguyen Vo Ky Anh, chief of the Physical EducationDepartment (the Ministry of Education and Training) concerning thisproblem.Compared with other regional countries, Vietnamese people are muchsmaller, shorter and lighter. Could you tell us what will be thephysical fitness standard of Vietnamese in the future, specificallyto the year 2020?As far as we are concerned, by the year 2000, Vietnamese should tryto reach the average height of 1.65m (for males) and 1.60 (forfemales). During past years, the physical growth of Vietnamese hasbeen strongly affected by the results of a number of consecutivewars and the country's underdeveloped economy, and thus physicaltraining has not been a concern. Another reason for the limitedphysical development of the people has been low educationalstandards and lifestyle; the people lack fundamental knowledgeabout the preservation and improvement of their physical condition.The current physical growth rate of the people has not improvedmuch in comparison with the year 1943.In your opinion, in order to reach the above-mentioned standard,what must we do in terms of physical education?Initially, we have to educate people about nutrition. In elementaryschools, we plan to bring physical fitness education programs intothe teaching curriculum, and at the secondary level, knowledge ofhealth will be included in subjects such as biology and citizeneducation. We will try our utmost to improve the quality of theseprograms.How about the current situation of the facilities of school yardsand exercise rooms, and the amount of time reserved for physicaleducation?It is discouraging for the country's physical education that at themoment, many schools do not have play yards and exercise rooms forpupils. The present area of school yards has been increasinglynarrowed or a major part of it has been utilized for economicactivities, building restaurants, clubs and dance halls forexample. The Ordinance concerning the construction of schools withpedagogical standards has not been properly implemented, so manynew schools are not built with school yards. In foreign countries,schools must have stadiums and exercise facilities to make sure thepupils' physical training is not interrupted, rain or shine.Physical education is now compulsory in schools, with at least twoperiods a week required for all levels of education. At theuniversity level, after four years, students must finish fivecredits in physical education if they want to take graduationexams; elementary and secondary pupils are required to complete atleast five credits.Teachers play an important role in the improvement of the qualityof physical education. Could you tell us whether the staffs areprofessionally qualified?Only a minority of physical education teachers have been trained ingymnastics and sports schools, the remainder are mostly graduatesof pedagogical colleges. For the time being, the country has twocentrally managed pedagogical schools--one in Hanoi and the otherin Ho Chi Minh City, three faculties for gymnastics training andsports teachers at Vinh, Hue and Bac Thai pedagogical universities,and 16 departments specializing in gymnastics and sports at localcolleges, plus a number of students at the Gymnastics and SportsUniversity. Every year, between 400 and 1,000 teachers graduate,but this number fails to meet the current demand. On the contrary,educational administrators still concentrate more on how to providepupils and students with adequate cultural knowledge rather thanphysical education. As a result students and pupils may not havegood physical fitness and this is not being given proper attention.At the elementary level, there are no gymnastics teachers availablesince teachers have to cover the curriculum and extra-curricularactivities, and directly manage classes as well. So, it is evidentthat right in the first years of school, our pupils are not givensystematic physical education. Gymnastics teachers are not onlyunqualified but also there are not enough to meet the demand. Onthe average, at all levels of education, one teacher has to cover2,000 pupils; this ratio at the high school level is 1/300, and1/200 at the tertiary level. We are now lacking 30,000 gymnasticsteachers.How much is the annual funding the State offers for physicaleducation?On the whole, this funding is too low, making up only a few percentof that reserved for general training and education. In particular,no funding of this kind is provided for the elementary educationlevel.Pupils and students only have good intellect when they are in goodphysical condition. We have developed a strategy for upgrading thequality of physical education in schools at different levels to theyear 2005. We hope the State will consider it a target to beurgently met, like many other targets and programs of theeducational sector.Reported by Thu HangSome basic health targets                    1995      2000 2020Average life expectancy                      65.5      68   75Proportion of newborns weighingbelow 2,500 gr.                              10.1%     7%   5%Proportion of children under five sufferingfrom malnutrition                            46.9%     30%  15%Average height of young people               -         -    1.65mPercentage of national budget invested inhealth care                                  3.09%     5%   8%Percentage of population receivingmedicines subsidized by the national budget  40%       -    70%Proportion of population provided withclean water                                  32%       80%  -Doctors/10,000 people                        4.2       4.2  -Source: Ministry of HealthBudget spending for centrally-run health establishments in 1997Unit: VND mil./bed/yearManagement authority               Hospital  Health    Consultation                                             station   roomMinistry of Health                 19        4.7       4Ministry of Labor, War Invalidsand Social Affairs                 5.3       1.7Other authorities                  10.5      4.7       4Source: Ministry of HealthCopyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Tales of Mollusksfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996By Tran Quang Thinh - HCMCThe meretrix, the oyster, the shell fish, and the corbicula wereperhaps well-known long ago but nowadays, not many people knowabout these bivalve mollusks.A businessman specializing in trading in specialty sea food shareda thought-provoking story about the oc huong (a kind of winkle).The oc huong, which can be found along the coast from Thanh Hoa toNinh Thuan, Binh Thuan provinces, has a popular reputation,especially for foreigners since its flesh is delicious and rich inprotein. Unfortunately, this kind of mollusk has been exploitedcarelessly and uncontrollably on a large scale since 1992.Admittedly, the purchase, processing and export of oc huong havebrought about practical economic changes creating more employmentfor laborers but unfortunately, fishermen have been hunting the ochuong excessively. Consequently, natural reserves of oc huong arerunning out and there will not be any left in the future.On a business trip not long ago to central Vietnam, the author hada chance to hear about a kind of oyster named so long from acolleague who disclosed that provincial authorities in Binh Thuanhad put a ban on catching this shellfish from now to July 31,1998.This was an urgent solution to restore and maintain so long bedsalong the coast, which were once considered the "richest mines ofso long's" in the entire country. Because of rash exploitation, theso long has dropped in number and the supply has been exhausted.The amount caught per year has decreased considerably: 25,000 tonsin 1993, 20,000 in 1994 and then 10,000 in 1995. Most were  youngoysters. Undoubtedly, the so long is still threatened withextinction. Previously, authorities forbade exploiting a scallopnamed diep in 1994 to 1995 to preserve this specialty.These examples are not special cases. It seems that people arealways "good" at thoughtlessly depleting resources which appear tobe boundless.Recently, an alarm was raised about a kind of shellfish named ocgao in Tien Giang. The yield of oc gao caught this year plummeteddramatically. There may be many causes but the most obvious isoverwhelming exploitation without planning or control. It is saidthere might be a temporary prohibition on catching oc gao soon toprotect this breed, which means consumers will not have a chance totaste oc gao."Will there be any chia voi (pipefish) in the future?" It is saidthat if visitors come to Nha Be (a suburban district in Ho Chi MinhCity) and do not taste the specialty chia voi, it means that theystill have not set foot in Nha Be. Demand inevitably results insupply so businesspeople and processors rushed to hunt for "chiavoi" to the extent that these fish now struggle to survive.Not long ago the press, especially foreign newspapers, praised aVietnamese scientist and businessman for breeding seahorses, so nowdemand for seahorses is extremely high. According  to a seahorsetrader whom we met on a recent trip to Nha Trang, about 20 millionseahorses are consumed worldwide every year. They are not "common"fish. There is no fisherman specializing in catching them. We wereon a boat and its owner, a fisherman, told us sincerely: "Nowadays,seahorses are becoming more scarce, they rarely run into our net.It turns out they are becoming very valuable. When catching aseahorse with its eggs, fishermen used to throw it back into thesea." But now, hardly anyone will do that since the fish fetches anexcellent price on the market. The market, in turn, influences theexistence of seahorses and gradually, they are becoming extinct.For that reason, the above-mentioned businessman and scientist inNha Trang has begun raising seahorses.As another businessman told us: "Breeding seahorses is really aprofit-making business." Big profits can be gained artificially,independent of nature and the seas. But if everyone could realizethis and everyone began raising these fish, what wouldhappen?Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Where to Go for Weekends? Hanoi needs more entertainment venuesfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996By Song XanhAlong with economic growth, many visual changes have occurred inHanoi and other large cities. New houses and buildings have beenconstructed and streets have been widened. Hanoians have adaptedthemselves to the market economy but now find that they havenowhere to go for entertainment on holidays or Sundays.Parks in the past and in the presentPreviously, one of the popular hobbies of Hanoians and visitors wasstrolling in the park, especially on Sundays, holidays or duringfestive occasions. Children and even adults used to amusethemselves on seesaws, tumbling-boxes, slides and merry-go-roundsin Thong Nhat Park, which was renamed Lenin Park. They could alsogo to the Botanical Gardens or the Zoo to watch elephants chewingsugar cane or hear the roar of tigers or lions. Now thedeterioration of the parks and the Zoo has resulted in a decreasingnumber of visitors. In Lenin Park, some new game equipment hasreplaced the old and the games are no longer free: visitors mustnow pay to sit on the slow and obsolete planes going up and down,in the crashing cars or in the train going around in circles. Howabout the Zoo? "The animals look so thin, sick and sluggish.Perhaps a lot have died because I saw many empty cages," a Zoovisitor said. The green trees, calm lakes and pure air in the parksare all strollers can enjoy after long hard working hours.The Hanoi Park Bureau is in charge of flower gardens, street treesand 47 parks in the city, including 50-hectare Lenin Park and10-hectare Bach Thao Park which serve over one million residents."We cannot meet the entertainment demands of the people because theGovernment pays hardly any attention to the problem," Do Duy Vuong,vice-director of Hanoi Park Bureau said.Cinemas turn to dance hallsNearly half of the ten cinemas managed by Hanoi Film and TapeCompany have been converted into dance halls or restaurants. Newnames such as Hollywood Club, Centropell, Metal and Com Vietnam Innhave replaced Me Linh, Dai Dong, Kinh Do and Dang Dung cinemas. "Itis true that people do not want to go to the movies any more. Socinemas will be converted into 'cultural centers,' including dancehalls, karaoke and video rooms," Nguyen Thi Lien, vice-director ofHanoi Film and Tape Company declared. Only a few cinemas are stilloperational. Thang Tam, the largest cinema in Hanoi consisting of1,000 chairs, and Dan Chu Cinema can organize projections justtwice a day. "We sell only between 10 and 50 tickets for everyshowing at Thang Tam. The reason is that movie-goers' taste haschanged but projection equipment hasn't," Lien added.The pioneers in modern techniques are private cinemas, includingFansland, a familiar venue for the youth in Hanoi, which was openedonly a few years ago. Fansland always offers viewers good filmswith high quality at reasonable prices. Following Fansland'ssuccess, Hanoi Film and Tape Company opened New Age, anair-conditioned 100-seat cinema adjacent to Thang Tam Cinema. NewAge often attracts many viewers on the weekends.At present a Disneyland for Hanoi may be a far-fetched dream.However, projects to upgrade cinemas, set up new game equipment inLenin Park and construct cultural and sport centers and underwaterpalaces are being considered. Hopefully, these projects will becarried out in the near future so that on weekends or holidaysHanoians or visitors won't scratch their heads asking each other,"Where should we go?"Prices at some entertainment venues in HanoiCinemas:Thang Tam: VND12,000/ticketNew Age: VND20,000/ticketFansland: VND12,000/ticketDan Chu: VND6,000 or 8,000/ticketDance halls:Queen Bee (9 Lang Ha St.): US$5/ticketRoyal (Hang Tre St.): US$5/ticketHanoi Hotel (Giang Vo St.): US$6/ticket (women free)VIP (Nguyen Du): US$4.5/ticketCentropell (Hang Cot): US$5/ticket for men;US$2.5/ticket for womenfree on Mondays, Tuesdays and WednesdaysHollywood Club: US$5/ticket (women free)Underwater World (Giang Vo Exhibition Hall): VND3,000/ticketCopyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Equity Definitionfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996"...First, the general opinion about  "equity" in health care doesnot mean "equalization," "being equal," or "equality". Equity meansthat those who have more demands are to be given more care, thosewho suffer more losses receive more attention; whereas, being equalor equality means that everybody with more or less the same demandsis to be treated equally. In the first stage of the transitionalperiod, there cannot be absolute equality but steps must be takento realize social equity. Equity also implies that more priorityand consideration must be given to certain classes of people in thesociety.Second, equity must include personal needs for health care when onesuffers diseases or has health problems and the ability to pay.Although both rich and poor have needs for health care, theirpayment ability is quite different. Therefore, equity mustguarantee that everyone's demand for medical examination andtreatment is met. Referring to market economy or services orpurchasing power also means mentioning the ability to pay. Atpresent, part of the population is unable to pay but still has theneeds, so the public health sector and the Government must takeresponsibility to satisfy the mini-mum need of the people forhealth care. The general view on equity in diagnosing and curingdiseases mainly has to do with the needs, not the ability to pay.Third, the poor and those who have made good contributions to thecountry  often find it hard to pay. Since they have contributed andsacrificed a lot on behalf of the nation, the society mustcompensate for their losses--that's a return for gratitude, notcharity. For this reason, the Government and the public healthsector must give more consideration to these people to maintainsocial equity.Fourth, the view on equity in health care shows that the normalcitizens, the poor, and those who are good contributors to thecountry are completely entitled to medical care, not that they begfor merciful treatment, pity, compassion or favor. As the Law onHealth Care for the Population says, everybody is entitled tomedical care. The Government and the public health sector musttherefore socialize the activities concerning health care andprotection for the citizens. The conditions required for winningsocial equity are that the Government must seriously considerinvestment in the public health sector and must be able tocalculate prices of the public health services to give goodservices without making a profit. The ability of people to pay forpublic health services in the market economy depends upon thepurchasing power of each person and the prices. The Government mustnot only know the cost and be able to calculate the prices forservices but must also offer certain kinds of medicine to patientsfree of charge. The Government must incur some financial losses inorder to help the common people. Equity must be accompanied bymedical morals, requiring a high sense of responsibility of thedoctors toward their patients and the same treatment for both richand poor patients."Excerpts from the speech of Minister of Health Do Nguyen PhuongCopyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Reaching higherfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996A survey of 1,149 students of Hanoi Medical University, aged 17-24(629 males and 520 females) shows that the height of students stillcontinues to increase after puberty in both sexes: males reach topheight at the age of 24 (164.29cm), and females at 21 (155.56cm).There is a distinct increase compared with Vietnamese young peopleof 10 years ago, and particularly 20 years ago; today's males'heights have increased by 4.95cm while females' are taller by5.46cm. However, surveys conducted in some localities also showthat pupils in municipalities and cities have better health thanthose in the countryside, in particular, the number of pupilsfeeling exhausted after a day at school makes up a high proportion(1/3-1/4). In an urban district of HCMC, up to 25% of pupils havebad health due to malnutrition.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Essentials of the Decree on the Statute of Tenderfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996On July 16, 1996 the Government promulgated Decree 43/CP on theStatute of Tender. Any previous provisions contrary to this Decreemust be abrogated.General ProvisionsThe Statute of Tender was promulgated to exclusively managetendering activities nationwide for the implementation of allinvestment projects on the territory of the Socialist Republic ofVietnam.- The person having the competence to decide on investment : TheBoard of  Management  if the capital invested is owned by a companyor cooperative; a State organization or agency of competence orauthorized according to the law if the capital invested isState-owned.- The tenderer is any economic organization meeting therequirements and status of legal entity to bid; the tenderer may bean individual if the bid is to select consultants.Domain and subjects of the Statute ImplementationThe Tender Statute implemented to select tenderers of investmentprojects in Vietnam and the tender which must be conducted inVietnam includes :- Investment projects approved by a competent authority incompliance with the provisions of the Charter on investment andconstruction management;- Investment projects of foreign joint venture (or businesscooperation) of State enterprises whose legal capital contributionis 30 percent and over;- Investment projects whose joint venture partners are to beselected, or of 100% foreign capital, or build-operate-transfer(BOT), build-transfer (BT);- Other types of investments the owner chooses to put to tendering;- With projects using financial aid of foreign organizations orpersons, the agency authorized to negotiate and sign agreementsmust report to the Prime Minister for any decision incongruent tothis Statute before signing.Selection of bidding forms- Open bidding: The number of tenderers is unrestricted. Theinvitation to bid must be announced in the mass media. For all bigprojects involving complicated technology and engineering process,a preliminary selection must proceed to permit only capabletenderers to bid.- Restricted bidding: Only a few tenderers capable of fulfillingthe requirements for the project  are invited to bid.- Designated tenderers: This is a special form to be applied inaccordance with the provisions of the Charter on investment andconstruction management of any project to be financed by the State.The agency in charge will hold discussions with a tendererdesignated by the competent authority; if negotiations fail,another tenderer will be invited to a discussion.Forms and modes of contract implementationContract signing by the project owner and the tenderer who has wonthe bid is compulsory. The contract must comply with the followingprinciples:a- A commitment by the project owner and tenderer to fulfill allthe requirements.b- The price stated in the contract is the one decided by thecompetent authority authorized to approve; it must not be modifiedin the course of implementation of the contract;c- Abide by the regulations on contracts of the jurisdiction ofVietnam.Depending on the nature of the project, the form of contract can befor consultancy, purchase of materials and equipment, constructionand assembly.The mode of implementing a contract will be chosen depending on thetime and price conditions stipulated in the contract:- Package contract: To be implemented according to a set price.This mode is to be used for projects with fixed quantity, quality,time. The price of the bid won is the one to liquidate thecontract.- Turn-key contract: To be implemented for projects authorized bya competent authority to bid for the whole project (from designingto purchase of materials and equipment, construction and assembly).The project owner will accept and take over the management of theproject when the tenderer completes the contract with the work andprice as specified by the contract.- Contracts with adjustable prices: To be applied with complicatedprojects having no conditions to determine the exact quantity andvolume at the time of signing or possible fluctuations of prices,with duration extended to over 12 months minimum.These contracts must list the items, conditions, formulas andlimits of adjustment and must have the written approval of thecompetent authority on investment on the cause of fluctuationfactors (labor, raw materials, equipment).Conditions of invitation to bid and bidding1- The project owner inviting contractors to bid must prepare thefollowing dossiers:- Documents deciding the investment or investment license by acompetent authority. Invitation to bid for consultancy in thepreparation of feasibility study must have the approval of theagency competent to make the  investment decision;- Approved bidding plans;- Invitation to bid (selection documents must be included ifpreliminary selection is required).2- Contractors wishing to bid must meet the following requirements:- Fully licensed or registered to operate;- Technical and financial capacities to meet the conditions statedin the dossier of invitation to bid.- Appropriate dossier for the bidding. Whether single enterprisesor joint ventures, contractors are allowed to file one biddingdossier only for each project.Conditions of international tender and preferential treatment oflocal contractors:1- Project owners may organize international tenders if:- No local contractors or only one local contractor can meet therequirement of the project;- The project is to be funded by an international organization orforeign country requiring internationaltenders.2- Local contractors whether single enterprises or joint ventureswill have the priority to tender the project if they haveconditions similar to foreign contractors.3- Local contractors winning the bid will have preferentialtreatment stipulated by the Government.4- Foreign contractors winning the bid must pledge to join inventures with a Vietnamese enterprise or hire Vietnamesesubcontractors for construction and purchase of appropriatematerials and equipment that can be produced or processed inVietnam.(Next issue: Forms of Bidding)Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnamese Income Surveyfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996By Tran HungVietnam has maintained a high economic growth rate. However, whatis the average per-capita income in Vietnam at present and how doesthe country's high economic growth affect workers' incomes?In the first half of this year, the average monthly income percapita of State sector workers was VND472,800 and gross domesticproduct averaged US$516 per capita, according to statistics fromthe Information Center under the Ministry of Planning andInvestment. Nevertheless, there was still a gap in earnings betweenthe central and local levels - VND616,000 and VND366,800respectively.The areas in which State workers were highest paid - overVND800,000 per month - include electricity-water supply withVND827,200, and post-communications and finance-banking withVND814,100.In the first six months of this year, the income discrepancybetween the central and local levels was broad in the three aboveareas: VND900,000 compared with VND542,700 in the electricity-watersupply sector; VND900,000 with VND439,000 in thepost-communications sector, and VND820,000 with VND610,200 infinance-banking.Such industries as oil and coal followed with incomes averagingVND799,300 per capita per month, in which the centrally governedarea attained VND850,000 and the locally governed, VND454,500. Thisis paradoxical although oil and coal are Vietnam's key exports.However, the income of workers at the central level was lower thanthat at the local level in two of the 18 areas surveyed, namelyfisheries, VND301,000 compared with VND420,400, andhotel-restaurant services, VND520,000 with VND616,600. Meanwhile,the areas in which the monthly per-capita income was equal at bothlevels included science (VND362,000) and health (VND350,000).Alongside the scientific and health sectors, those working inculture and sports also received a low monthly income, on averageVND347,000. The salary of those who work in the educational sectorwere even lower in the 18 surveyed areas in the country, averagingVND316,000 per capita, in which the income at the central level wasVND399,000 and that at the local level VND310,500.The above figures are just references as are all statisticsreleased by the General Department of Statistics and the Ministryof Labor, War Invalids and Social Affairs. At present, peopleprefer working in such areas as trading, services, restaurants andhotels.The incomes of workers in the foreign-invested and private sectorshave not yet been surveyed; therefore, an overview of personalincome throughout the country has not been done. According to theWorld Bank and United Nations Development Program, the annualincome in Vietnam is now US$700 per capita; particularly, BaRia-Vung Tau Province has attained an average income of US$1,100,Ho Chi Minh City US$1,000 and Hanoi US$800.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Gourds Reach Foreign Marketsfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996Environmentally-friendly luffas, which are often used for cleaningsaucepans by Vietnamese housewives, are now popular on the worldmarket for their newly-discovered uses.By Pham Hong VanIt is surprising that Vietnamese luffas have appeared on thecounters of big supermarkets in Western Europe. In addition, theyare used as ornaments in restaurants, as bathing sponges instead ofbrushes in hotels, and for physical therapy in hospitals.The luffa products are produced in An Giang Province by two jointventures: An Giang Agro-Product and Foodstuff Import-Export Company(AFIEX Co.) and International Foodstuff Company (IFC).At present, farmers in An Giang are financed by AFIEX Co. to growgourds for fiber. The seeds are from the Philippines, and can beharvested after three months with 15,000-20,000 gourds per hectare.The gourd fruit can reach 0.8-1 meter long each but cultivation isnot simple: Farmers must be experienced in growing local gourds;frames for the plant to climb must be well built; insecticides mustbe applied during the flowering period and gourd plants should befertilized at least three times a month.According to the Filipino agricultural experts who are guidingfarmers in An Giang, this kind of gourd is suited to the soil here.If well-cultivated, it can be harvested three times a year with thenumber of fruits beyond prediction. Over-three-kilo gourds aresoaked in water before their flesh is extracted. Then the luffasmust be dried in the shade (they can be broken if dried insunlight) for four days. After that they are brought to factoriesto be whitened before processing into various products: ornaments(luffas are cut into small pieces for artisans to assemble) orbathing sponges in round, triangle or oval shapes or belt-shapedfor back rubbing or for dish-washing. Finished products areexported to Western Europe at US$0.8-1.3/item, or higher accordingto orders and are most popular with overseas Vietnamese, especiallyin the U.S., Canada and Australia.To date, more and more foreigners tend to use luffas because of thecurrent trend of using natural products to avoid skin allergies.Big hotels in Ho Chi Minh City such as New World, Rex and Majesticare using luffa products to replace brushes. Some Asian markets arealso interested in these products.Currently, Tri Ton, Chau Phu, Cho Moi and Phu Chau districts of AnGiang Province are cultivating the Philippine gourd supplied byAFIEX Co. Farmers are provided with seeds and fertilizers; whenharvested, a category one dry luffa with a minimum length of 0.8msells for VND3,000; category two at VND2,000 and category three atVND1,000. Growers can earn VND15 million per hectare on average.What has been done in An Giang so far is just a trial step. If allgoes well, gourds will be grown in many other provinces and thevalue will increase.Luffa, once used to wash pots and pans or dishes, is now diverselyused and is valuable on the world market. Doing business in thetime of market economy is full of interesting opportunities.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Stone Handicrafts on Show Abroadfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996Tourists to the famous Ngu Hanh Mount, Quang Nam-Da Nang Province,all like to buy Non Nuoc stone handicrafts as souvenirs.By NGUYEN DINH LAC - HCMCIt was not until the beginning of the nineteenth century that avillage specializing in stone devices such as stone pestles,mortars, and chopping blocks was formed at the foot of Ngu HanhMount. The first copies of Cham statues carved of Non Nuoc stonewere made to meet some French orders. But to the year 1975, theactivities here had not developed with only some small villagesproducing simple handicrafts such as stone ashtrays, mortars,bracelets, and lion statues. However, since 1985, the shift oflocal fishermen to this career has brought new beauty and style tostone products. And since 1990, Non Nuoc handicrafts have found aposition on American, French, Canadian, and Hong Kong markets.Graduating from an art course in the army in 1988, Nguyen Long Buuis among the rare trained artists of the young generation in thestone handicraft-making village. On his return after his militaryservice, he created many products just for fun until 1993 when hispiece Nguong Vong was bought for a high price by an Australian.Since that turning point, Buu has shifted to making statues forhome and garden decoration and many of his products have been soldto foreigners. In the last two years, Buu has been invited to buildmonuments in Gia Lai, and Buon Ma Thuot. He is now preparing for anexhibition in Singapore sponsored by the Happy Wear InternationalCo.Ltd (Taiwan). This is the first time Non Nuoc stone handicraftswill appear in an international statue exhibition with 20 carvingsby Nguyen Long Buu; the shortest height is 0.30 meters, and thehighest 1.20 meters.The long-nurtured dream of Buu now is to make a bust of Uncle Ho inPac Bo.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Dong or U.S. dollar?from THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996I work for a foreign-invested company in Vung Tau. According toVietnamese labor regulations, the wage of an employee must bespecified in the labor contract. Should this wage be expressed inU.S. dollars or Vietnamese dong? Does the law of Vietnam have anyarticles dealing with this issue?Le Duc Thuan - Vung TauAccording to Article 5 in Decree 197-CP dated December 31, 1994 ofthe Government and Circular 11-LDTBXH/TT dated May 3, 1995, theemployer may choose the mode of payment to suit the laborconditions and production activities of the enterprise, but thischoice must be expressed in the collective labor agreement andlabor contract. Wages paid to Vietnamese employees must be inVietnamese dong at the U.S. dollar exchange rate fixed by the StateBank at the moment of payment.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Compensation for Labor Accidentsfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996The last sanction  for labor violations says, "Any employer whofails to meet labor safety measures will be fined VND10 million."In some cases, however, the violation can cause death for workers.So is 10 million enough to warn any boss who knows this violationquite well but ignores it and indirectly causes a casualty?Truong Quang Hung - Qui NhonAccording to Article 11 in Government Decree 06/CP dated January20, 1995, the employer must compensate the payment of at least 30months' wages for employees who lose over 81% of their workingability or for relatives of those who die of accidents. Ifaccidents are caused by employees' errors, they are also supportedby the employer with the payment of at least 12 months.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Largest shipbuilding JV licensedfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996The first and largest foreign-invested shipbuilding project inVietnam received a license from the MPI last week.The Hyundai-Vinashin Co.Ltd. is a 30/70 JV between VietnamShipbuilding Industry Corporation (Vinashin) and four companiesaffiliated with Hyundai Corp. (South Korea) with a duration of 50years. The first phase of the project, capitalized at US$95.4million, involves building a shipbuilding factory in Ninh PhuocCommune, Ninh Hoa District, 55 km from Nha Trang City, which willrepair 100 ships of up to 120,000 tons and build five new ships ofup to 80,000 tons/year. In the second phase, US$300 million will beinvested in developing the Hyundai-Vietnam Industrial Complex toproduce steel, oil and gas exploitation facilities and dieselengines.Vinashin is seeking partners to repair and upgrade its shipyards inorder to increase the total capacity of the national fleet to 1.5million tons by the year 2000. Established in January this year, itis one of the largest companies of Vietnam's maritime industry with22 affiliated units. Between now and 2010, the company will try tomodernize technology and build new ships of 10,000 tons, containervessels and military ships and develop three shipbuilding centersin Vietnam.There are 60 ship repair and building factories in Vietnam but onlytwo can build ships of up to 15,000 tons, two others can buildships of up to 3,000 tons and the remaining can repair and buildships of under 1,000 tons.According to the development plan for the shipping fleet to 2010,Vietnam needs over US$500 million to increase the DWT of itsshipping fleet to one million tons by 2000, and US$3 billion toreach the targets of 3.5 million tons by 2005 and six million tonsby 2010.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Privileges offered to workers in equitized SOEsfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996Workers in equitized enterprises can hold stakes equivalent to 25%of the enterprise's assets, according to a circular on financialissues, sales of shares and interests of workers in equitized Stateenterprises.Circular 50TC/TCDN issued by the Finance Ministry states that theequitized State-owned enterprise (SOE) is allowed to offer 10% ofits asset value in shares to workers depending on seniority andindividual performance. The value of the shares for each workermust not exceed six months' salaries. These shares are ordinary andState-owned and the worker can enjoy dividends until the end ofhis/her life.The circular also states that the equitized enterprise can sell 15%of the value of its assets in shares to workers on credit, but thetotal value of these shares must not exceed the value of sharesbought in cash by the workers at the enterprise. Workers can enjoydividends of the shares bought on credit on a yearly basis, buteach year they must repay at least 20% of the value and 4% of theinterest on these shares. If they fail to pay the loans in twoconsecutive years, they must return the shares to the State. Also,they cannot inherit, sell or mortgage the shares if they have notpaid in full the amount owed.In all, workers at equitized enterprises can hold shares equivalentto 25% of the value of the assets of the enterprise. However, onlythose who are on the payroll and work for over three years by thetime of equitization and will continue working thereafter can enjoythese privileges.The equitized enterprise can only sell shares after competentauthorities have appraised its assets and determined the value ofthe assets allowed to be sold or the funds to be mobilized. Also,it must announce at least three times on the mass media the totalvalue of assets, the amount of shares to be sold, those allowed tobuy shares, time of issue and profit margin of the three previousyears.Recently, Minister and Director of the Central Steering Committeefor Equitization Phan Van Tiem signed Decision 01/CPH on theprocedure to turn SOEs into joint stock companies. Accordingly,there are four steps for SOEs to proceed in turning into jointstock companies: Preparation for equitization, drafting theequitization plan, approval and development of the plan, andinauguration of the joint stock company and business registration.Equitized SOEs are divided into two categories: Those with capitalof over VND3 billion and those with capital under VND3 billion. Theequitization board of the SOE must publicly announce the financialstanding of the enterprise before proceeding with equitization andthe sales of shares as well as the organization of registration forshare buyers.In the two years of 1996 and 1997, the Government expects toequitize 150 State enterprises, of which each ministry, province orcity will have 2-4 enterprises to be equitized, and to sell sharesof State enterprises to foreign buyers on a pilot basis.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Business Briefs, September 13-20, 1996from THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996* According to the Ministry of Industry, total industrialproduction in the first eight months of this year was VND69,639billion, up by 13.4% from the same period last year. The figure forthe whole year is expected to reach VND102,000-104,000 billion, upby 14-15.5% from 1995.* Vietnam Copper Wire Company (CFT) has opened a copper wirefactory in Bien Hoa, Dong Nai Province. CFT is a US$18-million JVbetween Vietnam Electric Wire and Cable Corp. and two Japanesecompanies--Furukawa Electric and Tomen.* According to the PMU1, the World Bank has approved loans ofUS$200 million for repairing the Vinh-Dong Ha section of NationalHighway 1 (300 km). The project will be developed in September1997.* Vietnam Maritime Bureau has permitted ships of up to 20,000DWT tohandle cargo at Phu My Port in Vung Tau. The port has beendeveloped by the JV Baria Serece with a designed capacity for30,000DWT ships.* The Prime Minister has allowed Son La Province to build a cementplant (500,000-600,000 tons/year). Funds for the project can besourced from loans or joint ventures with domestic or foreignpartners.* The HCMC People's Committee has assigned the Trading Company ofCu Chi District as manager and developer of two industrial parks inthe district--the Tan Quy and Tay Bac, which will house factoriesproducing electronics and consumer goods.* Vietnam Agricultural Machinery Company (Vinappro) exportedUS$500,000 worth of engines, pumps and other machines to SoutheastAsian countries in the first eight months of this year. The companyexpects an export turnover of US$650,000 this year.* The Government has approved construction of the Saigon 2 Bridgein HCMC, in addition to the existing Saigon Bridge, to handle theincreasing traffic after 2000. The project will be built in 2000 inBOT form with total costs of VND280 billion.* By the end of August, the MPI had licensed 1,731 foreigninvestment projects with total capital of US$22.73 billion. Atpresent, Taiwan is the top foreign investor with US$2.45 billion,followed by Hong Kong (US$2.3 billion) and Japan (US$2.2 billion).* Dong Xuan Market in Hanoi is opened to business after 11 monthsof construction. The market was destroyed during a fire in 1994 andwas rebuilt with total costs of VND79 billion (US$7.2 million).* The Prime Minister has instructed concerned authorities toexamine the hygiene of fresh milk produced and consumed in Vietnamto prevent the possible transmission of diseases from cow milk topeople.* The Prime Minister has issued Decree 52/CP to adjust the businesslicense tax with the minimum rate of VND25,000 and the maximum rateat VND850,000. The new rates will be applied from 1997.* In the past eight months, 192 foreign investment projects withtotal capital of US$3.39 billion were registered at the MPI, 54% ofwhich were in industry. Tourism and hotels only account for 17%.* An exhibition on fake goods is being held at the Cultural Houseof District 5, HCMC from Sept. 14-22. Along with the exhibition, aworkshop on fake goods was held on Sept. 18.* In the first eight months of this year, Vietnam exported US$265million worth of garments and textiles to the EU, up by 29.5% fromthe same period last year.* The Ministry of Health has banned medicine vending and cautionedthe public against using medicines of unclear origin sold by streetvendors.* Cat Bi Airport in Haiphong has resumed operations after half ayear of upgrading. It can now receive Boeing 737-300 aircraft.* The Prime Minister has allowed the television sector to userevenues from advertising for its own development.* National Assembly Chairman Nong Duc Manh visited Malaysia lastweek to strengthen bilateral ties. Manh was received by MalaysianPM Mahathir Mohamad and King Yang Di-Pertuan Agong X. He praisedMalaysia's determination to develop the 2020 Vision Strategy andits active contributions to the development of ASEAN.* Trade Minister Le Van Triet went to Jakarta to attend the 28thMeeting of ASEAN Economic Ministers on Sept.12-13. The ministersagreed on the signing of a protocol to supplement the ASEANInvestment Promotion and Protection Agreement and called forgreater economic cooperation among regional countries. They alsoapproved the agreement on a dispute settlement mechanism and theplan for the ASEAN Investment Area.* Finance Minister Ho Te attended the 10th Conference of the AFTACouncil in Jakarta last week. The conference approved newcommitments to implement the CEPT scheme, beginning November thisyear, as a step towards the establishment of the AFTA by 2003.* President of the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA)Huguette Labelle visited Vietnam last week to review the progressof CIDA programs in Vietnam and discuss issues related to theFrancophone, economic reform, regional cooperation and others. AnMOU for the Vietnam-Canada Short-Term Retraining Fund and anagreement for a project to introduce new farming concepts in thetwo poorest districts of Tra Vinh Province were signed.* A Vietnamese delegation, led by Deputy Minister of Trade NguyenXuan Quang, went to Poland to attend the First Poland-SoutheastAsia Economic Cooperation Forum last week.* The Greater Mekong Growth Summit was held in HCMC from Sept.16-18with the participation of the Mekong Commission, Asian DevelopmentBank, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, Myanmar and China.Discussions focused on further development, challenges andopportunities for the Greater Mekong Sub-region.* According to the amended Ordinance on the rights and obligationsof domestic entities that are granted land or leased land by theState, which was announced by the State President's Office lastweek, there are two types of domestic economic entities which aregranted land by the State and must pay land rental: those usingland to build houses for sale or lease to Vietnamese citizens andthose using land to develop infrastructure to transfer or lease.* At least 27 people were killed and three others injured last weekwhen a tropical depression hit the Central coast which left tens ofthousands of people homeless and caused damage estimated athundreds of billions of dong. The affected provinces were Ha Tinh,Quang Tri and Thua Thien-Hue where water levels in rivers rose andflooded several parts of the three provinces.* Vietnam Electricity Corp. has selected the Japanese-Australian JVElectric Power Development Corporation International-Pacific PowerInternational consultant for the first phase of Pha Lai No.2Thermal-Power Plant (600 MW). The US$13 million consulting contractwill be carried out in three years. The JV also won the consultingcontract for the first phase (establishing technical design andbidding documents), valued at US$10 million. Funding for theproject, estimated at US$700 million, will be provided by loansfrom the Japanese Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund.* The HCMC People's Committee has approved two plans to build theThu Thiem Bridge over the Saigon River and asked concerned partnersto prepare feasibility studies for the plans. According to thefirst plan, which requires total costs of US$72.2 million, thebridge is 1,065 m long with a movable span for the navigation of10,000 ton ships. The second plan, which costs US$112 million,proposes a spiral section on Ton Duc Thang St. to link with themain part of the bridge.* Vietnam Machinery Import-Export Corp. (Machino Import) and threeJapanese companies-Asian Honda Motor, Showa and Itochu, have signedan agreement for a US$18-million JV to produce motorcycle parts inVietnam. The JV, in which Asia Honda holds a 50% stake, MachinoImport 30%, Itochu 10% and Showa 10%, will build its factory inDong Anh Dist., Hanoi, which is due to start production in late1997 with a capacity of 200,000 sets of parts to supply theUS$104-million Honda motorcycle plant curently under constructionin Vinh Phu Province.* The Commercial Association of the Philippines has reached anagreement to cooperate with An Giang Province to developinfrastructure works in the province. The partners will build20,000 houses, the administrative building of the provincialgovernment, Long Xuyen Commercial Center, the tourist areas in Samand Cam mountains and upgrade seven roads in the province. ThePhilippine partner will provide loans, equipment and technicalexperts while An Giang Province will contribute land, prepareplanning and supply labor.* According to the Japanese daily Nihon Keizai Shimbun, LotteCo.Ltd. and Nissho Iwai Corp. will join in a venture with a privatecompany in HCMC to establish a hamburger chain in Vietnam. TheVietnam Lotteria JV, capitalized at US$600,000 with respectivecontributions of 60/30/10, will open its first hamburger shop inHCMC in May 1997, and increase to 50 in Vietnam by 2000 and 200 by2010.* In the first eight months of this year, Vietnam CementCorporation produced over 3 million tons of cement and sold 3.47million tons, up by 11.9% from the same period last year. To meetdemands of southern provinces in the coming dry season, the companywill import more cement and increase production this month to480,000 tons, up by 186,000 tons from August.* The Hai Duong Tourism Center JV and the International Hotel andResort Management Company of the Sovena Pavillion Hotels andResorts Group have signed a contract to manage and operate the AnaMandara Tourism Resort in Nha Trang. The US$7.2 million resort,which is designed as a traditional Vietnamese village with greeneryand recreation facilities, will be operational late this year.* The Tourist Company of Tay Ninh Province and Chongqing MachineryImport-Export Company (China) have signed an agreement to build acable car line (1,340 m) on Ba Den Mount. The line will have 184two-person gondolas. With the completion of the line, the provinceexpects to receive 1-1.2 million visitors/year.* Over 200 companies from 13 countries and 20 Vietnameseenterprises will participate in the EPM Vietnam '96, aninternational exhibition on general industrial machinery which willbe held in Reunification Palace, HCMC from Nov.18-22, 1996.Organizers are Vietnam Chamber of Commerce and Industry and theinternational trade fair company Hannover of Germany.* HCMC police have decided to prosecute Liu Tien Kuang, a Taiwaneseexpert at Hue Phong Shoe Company, for beating six Vietnamese femaleworkers with a shoe and forcing 122 workers to stand in the sun.Earlier, Kuang was expelled to Taiwan for twisting the necks of twoworkers and pushing a female worker into the production line.* The World Bank has submitted to the Vietnamese Government aproject to upgrade the urban traffic system in Hanoi. WB willprovide loans of US$24.8 million for the project, which aims atbuilding and upgrading roads in Hanoi's ancient streets.Copyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: The Path of AIDSfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996In December 1990, the intelligentsia in Ho Chi Minh City wasstirred by the first detection of an HIV-positive case in Vietnam.A Vietnamese girl residing in the city tested positive with the HIVin her blood when she took a health examination to go abroad withher fiance.By Thuc Doan - HCMCMore than five years have passed. People have forgotten the storybut the girl has to work and live day and night haunted by thevirus that causes AIDS.In 1990 and 1991, only one HIV-infected case was found. The nextyear, 1992, twelve cases were detected, but in 1993 the number ofpatients soared to 1,000 nationwide. Over the past three years, theHIV virus has taken the lives of 329 Vietnamese.A source from the Vietnam AIDS Prevention Committee indicated that,as of Sept. 7,1995, the number of virus-infected cases reached4,316 including 80 foreigners and 4,239 locals. Of them, 508 peoplehave been diagnosed as AIDS patients.Meanwhile, to August 30, results from the program on epidemiccontrol showed that the southern cities and provinces account for3,516 HIV-infected cases, with 1,741 cases detected in HCM City.According to Mr. Dang Van Khoat, chief of the Information Center ofthe Vietnam AIDS Prevention Committee, AIDS in Vietnam isdeveloping more slowly than in other Asian nations. "AIDS has notyet knocked at every door as seen in some parts of the world,"Khoat said.Officials from the Vietnam AIDS Prevention Committee said thatalthough the number of HIV-infected cases in the country is nothigh compared with other countries in the Asian region, the virushas became dangerous to Vietnamese people. The available figures donot reveal exactly the number of HIV-infected people in thecountry, according to an AIDS expert. "They are just statisticsfrom the annual result of the program on epidemic control and testresults from blood-donors," he said.Dr. Le Hoang Son of the HCMC AIDS Prevention Committee said thatthe number of HIV-infected people in HCMC could reach an alarming20,000 case-mark if comprehensive tests are available to the city'spopulation. "The infection rate of HIV-virus varies by socialclass," Son said. To date, in Southern cities and provinces, 18pregnant women, four children and 116 normal citizens who do notbelong to the high-risk groups are HIV patients.At first, the increase of HIV-infected cases was mainly among drugaddicts. However, in recent years, the number of people infectedwith the virus due to sexuality has doubled annually. According tostatistics from the HCMC AIDS Prevention Committee, the ratio ofHIV-infected cases of prostitutes was 0.47% in 1993, 0.62% in 1994,1.07% in 1995 and up to 1.17% in the first six months of 1996. Asof August 30, there were 242 HIV-infected prostitutes in southernprovinces, 6.72% of the total cases.Experts from the AIDS Prevention Committee said that Vietnam is nowwhere Thailand was seven years ago. The country is facing on AIDSthreat as the number of AIDS-related deaths grows significantlyalthough the Government has spent large sums on AIDS preventionprograms implemented since 1990. In HCMC, the local budget earmarksover VND 3 billion for AIDS prevention operations every year.HIV-Infected patients' livesThe world's most famous HIV patient, basketball superstar MagicJohnson, made a comeback after announcing in 1991 that he wasretiring from basketball because he was infected with HIV.Meanwhile, he isn't waiting for a cure, he's too busy living. Inmost cases, Vietnamese HIV patients are not so fortunate asJohnson. They often live all day long haunted by the HIV withoutlove from their families. Some patients show resentment against thevirus which "sows" its "dead seedling." Their fights against thisdeadly disease are courageous as they understand that Vietnamcannot afford to import expensive drugs to help AIDS patients livelonger. Overcoming the fear, HIV patients have gathered together toestablish a "friends help friends" group. The group belongs to theHCMC Health Center and operates with the purpose "building goodrelationships among HIV-infected patients who need sympathies fromothers."The "Friends Help Friends" group has 70 volunteers to care for AIDSpatients under treatment at Binh Trieu Hospital. Phung, a member ofthe group said, "I help these patients because I need love andsympathy from society. I wish my remaining days to bemeaningful."At present, many clubs of HIV-infected patients have beenestablished in the country as well. AIDS patients come togetherbecause they don't want to be overwhelmed by loneliness.HIV-infected patients in Vietnam1990                               11991                               11992                               121993                               1,1371994                               2,2911995                               3,265Sept. 7, 1996                      4,319Source: Vietnam AIDS Prevention CommitteeHIV-infected patients in Vietnam by agesUnder 13 years old                 0.2%13-19 years old                    3%20-29 years old                    20.5%30-39 years old                    43.2%40-49 years old                    26.7%Over 50 years old                  2.2%Not available age                  4.2%Source: Vietnam AIDS Prevention CommitteeAIDS Consulting Centers in HCMC1. Information and Health Education Center - 59B Nguyen Thi MinhKhai Street, Dist. 1. Tel: 8 2248782. Preventive Health Center - 699 Tran Hung Dao Street, Dist. 5.Tel: 8 356155, 8 3561193. Dermatology Hospital - 69 Ngo Thoi Nhiem Street, Dist. 3. Tel:8 2431514. Labor Union - 14 Cach Mang Thang Tam Street, Dist. 15. HCMC's Youth Cultural House - 4 Pham Ngoc Thach Street, Dist. 1.Tel: 8 2431526. Women's Association Union - 32 Tran Quoc Thao Street, Dist. 3.Tel: 8 243150194 Ly Chinh Thang Street, Dist. 3 Tel: 8 4461637. HCMC Red Cross Association - 201 Nguyen Thi Minh Khai Street,Dist. 1. Tel: 8 356558Estimated Distribution, as of mid-1996, of adults and childreninfected with HIV since the late 1970sGlobal total                       27.9 millionSub-Sahara Africa                  19 millionSouth and Southeast Asia           5 millionLatin America                      1.6 millionNorth America                      1.2 millionAustralia                          23,000Caribbean                          330,000Western Europe                     640,000Eastern Europe and Central Asia    31,000Source: UNAIDS Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDSCopyright 1996 The Saigon Times MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE via NewsNetSeptember 20, 1996Vietnam: Art Lovers Enjoy Abstract Chinese-ink Paintings and "Autumn Wind"Silk Worksfrom THE SAIGON TIMES MAGAZINE, September 20, 1996By Phung Quoc Ham - HCMC* For Vietnamese art lovers, Truong Han Minh is the most famousartist in the school of Chinese- ink painting in Ho Chi Minh City.After successful exhibitions in Hong Kong, Malaysia, Japan, Koreaand France, this year Truong Han Minh decided to introduce his newworks to art lovers in the city. The modern Chinese-ink paintingsby the artist have a blown abstract air. They are on display in theCultural Center of District 1 located at 6 Mac Dinh Chi Street fromSept.15 to 30.* The silk painting exhibition titled "Autumn Wind" by threeartists--Nguyen Phi Long, Nguyen Thi Nha Phuong and Nguyen Thi NgocMai--is at Laborers' Cultural House, 55 B Nguyen Thi Minh KhaiStreet, District 1 (until Sept.25). Saigonese viewers cancontemplate the beauties of the country through the works of PhiLong and Ngoc Mai. Meanwhile, artist Nha Phuong expresses ideasthrough  flowers and cats in her works.Copyright Saigon Times Magazine 1996Back to Headline List WT03-B06-25IA087-000634-B043-71http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it64.html 205.156.212.5 19970122031511 text/html 49439HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:13:13 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:15 GMTContent-length: 49252Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it64.html Sample Issue Copyright COUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNet January 16, 1989 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TERROR-SCOPE * Solution may be near in the Palme assassination. Swedish police are (70 words) * Welcome to chemical terrorism, #1. Most references address the (108 words) * Welcome to chemical terrorism, #2. A bomb containing "powerful" (45 words) * Trial of CCC and FRAP terrorists in Belgium is being closely (57 words) * Red Army Faction spent much of last summer seeking an armor- (58 words) * Look for more anti-Arafat cooperation among splinter factions of (47 words) * Little credence is being placed in a pledge by Colombia's M-19 to (29 words) * Look for increased violence in Paraguay. The country is increasingly (34 words) * Mosad has moved its European operations center to West Germany (34 words) * Quote of the Week: "The technology (of making a bomb like the one (35 words) INTERLINE BAGGAGE TRANSFER ENTERS PAS 103 EQUATION (194 words) STRANGE WARRANT ISSUED IN CITY OF POROS ATTACK (256 words) Brian R Hollstein, CPP, has been elected president of the American (24 words) We Are Moving! Effective 1 February 1989 Interests Ltd will be (28 words) FAA ISSUES AIRPORT ACCESS REGULATIONS (533 words) GAO ISSUES REPORTS ON SECURITY MATTERS (124 words) PRO-FILE PRO-FILE: ETHNIC KURDS SPAN FIVE NATIONS (579 words) PKK is more terrorist than guerrilla outside the Kurdistan area and (329 words) WORLD VIEW *** A legal technicality has freed Dutch terrorist Rene Roelofsma, (61 words) *** A lack of evidence has freed West German terrorist Christiane (84 words) *** Merger of two aircraft security firms has been announced. (80 words) *** Nuclear Regulatory Commission fines have been proposed for two (62 words) *** Red Army Faction (W Germany).was shopping around southern (77 words) *** A coin-sized subcutaneous transmitter has been patented by a (45 words) *** US Defense Dept released a 130-page report on Terrorist Group (194 words) *** Steyr Mannlicher has a new pistol incorporating many high-tech (61 words) *** A university lecturer was released after denying charges of (54 words) HOAXES CLOUD U.S. EXTREMISM PICTURE (293 words) STATUS REPORT: U.S. LEFT-WING GROUPS (335 words) CALENDAR (564 words) CURRENTLY ACTIVE GROUPS *** African National Congress (Southern Africa). Announced it will (639 words) MAJOR INCIDENT LOG Bayonne/12 January: Police arrested Basque ETA military leader Jose (801 words) CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989* Solution may be near in the Palme assassination. Swedish police are* Solution may be near in the Palme assassination. Swedish police arestill interrogating a 41-year-old man identified by the late primeminister Olof Palme's wife, Lisbet, as the man who shot her husbandon a Stockholm street. The man was also identified by Palme's son,Maarten, as the one who began to follow his parents after they left acinema. Forensic tests are underway on his clothing and firearms.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989* Welcome to chemical terrorism, #1. Most references address the* Welcome to chemical terrorism, #1. Most references address theissue as if it were some futuristic threat involving high-technologyexpertise. In fact, eight cases of chemical-weapon terrorismhospitalized 32 people in England in the past year. Animal rightsgroups use corrosive acids to generate fumes in areas where workersare located in targeted organizations, such as surreptitiously pouringit on rugs in public reception areas of research laboratories, packinghouses, furriers and others. The fumes sicken staff and visitors alike,sometimes burning throat membranes. At some large farms,extremists have poured the acid in selected areas so that fumes causestampedes by animals, thus wrecking facilities.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989* Welcome to chemical terrorism, #2. A bomb containing "powerful"* Welcome to chemical terrorism, #2. A bomb containing "powerful"toxic gas was thrown into a Santiago, Chile, radio station on 20December. Staff of Radio Cooperativa and people in nearby homeswere sickened by the unidentified gas.and the station had to betemporarily abandoned.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989* Trial of CCC and FRAP terrorists in Belgium is being closely* Trial of CCC and FRAP terrorists in Belgium is being closelywatched by West Germany's Autonomous Cells, who recentlyfirebombed two West German trade missions in Denmark as an act ofsolidarity. The Cells have also threatened a Belgian diplomat andpolice are concerned that more "solidarity actions" will follow anyconviction emerging from the trial.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989* Red Army Faction spent much of last summer seeking an armor-* Red Army Faction spent much of last summer seeking an armor-piercing grenade but failed to find one after contacting the RedBrigades, a Spanish group and others. The effort was disclosedthrough intercepted documents and speculation is that the device wasintended for the assassination attempt  against Hans Tietmeyer, WestGermany's state secretary, outside Bad GodesbergBack to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989* Look for more anti-Arafat cooperation among splinter factions of* Look for more anti-Arafat cooperation among splinter factions ofthe PLO. If nothing else, Arafat has united those factions against him.Some reports indicate security is being tightened around allPalestinian leaders so Israel cannot exploit the new moderation bydecapitating the movement through Mosad assassinations.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989* Little credence is being placed in a pledge by Colombia's M-19 to* Little credence is being placed in a pledge by Colombia's M-19 todemobilize and disarm within six months. The movement says it willbecome a legitimate politcal party.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989* Look for increased violence in Paraguay. The country is increasingly* Look for increased violence in Paraguay. The country is increasinglyslipping into harsh repression and countermoves by dissident politicalgroups. Even neighboring Argentina has officially protested the arrestand beatings of political opponents.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989* Mosad has moved its European operations center to West Germany* Mosad has moved its European operations center to West Germanyafter being squelched by the British during a recent furor, accordingto reports. Efforts to move the operations center to France wererebuffed.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989* Quote of the Week: "The technology (of making a bomb like the one* Quote of the Week: "The technology (of making a bomb like the oneon Pan Am 103) is more widespread than I think is generallyunderstood by people." Unidentified US Defense Dept intelligenceofficial.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989INTERLINE BAGGAGE TRANSFER ENTERS PAS 103 EQUATIONBags from other airlines may have been transferred to Pan Am flight103 at Heathrow, Interpol sources have told CT, thus complicating theinvestigation which has previously focussed on baggage originating inFrankfurt on Pan Am's own system. Interline transfer of "a few bags"could vastly expand the number of potential entry points for the bombsince it is now considered possible that the bomb was never in Frankfurt.Interpol officials expressed surprise at a West German news reportclaiming the Irish Republican Army put the bomb aboard the aircraftas a cooperative operation with a Middle Eastern group. Interpol said"educated speculation" now indicates a cooperative operation betweenMiddle Eastern groups, either a Palestinian splinter group out ofLebanon or Iranian factions.Further tests of the residues are being made to confirm initial beliefthat it was Czech-made Semtex plastic explosive which made up thebomb. Several national police services are running similar materialspast their detector devices and sniffer dogs to see how they do indetecting it. FBI bomb and explosives experts are continuing toexamine information to get as complete a picture of the bomb as possible.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989STRANGE WARRANT ISSUED IN CITY OF POROS ATTACKGreece has issued an arrest warrant for a man apparently killed in the11 July attack on the tourist cruise vessel City of Poros near Piraeus.The district attorney issuing the warrant gave no explanation fornaming Mohammed Adnan Zozad, 21, as a fugitive despite an earlierpolice report saying the Lebanese national had been killed in anexplosion aboard the vessel and part of his leg had been found. Eitherthe government now believes the police report to be mistaken or thewarrant may serve some legal purpose despite Zozad's death.Absent from the warrant is any mention of Laurent Vigneron, 23,whom eight witnesses identified as one of the attackers. He wasreported to be firing a submachine gun at passengers, but when Greecenamed him as a terrorist, the French government protested that hewas merely on vacation. Others involved have been named by Greeceand they include ringleader Mohammed Khadar, AKA Hejab Jaballa, aLibyan passport holder who has been linked to Abu Nidal. He isbelieved to have been killed when a car bomb he was deliveringapparently exploded prematurely near a marina shortly before thecruise ship was to dock.Greece believes the goal of the attack was to force release of AbdelOsama Zomar, jailed in Athens awaiting extradition to Italy for hisrole in a Rome synagogue attack that killed a child in October 1982.Zomar was deported by Greece, but not to Italy. He was sent to acountry of his choice last month: Libya.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989Brian R Hollstein, CPP, has been elected president of the AmericanBrian R Hollstein, CPP, has been elected president of the AmericanSociety for Industrial Security (ASIS). He is corporate securitymanager for Xerox Corp.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989We Are Moving!  Effective 1 February 1989 Interests Ltd will beWe Are Moving!  Effective 1 February 1989 Interests Ltd will belocated at Suite 101, 8512 Cedar St, Silver Spring, MD 20910. Ournew telephone number is 301/588-7916.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989FAA ISSUES AIRPORT ACCESS REGULATIONSOn 4 January the US Dept of Transportation finally issued its long-awaited airport access control rule, requiring airports by 8 Februaryto begin compliance. About 270 airports are required under the rule toinstall computerized security systems or equivalents, with largerairports having 24 months to comply and smaller facilities up to 42months. A seminar will be held in Washington, DC, in mid-February todiscuss the rule and its application.AOCI has sharply protested the rule, especially on grounds of its cost.Deborah Lunn, acting executive director of the Airport OperatorsCouncil Intl, said FAA has drastically underestimated the cost toairports of installing the systems required. Lunn pointed to anunobligated $6 Billion aviation trust fund and the FAA's failure toprovide any source of funding for the security improvements,contrasting these with an industry-estimated pricetag three timesthe estimate of FAA. This "will require airports to turn to the localtaxpayer or to divert grant funds that had been planned for otherprojects," she said. FAA estimates the requirement will cost about$119.1 million over a ten-year period and Lunn said it's possible thatprice could apply to one or two major airports. The AOCI estimatesrange from a low of $161.9 million to $800.5 million.Industry had proposed a pilot program to determine the mosteffective way of addressing the access control problem, but FAArejected this approach. In fact, FAA rejected virtually everysuggested change to the rule as it was proposed by the federal agency,except for minor modifications to deadlines. FAA rejection of thecomments made by industry was explained away by "numerouscommenters ... made incorrect assumptions about the scope of the rule."AOCI is considering a lawsuit over the rule, insisting that FAA isblowing a smokescreen when it says the rule is being misconstrued.The industry group feels its interpretation is accurate and cited fourmajor concerns in the final rule:* FAA said to define the term 'secured areas' in the rule wouldcompromise airport security programs. AOCI says this leaves theterm legally undefined.* FAA used the word 'immediately' to describe when requiring thespeed at which a dismissed employee's access must be denied. AOCIsays that is not acceptable, although FAA counters that it is meantmerely to convey the sense of urgency involved.* AOCI says general aviation and other tenants are subject to theairport's rules and enforcement, not the FAA's, and this leaves a hugegray area of how to comply with the published access control rule.* FAA refuses to specify the types of doors to be fitted withenhanced controls. "To do so," said the agency, "would compromise theairport security program. FAA does not envision that every door ...will need the enhanced access controls." AOCI notes this leaves theairport in a catch 22 situation.It is unlikely FAA will budge in light of the hearings where 60aviation organizations testified and had little effect on the agency'sproposed rule. AOCI may well take the matter to court for judicialrelief. Congressional intervention is unlikely because of theimplications any politician would sense in "weakening" security.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989GAO ISSUES REPORTS ON SECURITY MATTERSGeneral Accounting Office (GAO) has released two reports of interestto security professionals. Many such reports have a cover datepreceding the release date by one or two months. First five copies ofany one report are free from US General Accounting Office, PO Box6015, Gaithersburg, MD 20877. Telephone 202/275-6241.Aviation Security: FAA's Assessment of Foreign Airports. (ReportGAO/RCED-89-45) This report says FAA has "made significantprogress" in assessing foreign airport security. It names no foreignairports for security reasons. Some shortcomings were found.Nuclear Security: Dept of Energy Actions to Improve the PersonnelClearance Program (Report GAO/RCED-89-34) This reportsummarizes progress made in speeding clearances and improving theiraccuracy. It gives statistics but does not identify installations forsecurity reasons.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989PRO-FILE: ETHNIC KURDS SPAN FIVE NATIONSStrewn over the territory of five nations are the ethnic Kurds, whohave struggled to achieve an independent state for years. They have ahistory of armed conflict with various rulers and live in mountainousportions of eastern Turkey, northeastern Syria, northern Iraq,northwestern Iran and even parts of south-central Russia. The mostrecent upsurge in violence occurred with the 1979 Islamic revolutionin Iran. That event sent many Kurds from northwestern Iran to campsin Iraq and Turkey.Kurds were prime suspects in the assassination of Swedish primeminister Olof Palme, and they have been active in western Europe asassassins of political enemies.  Various Kurdish groups have bombedembassies and government offices. It is puzzling, in light of this, thatthe just-released Defense Intelligence Agency booklet on terrorgroups makes no mention of the Kurds.August 15, 1984, marked the beginning of a wave of violence by one ofthe most militant of Kurdish organizations, the PKK, and the campaigncontinues to this day  On that 1984 night, the PKK (Kurdish WorkersParty) launched a coordinated series of attacks on Turkish policestations in the eastern part of the country. Since then, guerrillawarfare on a limited scale has existed between Kurds and Turkishsecurity forces. Ironically, it was Turkey that was originally themost helpful nation to the Kurds when they became refugees from Iranand Iraq.PKK is the largest and most militant of Kurdish organizations. It is anamorphous group with 2000 to 3000 militant members led byAbdullah Ocalan. The Partisan Group, headed by Hussein Yildirim, hasabout 1000 to 1500 militant members. There are two smallermovements, each with several hundred followers. The groups functionas political parties in exile, counting thousands of general members.However, only a limited number of those are military activists whocould be called terrorists or guerrillas. Previously unknown KurdishLiberation Army was first heard from in December 1988 when itassassinated a political activist in Hakkari.By far the most active and militant group is the PKK. It is anenigmatic organization with vague socialist-separatist roots, headedby a council which often changes location around the Turkish-Iraqiborder area. Its organization. Well-established and run somewhat likethe PLO, the PKK has numerous foreign branches, committees andservices. In recent years PKK cells have become well established inwestern Europe, particularly in large emigre communities in citieslike Amsterdam, Hamburg, Frankfurt and Zurich. Although it raisesmoney and conducts gunrunning and retaliatory operations far afield,PKK keeps its organizational center-of-gravity in the tri-state areaof Turkey-Iran-Iraq that it considers its homeland.PKK operations in Turkey have been the centerpiece of its activitiessince 1984 and represent a clear shift away from Iran and Iraq. ThePKK activity has far surpassed that of the Armenian group, ASALA, infrequency if not in dramatic impact. One of the most frequent of PKKoperations is the 10-to-20-man ambush against security patrols byTurkish forces. Weapons are usually Kalashnikovs and grenadesacquired via the Iran-Iraq war. Tactics are primitive, e g, ambush,sniping, selective assassination of local officials, and only on homeground of Kurdistan, which is devoid of high-tech infrastructure.Recently this trend has changed with the suspicion that PKKsabotaged a Lufthansa Airlines Boeing 737 cargo flight in the springof 1988. PKK may also have been behind some advanced explosivesused in several cities in central Turkey in the summer of 1988.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989PKK is more terrorist than guerrilla outside the Kurdistan area andPKK is more terrorist than guerrilla outside the Kurdistan area andhas numerous cells operating throughout western Europe. Its mostrecent high-profile event was the kidnap of Mehmet Reyhan, son of awealthy newspaperman, in Zurich on 27 December. Swiss police freedReyhan a week later, preventing a $5 million ransom payment.Nonetheless, assassination of political opponents or those refusing topay extortion appears an active pursuit, as do gun running and drugsmuggling operations.Turkey has had a difficult time dealing with the Kurds, who areconcentrated in an inaccessible, high-tension region governed foryears under a state of emergency. Using a carrot-and-stick approachwith the local population, authorities have set up a militia withgenerous salary, weapons and rewards. Rewards are $250 forarresting and $1000 for killing a Kurdish guerrilla. High fees are paidto scouts. On the other hand, certain groups are outlawed, e g, PKKTPLP-C and communist parties, and heavy penalties are in effect foraiding the guerrillas. Repression in some areas is heavy and justicecan be wholly arbitrary.With Iraq gassing Kurdish villages and Iran reportedly assisting thePKK, Partisan and TPLP-C movements, the situation is grave. TPLP-Chas an "Urgent Action Group" which bombed the South Korean embassyin Ankara and the Ministry of Justice office in Istanbul. New policepowers, communications, thermal imaging and sensory equipment arebeing employed, as are new sniper rifles and increased militarytraining for recruits. A new 5000-man military unit has been formedand specially trained for counter-guerrilla operations.Controlling the situation is difficult, considering the number ofactors involved. The leader of the Partisans has accused PKK leaderOcalan of being a CIA agent. Some observers predict an increase inKurdish terrorist activity in western Europe. It is believed thatTurkey will be able to contain the domestic problem in the near futurebecause the trend since 1986 has been toward fewer operations in theeastern part of the country.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989*** A legal technicality has freed Dutch terrorist Rene Roelofsma,*** A legal technicality has freed Dutch terrorist Rene Roelofsma,convicted of firebombing several corporate facilities and causing $30million in damage in an anti-Apartheir campaign by the RARA group.His lawyer argued that the prosecuting attorney had been at the sceneof evidence-gathering in Roelofsma's apartment for only five minutesinstead of the legally required 15 minutes. The judge agreed.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989*** A lack of evidence has freed West German terrorist Christiane*** A lack of evidence has freed West German terrorist ChristianeEndrigkeit, 28, as well as her Lebanese accomplice Ahmad Hasi, 38.Both are suspects in the La Belle disco bombing in April 1986 in WestBerlin that killed two US soldiers and a Turkish woman, woundingmore than 200. The State's Attorney's office said there wasinsufficient evidence to hold them. Endrigkeit is generally believed tohave planted the bomb on Hasi's instructions but the government feltit could not prove the charge.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989*** Merger of two aircraft security firms has been announced.*** Merger of two aircraft security firms has been announced.Shepherd Intelligence Systems has acquired Defense Technologies Inc.(DTI), both Massachusetts firms and well established in aircraftprotection from tampering or intrusion. Robert F Jasse, founder ofShepherd, is chairman and CEO of the combined firms, while JimBricker, chairman and CEO of DTI, becomes VP and General Manager.Shepherd Intelligence Systems will expand into military aircraft andcorporate markets. Shepherd is an affiliate of EG&G, a privately heldcompany.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989*** Nuclear Regulatory Commission fines have been proposed for two*** Nuclear Regulatory Commission fines have been proposed for twoutilities for security violations. Portland General Electric Co may paya $75,000 fine for degraded physical barriers and failure to properlylog visitors into and out of facilities. A $25,000 fine was proposedfor Carolina Power & Light for violation of physical securityregulations. Both fines involve nuclear power plant vital areas.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989*** Red Army Faction (W Germany).was shopping around southern*** Red Army Faction (W Germany).was shopping around southernEurope for armor-piercing grenades last summer. Italy's Red Brigadesreportedly could not deliver the type RAF wanted, so RAF went toSpanish contacts and again did not succeed. The effort came to lightthrough intercepted documents. Speculation is that RAF may havewanted the grenade for the 22 September assassination attemptagainst Hans Tietmeyer, West Germany's State Secretary. He escapedan attempt with submachine guns and a shotgun.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989*** A coin-sized subcutaneous transmitter has been patented by a*** A coin-sized subcutaneous transmitter has been patented by aplastic surgeon, Dr Daniel Man, who says it could be easily put underthe skin of someone in danger of being abducted. The victim could beelectronically tracked from a distance of several miles.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989*** US Defense Dept released a 130-page report on Terrorist Group*** US Defense Dept released a 130-page report on Terrorist GroupProfiles, apparently compiled by the Defense Intelligence Agency. DODsaid it cost $71,000 for 45,000 copies and "countless hours" oflabor.to complete. It's too bad that with all the Pentagon's resourcesthey couldn't have done a better job. The report has no index, no list ofinitials or acronyms (but it does have introductions by Vice-PresidentGeorge Bush and Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci). It also makes nosignificant reference to the Kurds, Anti-Imperialist InternationalBrigades, One Tirol, Catalan terrorist groups or many others. If onealready knew the full anglicized name of GRAPO, one could find it, butnot otherwise, as is the case with AIIB and other groups. Statementsin the book do not agree with statements made by other US agencies.While many security intelligence professionals bristle when thequestion of freedom fighter versus terrorist arises, there is thecomment by President-elect Bush: "The difference between terroristsand freedom fighters is sometimes clouded." In short, the book seemsmore like a public relations effort than a serious reference work. Thepublic can look at pictures of wreckage and say Wow!Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989*** Steyr Mannlicher has a new pistol incorporating many high-tech*** Steyr Mannlicher has a new pistol incorporating many high-techfeatures used on the well-received AUG assault rifle. The newpistolwill use synthetic materials, interchangeable barrels andactions for different calibers, and advanced ergonomic design. It willbe available in 9mm and 10mm calibers, with the full-auto versioncalled the TMP (tactical machine pistol) and the semi-auto SPP(special purpose pistol).Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989*** A university lecturer was released after denying charges of*** A university lecturer was released after denying charges ofwriting a bomb threat note on an airline flight. All charges weredropped against Peter M Canning when an 11-year-old boy who hadoccupied the same seat on a prior American Airlines flight admittedputting the note in the same seat Canning later occupied.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989HOAXES CLOUD U.S. EXTREMISM PICTURETwo recent incidents of faked death threats call attention to the factthat perhaps as much as 15% of US alleged "threats" or "incidents" aremerely pranks or hoaxes perpetrated by alleged victims. In two recentcases, perpetrators of hoaxes stood to gain both enoblement inacquiring victimhood with attendant celebrity status, and also toperpetuate the myth that they are an embattled and terrorizedminority. It also becomes much more difficult to criticize thefanaticism and excesses of any interest group when there have beenacts of violence against it, as hoaxers are often well aware.An anti-racist legal secretary in White Plains, NY, who voiced supportfor a controversial Yonkers, NY, desegration plan was arrested forhaving painted the death threats on her own apartment door that shelater insisted were painted by right-wing terrorists. Laurie A Rechtalso reported false telephone threats to her home. She had been toutedas an example of moderation and was even awarded an honorarydegree by the College of New Rochelle. Both phenomena angered localwhite citizens but the FBI suspected the threats were a hoax.Surveillance cameras and a telephone tap showed she had painted herown door and there were no phone threats.A college student at Northwest Missouri State University wassuspended after admitting he fabricated stories about an assault andallegedly racially motivated death threats. Quentin L Banks, 18,admitted the hoax after the Missouri Highway Patrol began toinvestigate. The student said he was so "distraught" over "racism"that he devised a plan "to test university policy." In the wake of theBanks case, other "racist" incidents reported at NMSU, includingsupposed KKK activity, are being re-examined following evidence theymay have been fabricated or greatly exaggerated.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989STATUS REPORT: U.S. LEFT-WING GROUPSNote: Listing here does not imply that these groups are necessarily"terrorist," but merely that they are "radical" or "extremist" and thatthey have been the subject of law enforcement interest in the past..Communist Party, USA, 239 W 23d St, NY, NY 10011. Noew has about19,000 members, up from 6000 in the early 1960s when the partywas at its ebb. Membership is concentrated in large industrial areas,including the New York City area, Chicago, Los Angeles, Philadelphia,San Francisco and Seattle. The official party group for members under18 is the Young Communist League, formerly the Young WorkersLiberation League and before that the W E B Dubois Clubs. The partypublishes the Peoples Daily World newspaper, Political Affairs, andnumerous pamphlets. The official party publishing house isInternational Publishers. The CPUSA is primarily the propaganda armof the Soviet Union in the USA. Members are rarely involved inviolence and have avoided espionage since the 1950s. The party hasbeen heavily infiltrated by the FBI in the past and currently remainsunder moderate surveillance.Socialist Workers Party, 14 Charles St, NY, NY 10013. Small, heavilyminority in membership makeup, formerly Trotskyite, Marxist partywith local groups in about 20 states. Membership is between 2000and 3000. SWP youth group is the Young Socialist Alliance, PO Box471, NY, NY 10003, with about 25 local groups, including on majorcollege campuses. Membership is estimated at 450. The SWP publishesThe Militant, which gained notoriety in 1963 with a photo of LeeHarvey Oswald clutching the newspaper in one hand and a rifle in theother. The official SWP publishing house is Pathfinder Press. The YSApublishes the monthly Young Socialist. The SWP andYSA have generallyavoided violence, although some YSA members have been arrested asindividuals in the past. The SWP recently won a large settlementagainst the FBI for illegal surveillance and burglaries at SWP officesaround the country during the 1960s and 1970s.(By Laird Wilcox)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989CALENDARSome training organizations have dates planned for a variety of topicsthroughout the year. Fees shown may vary with early/lateregistration or for members/non-members of sponsoring groups.Readers should write or call for a complete current listing. This is arepresentative list and other organizations also conduct training.American Defense Preparedness Assn, (ADPA) Suite 900, 1700 NMoore St, Arlington, VA 22209. 703/522-1820. Focus on hardware &military market. Meeting sites vary.American Society for Industrial Security, (ASIS) Education & SeminarDept, Suite 1200, 1655 N Fort Myer Drive, Arlington, VA 22209.703/522-5800. Meeting sites vary.Information Systems Security Assn, PO Box 9457, Newport Beach, CA92658. 714/250-4772.Jarvis Intl Intelligence, PO Box 690563, Tulsa, OK 74169. 918/835-3130.Emphasis on surveillance and electronic techniques, althoughother courses are taught.Kobetz & Assoc, specializes in physical security, terrorism, aircraftsecurity, hostage negotiations and other topics. Rte 2, Box 3645;Berryville, VA 22611. 703/955-1128.MIS Training Institute, Information Security Div, 498 Concord St,Framingham, MA 01701. 508/879-7999.National Rifle Assn, Security Training Dept, 1600 Rhode Island Ave,NW, Wash, DC 20036. 202/828-6167. Has firearms training sites inFlorida, New Mexico, New Jersey, California, Virginia, Texas,Louisiana, Michigan, Wisconsin, Ohio, Wyoming and KansasNational Sheriffs' Assn, Training Div, 1450 Duke St, Alexandria, VA22314. 800/424-7827 or 703/836-7827.Quintilian Group, PO Box 9351, Arlington, VA 22209. 703/525-7525.Focus on physical security technical training. Classes repeat monthlyin Arlington, VA.Ross Engineering, industrial espionage, electronic eavesdropping,audio surveillance, electronic spying & technical surveillance. 7906Hope Valley Ct, Adamstown, MD 21710. 301/831-8400.Scotti School of Defensive Driving, 10 High St, Suite 15, Medford, MA02155. 1-800-343-0046 or 617/395-9156. Focus on executiveprotection & terrorism. Training sites vary. Scotti provides the drivertraining segments of programs by Kobetz and Vance Intl.Univ of North Florida, Institute of Police Technology & Management,4567 St Johns Bluff Road South, Jacksonville, FL 32216. 904/646-2722.Classes in Jacksonville, FL.-------------17-19 January: Liability risk management in law enforcement,$100/person; Jackson, MS. Natl Sheriffs Assn.19-20 January: Safes, Vaults & Security Containers*; Quintilian Group.21 January: Combination Lock Service*; Quintilian Group.23-24 January: Defense against Methods of Entry (DAME)*; Quintilian Group.23-27 January: Advanced eavesdropping countermeasures; Tulsa, OK.$700. Jarvis.25-26 January: Bomb Technology & Counter-Sabotage*; Quintilian Group.5-9 February: Intl Seminar on Aviation Security; Israel Ministry ofTransport and El Al Israel Airlines, Tel Aviv. Details: 212/247-4753(US) or 44-1-258-3083 (Europe).6-10 February: Security Firearms Instructor Schools*; Palm Bay, FL,$300. NRA7-8 February: Night Operations Symposium, Gaithersburg, MD. ADPA,meeting is classified.15-16 February: Tactical vehicles, Orlando, FL. ADPA, meeting isunclassified.17-18 February: CPP Review course*; Ritz-Carlton Hotel, Atlanta, GA.$325/$375. ASIS20-24 February: Long Range Rifle Instructor Schools*; Palm Bay, FL,$300. NRA27 February-3 March: Submachine Gun Instructor Schools*; Palm Bay,FL; $300; NRA.28 February: Computer Virus briefing*; MIS; Chicago.13-17 March: Assets Protection Concepts & Methods*; Dallas, TX;$690/$790; ASIS.27-29 March: Information Systems Security Assn conference; CopleyPlaza Hotel, Boston, MA.14-20 May: Executive Protection*; Kobetz.16-18 May: Carnahan Conf on Security Technology, Lexington, KY. Univof Kentucky. Details: 606/257-4296.7-9 June: Security Technology, Virginia Beach, VA. ADPA. Call forpapers Cavalier Beach Club.Theme is technical solutions tooperational problems. Details: Col W B Holt at ADPA.* Events scheduled again on later dates at the same site or elsewhere.Check sponsor for details.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989*** African National Congress (Southern Africa). Announced it will*** African National Congress (Southern Africa). Announced it willclose its bases in Angola as a gesture of support for the agreementsigned last month involving Cuabn and South African troops. It hasbeen estimated that ANC has seven bases in norhtern and westernAngola with 2000 ANC members training.*** Brunswijk Jungle Commando (Suriname). Ronnie Brunswijk sayshe will re-arm his troops after losing faith in the peace process ofthe government.*** Egypt's Revolution (Egypt). Dr. Gamal Shawky Abdel Nasserreturned to face trial for attacks on US and Israeli diplomats. He and20 co-defendants are charged with trying to sabotage the Camp Davidaccords. He is a nephew of the late Egyptian president  Gamal AbdelNasser, whose son, Khaled Nasser, is also among the accused butremains a fuigitive in Yugoslavia.*** Fatah Revolutionary Council (Abu Nidal)(Middle East).The NewYork Times named a Palestinian figure, Samir Kadar, as a suspect inthe Pan Am 103 bombing. He has risen through the ranks of Abu Nidal'sorganization, said the newspaper, and is now commander of a cell in Europe.*** Fedayeen (Middle East). Four members of the left-wing terroristgroup are on trial for damaging offices of IranAir in London. Britishpolice said the four attacked the airline's computers on 14 December.*** GRAPO (Spain) is apparently in another resurgence since twomembers were arrested in France early in January carrying plans forattacks on Spanish commercial targets. The documents used codenames for as-yet-unknown GRAPO colleagues.*** Guardians of the Islamic Revolution (Iran). Claimed credit fordowning Pan Am 103 as revenge for the US Navy downing an Iranian Airbus.*** Iparretarrak (Spain). Basque separatist group had eight membersarrested in France.*** Jewish Defense League (USA). Won a court decision to keep itsname out of a trail involving former members accused of fatallybombing a business competitor. A Los Angeles judge said the trial ofRochelle Manning and an accomplice cannot hear that Manning and herhusband, Robert, were once JDL members. Robert Manning is now afugitive living on the West Bank with other Rabbi Meir Kahane followers.*** Kurds (Middle East). Turkey says terror attacks by the Kurdsdropped 26% in 1988 as a result of energetic security measures. Tenmissile launchers were captured, along with large amounts of otherarms and equipment. In 1988, 119 Kurds were killed, compared with41 security personnel and 97 civilians.*** Montoneros (Argentina). Intelligence sources dismiss reports thatthe group is planning to resume large scale operations. An official ofthe national intelligence agency did acknowledge, however, that twomen who committed a bank robbery are linked to the Montoneros.*** Ohio Seven (USA). Trial on sedition charges finally has begun ofthe group in Springfield, MA. Various legal developments have reducedthe defendants to three: Patricia Gros Levasseur, 40, her husband,Raymond Luc Levasseur, 42, and Richard C Williams, 41.*** One Tirol (Italy). Threatened new attacks against politicians,journalists, judges and police in continuation of its campaign forunification with Austria. One Tirol has caused great damage withbombing of power pylons and railroad installations in South Tirol.Police take the new threat very seriously.*** Palestine National Salvation Front (Middle East). Has beenpromised $2 million in aid by Libya, according to a Lebanesenewspaper. The aim is to create a rival PLO leadership to challengeYassir Arafat.*** Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso)(Peru). Is now reported to controlmore than 20 villages in two provinces, an unusual strategy for aterror group.*** United National Front in Occupied Palestine (Middle East). Newlyformed coalition issued a call for a militant organization to replaceYassir Arafat as leader of the Palestinian struggle. Coalition consistsof Islamic extremists, pro-Syrian radicals, Ahmed Jibril's PFLP-GCand Abu Moussa's splinter faction of the Fatah Revolutionary Council.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOUNTER-TERRORISM INTELLIGENCE REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 16, 1989Bayonne/12 January: Police arrested Basque ETA military leader JoseBayonne/12 January: Police arrested Basque ETA military leader JoseAntonio Urruticoechea, AKA Josu Ternera, near this city in SW France.He fired on police from a motorcycle but was arrested withoutinjuries. Arrested in a nearby hideout was Maria Helena Belliko,another ETA leader. Urruticoechea is one of the most successful andviolent terrorist leaders and escaped capture on several prioroccasions.The Hague/10 January: Police disclosed arrest of three employees of aDutch security company involved in a series of bomb and arsonattacks. The government had refused to renew the security guardlicense of Toetanchamon Investigation Bureau (TIB), which wasreported by newspapers. Soon after, a series of bombings and arsonattacks struck newspaper offices. Interpol is seeking a fourth manfrom the security firm, who apparently fled Holland.Cotabato/9 January: Two grenades were thrown into a crowdedbasketball game in the Philippines, killing 28 and injuring more than 80.Jerusalem/9 January: A bank was firebombed, injuring five workers.Elsewhere, masked attackers stabbed a hospitalized Arab believed tobe aiding Israeli authorities.Ayacucho/9 January: Shining Path killed 12 Peruvian peasants it saidwere cooperating with the government. The nine-year campaign by theMaoist group has now killed more than 15,000 people, mostlypeasants. Elsewhere, the group killed a provincial judge, an attorneyand three police officers in an ambush. Some reports said 12terrorists were killed in the shootout that followed the ambush.Jerusalem/8 January: A grenade exploded in a pornography shop,apparently placed by ultra-right religious group. Injuries were notimmediately reported.Happauge/8 January: A grenade was found on a transformer at ashopping center on New York's Long Island.Johannesburg/6 January: Four grenades were lobbed into a crowdedpolice compound in South Africa, killing one officer and wounding 28.New Delhi/6 January: Sikhs rampaged after the execution of twoconvicted assains of Indira Gandhi, killing Hindus and smashing busesin the Punjab.Washington/5 January: Police shut down White House gates for nearlyan hour while a suspicious car was checked out. Police later said asniffer dog had given a false alarm.London/5 January: Naveed Aslam was sentenced to a year in jail forphoning a bomb threat to British Airways so the resulting delay wouldallow his girlfriend to catch her flight to Casablanca. She had overslept.Bangkok/4 January: A Saudi diplomat was killed by three shots on asidewalk near his embassy. The killed escaped and there was no claimof responsibility.Karachi/3 January: A Saudi diplomat was shot on a sidewalk near hishome and seriously wounded by two bullets in the neck and head. Theattacker escaped and responsibility was claimed by "Soldiers of the Right.".Medellin/3 January: Ten armed masked men kidnapped two USmissionaries who had worked in Colombia as long as 16 years.Peshawar/30 December 1988: A French UN worker in Pakistan waskilled in his hotel room by a burst from a Ak-47 rifle. Local reportsblame Afghan secret police KHAD, but Swedish sources said it mayhave been suicide.Zurich/27 December: PKK kidnapped the son of a prominent Turkishjournalist. He was later freed by police.Navarre/23 December: In one of several attacks claimed by ETA, agrenade was fired at a Civil Guard post from nearby woods. When apatrol entered the woods to investigate, they entered a minefield andset off six explosions, seriously wounding one guardsman. In anotherattack, a bar owner was assassinated as an informer.Ankara/22 December: Portugese diplomat Sergio Manuel Pinto Mutinhowas killed near Incel by several attackers with knives. Turkish policesaid the second secretary had been stabbed 18 times.Adelaide/21 December: A huge bomb was found on the roof of anAustralian police station with all but one inch of its fuze burned. The18-stick gelignite bomb was placed by unknown persons for unknownreasons, police said.Cairo/20 December: Police killed three members of an Egyptianfundamentalist group during a raid on an apartment. One of the deadwas wanted for killing a police officer during an early Decembershootout. The incident sparked riots among fundamentalists in Egyptbut the government said such acts would be met with force.Nice/19 December: An explosion killed one resident and injured 12others at a hotel used by immigrant workers on the French Riviera.Most residents are Tunisians and a nearby note claimed responsibilityfor "The Masada Group." The note was marked with a Star of David.West Berlin/16 December: Police arrested seven people and chargedthem with membership in an unspecified terrorist group afterexplosives were found stacked in the basement of a house.Singapore/4 November: Pirates attacked the SS Hai Hui near Horsburghlighthouse near here and kidnapped the master. Report of the incidentwas delayed. There is no news on the captain's whereabouts oridentity of his abductors.Back to Headline List WT03-B06-26IA087-000634-B043-136http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it145.html 205.156.212.5 19970122031632 text/html 221076HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:13:31 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:26 GMTContent-length: 220888Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it145.html Sample Issue Copyright SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES via NewsNet October 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES 7 disqualified from contesting top posts / Umno (613 words) Sipadan, Ligitan row to go to World Court: Leaders to explore further bridge proposal (439 words) Activists land on Diaoyu islands: Page 14 (709 words) Taipei forum to look into cross-strait relations (478 words) 2 Taiwan officials nabbed for crime (187 words) Communist Party to endorse Jiang"s authority at plenum (310 words) Beijing : It"s Chinese territory: Activists land on Diaoyu islands (176 words) Hongkongers jubilant at news of protest landing: Activists land on Diaoyu islands (568 words) Landing by HK, Taiwan activists regrettable : Japan: Activists land on Diaoyu islands (510 words) Proposed sales-tax hike Japan"s main issue for coming polls (537 words) Indonesia urged to ban distribution and sale of alcohol (614 words) Two main blocs emerging as Thai parties get set for polls (505 words) Jakarta detains 24 Taiwanese and Thai fishing boats (360 words) NSTB executive director and surgeon wife die as car hits tree: "Champion of R&D, and a good friend", "Surgeon well-loved byfriends and patients" and "Retired teacher pleasant and respected" (551 words) Car levy on S"poreans : "Reasons not good enough" (154 words) Leaders to explore further bridge proposal: Sipadan, Ligitan row to go to World Court (432 words) Action called against sect for "causing families to break up" (235 words) Retired teacher pleasant and respected: "NSTB executive director and surgeon wife die as car hits tree" andPage 22 (412 words) Surgeon well-loved by friends and patients: "NSTB executive director and surgeon wife die as car hits tree" andPage 22 (553 words) Champion of R&D, and a good friend: "NSTB executive director and surgeon wife die as car hits tree" andPage 22 (566 words) Sunday"s accident toll (128 words) Restaurants now list prices of "extras": "Check it out" and "Prices listed after customers" grouses" (626 words) Prices listed after customers" grouses: "Check it out" and "Restaurants now list prices of "extras" " (224 words) Grandmother"s outstanding volunteer work rubs off on her (440 words) Retirees to pay only $18 to keep club membership (533 words) Polly wants a letter, Polly wants a letter (539 words) Woman living alone found murdered (376 words) Man posed as cop and tried to extort money (200 words) 86-year-old man sues daughter for return of Tiong Bahru shop (515 words) Being good hosts a decisive factor (318 words) A fine example: At least a third of regular volunteers are 30 or younger / Children"s Cancer Foundation (329 words) At least a third of regular volunteers are 30 or younger: A fine example (599 words) Troubled Tories hope much from conference: Senior Tory party member defects (675 words) Chris Patten"s last hurrah (687 words) S46"s self-dissolution -the final episode in 7-year political adventure (1536 words) Committee to allay fears: Internet advisory panel to help fine-tune rules / National Internet Advisory Committee (295 words) Internet advisory panel to help fine-tune rules / National Internet Advisory Committee, Singapore Broadcasting (20 words) Committee to allay fears (540 words) SM Lee, Major hold "very friendly" meeting: Singapore model comes as a package -take it or leave it (216 words) Let people know what ingredients go into food (106 words) 5-day week won"t be standard practice in Civil Service (235 words) Give clear reply on cyclists" behaviour (143 words) Police will take action against reckless cyclists (336 words) Exempt some donations entirely from estate duty (388 words) GRCs : Amendment Bill may be unconstitutional (687 words) Bourse fails to rally on back of Wall Street gains: Dow breaches 6,000 for first time in early trading (463 words) August manufacturing output dwindles 7.6% (316 words) Slower property investment sales in third quarter (577 words) GE Life sales agents protest against plan to cut commission / Great Eastern Life (525 words) Delifrance issuing 45.16m shares at 78 apiece in IPO / Delifrance Asia, SES, Stock Exchange of Singapore (445 words) STIC to begin work on Wuxi park"s third phase by next September / Singapore Technologies Industrial Corporation, STIC (416 words) TRI pays $63m for 15% stake in US satellite firm / Technology Resources Industries, TRI, Orbcomm Global LP (302 words) Quokka subsidiary buys Southcorp"s Rheem division / Quokka Investments, Rheem Concrete Industry Product, Cesco Australia (319 words) Scotts hearing told about new documents / Scotts Holdings, Scotts Investments (Singapore) Pte Ltd (525 words) Issues, rather than insults, take centre stage in lively debate: "Clinton parries Dole"s debate offensive", "Round One to Clinton-Careful, contained and mainly cautious"and "Round One to Clinton-Critiques and the occasional bit of wit" (516 words) Round One to Clinton -Critiques and the occasional bit of wit: "Issues, rather than insults, take centre stage in lively debate","Round One to Clinton -Careful, contained and mainly cautious"and"Clinton parries Dole"s debate offensive" (368 words) Round One to Clinton -Careful, contained and mainly cautious: "Issues, rather than insults, take centre stage in lively debate","Round One to Clinton -Critiques and the occasional bit of wit"and"Clinton parries Dole"s debate offensive" (373 words) CPIB nabs two linked to Amcol"s Mauritius deal / Amcol Holdings, Sando & Cie (228 words) Easyknit falls short of issue price on market debut / Easyknit International Holdings Ltd (251 words) Dow breaches 6,000 for first time in early trading: "Overseas funds pour into Hongkong bourse" and "Bourse fails torally on back of Wall Street gains" (430 words) Property buyers becoming highly price-sensitive : Analysts (658 words) Doing the sums on Tampines Finance Park - Will banks be sold on relocating their operations? (1412 words) Two men, their friendship and passion for science: Computer science and biology make good bedfellows (931 words) Computer science and biology make good bedfellows: Two men, their friendship and passion for science (609 words) Two art auctions rake in $10 m and record prices (510 words) Ovarian cancer girl may miss umrah (412 words) Day when two Japanese bombs fell (712 words) Sheer joy with Bartok showpiece (429 words) Souls in containers teem with secret lives (486 words) Jackson"s concert aims to make HIStory here: "Tickets selling well" and "Selangor bans concert by Michael Jackson" (687 words) Tickets selling well: Jackson"s concert aims to make HIStory here (193 words) CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 19967 disqualified from contesting top posts / Umnofrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Brendan Pereira in Kuala LumpurUmno cracks down on abuses SEVEN candidates, six of them vying for Umno Supreme Council posts, weredisqualified from contesting the elections starting tomorrow for abuse ofpower and flouting party rules.And more are likely to be disqualified, with investigations currently underway against some candidates for serious breaches of discipline.At a press conference yesterday evening, Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim said a caseunder investigation involved a contestant for the post of Umno Youth chief whohad asked delegates to swear by the Quran to support him.Said Datuk Seri Anwar: "We have not got concrete evidence as yet but using theQuran for this purpose to me is a serious offence."He identified the six who were disqualified from contesting the SupremeCouncil election as Datuk Aini Taib, Selangor state executive councillor;Datuk Shariff Omar, deputy chief minister of Penang; Datuk Malik Hanapiah,Perak state executive councillor and former political secretary of PrimeMinister Datuk Seri Dr Mahathir Mohamad; Datuk Salomon Selamat, Member ofParliament and former political secretary of Datuk Anwar; Mr Latiff Mirasa,Penang state executive councillor and Datuk Adam Hamid, Johor state executivecouncillor.All were among 61 people contesting for the 25 posts available on the SupremeCouncil, the highest decision-making body in the party.The seventh person disqualified from the elections was Mr Ayob Mat Aris, whowas vying for a position on the Umno Youth executive council.Datuk Anwar said that the decision to disqualify these members were taken at aspecial committee meeting chaired yesterday afternoon by Dr Mahathir. He saidthat solid evidence had been obtained by the party, enabling it to take thisaction.The evidence related to money politics, abuse of power and violation of theno-campaigning rule which was introduced by the party leadership to curbexcessive politicking.He said that this action should put to rest fears that some people werereceiving favours, noting that Datuk Malik was the former political secretaryof the party chief while Datuk Salomon was his former political secretary.The disqualification of the seven follows the disciplinary action taken byUmno against five members of the Jempol division in Negeri Sembilan for beinginvolved in money politics.Datuk Seri Anwar said that investigations into money politics and otherillegal practices would continue even after the elections.Umno has been waging an ongoing battle against money politics which has beenrampant in the party in recent years.On Sunday, party chief Dr Mahathir noted that money politics seemed to havebecome a norm in Umno and the time had come to rid the party of all forms ofcorruption and filth.He said that if the party leadership did not take stern measures to remedy thesituation, it could endanger not only the party but the whole race and nation."We have repeatedly talked about money politics and convened a specialassembly in 1994 but the problem still could not be overcome. Instead, itseems like it has become an institution."SEVEN NAMED* Datuk Aini Taib, Selangor state executive councillor * Datuk Shariff Omar,deputy chief minister of Penang * Datuk Malik Hanapiah, Perak state executivecouncillor and former political secretary of Prime Minister Datuk Seri DrMahathir Mohamad * Datuk Salomon Selamat, Member of Parliament and formerpolitical secretary of Datuk Anwar * Mr Latiff Mirasa, Penang state executivecouncillor * Datuk Adam Hamid, Johor state executive councillor. * Mr Ayob MatArisCopyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Sipadan, Ligitan row to go to World Court: Leaders to explore furtherbridge proposalfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Brendan Pereira in Kuala LumpurMALAYSIA and Indonesia have decided to refer their claims on the Sipadan andLigitan Islands to the International Court of Justice.This ends a stalemate over the islands, lying off the border between Sabah andEast Kalimantan. The two countries have been trying to resolve the issue since1991.The decision was made after a meeting between Malaysian Prime Minister DatukSeri Dr Mahathir Mohamad and President Suharto of Indonesian here yesterday.During the 90-minute meeting, a wide range of issues, from economiccooperation to the agenda for the World Trade Organisation meeting inSingapore, were discussed.Mr Ali Alatas, Indonesian Foreign minister, briefed the press on thediscussion. He said that after exhausting legal and technical arguments on theislands issue, it was decided that the talks should be elevated to thepolitical stage.Malaysia's Deputy Prime Minister Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim and Indonesia'sState Secretary Moerdiono held four rounds of talks and both concluded thatthey had strong cases. In view of this deadlock, Mr Alatas said both DrMahathir and President Suharto concluded that the question of Sipadan andLigitan islands should be referred to the ICJ.He told a packed press conference: "We are doing so because both sides are ofthe view that the matter should not drag on too long" -as the issue might beexploited by those not wishing Malaysia and Indonesia to have close relations.The decision of the ICJ, he said, would be accepted by both countries. Thenext step would involve Mr Alatas and his Malaysian counterpart Datuk AbdullahBadawi working out the procedures to forward the case together.He stressed that both countries would forward the case together. "We must movein unison. We believe in doing so, we would resolve the issue amicably and ina just way."The Indonesian minister said that this case showed that whenever there was adispute between Asean countries, it could be settled peacefully and in thespirit of Asean.Indonesia's agreement to agree to refer the claim is a change from itsprevious position. Last month, Armed Forces chief Feisal Tanjung was quoted byAntara national news agency as saying that any move to refer the issue to theinternational court would mean involving a third party.He said that it was not good to let other countries which do not understandthe problem meddle in it. But Indonesia never shut the door on this method ofresolution.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Activists land on Diaoyu islands: Page 14from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Lee San Chouy, Taiwan CorrespondentProtesters plant Taiwan and Chinese flagsTAIPEI -Taiwan and Hongkong protesters yesterday broke through a Japanesemaritime cordon to land on the disputed Daioyu islands, where they plantedTaiwanese and Chinese flags to challenge Tokyo's claim to the islands.Taipei provincial assemblyman Ching Jie-shou and Hongkong legislator Tsang KinShing were among the seven protesters who swam ashore to plant threeblue-and-red Taiwanese flags and one red five-star Chinese flag earlyyesterday morning, said a United Evening News report filed from one of the 50boats, which set off on the third and largest protest voyage on Sunday.The flags were swiftly removed by Japanese Maritime Safety Agency officials.Having accomplished its mission, the flotilla returned to the northernTaiwanese port of Shen Ao, where a heroes' welcome greeted the protesters.In Hongkong, the people were equally jubilant on hearing news of thesuccessful landing.In Tokyo, Japanese officials gave a veiled warning that future protest boatscould be seized if found in Japanese waters.Mr Ching said in an interview with state radio: "We will continue our effortsto protect the Diaoyu islands ... We will not quit until we succeed."According to the United Evening News report, at least 50 Japanese boats andhelicopters were mobilised to stop the protest boats from entering the12-nautical-mile territorial zone claimed by Japan.No one was hurt yesterday, although some people had to scramble onto otherprotest vessels after their boat was rammed by a Japanese patrol boat amid thetense stand-off.Unconfirmed reports said that at least one protester fell overboard and wasthen rescued.The more than 300 activists had set sail in 30 boats from Taiwan's Wanli andShen Ao ports on Sunday evening for the Diaoyu islands. Twenty boats carryingjournalists accompanied them.At 5.35 am yesterday, they arrived within the 12-nautical-mile limit whereJapanese patrol boats began to surround the flotilla.But the Japanese boats were unable to stop the small boats whose crews hadbeen practising landings for a week.Mr Ching was later quoted as saying that some activists had set off on rubberboats and water scooters to divert the attention of the Japanese boats whilethe seven swam ashore.At 6.20 am, three activists including Mr Ching and Mr Tsang planted a Chineseflag and a Taiwanese flag near the lighthouse erected by a Japanese right-winggroup in July.Ten minutes later, they were driven off the island by Japanese maritimepolice, who tore the flags down.Another group of four activists, however, managed to make a landing at 6.35am. The four, who stayed for a few minutes on the island, planted twoTaiwanese flags.One of them, Mr Lee Chueh-min, was later quoted as saying: "We weresurrounded. The sea was covered with Japanese ships and the sky was full ofhelicopters, but I had only one goal in mind -to land and to place theTaiwanese flag."This is probably the most important moment of my life."Taipei yesterday praised the landing, but reiterated its position that theDiaoyu dispute should be resolved only through diplomacy and negotiations.Government spokesman Su Chi said: "We always admire and recognise acts ofpatriotism to protect our land. We also feel very good that ... they arereturning after a rational, peaceful protest."However, he added: "The sovereignty and territorial disputes should all beresolved through negotiations."Taiwan and Japan have conducted two rounds of "unofficial" talks over thedispute, including the issue of fishing rights near the island group, butfailed to reach an agreement.The Diaoyu chain, known in Japan as the Senkaku islands, lie about 150 km offnorth-eastern Taiwan and are believed to be potentially rich in oil andnatural gas.Anti-Japanese sentiment in China, Taiwan and Hongkong has been rising sinceJuly.Two protest voyages took place last month.The leader of the second trip, Hongkong activist David Chan, drowned afterjumping into the sea near the islands.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Taipei forum to look into cross-strait relationsfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Sunny GohIt will chart path based on public consensusTAIWAN will hold an inaugural national conference in late December to chartits position on troubled ties with China "based on public consensus", aspokesman for the President's Office told The Straits Times yesterday.The grand forum, which will take in views ranging from opposition parties tobusiness guilds, will also "brainstorm" changes to the island's Constitutionand the speeding up of its economic development.Findings and suggestions from the meeting will be compiled into a report to besubmitted to President Lee Teng-hui to help him "set the direction for theisland's future", the spokesman said."It is the first ever meeting of its kind, and participation is expected to bemassive in terms of representation and vigorous in debate," he said bytelephone.The "National Development Conference" will bring together 150 representatives-50 each for discussions on the constitutional system, economic developmentand cross-strait relations -who will be invited from all sectors of society.These three have been the most problematic issues affecting Taiwan in recentyears, with corruption and triad activities on the rise and Sino-Taiwan tiesat a low ebb.President Lee appointed Vice-President Lien Chan as the convenor of apreparatory committee last month to work out the conference details, andinvited each of the three major political parties to assign a deputy convenor.Mr Tsiang Yien-si, Kuomintang Central Standing Committee member and senioradviser to the President, is expected to be the KMT's deputy convenor. Thedeputy convenors for the Democratic Progressive Party and the New Party havenot yet been made known.Asked whether the Taipei authorities would abide by the conferencerecommendations, the spokesman said that the government would have to take thesuggestions very seriously, otherwise it would defeat the purpose of such ameeting.President Lee himself is expected to evaluate the more sensitive proposals aspart of his election pledge in the presidential election in March this year toseek public consensus on major policy and reform programmes.But the two opposition parties had already poured cold water on the idea,although neither had turned down an invitation to take part. "This is justsmoke. It is like giving a candy to cheat a child," said DPP legislative whipYen Chin-fu.Opposition New Party lawmaker Yok Yu-ming, also pessimistic, said the meetingwould not solve any problems.While the conference is set for end-December, the actual dates and venue havenot been fixed. But the official Free China Journal said the meeting wouldlast five days, probably from Dec 23, with the Taipei International ConventionCentre and the Chungshan Building on Yangming Mountain as the two most likelyvenues.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 19962 Taiwan officials nabbed for crimefrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96TWO Taiwan councillors were detained by police in the continuing crackdownagainst organised crime, the China Times reported yesterday.Chiayi city councillor Wu Jung-an and Changhua county councillor HsiehHung-lung, whose cases are not linked, are being remanded in the easternTaiwan prison on Green Island.Wu, first arrested for alleged drug trafficking in August, was caughtattacking a debtor on Sept 24 together with more than 10 gangsters who werecarrying illegal arms, the Chinese-language daily said.During investigations, unidentified witnesses told police of Wu's involvementin several blackmail cases. Two people accused him of threatening them with agun and coercing them to buy second-hand cars from him at exorbitant prices.A third person said Wu had forced him to hand over NT$200,000 (S$10,360) tobuy drugs.As for Hsieh, he was arrested last Friday for firing a shot at a man earlierthis year.According to China Times, he admitted shooting the man, who helped him run alounge, because of a financial dispute.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Communist Party to endorse Jiang"s authority at plenumfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96THE Chinese Communist Party (CCP) is expected to endorse President JiangZemin's "leadership and authority" at the party's plenum this week, it wasreported yesterday.Quoting a well-informed source in Beijing, the independent Chinese-languageMing Pao Daily News said the CCP would give its endorsement at the end of theannual meeting.Elaborating on his achievements, the report said that since Mr Jiang, 70,became party general secretary in 1989, he had been placing equal emphasis on"material civilisation" and "spiritual civilisation".Spiritual civilisation -the promotion of communal morality in a society whichhas attained economic progress -has been promoted strongly in China's officialmedia in recent months.Mr Jiang has also stressed the need to "talk politics" and to place emphasison the "righteous spirit" and on learning.A resolution on spiritual civilisation to be passed at the plenum would makethese theories the official line and the overall will of the party, added thereport.In his speech to the plenum, which starts today, Mr Jiang is expected to callfor "the enhancement of the power of the party" in leading China into the 21stcentury.His vision for the party's Politburo and Central Committee is for them to "usepolitical superiority to control the overall situation and central authorityto coordinate the national pace and unify the party's will".The Ming Pao report also quoted analysts as saying that Mr Jiang's call tosafeguard the party's political authority had been well received within itsranks and in the military.They said that the Beijing leader's determination to make political authoritythe overall guiding principle showed China would continue to use "a graduallyprogressive and moderate approach" towards an in-depth development of thecountry's reforms.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Beijing : It"s Chinese territory: Activists land on Diaoyu islandsfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Mary Kwang, China CorrespondentBEIJING -A Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman yesterday reiterated that theDiaoyu islands in the East China Sea were an inalienable part of Chineseterritory.He also said that the Chinese stance on the issue was consistent and clear.He made these remarks in response to queries from the media on China'sreaction to the early-morning landing yesterday by Hongkong and Taiwaneseprotesters on the disputed islands.The spokesman also said that incidents initiated by the Japanese side hadprovoked and angered the Chinese people.While he did not say what these incidents were, his remarks were apparentlytargeted at the construction of a lighthouse on one of the islands in July byJapanese right-wingers.The Japanese Coastguard had even allowed the right-wingers to return to theislands to repair the structure after it was damaged in a typhoon, but theyhad turned away boats from Hongkong and Taiwan approaching the islands.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Hongkongers jubilant at news of protest landing: Activists land on Diaoyuislandsfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Wang Hui Ling, Hongkong CorrespondentEvent grabs morning and evening headlinesHONGKONGERS greeted with jubilation the landing on the disputed Diaoyu islandsby protesters from Hongkong and Taiwan early yesterday.News of the successful mission hit the headlines in the morning and was playedup in graphic detail by evening newspapers here.At least one Cantonese news station devoted a few hours to the news, airinginterviews with analysts and reporters covering the event.Some radio listeners who called a phone-in programme also referred to theevent, even though the programme dealt with a completely different topic.A television station devoted 27 minutes of its half-hour evening news bulletinin Cantonese to coverage of the voyage, with extensive footage of the landing,the planting of the Chinese flag, the encounters with the Japanese authoritiesas well as the return of the protesters to Taiwan's Shen Ao port.Politicians from two of Hongkong's biggest political parties -the DemocraticParty and the Liberal Party -also welcomed the news, although they were quickto add that now that the protesters had fulfilled their mission to plant flagson the disputed islands, the ball was now in Beijing's court to pursue thematter.Democratic Party vice-chairman Yeung Sam said: "All we are trying to do ismake a symbolic protest against Japanese occupation of the islands."Actually, there is not much the people in the community can do because it isall related to the foreign policy of the Chinese government."If the Chinese government refuses to take tough action against the Japanesegovernment, it will be very difficult for China to reclaim its sovereigntyover the islands."Liberal Party vice-chairman Ronald Arculli said that he hoped the move wouldgive the Chinese government an understanding of the strength of feelings overthe issue and inspire it to open diplomatic channels to settle the dispute.The New Evening Post and the Sing Tao Evening News splashed the landing ontheir front pages.Calling it a successful breach of Japanese defences, they also accused theJapanese of crashing into some protesters' boats. One headline screamed:"Shameless Japanese security forces remove Chinese flags but claim they wereblown away" in an apparent reference to eyewitnesses' claims that Japanesecoast guards had removed the Chinese flags placed by the protesters.Analysts interviewed on radio said that the successful voyage was a testimonyto the better preparations and strategies adopted by the latest group ofprotesters.Democratic Party legislator Tsang Kin Shing, who was one of those who reachedone of the disputed islands, told reporters that he would not be organisinganother trip to the islands to dismantle a lighthouse erected by Japaneseright-wingers. He was reported to have said that such a task should be left tothe Chinese government.Amid the jubilation, an English-language radio station yesterday ran aninterview with a Caucasian photographer who had accompanied an earlierill-fated voyage to the Diaoyu islands, in which protester David Chan drowned.He said that the attempt to make Chan out as a hero and martyr wasregrettable, as his action was foolish and had endangered lives. It was alsopartly the result of frenzy whipped up by the media, he added.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Landing by HK, Taiwan activists regrettable : Japan: Activists land onDiaoyu islandsfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Kwan Weng Kin, Japan CorrespondentTrespassing vessels could be seized, it warnsTOKYO -Japanese officials yesterday expressed regret at the early-morninglanding by Hongkong and Taiwan activists on the disputed Diaoyu islands andhinted that vessels carrying protesters could be seized in future if they werefound trespassing in Japan's territorial seas.Commenting on the landing, Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto stressed the needfor the authorities on all sides to take a level-headed approach."Whether this affair will blow up any further will depend on whether theauthorities on both sides will be able to create calm," he told reporters.Deputy Chief Cabinet Secretary Teijiro Furukawa, standing in as thegovernment's chief spokesman, described as "extremely regrettable" the landingon the Diaoyu group -known as Senkaku islands to the Japanese -and echoed thePremier's call for calm."Relations with neighbouring countries and territories must not deterioratebecause of such incidents. We hope all parties concerned will deal with itcalmly," he said.Although vessels carrying activists from Hongkong and Taiwan succeeded ineluding patrol boats belonging to the Maritime Safety Agency -Japan's coastguard -and got close to the islands yesterday, the agency made no attempt toseize the trespassers."But in future, if they do not comply with our warning to withdraw, we willtake appropriate measures," said Mr Furukawa, raising the possibility that theagency would in future apprehend the protest boats.In October 1990, the Japanese authorities succeeded in repelling a fishingboat carrying Taiwanese athletes that attempted to plant an Olympic torch onthe Diaoyu islands.Yesterday afternoon, Foreign Ministry Vice-Minister Sadayuki Hayashi announcedthat Japan would ask the authorities in Beijing, Hongkong and Taipei formallyto prevent a repeat of yesterday's incident."The problem must not affect our relations with neighbouring countries. Ibelieve China and Taiwan feel the same way," he said.Japanese officials also expressed the hope that the matter would subside nowthat the activists had achieved their objective of reaching the islands anddemonstrating the respective claims of the Chinese and Taiwanese.On Sept 26, Hongkong protest leader David Chan drowned in a mishap off thedisputed islands after a vessel carrying him and other activists wereprevented from landing by Japanese patrol boats.Yesterday's landing was displayed prominently on the front pages of theevening editions of the major Japanese papers although the media here has byand large given minimal coverage to the territorial dispute with China andTaiwan.For example, there have been no stories in the press to explain the historicalbasis for Japan's claim to the islands, reflecting in part the fact that mostJapanese have shown little interest in the dispute.But despite the relatively low-key treatment accorded the issue here, MrHashimoto expressed unhappiness with the Japanese media recently, saying itwas against Japan's national interests for the press to highlight the issue.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Proposed sales-tax hike Japan"s main issue for coming pollsfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Kwan Weng Kin, Japan CorrespondentTOKYO -The government's proposed hike in the sales tax from next April emergedclearly yesterday as the main issue dividing Japan's two largest politicalparties in the upcoming general election, campaigning for which beginsofficially today.The tax-policy gap between the Liberal Democratic Party led by Prime MinisterRyutaro Hashimoto and the opposition New Frontier Party headed by Mr IchiroOzawa was highlighted in a nationally-televised debate for leaders of Japan'ssix largest parties.Seeking to continue as Premier after the polls, Mr Hashimoto reiterated hisdetermination to raise the sales tax from the existing three per cent to fiveper cent next year to pay for the burgeoning costs of welfare and other publicservices.But he stressed that the hike would be linked to the implementation ofadministrative and economic reforms and that pensioners and other low-incomeearners likely to be penalised by the higher tax would receive specialconsideration.Criticising Mr Hashimoto's coalition government for failing to push hardenough for reforms so far, Mr Ozawa opposed an increase in the sales tax andpledged to reduce taxes by 18 trillion yen (S$228 billion) and to make up forthe loss in revenue by slashing government expenditure and expanding consumerspending.The Japan Communist Party was the only other party among the six yesterdaywhich included the Democratic Party of Japan, the Social Democratic Party andthe Sakigake -that supported a freeze in the sales tax. Apart from thisglaring difference over tax policy between the LDP and NFP, all six partieswere unanimous in their calls for comprehensive reforms to the country'sadministrative and economic systems.LDP's Mr Hashimoto appealed to voters to give his party a mandate to bringabout a "robust economy" through deregulation and reforms and remindedeveryone that he had plans to set up a panel of advisers to work out an actionprogramme within a year.Mr Ozawa, saying he would retire from politics if his party should come topower and fail to carry out its election promises, warned voters they had achoice between "prosperity through drastic reforms" or "decay by taking noaction".Yesterday's party leaders' debate laid down the battle lines for the electioncampaigning which kicks off today.But politicians will undoubtedly have difficulty getting their messages acrossto their electorate as a survey by the quasi-national NHK network releasedyesterday found that only 50 per cent of Japanese voters were interested inthe upcoming polls.This was 17 percentage points lower than in the July 1993 elections, whichushered in Japan's first coalition government in decades.Nevertheless, a record number of over 1,400 candidates are expected to vie for500 Lower House seats in the Oct 20 election which will be conducted under anew system of single-seat wards and proportional representation.Many candidates belonging to the major parties are exploiting a provision inthe election law that allows candidates to stand in both single-seat wards andproportional representation constituencies, thus increasing their chances ofwinning a parliamentary seat.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Indonesia urged to ban distribution and sale of alcoholfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Paul Jacob, Indonesia CorrespondentReligious objections, dangers of drink citedJAKARTA -Muslim grassroots leaders and youth representatives have called onthe local government here and provincial administrations elsewhere to movetowards imposing a comprehensive ban on the sale and distribution of alcoholin the country.About 3,000 representatives, citing religious objections and the dangers thatalcohol and its easy availability posed to Indonesian youths in particular,made the call in a statement issued after gathering for a sermon on Sunday atthe Matraman Mosque in East Jakarta.The representatives recognised efforts to tighten the supervision, control andsale of alcohol through local government regulations but said that theauthorities should go a step further and impose an outright ban.Their statement said that distributors and consumers were already faced withthe full weight "of sanctions from Allah".As such, government moves to impose stringent controls and greater supervisionon alcohol -such as by increasing the cost of distribution licence fees andhigher penalties for violating rules -had to be revised.The authorities should instead "prevent and prohibit every effort to legalisealcoholic beverages" and should develop policies and action programmes whichwould "increase faith and piety" and ensure there could be abstinence from"that which is known to be forbidden".The Republika daily yesterday quoted leaders like Haji Nurudin, secretary ofthe Madura Ulemas Board, as saying yesterday that "alcohol, or wine andliquor, according to the Prophet Muhammed, is the source of all evil".The call on Sunday followed moves by local governments in Jakarta, WestSumatra and East Java to institute new rules which they believed would helpkeep alcohol distribution and consumption under control while not eliminatingit altogether.Higher annual licence fees -up to 10 million rupiah (S$6,000) from the currentone million rupiah -have been proposed for approval by the Home AffairsMinistry. These would ultimately increase the cost of alcohol sold at outletsand thereby prevent youths from being able to afford to drink.Labels must also be affixed on bottles warning that liquor is harmful and theminimum content of bottles must be 200 cc -again to ensure that the highercost would make alcoholic beverages unaffordable to youths.The grassroots leaders and youth representatives who met on Sunday were notalone in their quest to ban the sale and distribution of alcohol.Representatives of the Muslim-based United Development Party have saidpreviously that steps being proposed by the local government meant that liquorcould still be sold.The West Sumatra chapter of the Majelis Ulama Indonesia, the country's highestcouncil on Islamic affairs, made a similar call for controlling regulations tobe revised so that alcohol would be banned, while Muslim leaders in East Javaalso urged a review, citing alcohol's incompatibility with religiousteachings.There has yet to be any formal central-government reaction although leaderssuch as Information Minister Harmoko, who also chairs the ruling Golkar party,said previously that the party wanted firmer measures in place, including theimposition of strict maximum limits on the alcohol content of beverages soldto the public.Another underlying argument used by opponents of alcohol has been the linkwhich many see between alcohol consumption and criminal activity, andalcohol's effects on youths.Beer brewers here produce a total of 150 million litres annually with totalsales amounting to 500 billion rupiah.According to the Republika daily, annual domestic production of alcoholicbeverages totals eight million cartons while imports amount to five millioncartons annually.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Two main blocs emerging as Thai parties get set for pollsfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Sinfah Tunsarawuth in BangkokTHAI political parties have virtually re-aligned themselves into two blocs inthe run-up to next month's general election with the Democrat and NewAspiration parties forming the core of each camp.The Democrats received a boost over the weekend when prominent banker andformer finance minister Tarrin Nimmanahaeminda -believed to be groomed byparty leader Chuan Leekpai to succeed him -announced he would contest thepolls on a Democrat ticket.Mr Tarrin's decision to make his electoral debut in Bangkok is likely toenhance the prospects of the Democrats winning most of the 37 seats in thecapital.The Democrats last week forged an understanding with four parties -ChartPattana, Palang Dharma, Seritham and Solidarity -to form the next coalitiongovernment if the party won the most seats in the House of Representatives onNov 17.The five parties also agreed to be "friendly" and to avoid attacking eachother during the election campaign.But their agreement did not preclude any party from joining the other bloc-led by the New Aspiration Party (NAP) of General Chavalit Yongchaiyudh -if itshould win the election and form the core of the next government.The NAP has not yet received any open support from other parties, but it islikely that three parties -Social Action, Prachakorn Thai and Muanchon -willalign themselves with the former army chief. The four parties are currentlypartners in the caretaker government of Prime Minister Banharn Silpa-archa,whose Chart Thai party was weakened last week when a group led by itssecretary-general, Sanoh Thienthong, defected to the NAP.Mr Banharn had said he did not expect to become Prime Minister after nextmonth's polls, but would remain as the leader of Chart Thai.He has not yet indicated which of the two parties -Democrats and the NAP -hisparty will support.Gen Chavalit was the prime mover in forcing Mr Banharn to announce hisresignation last month in the face of a no-confidence motion in parliament.Mr Banharn did not honour his pledge and leave office, but instead dissolvedthe House and called for fresh elections on Nov 17.With Mr Tarrin's decision to contest the election, the Democrats will be ableto present a strong economic team which should appeal to the educatedmiddle-class, an important electoral group in the capital.Mr Tarrin told a radio interview yesterday that apart from him, former deputypremier and banker Dr Supachai Panitchpakdi, former minister in charge ofenergy affairs Dr Savit Bhotiwihok and Democrat party spokesman AbhisitVejjajiva would be in the economic team if the Democrats won the right to formthe next government.A former top banker before entering politics, Mr Tarrin earned high marks asfinance minister in the Chuan government when he took up the Cabinet post as anon-MP at the invitation of Mr Chuan.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Jakarta detains 24 Taiwanese and Thai fishing boatsfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Paul Jacob, Indonesia CorrespondentJAKARTA -Increased patrols by naval ships and military maritime aircraft haveresulted in the detention of 24 Thai and Taiwanese fishing boats which enteredterritorial waters in the eastern part of Indonesia last week, the MediaIndonesia newspaper reported yesterday.The latest intrusions come in the wake of the seizure of 50 fishing boats fromChina in the latter half of last month after they entered Indonesian watersillegally and were found to have had false documents permitting them to fishin the area.Indonesian navy chief Vice-Admiral Arief Kushariadi disclosed the latestround-up of 24 vessels, but without giving a breakdown. He is due to visit thenaval base in Tual, Maluku, where the vessels and 300 Thai and Taiwanesefishermen are detained.He said the increased number of fishing boats detained in recent months wasthe result of heightened round-the-clock monitoring of east Indonesian watersby naval patrols and air-force maritime aircraft.The Indonesian military disclosed last month that ships from itsSurabaya-based Eastern Fleet and other bases would intensify patrols in thecountry's resource-rich eastern waters -as well as in the waters around theNatuna islands where a multi-million-dollar natural gas project was gettingunder way.Vice-Admiral Arief said the Chinese, Taiwanese and Thai vessels detained hadentered Indonesian waters illegally and were fishing in the area using fakepermits.Permits must be obtained from local authorities and the fact that falsedocuments had been issued indicated possible collusion between localbusinessmen and local authorities, he said.The question of prosecutions of those detained so far would be left to theregional office of the Attorney-General, he added. It was no longer a matterfor the navy as the case now also involved the question of how the vessels hadbeen able to secure fishing permits.Late last month, the navy reported detaining seven Chinese boats which wereflying the Indonesian flag in waters off the coast of southeastern Maluku -thefirst time such a ploy had been detected.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996NSTB executive director and surgeon wife die as car hits tree: "Champion ofR&D, and a good friend", "Surgeon well-loved byfriends and patients" and"Retired teacher pleasant and respected"from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Dorothy HoCar crash in Perth NATIONAL Science and Technology Board executive director Vijay Mehta and hiswife, Dr Amar Kaur, were among three people who died in a car crash near Perthon Saturday.They were in a car which was being driven by retired teacher JaganathanGovindsamy, 62, when it went out of control and hit a tree, Perth policeconfirmed yesterday.Mr Mehta, 45, his wife, 41, and Mr Jaganathan's wife, Suppamal, a 60-year-oldretired teacher, died on the spot.Mr Jaganathan was admitted to hospital, and was discharged yesterday.The Mehtas, who had no children, were in Australia because Dr Amar, the headof Toa Payoh Hospital's ear, nose and throat department, had been attending amedical conference in Cairns, Queensland, from Sept 28 to Oct 3.After the conference, they went to Perth to visit the Jaganathans, who wereold family friends, and stayed with them in their home there.The Jaganathans' daughter, Rebekah, 27, a church worker, said in a telephoneinterview yesterday that her parents had taken the Mehtas out sightseeing onSaturday when the tragedy occurred."They were on their way back from Margaret River when the accident happened,"she said.The accident occurred near Busselton, about 250 km south of Perth, accordingto the Major Crash Investigation Section of the Perth police, which ishandling the case.The Jaganathans' white Mazda 626 sedan had split into two on impact, anotherfamily member said yesterday. The couple also have a 28-year-old son, who isin university.News of the three deaths shocked colleagues and friends here. NSTB chairmanTeo Ming Kian was among those who paid tribute to Mr Mehta's abilities as anengineer at the forefront of Singapore's Research and Development efforts."Vijay and his wife, Amar, were personal friends. Apart from the loss to theboard, their unfortunate deaths were also a tragic and personal loss to me andmy family," Mr Teo said in a statement.He said that he had brought Mr Mehta from the Ministry of Defence to the NSTBin 1993 at a time when it had been experiencing frequent changes inleadership."He brought stability to NSTB. He was looking forward to leading the boardinto the second phase of development," Mr Teo added.Mr Mehta graduated with first class honours in aeronautical engineering fromthe University of Manchester and obtained a master's degree from StanfordUniversity in California.His wife, the only woman ENT surgeon in Singapore, studied medicine here anddid her postgraduate work in Edinburgh, Scotland, and at Stanford University.She was active in the Sikh community and was in the midst of planning a clinicat the Central Sikh Temple.Several doctors and staff members at Toa Payoh Hospital were in tearsyesterday when they learnt that she had died and some of were too distraughtto speak.Meanwhile in Perth, police were waiting to interview Mr Jaganathan, who wasresting at home. He had some stitches near one ear, and suffered bruises and asore shoulder."He does not remember anything," said his daughter, Rebekah.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Car levy on S"poreans : "Reasons not good enough"from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96JOHOR BARU -The Malaysian Chinese Association has urged the Johor Baru CityCouncil to give more valid reasons to collect a M$3 (S$1.70) levy fromSingapore cars entering the country through the Johor causeway.The Star quoted Johor Baru MCA division secretary Wee Ka Sion as saying: "Thelevy should not be imposed as a retaliatory measure against the SingaporeGovernment for charging Malaysian cars M$30 if they enter the republic morethan five days in a year."There has to be a valid reason ... such as to reduce traffic congestion."He added the MCA division would support the council's intention to study theimposition of the levy."The funds arising from the levy must also be for a good cause such as roadupgrading instead of merely filling up the council's coffers," he said.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Leaders to explore further bridge proposal: Sipadan, Ligitan row to go toWorld Courtfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Brendan Pereira in Kuala LumpurThe Mahathir-Suharto meetingINDONESIA and Malaysia have agreed to explore further the idea of a bridgelinking Peninsular Malaysia and North Sumatra.Both countries, however, have made it clear that the private sector ought tocome up with capital for the project, which would enhance travel andcommunications between Malaysians and Indonesians.This proposal was among a range of economic and trade issues discussed byPrime Minister Datuk Seri Dr Mahathir Mohamad and President Suharto at a90-minute meeting in Kuala Lumpur yesterday.The Indonesian leader was on a two-day visit. He was accompanied by ForeignMinister Ali Alatas and State Secretary Moerdiono.At a press conference, Mr Alatas said Indonesia thought the idea of a bridgefrom Peninsular Malaysia to North Sumatra was a good one.It was consistent with planned bridges linking Sumatra with Java and otherparts of Indonesia, he said.The bridge would also go well with Jakarta's policy of allowing tourists fromneighbouring countries to drive and use their cars in the country.Mr Alatas said President Suharto and Dr Mahathir also discussed.* Trade between the two countries. Dr Mahathir noted that while investments inIndonesia had increased, there was still room for expansion.Indonesia said that it welcomed investments and hoped that investors showedinterest in the eastern part of the the country and in labour intensiveindustries.* The increasing traffic in the Straits of Malacca. Mr Alatas said that toalleviate the situation in the straits, Indonesia offered an alternative routefor large ships through the Lombok Straits.* The World Trade Organisation meeting in Singapore. Both leaders agreed thatnon-trade related issues such as human rights and labour matters should not beincluded. Otherwise, the meeting's agenda would be overloaded.Mr Alatas was also asked about the reported split among Asean nations onallowing Myanmar into the grouping.He said that there was no divergence of opinion on allowing Myanmar in. Theonly difference of opinion was when the country should become a member ofAsean.Indonesia's position was straightforward: if procedures were followed, then itwas prepared to accept Myanmar anytime.Asked if the human rights record of Myanmar's army junta would be a factor indetermining its membership in Asean, he noted that even the United Nations didnot evaluate the internal situation in a country before allowing it to be amember.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Action called against sect for "causing families to break up"from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96JOHOR BARU -The Malaysian Chinese Association has urged the Home AffairsMinistry to act against a religious sect for allegedly breaking up families ofits followers.The Star yesterday quoted the party's Johor Baru division secretary, Mr Wee KaSiong, as saying that the group "preaches a lifestyle contrary to local familyvalues". He did not elaborate.He said the group had been operating in the state for several years and itsmembership was growing."We have received several complaints from the Chinese community against theTaiwan-based group which has brainwashed some people."Initial investigations show that many teenagers and wives who joined the secthave left their homes and cannot be traced."There have also been allegations of sect members being told to refrain fromsleeping with non-member spouses," he added.The sect's leaders also compelled members to coerce their relatives to joinit.A businessman, Mr Tan Kim Boo, 39, said his 30-year-old wife had been missingsince December last year after joining the sect in 1989. He said she had alsotried to force him to become a member."She left saying that she did not want anything to do with me or ourfive-year-old son," he said, adding the sect had more than 100 members in DesaCemerlang alone.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Retired teacher pleasant and respected: "NSTB executive director andsurgeon wife die as car hits tree" andPage 22from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Julie Kee, Allison Lim and Dorothy HoSingaporeans killed in Perth crashTHE retired teacher who died in Saturday's accident in Perth was a pleasantwoman who was respected by her students and colleagues alike.Mrs Suppamal Jaganathan, 60, became a teacher at her alma mater in 1956 aftershe graduated from St Hilda's School in 1955."She's a very pleasant woman and a very nice person," said Mrs A. Abraham, 59,an ex-colleague and friend of Mrs Jaganathan."It's so sad that she died."The principal of St Hilda's Secondary School added: "We were all so shocked,it was so sudden."Mrs Jaganathan used to teach English and mathematics at St Hilda's PrimarySchool and was the school's English and library coordinator before retiring in1989.Her retirement came just before she emigrated to Perth with her family inearly 1990.Mrs Abraham, who has known Mrs Jaganathan since 1969, said the retired teachervisited Singapore regularly even after she moved to Perth.She had moved there with her husband, Mr Jaganathan Govindsamy, 62, a retiredteacher from Upper Serangoon Technical School, and two children.Daughter Rebekah, 27, works in a church in Perth, and her son, 28-year-oldSri, studies aviation at the Edith Cowan University in Perth.When contacted, Rebekah was too distraught to talk about her mother.Mrs Jaganathan's niece, Madam Malini Krishna, 38, a teacher at Hai Sing HighSchool, said that her aunt was a friendly person who was hardworking andpleasant."When friends heard about the accident, those who lived as far away as Sydneycalled up the family to ask what had happened," said Madam Krishna.She added that Mrs Jaganathan's family had planned to come to Singapore for awedding next month.About eight members of the Jaganathan family are already in Perth, said MrsAbraham.They include Mrs Jaganathan's sisters Mrs Kasturi Shanmugan, who works as aclerk at St Hilda's Secondary School, and Mrs Amurthavalli Naidu, anex-principal of Telok Kurau Secondary.Other family members, Mr and Mrs A. Nathan, also went to Perth. Mr Nathan isthe principal of Upper Serangoon Technical School.Madam Krishna, who was supposed to leave for Perth today, has cancelled hertrip as she said the family was expected to return soon.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Surgeon well-loved by friends and patients: "NSTB executive director andsurgeon wife die as car hits tree" andPage 22from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Julie Kee, Allison Lim and Dorothy HoSingaporeans killed in Perth crashNEWS of the death of Dr Amar Kaur, Singapore's only woman ear, nose and throatsurgeon, left the staff of Toa Payoh Hospital's ENT clinic -including clerks,nurses and other doctors -shocked and red-eyed.She was well-loved by both her colleagues and patients, for the care andconcern she showed everyone, and the hospital had given her an award forexcellent service.Its chief executive, Mr Liak Teng Lit, said that all the staff in the ENTclinic cried when they received news of her death yesterday morning.A friend, ENT consultant A. B. John of Tan Tock Seng Hospital, said: "I'venever seen a patient who has not had good things to say of her."Dr Amar, 41, graduated from the then University of Singapore in 1979 and laterwent to Edinburgh for a training fellowship.In 1991, she left to spend a year at Stanford University in California foradvanced training in otolaryngology (ENT).She spent a year at the Singapore General Hospital after that and left in 1993to head the ENT division at Toa Payoh Hospital.Her colleagues, including the former head of SGH's otolaryngology department,Dr Chew Chuan Tieh, knew her as one of the best ENT surgeons here.He remembered her as a good team player, who worked tirelessly to help buildthe hospital's ENT division."When she started about three years ago, there was only one other doctorbesides Dr Kaur in the division. Very often she would be called in the middleof the night to perform emergency procedures."I would see her working at 1 or 2 am. She would work without complaining."She married Mr Vijay Mehta, the executive director of the National Science andTechnology Board, about three years ago and Mr Liak described them as a lovingcouple.Mr Mehta would visit her frequently at the hospital so that they could havetheir lunch together.Dr Amar was also active in social work in the Sikh community. She was a memberof the Punjabi-Sikh Welfare Council and the head of the council's medicalsub-committee. It had been formed to open an outpatient clinic in the CentralSikh Temple, in Serangoon Road.Council chairman Sorinder Singh said he was to have met her yesterday.He said: "So it came as a terrible shock to me when I got the news on Sundaynight, that she had died."He described Dr Amar as a woman who would bend over backwards to help othersin need. She had been actively involved in the community's welfare work formore than 10 years.The couple's deaths were particularly painful for Dr Aw Chong Yin, seniorregistrar at Toa Payoh, who had worked with Dr Amar since 1993.They had grown close and he had become a close family friend. In fact, the twodoctors attended a medical conference in Cairns in Australia the week beforethe accident.His voice breaking, he said: "I can't believe that they are gone, especiallyAmar, she was always so lively and energetic."Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Champion of R&D, and a good friend: "NSTB executive director and surgeonwife die as car hits tree" andPage 22from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Julie Kee, Allison Lim and Dorothy HoSingaporeans killed in Perth crashMr Vijay Mehta described as balanced and mature, approachable and good tostaffPEOPLE who knew Mr Vijay Mehta remembered him yesterday as an outstandingengineer who championed research and development, and as a good friend whoalways had time for people.Friends and colleagues were shocked by the news that the executive director ofthe National Science and Technology Board had died in a three-death car crashnear Perth last Saturday.Brigadier-General Wesley D'Aranjo, deputy secretary of technology, Ministry ofDefence (Mindef), who knew Mr Mehta for about 20 years, said: "We were veryclose friends."He was an excellent engineer and a balanced and mature person who was alwayswilling to listen and consider the alternatives. He was also very approachableand good to his staff."Mr Mehta, 45, had worked under BG D'Aranjo in Mindef's Defence MaterielOrganisation before moving to the NSTB. BG D'Aranjo said: "Very rarely did Isee him get angry. He would get angry only on points of principle."The defence technology and research development communities in Singapore areshocked and saddened by his death, and would like to convey their heartfeltregrets to Mr Mehta's family."In a statement, the NSTB paid tribute to Mr Mehta, who was seconded fromMindef before his appointment as its executive director in August 1993.It said he led the board successfully in several initiatives such as theResearch Incentive Scheme for Companies and the Technology Development Fund.Between 1991 and 1995, the board secured $2.7 billion in R&D investments fromthe private sector, set up 13 national research centres and institutes andvarious schemes to encourage innovation and technology commercialisation, andexpanded its R&D manpower pool. During his term, three new research institutesand centres were set up -the Environmental Technology Institute, Institute ofMolecular Agrobiology and the Centre for Signal Processing.The board said he had played a key role in charting Singapore's science andtechnology directions. He co-chaired the National Science and Technology PlanSteering Committee, contributing to the formulation of the five-year $4billion National Science and Technology Plan.Overseas, he was instrumental in forging strong science and technology linkswith Canada, Germany, Israel, India and the United States, and representedSingapore on the Asean Committee for Science and Technology and in Apec'ssenior officials' meeting for science and technology.He also served on the boards of Singapore Technologies Electronic andEngineering Limited, Singapore Science Park and National Biotech Committee,and was an observer on the Economic Development Board's executive committee.He was awarded a Public Administration Medal (Silver) in 1991.Professor Su Guaning, director of the Defence Science Organisation and a closefriend, said: "He was a person who could rally people together and get them towork towards a common goal. He loved life and was a good friend to many."Mr Lim Swee Say, director of NTUC's administration and research unit, whoco-chaired the National Science and Technology Plan Steering Committee with MrMehta, said: "He laid a clear vision for the future growth of R&D in Singaporetowards the year 2000. He will be fondly remembered and sadly missed by all."Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Sunday"s accident tollfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96ONE man died and four others were injured in two separate accidents on Sunday.In the first accident, a car travelling along Jalan Bahar towards Lim Chu KangRoad collided with a motorcycle at the junction of Jalan Bahar and Choa ChuKang Road.The driver and passenger of the car, the motorcyclist and his pillion riderwere hurt. All four were sent to the National University Hospital.In another mishap at about 6 pm, a man died after his motorcycle skidded nearFullerton Road. Mr Errol Louis Workman, 48, hit his head on the kerb and diedinstantly.Witnesses to both accidents can call the Traffic Police on 221-0000.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Restaurants now list prices of "extras": "Check it out" and "Prices listedafter customers" grouses"from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Dawn TanOn the menu: Prices of * Peanuts * Pickles * Wet towels * Chinese teaIF YOU go out to a Chinese restaurant for dinner tonight, be prepared for someextra items on the menu.The prices of peanuts, pickles, wet towels and Chinese tea are now beingprinted in some restaurants here.For years these have been accepted as unlisted items for which diners had topay. Sometimes these little extras came to as much as $20 for a table of 10.The change is a result of the Restaurant Association of Singapore's proposalfor its Chinese restaurant-members to list and price these items to avoidmisunderstandings.The association has about 100 Chinese eateries as members, half the number ofsuch restaurants in Singapore.It said it sent out about 120 letters to these members about two months agoafter such items became an issue among consumers earlier this year.It did not know how many had adopted the proposal. A Straits Times check foundthat 14 restaurants have already done so.They are Tung Lok Sharksfin's eight restaurants, Sin Leong's two restaurants,Jumbo Serangoon and Jumbo Seafood, Victoria City and Szechuan Garden.Another nine contacted -the Lucky Restaurants group's six restaurants, DragonPhoenix Restaurant and Yunnan Group's two restaurants -said they will be doingso when they reprint their menus by the end of the year.The prices of the items vary slightly at the different restaurants. At DragonPhoenix, for example, peanuts, towels and Chinese tea come to $17 for a tableof 10.The Szechuan Garden spokesman said: "This way, it's clear-cut. There won't beany misunderstanding between the restaurant and our diners."Jumbo Serangoon's restaurant manager Bernard Chia said: "Customers whocomplain usually go to the association. If we inform diners of the prices,there will be no communication breakdown."Traditionally, at Chinese restaurants, diners find out how much the extrascost only when they get the bill. But some people, including tourists, havecomplained that this was unfair.The association's assistant director, Ms Chua Say Khiang, said: "Nowadays,customers are more vocal and they will speak up if they are not happy."If the restaurants state the prices clearly, then they won't have grounds tocomplain.""As time goes by, more restaurants are likely to do so. No restaurant wants toleave a bad impression on its diners."But five others contacted -Teochew Garden, May Garden and Tsui Hang Village'sthree restaurants -said they did not see the need for the items to be listed,as they have never had complaints before.A May Garden spokesman said the restaurant did not face a problem as waitersask the diners if they want the "extras" before serving them.But Lucky Restaurants' group chairman Edmund Loo said: "We are in the serviceindustry. We cannot keep asking the customer whether he wants this or that.It's quite rude in front of his guests."Stating the prices clearly is the best thing to do."Tung Lok Sharksfin's (Scotts) restaurant manager Paul Lo said: "Diners expectto be served appetisers, wet towels and Chinese tea. It's part and parcel offine dining in a Chinese restaurant."Several diners welcomed the move. Administrator Loretta Yeo, 21, said: "Dinershave the right to know the cost of the "extras" before starting their mealsince they are paying for it."Housewife Amy Tan, 43, noted: "I'd rather patronise a restaurant that isupfront with me than one which gives me a nasty surprise after the meal."Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Prices listed after customers" grouses: "Check it out" and "Restaurants nowlist prices of "extras" "from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96SPARKING A CHANGEA COMPLAINT to The Straits Times prompted the Restaurant Association ofSingapore to start listing the prices of towels and other extras.A reader complained in the Forum page on May 30 that she felt cheated afterbeing charged $8 for two plates of Szechuan pickled vegetables at a Chineserestaurant.The Consumers Association of Singapore, in its reply, said that restaurantsought to ask customers if they wanted such "extra" items.It added that "the most upfront practice was to include the prices on themenus so that customers will not be taken by surprise and be embarrassed".It urged the Restaurant Association of Singapore to take the matter up andregulate practices in the business.The Singapore Tourist Promotion Board also said then that between August lastyear and May this year, three Western tourists had complained about beingcharged for items not on the menu.In July the restaurant association discussed whether to encourage members tolist the prices of the "extras" on the menu, or to ask them to consult theirguests before serving them.It then sent about 120 letters to its member Chinese restaurants, proposingthat they list the prices of the "extras".Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Grandmother"s outstanding volunteer work rubs off on herfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96FOREIGN student Sandy Chan, 14, a Malaysian, has only been living in Singaporewith her paternal grandmother, Madam Leong Ah Say, 61, a housewife, for twoyears.But already, her grandmother's volunteer work with the elderly has had animpact on her.About four or five times a week over the past year, she has been helping hergrandmother deliver meals to needy old folk living nearby.Sometimes, she would even do their housework for them.On Sunday, she watched proudly as her grandmother received one of nineoutstanding service awards given to befrienders and befriender coordinators bythe Lions Befriender Service Association.The awards were given to volunteers who had gone beyond the call of duty tohelp the lonely elderly with various needs, such as delivery of meals andhousework.In Madam Leong's case, she received the award for being a consistent volunteerfor the past five years.She had not only cooked and delivered meals to several elderly people livingnearby, but she had also done their housework and looked after last rites andfuneral arrangements.Apart from the nine outstanding service awards which were given for the firsttime, the association also gave 68 other volunteers fiveand 10-yearlong-service awards.The association is the single largest group of volunteers in Singaporeproviding direct service to the elderly.Started by the Ministry of Community Development in 1982, it was taken over bythe Lions Clubs of Singapore North, Serangoon Gardens and Stamford last year.It now has 820 volunteers befriending a total of 1,653 elderly people.Mr Shiva Banerjee, the association's chairman, said that there were plans toexpand its programme to reach out to more of the 20,000 lonely elderly livingin Singapore."The people we are serving now are only the tip of the iceberg," he said.On Sunday, in front of a crowd of more than 800 volunteers, Lions Clubmembers, ministry officials and grassroots leaders, Mr Sidek Saniff, SeniorMinister of State for Education and guest of honour at the occasion, praisedthe award recipients.On helping others, Mr Sidek said: "I have always remembered something which myfather told me. When you help people, forget about it. Try to think of whatyou have yet to contribute, of people that you have yet to help. But if peoplehelp you, you remember it until your last breath."If Singaporeans had this kind of value system, then they would become caring,he said.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Retirees to pay only $18 to keep club membershipfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Ahmad OsmanSUCCESSFUL PROTESTRETIREES in the Civil Service Club will continue to pay an annual fee of only$18 if they do not want to use its facilities with their families.Those who opt for free supplementary membership for their spouses and up tothree unmarried children between 12 and 21 years old have to pay more from Jan1 next year.The amount is $6 per month or $72 annually for those who used to work inDivisions One, Two and Three in the public sector.It will remain at $3 every month or $36 each year for former Division Fourofficers.There is a one-time administrative charge of only $10 for each supplementarycard for a family member under the two-tier ordinary membership schemestarting next year.The new option was offered to all 1,846 retirees by the club general manager,Mr Chan Foon Chee, last Saturday.He told them last month that they would lose their membership if they did notjoin the scheme offering a package "which could not be obtained anywhere".It was meant to boost the club's membership of 9,895 and attract more membersto use facilities in three clubhouses which were under-utilised on weekdays.Some retirees protested that the scheme would force those who could not affordthe new fees to leave the club.They also complained that it was unfair to make them pay more when the annualfees would be halved to $72 for Division One officers.The Government Pensioners' Association, Singapore, wrote two letters urgingthe club to allow retirees drawing small monthly pensions to continue paying$18 per year.They should not be deprived of "the only affordable club available to us",association secretary Thampoo Panjacharam said.He noted that the cut in the fees for those in the higher divisional statusshowed that the club was concerned about the need to recruit such people asmembers.These officers, he argued, would be able to pay the fees even after theyretired because of their enhanced pensions."Many of us who retired prior to Jan 1, 1982, are not that lucky," he wrote toMr Chan last week."It is this group of pensioners who need succour in such things as socialactivities and entertainment," he said.He said later that the option was welcomed by retirees who did not go to theclub regularly and did not need the family package.These people, he added, should be allowed to continue paying the $18 annualfee for themselves.Two retirees said they would become ordinary members as the fees from nextyear were cheap."I do not mind paying $6 every month. It is very cheap," said Mr O.Y. Chan, aretired police superintendent.Said Mr Wong Keng Pun, a retired senior Customs superintendent: "Thefacilities offered by the club are comparable to those in other clubs. Mythree children are all above 21 years, but my wife will benefit from the newscheme."Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Polly wants a letter, Polly wants a letterfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Braema MathiSchool's English project lets pupils' voices be heardFOUR Primary 5 pupils, who wrote to the school newsletter as part of anEnglish project, ended up improving not just their language skills, but alsothe life of a schoolmate.Their suggestion, that a ramp be built to help a mother who carried herdisabled daughter up some steps to her class every day, was taken up by theschool.Shuqun Primary also replaced the harsh ringing of the school bell with amusical chime, acting on a suggestion from another pupil.The pupils have been dropping these suggestions into a letter-box at the feetof a cardboard cut-out of a parrot called Chatterbox.Eight teachers compile the letters, jokes, riddles, essays and poems for anewsletter called Chat-a-Away, which is distributed throughout the schoolevery term.The newsletter is part of the school's English project called Joy-Write. Itwas introduced in 1992 to help the school's 1,900 pupils improve their writingskills.Principal Wong Chwee Neo said the main aim of the project was to publishchildren's work. The idea of having an audience, she said, was an incentivefor the children to write.Madam Wong presented the English project at the 11th Sharing of Experiencesfor primary school principals on Saturday. The session was organised by thePrimary School Professional Committee.In an interview yesterday, Madam Wong said: "The children can express theirfeelings this way and we have come to know them better."Chat-a-Way is now seen as being part of the school identity."The school receives an average of 120 letters a term, or about five per class.In them, children ask for advice on school matters such as managing theirstudies and also on personal issues such as coping with parents who seem tofavour one child over another.One child wrote to say that the school should look for a mate for the lonelyrabbit in the school's eco-garden, while another asked for help as her fatherwanted to throw out five cats.Miss Bong Mui Yoke, 33, the teacher in charge of the newsletter, said theteachers edited the grammar but not the content of the children'scontributions. They also wrote the replies and occasionally took on the roleof an agony aunt.Miss Bong said: "It is a lot of work but it is a great chance for pupils tospeak their minds."They will speak up once they know that there is an audience. Even if it isthe teachers who read it when the work doesn't get published."Besides the newsletter, the pupils' works are published in class magazines,the school publications and personal files.After the final-year examinations, about 40 pupils function as an editorialteam to publish their class magazines.All these efforts, said Madam Wong, have helped to improve the Englishresults.At the Primary School Leaving Examinations, the number of A*/A grades has beenclimbing, from about 30 per cent in 1993 to 46 per cent in 1995.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Woman living alone found murderedfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Jasbir SinghA WOMAN was found dead in her Ang Mo Kio flat on Friday night in a case whichthe police have classified as murder.Madam Karamjeet Kaur, 52, was discovered by her 22-year-old daughter, studentnurse Kavita Pal Kaur, lying on the kitchen floor of her three-room flat ataround 11 pm.She had deep cuts on her forehead and upper lip.Madam Karamjeet had been living alone after her mother, Madam Harnam Kaur, andMiss Kavita moved out of the Ang Mo Kio flat two months ago.According to Madam Karamjeet's brother, Mr Dhillon J., 42, Miss Kavita visitedthe flat that day because she felt that something bad had happened to hermother after receiving a call from her mother's friend.Said Mr Dhillon yesterday: "Normally, my sister would call her good friend,who lives in Kembangan, to chit-chat. But that day she did not."The friend, who wanted to be identified only as Madam J. Kaur, told TheStraits Times: "It was surprising that on Friday she did not call. Even mymaid was surprised. I tried to call her several times that day but nobodypicked up the phone."After trying since morning, I finally told her daughter, Kavita, at around 9pm to check on her mother.""I was worried that she may have had an asthma attack," added the 47-year-oldhousewife."Karamjeet used to call frequently ever since she began to live alone over thelast two months," she said.The two women have been close friends since childhood.Miss Kavita's uncle, Mr Mehinder S., 44, said: "She told me that when shearrived at the flat she found the iron gate unlocked. But the main door wasstill securely fastened."When she entered the flat she found the whole place ransacked."The telephone was disconnected and she found her mother's body lying on thekitchen floor."Mr Mehinder is another brother of Madam Karamjeet.Miss Kavita immediately called the ambulance. Her mother was pronounced deadby the ambulance team around 11.30 pm.Police are investigating.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Man posed as cop and tried to extort moneyfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96Column:  In The CourtsA MAN who posed as a police officer was sentenced yesterday to two years' jailand given four strokes of the cane for attempted extortion.District Judge F.G. Remedios heard that Mr Rejak, a construction carpenter,approached Tan Ah Chong, 25, on March 31 and asked for directions. Tan claimedto be a police officer and told him to go to a nearby void deck.There he took Mr Rejak's wallet and also demanded money.He became angry when he found out that Mr Rejak had no money.He then took his watch.He also told the construction carpenter to get $200 from his quarters inexchange for his work permit, which Tan had taken.When a policeman on patrol duty arrived at the scene, Mr Rejak told him whathad happened.The policeman arrested Tan after finding Mr Rejak's watch on him.Tan has five previous convictions for theft, drug consumption, possession ofoffensive weapons and fraudulent possession of property.The maximum punishment for extortion is five years' jail and caning.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 199686-year-old man sues daughter for return of Tiong Bahru shopfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96Column:  In The CourtsBy Elena ChongAN 86-YEAR-OLD man is suing his daughter for the return of a shop in Kim TianRoad which she said was a gift to her.Mr Cheng Buck Qui, a former provision shop owner, said in his statement ofclaim that he was influenced by his daughter, Madam Cheng Muay alias Cheng LeeWeng, 54, a housewife, into signing a letter of instruction to a lawyer totransfer the property to her in June 1990.A month later, he also signed another document for the property to betransfered to her for $420,000.But it is his case that no money was paid. Neither had he given the shop toher as a gift.Opening Mr Cheng's case yesterday, counsel Tay San Lee told JudicialCommissioner Lim Teong Qwee that when his client signed the documents, he didnot have the benefit of independent legal advice, or knew what he was signing.Mr Cheng had a severe hearing impairment, and was illiterate.Mr Tay said it was not disputed that his client and his late wife, Madam KooBeng Eng, bought the property in 1962 for $36,000.It was mortgaged to a bank in 1968 to get overdraft facilities for Mr Cheng.In January 1990, 2-1/2 years after Madam Koo's death, Madam Cheng paid $20,000to discharge the mortgage on the property.In June and July 1990, she and her father went to the office of Messrs PeterMowe & Partners to sign the papers relating to the transfer of the Kim TianRoad property, which is off Tiong Bahru Road.Mr Cheng is seeking a declaration that the transfer be set aside due to theundue influence of Madam Cheng, who has denied this.Madam Cheng's case is that her father had intended to transfer the property toher as a gift, and that the letter that he signed was based on hisinstructions to the lawyer.Cross-examined by Madam Cheng's lawyer, Mr Chandra Mohan, Mr Cheng's adoptedson, 47-year-old cabby Cheng Liang Choon, denied that he had instigated hisfather to bring the action against Madam Cheng.Mr Chandra Mohan had suggested that Liang Choon had hoped that Madam Chengwould offer some money to her father who would then hand it over to him.Asked why his father wanted to mortgage the property to obtain a loan, LiangChoon said his father had no money and wanted to help him as he was indebted.He said he had stopped his pork rib soup business since end-1994 to look afterhis father.Liang Choon, who obtained a taxi licence four months ago, admitted that he hadlost more than $1 million betting on horses, and that his father used to payhis gambling debts.Asked how much his present gambling debts were, he answered that they wereabout $100,000.The hearing continues.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Being good hosts a decisive factorfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96Tourism awards THIS year's annual tourism award winners will be people who provide more thanservice with a smile.The winners of these coveted Singapore Tourist Promotion Board (STPB) awards,to be given on Friday, must be good hosts to tourists too.The best salesgirl, waiter, tour guide, hotel receptionist and taxi driverwill be judged on product knowledge, attitude and how well they communicatewith customers.The change in focus meshes with STPB's strategy to give visitors a memorableexperience. This is part of Tourism 21, a blueprint for the industry'sdevelopment.The titles have also been changed to reflect the new concept. So the RetailSales Assistant of the Year of previous years will become Tourism Host of theYear -Retail. There will be Tourism Hosts of the Year for Taxis, Tour Guiding,Restaurant, Hotel, Travel Agency and Leisure Attraction.Awards will be given for Outstanding Contribution to Tourism and to a TourismEntrepreneur of the Year and Convention of the Year.Finalists in the awards to organisations that excel are:* Hotel of the Year: Hyatt Regency Singapore, Four Seasons and Shangri-La.* Best dining experience: Aziza's Restaurant, Chang Jiang Shanghai Restaurant(at Goodwood Hotel), and J.P. Bastiani Mediterranean Bar & Restaurant.* Best shopping experience -shopping centre: Forum the Shopping Mall, ParcoBugis Junction and Tanglin Mall.* Best shopping experience -retail outlet: Giordano Originals, Robinson & Coand The Athlete's Foot.* Travel agency of the year (inbound): Holiday Tours & Travel and TradewindsTours & Travel.* Travel agency of the Year (outbound): Chan Brothers and Ken-Air Tours.* Nightspot of the Year: Sparks, Zouk and Hard Rock Cafe.* Leisure attraction of the Year: Jurong BirdPark, Night Safari and SingaporeZoological Gardens.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996A fine example: At least a third of regular volunteers are 30 or younger /Children"s Cancer Foundationfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96* MEDICAL officer Tan Hiang Khoon was only 25 years old when, in the course ofhis volunteer work with chronically ill children, he heard that parents withcancer-stricken children had voiced the need for a support group.Dr Tan, then a houseman, decided to rope in six other young volunteers to helpmeet this need. This was five years ago.Since then, the welfare group they set up -Working in Aid of Leukaemic Kids,now known as the Children's Cancer Foundation -has grown from strength tostrength.Dr Tan, now 29 and chairman of the foundation's management committee, said thefoundation served 195 families, compared to only 30 then.Where previously there were only five volunteer counsellors who worked on anad-hoc basis, there are now four full-time social workers and another 15volunteer counsellors.Recalling the difficult times then, Dr Tan said: "We had no money, and nocredibility. As a young organisation, it was difficult to convince people todonate money."The programmes, he said, were also far from satisfactory.Counselling services were run completely by volunteers who also had to copewith their full-time jobs. He said: "The counsellors' main job then was tooffer a listening ear. More serious problems were referred to relevantagencies."Now, apart from counselling services and social outings for parents andchildren, the foundation also organises parent support groups, workshops andseminars, and provides financial assistance to families to help bear the costsof chemotherapy.Despite his busy work schedule, he still manages to spend an average of fivehours a week working for the foundation.He said: "Once you get into the system, it becomes a part of your life and apart of you. I don't feel as if I have to give up other things in my life todo this work."Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996At least a third of regular volunteers are 30 or younger: A fine examplefrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Julie KeeIs the post-65 generation concerned only with chasing the five Cs? Recently,Associate Professor Ho Peng Kee, Senior Parliamentary Secretary for Law andHome Affairs, cited the 1990 census report, which found that a higherproportion of teenagers volunteer for community service than any other agegroup. Professor Tommy Koh, Ambassador at Large, also said many were willingto give up their time to help others. Julie Kee checked the volunteer profileof seven welfare bodies, and spoke to one young volunteer who helped set up acharity organisation in his spare time.Not all young people are materialistic, say welfare groupsNOT all young people are materialistic and concerned only with chasing thefive Cs, said staff members of seven welfare groups The Straits Timesinterviewed.At least one out of three people who volunteer their services regularly atthese welfare bodies are 30 years old or younger -born after 1965.And in one case, the proportion even goes up to four in five.This makes them an important manpower resource in a field that is highlydependent on volunteers, they said.The post-65 generation forms 47 per cent of Singapore's population, and thenumber is estimated at 1.42 million.The National Council of Social Service, which categorises its volunteers bytheir occupations, said that this year, 33.7 per cent of the people who signedup for its volunteer placement programme were students.Another 55.1 per cent were working adults and professionals, while housewivesformed 10.7 per cent, and retirees made up 0.5 per cent.The council found that despite their youth, young volunteers did not restrictthemselves to any particular type of community work.Ms Theresa Lee, divisional manager of the council's Volunteer Action andDevelopment Centre, said: "Students generally want to volunteer to work withchildren and young people."However, we do see a growing interest by students towards working with theelderly and the disabled."In the Movement for the Intellectually Disabled in Singapore, (Minds), youngworking adults below 30 years old make up half the volunteer pool.Mr Aaron Ng, executive director of Minds, said that young volunteers wereimportant because they provided much-needed help in activities which werelabour-intensive.Their role as volunteers, he said, complemented those in the older age groupswho tended to offer managerial expertise.In the Singapore Volunteers Overseas Programme run by the SingaporeInternational Foundation, about one-third of the people who sign up are fromthe post-65 generation.Participants usually take leave of absence or resign from their jobs to serveas volunteers.They are paid a living allowance of about $400 a month and sent to developingcountries such as Indonesia, Nepal, Vietnam, Botswana and Ghana to providehumanitarian and technical assistance.Miss Low Lih Jeng, the programme's assistant director, said: "The spirit ofaltruism comes out very strongly."If these young people did not come forward, it would definitely have affectedthe success of our programme."On whether today's youth were materialistic, she said: "I think a lot of youngpeople want to help but it's a matter of balancing work commitments withvolunteer work."According to Mrs Geri Lau, secretary-general of the Singapore Red CrossSociety, it was not wrong for young people to put a premium on striving hardin their careers and being competitive."This is necessary for a vibrant society," she said.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Troubled Tories hope much from conference: Senior Tory party memberdefectsfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Neville Stack in LondonTHE Conservative Party hopes that its last conference before the generalelection will be a jolt of adrenaline.But even the managers, who usually succeed in keeping the conference runningdemurely along party lines, will be hard put to disguise the faults thatsunder the party from the Cabinet down.Add to that the usual crop of financial-sleaze scandals to set Tory tongueswagging, in private at any rate, and the scenario looks pretty bleak for theconference, which begins in earnest today in Bournemouth with the arrival ofthe Prime Minister.There have been dozens of critical resolutions tabled on the leadership'spolicy over Europe and monetary union. But few will survive the chairman'spruning knife, and whatever criticisms voiced will be tentative.The conference, both on the floor and in the side-show meetings, will bedominated by the issue of Europe and what to do about it.It is the perceived loss of sovereignty which would follow the adoption ofeconomic and monetary union (EMU) that is obsessing Conservatives.Prime Minister John Major, with the support of most of his Cabinet, is keepinghis powder dry prudently (as is opposition leader Tony Blair) and not makingany decisions until he has to. But that does not suit his rebel faction, nowgrown to nearly half his parliamentary and grassroots party.Whipped on by the xenophobic right-wing press, the Europhobes will demand thathe rule out EMU for the life of the next parliament.He will not concede.If he does, his Euro-enthusiast Chancellor (Finance Minister) Kenneth Clarkewill resign and set up his own caucus of the Tory left -and that will splitthe party asunder and lose it all chances at the general election.Mr Clarke, a genial verbal bruiser, has told his friends that he will relishthe chance of a conference confrontation with the party dissidents, one thathis high office precludes in the House of Commons.The Daily Mail's political columnist Simon Heffer is not alone in the media intaking a sour view of the whole affair."In a sensible party, the last conference before an election is used to setout the programme on which that conference will be fought," he wrote. "Intheir highly successful conference at Blackpool, Labour did just that."The party that comes to Bournemouth will be immersed instead in a soup ofintrospection, flavoured with dollops of defeatism, despair and recrimination ... the ideas-free zone that the party has become will disappoint those whowant a new, powerful message to take to the people."The sub-text to all this manoeuvring is: What happens after the election? Thatis the hidden agenda that will dominate the conference.The polls continue to predict that Labour will sweep in, but wiser heads-including Mr Blair's -are not so confident. Tory sheep scurry back to thefold when they scent the Labour wolf.But assuming the Tory death-wish comes true and it loses, Cabinet ministersMichael Portillo and Michael Howard will battle with leadership challengerJohn Redwood for the hearts and wallets of the right.Mr Clarke and deputy Prime Minister Michael Heseltine will line up on theleft, alongside that doughty octogenarian former premier Sir Edward Heath. Butthis disregards, as many unwisely do, the Prime Minister's calibre.Mr Major will point to the rapid improvement in the economy and the standardof living, Britain's many competitive advantages and the fall in unemployment.He will be optimistic about the years ahead. He will be wary of Europe'smachinations but not hostile.He is no charismatic orator, as Tony Blair is. But in his own dogged, steadyway, he is in tune with the millions of similar people in the mythicalconstituency called Middle England.The writer covers European developments and issues for The Straits Times.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Chris Patten"s last hurrahfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96HONGKONG Governor Chris Patten's valedictory address to the LegislativeCouncil (Legco) last week was expectedly dramatic. It was his last annualpolicy address on Hongkong; it was the last any British Governor would makethere; and the forum was no other than the elected Legco, the main point ofcontention between the outgoing colonial authorities and China, to which theterritory will revert next year. Beijing, which says that Mr Patten'selectoral reforms violate the 1984 Sino-British treaty on Hongkong, has vowedto abolish the Legco, elected last year for a four-year term, and replace itwith a provisional chamber. Mr Patten's opposition to the provisionallegislature, and his impassioned defence of the existing one, was summed up inhis question: "How can you have complete faith in the future of the rule oflaw if you worry about the integrity of the institution which makes the laws?"Now, the belief in the need for the rule of law is eminently justified, ofcourse; the problem lies in equating it with Legco's continued existence. Noone would deny the need for an independent judiciary, which protects not onlythe man on the street but also trade and industry, by enforcing contractualand other legal obligations without which a highly-developed economy isimpossible to sustain. The rule of law also ensures the probity of governmentin what is the world's eighth largest trading community. No one would deny theneed for a meritocratic civil service, which administers Hongkong with quiet,predictable efficiency. Were that efficiency to be subordinated toextra-professional considerations, the consequences for the territory's way oflife would be seen ultimately in its economic bottomline as well.Not only is all this true, but also, Beijing knows it as much as the departingauthorities do. But what China knows, and they continue to refuse to accept,is that their political blueprint for the colony, made in the teeth ofBeijing's opposition, is not the sole repository of these safeguards. Thepoint is whether the rule of law prevails; to make it conditional on thecontinuance of Legco will get Hongkong nowhere. As a matter of principle,Beijing is opposed to an institution that rejects the spirit and purpose ofthe 1984 joint accord. As a matter of practice, it is idle to believe thatChina will not carry out its threat to disband Legco. Indeed, the rule of lawexisted in Hongkong before the arrival of the elected council. Why, then,place so much in the care of an institution that was not guaranteed to comeinto existence and which is doomed to fail? What is achieved by saying that asmooth transition in 1997 is not an end in itself, a successful transition, assmooth as possible, being what is necessary? Why rub in the point by layingdown benchmarks by which others will apparently judge Hongkong after 1997?More productive were Mr Patten's reference to the fundamentals of Hongkong'ssuccess -the hard work and skill of its people, its beneficent administrationunder the rule of law, its openness to the world -and his pledge of assistanceto his successor, the Chief Executive-designate, who is expected to be chosenby the end of this year. For Hongkong's enduring qualities to thrive after thehandover, it will need to enjoy economic autonomy. The Chief Executive mustensure, and must be seen to be ensuring, that it does so. To do his job, hemust have China's confidence, because it is this that will give him thewherewithal to stand up for Hongkong when necessary. What is good is that thisco-operation is only to be expected. Hongkong's autonomy is in the interestsof both the territory and China and, indeed, these interests will convergeeven more closely after 1997. This makes it natural for the mainland to letthe territory do business its own way. Hongkong's well-wishers hope that itwill continue on this natural trajectory without political obstacles coming inthe way. Ultimately, its future lies with China.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996S46"s self-dissolution -the final episode in 7-year political adventurefrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Brendan Pereira in Kuala LumpurON SUNDAY, the Parti Melayu Semangat 46 (S46) general assembly createdpolitical history in Malaysia when it became the first party to pass a motionfor self-dissolution.This ended its seven-year adventure in the political landscape and paved theway for its members to rejoin Umno.Despite the brave talk of party leaders and delegates at the special generalassembly of disbanding in a position of strength, facts seem to suggest thatit faced only two choices: Either reunite with the stronger and morewidely-accepted Umno or slide into political oblivion.Consider these facts: In the 1990 general elections, a year after it wasformed, S46's candidates managed to win six Parliamentary seats and 12 stateseats.Five years later, it performed miserably in all states, save for Kelantan,where S46 candidates won 11 seats on the state assembly.Even party president Tengku Razaleigh Hamzah, a Kelantan strongman since the70s, was not spared the swing in votes.He won his Gua Musang parliamentary seat on a reduced majority of 4,746 votes,compared to the 8,980 before.In his speech at the general assembly, deputy president Datuk Rais Yatimrecognised this erosion of support. Speaking to 500 delegates on Sunday, henoted that S46 had spent the last few years trying to oppose Umno.But the party's message and struggle were only effective and accepted inKelantan and a few places on the west coast of Peninsular Malaysia.He said: "From statistics, the two elections gave Umno nearly three millionvotes, 440,000 for PAS and 600,000 for S46."Umno and PAS (Parti Islam) politicians say that the party was headed for aheavy and potentially crippling defeat at the next elections.Said an Umno Youth politician: "The euphoria of starting a new party with acommon enemy was getting weaker. This was evident at branch level where manymembers had seemed to have lost the fire and crossed over to Umno."PAS was even more damning in its assessment of the political survival of itsformer ally in the Angkatan Perpaduan Ummah. Kelantan Mentri Besar Datuk NikAziz Nik Mat, scoffing at S46's chances of denting its hold on the state, toldThe Straits Times: "S46 will be lucky if it can win a few seats in the nextelections. If its candidates fight head-on with PAS candidates, it will haveless than 10 seats in the state assembly."An exaggeration perhaps but observers say that the slightly built religiousteacher was not very far off the mark.They noted that the main problem with the party was that it had lost much ofits relevance. It was born at a time when Malay politics was at its lowestebb.In 1987, Tengku Razaleigh Hamzah challenged Umno president and Prime MinisterDatuk Seri Dr Mahathir Mohamad unsuccessfully for the party president's post.He then took the matter to court on the ground that some delegates who votedwere ineligible.A year later, the High Court declared Umno illegal and the main vehicle ofMalay unity was de-registered. Umno Baru was set up by Dr Mahathir whileTengku Razaleigh formed S46.Against this backdrop, there were accusations of corruption and money politicsbeing hurled by Tengku Razaleigh Hamzah's camp against Dr Mahathir and hissupporters.During this time of great disunity, the S46 filled a vacuum for many formerUmno members who felt that the party had lost its way and was not lookingafter the interests of the Malays.There was also a tremendous feeling of sympathy towards S46 after elder Malaystatesmen such as the late Tunku Abdul Rahman and Tun Hussein Onn wereblacklisted and not allowed to join the new Umno.Two years later, these feelings of anger and frustration turned into protestvotes at the general elections.In Kelantan, the National Front led by Umno tasted its worst defeat, losing inall 39 state and 13 parliamentary seats. More importantly, it gave up controlof the east coast state which it had ruled since 1978.Mr Hassan Harun, an Umno Supreme Council member and a Kelantanese, said: "Whathappened in 1990 was a show of anger and protest by the voters. I do not thinkthat it was because of S46's or PAS' election platform."Following that election, however, things changed. S46 realised that it wasvery much a second-class citizen in the Angkatan Perpaduan Ummah in Kelantan,which it formed with PAS, Berjasa and Hamim.The Islamic party was slowly exerting control over all policies in the state,sometimes with total disregard for its ally.This alienated some S46 leaders such as Datuk Ibrahim Ali, Datin PadukaRahimah Osman, Datuk Harun Idris and Ms Marina Yusof, who left the party.At the same time, under the leadership of Dr Mahathir, the Malaysian economysoared.Double-digit economic growth created jobs and opportunities for everyone. Anew breed of Malay entrepreneurs were created, giving the community immensepride and a larger share of the economy.The feel-good factor was evident among Malaysians who spurned even traditionalopposition parties such as the DAP (Democratic Action Party) and returned theNational Front to power with a large majority.Thorny issues of money politics and corruption within Umno were met head-on byDr Mahathir. Some party members were expelled after being found guilty ofusing money to buy political patronage.The battle to curb this disease is still very alive with Dr Mahathir banningall candidates for the Umno elections this week from campaigning.On Sunday, he told delegates to pick only clean leaders so that the partycould eradicate money politics.Bit by bit, the raison d'etre of S46 was being chipped away, a factacknowledged by Datuk Rais.He noted: "Our issues and the focus of our struggles between 1987 and 1990 isnot given much weight by Malays. The two elections have proven this fact."The change in the environment, the attitude and economic values have played arole. Economic change has played the main role in changing the view andstruggle of Malays and Malaysians."Tengku Razaleigh was even more frank. He said: "The reality that Umno isstrong and accepted by the public has to be accepted."But factors beyond the party's control were only one dimension of the slide inthe party's fortunes. It also suffered from an image problem.Many of the party' stalwarts were former Umno members who had held federalministers' posts. These included Tengku Razaleigh, Datuk Rais and Datuk MananOsman.They were not in the mould of Mr Lim Kit Siang or Mr Karpal Singh and couldnot galvanise the opposition or gain wide acceptance as members of theopposite bench.In the end, they were neither seen as a National Front party nor as aneffective opposition.Its stand on the powers of the Malay rulers also alienated a number of itssupporters and the public. When there was a groundswell of feeling against theexcesses of the sultans and when the federal government moved to passlegislation removing their legal immunity, S46 did not support the motion.The party stated that the special role of the Malay rulers was important toprotect the rights of the Malays and Islam. However, there was talk that therejection of the legislation had more to do with Tengku Razaleigh's closelinks to the Kelantan Palace.The final nail in the coffin was its poor choice of political allies, rangingfrom DAP to PAS.Neither of these parties shared its political goal: to be in the forefront ofMalay nationalism. In fact, PAS eschews nationalism in any form. It regards itas assabiyah, a form of racism.Not surprisingly, S46 fell out with its allies. In Kelantan, it was notconsulted on many issues and made to look incompetent.This year, the PAS-led government decided that all eating shops should bebarred from opening before 3 pm. This did not go down so well with non-Malayshopkeepers.Even decisions to ban wayang kulit, carnival rides and unisex hair salons werenot taken in consultation with S46 leaders.The unpopularity of some of these decisions cost S46 candidates a huge chunkof non-Malay votes in the 1995 elections.Worse still, its threats to leave the Angkatan Perpaduan Ummah were laughedoff by PAS.Said Mr Wan Ismail Wan Jusoh, press secretary to the Mentri Besar, Datuk NikAziz: "We do not bow to threats. They were a party on the way down, losingsupport on the ground every day."Seeing the writing on the wall, the leaders decided to dissolve the party andreunite with Umno.As Tengku Razaleigh noted: "The party is only a tool to serve and achieve ahigher objective, that is to realise the goals of religion, the race and thenation."Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Committee to allay fears: Internet advisory panel to help fine-tune rules /National Internet Advisory Committeefrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96INTERNET PRIVACYTHE legal sub-committee of the National Internet Advisory Committee willdiscuss the issue of privacy in cyberspace, said its chairman Lee Seiu Kin ofthe Attorney-General's Chambers.After a recent case in which a man was fined $61,500 for downloading smut offthe Internet, some Internet users here were concerned that they were beingtracked.This was despite assurances by the Singapore Broadcasting Authority thatindividuals' movements on the Internet were not being monitored.Mr Lee said: "If many people feel this way, then this will not be good for thedevelopment of the Net so we want to look at how we can allay these concerns."The deputy director of the AG's Chambers civil and international affairsdivisions said he was in the process of forming the team.He said it was likely that the legal sub-group would include members fromoutside the main committee, who would provide a good balance of ideas.An avid surfer himself, he often combs the World Wide Web for four or fivehours a night, "to get an idea of what is out there". He also makes use of theInternet, especially e-mail, in his daily legal work.He made it clear that he saw the need for some amount of Internet regulation.He revealed that, at its first meeting a week ago, the committee was shownsome of the pornographic web sites which have been blocked under SBA contentguidelines. He said quite simply: "I wouldn't want my children to see that."Nonetheless, like his fellow committee members, he sees the Internet as apotent force to be taken advantage of.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Internet advisory panel to help fine-tune rules / National InternetAdvisory Committee, Singapore Broadcastingfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Raoul Le BlondAuthority, SBACopyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Committee to allay fearsfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Raoul Le BlondTHE new National Internet Advisory Committee (NIAC) will look into issues suchas privacy in cyberspace and promote the use of Internet services such aselectronic mail.It will also help to fine-tune Singapore Broadcasting Authority (SBA) rulesfor the Internet here.The NIAC chairman, Associate Professor Bernard Tan, sketched its directions ata press conference yesterday.He said the 19-member group, appointed by the Ministry of Information and theArts (Mita) recently for a two-year term, had held its first meeting a weekago.The body will look at information provided on the Internet, as well aselectronic bulletin boards.It will advise the SBA on Internet rules, but would not be involved in theday-to-day policing, he said.The rules are aimed at keeping out objectionable content, such as pornographyand politically inflammatory material.The NIAC will look at the ways Internet usage is affected by the rules, andwhether there is a need to fine-tune them."The SBA regulations are not cast in stone," he said. But he stressed that hiscommittee could only make recommendations.Prof Tan, who is also the dean of the National University of Singapore'sScience faculty, said that three sub-committees had been formed.These would gather feedback on users' concerns, and come up with ways toeducate the public on the Internet.The sub-groups are the:* Legal sub-committee headed by Mr Lee Seiu Kin, senior state counsel anddeputy head (civil division) and (international affairs division),Attorney-General's Chambers;* Industry sub-committee headed by Mr Johnny Moo, group managing director ofComputer Systems Advisors Group;* Public education subcommittee, led by Mr Tan Yap Kwang, director of theEducation Ministry's planning division.One of the first areas the NIAC will study is the effect that proxy serversare having on Internet access here.Proxy servers are devices, installed in computer networks, which speed upaccess to often-accessed Web pages.They are also used here to block sites which the SBA deems objectionable.Since Sept 15, Internet Access Service Providers here have required publicsubscribers to use proxy servers, prompting some users to complain aboutslower access.Another area that the NIAC would study is promoting the wider use of Internetservices.Prof Tan said: "While a lot of attention has been focused on the use of theWorld Wide Web, we want to encourage the use of electronic mail among thewider population."He added that the committee would also work to heighten the public's awarenessabout the Internet and its potential.With its members coming from a broad range of professions -the law, governmentbodies, schools and industry -the committee was well-placed to gatherfeedback, he said.There are about 100,000 Internet subscribers here. But equally important werethe views of those who do not use the Internet regularly, such as parents ofchildren who are avid surfers.He said much of the discussion about the Internet was misinformed, and thatthe committee would work to correct this.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996SM Lee, Major hold "very friendly" meeting: Singapore model comes as apackage -take it or leave itfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Neville Stack in LondonSENIOR Minister Lee Kuan Yew called on British Prime Minister John Major atNumber 10, Downing Street, yesterday.Mr Major had returned on Saturday from the European Summit in Dublin and waspreparing to leave for the crucial Conservative Party conference inBournemouth."Mr Major made great efforts to meet Senior Minister Lee," a diplomatic sourcesaid.The Straits Times understands that Mr Major was working on the keynote speechthat he will deliver at the Tory conference."The meeting was very friendly and constructive and it centred on the growthof opportunity in the Asia-Pacific region," said a Downing Street source."They discussed opportunities for Singapore-British trade."Mr Lee later met the British Deputy Prime Minister Michael Heseltine, formerpresident of the Board of Trade.And he spoke at a private luncheon of the influential Chairmen's Club at theBerkeley Hotel.Mr Lee, who is on a private visit to England, invited Mr Tony Blair, leader ofthe opposition Labour Party, to dinner last night.Today, Mr Lee will give a talk at Asia House, a forum for economic, commercialand cultural activities linking Asia and Europe.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Let people know what ingredients go into foodfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96I REFER to the letter "McDonald's should say how food is cooked" (ST, Aug 28).I was shocked to learn that beef extract is used for french fries and hashbrowns. I am surprised that McDonald's has not responded to date.Do other fast-food outlets also use beef extract in their cooked food? I alsounderstand that most cheese contains beef.Consumers who do not eat beef for religious or health reasons are not aware ofthis. They should be told what ingredients go into foodstuff.V. RAJAMCopyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 19965-day week won"t be standard practice in Civil Servicefrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96MS JENNI HO, in her letter "Benefits in shorter work week" (ST, Sept 27),suggested that Government should take the lead in implementing a five-day weekfor civil servants.The Prime Minister, in response to a question on a five-day week at a forum inApril this year, stated that "... this should be left to the market to decideand that the Government would not set the tone by allowing the Civil Service afive-day week and encouraging other employers to do so".Statistics from the Ministry of Labour show that two-thirds of private-sectororganisations work a 5.5-day week or even longer. The table (right) gives the1995 work-week figures for clerical, sales, service, production and relatedemployees.The Civil Service will not adopt a five-day work-week as a standing practice.But ministries may adopt flexible work-week arrangements where this willimprove the level of service to the public.For example, the Inland Revenue Authority of Singapore has extended itsservice hours to full-day operation on Saturdays. The roster for the six-dayservice is such that counter officers work five days a week, includingalternate Saturdays.Many supervisors turn up for work every Saturday as their staff are on duty.MISS CHOONG KET CHE Public Affairs Manager Prime Minister's Office PublicService DivisionCopyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Give clear reply on cyclists" behaviourfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96THE reply from the Land Transport Authority (ST, Oct 4) in response toreaders' views on the irresponsible road behaviour of cyclists on our roads islame, to say the least.It ignores the concerns of many road users, who wonder whether cyclists haveto follow traffic regulations or not. Is the number of accidents involvingcyclists not high enough yet for a proper response?Ignorance of traffic regulations among cyclists is so prevalent that it is notuncommon to see Neighbourhood Police Post members making their rounds at nightwithout a lamp on their bicycles or riding two abreast!As cyclists tend to ride along pedestrian footpaths and pedestrian crossings,would the LTA please give a clear and unequivocal reply?RICHARD HO KONG FATTCopyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Police will take action against reckless cyclistsfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96WE WOULD like to thank the writers of the letters "Cyclists here seem to defyrules and safety" (ST, Sept 27), "Make safe cycling easier" and "Most cyclesare not fitted with bells" (ST, Sept 30) for their feedback.In our news release on the accident situation for the first half of this year,we raised our concern over cyclists, particularly cyclists who are recklessand behave irresponsibly on the roads.We take a serious view of such conduct and will not hesitate to take actionagainst them.The Road Traffic (Bicycles) Rules require, for example, that all bicyclesshould have a front lamp and a rear red light or reflector during hours ofdarkness.They also require that bicycles must be ridden in an orderly manner and withdue regard for the safety of others. Action has always been taken againstcyclists who flout these rules.As for the suggestion to educate cyclists, the Traffic Police have, since1981, trained primary schoolchildren on safe cycling at the Road Safety Parkat the East Coast Parkway.Some 10,000 schoolchildren who attend these programmes each year are taught,among other things, to obey signals and signs to ride safely, and to put onproper riding attire. The students also play a traffic game simulating roadsituations and are given "demerit points" if they fail to comply with thetraffic rules.Road safety talks are conducted at schools, community clubs and othergrassroots organisations. We will continue to place emphasis on education andexplore new ways to undertake this.The Traffic Police are monitoring closely the accident rate involving cyclistsand will continue with their enforcement action. In the meantime, we wouldlike to remind all cyclists to keep to the traffic laws for their own safety,as well as that of other road-users.JOHN CHANG Head Media Relations Public Affairs Department Singapore PoliceForceCopyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Exempt some donations entirely from estate dutyfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96I REFER to your articles (ST, Oct 4) on Mr C.J. Koh's donation of $2 millionto the Universities Endowment Fund.Although it has been well publicised that the donation is tax-deductible, Iwonder if it is equally well known that such donations would not be exemptfrom estate duty if the gift was made during the donor's lifetime unless hesurvives for one year after the time of the gift (in the case of a gift to apublic or charitable institution).Otherwise, the money donated is deemed under the law to still belong to thedonor at the time of his death, and estate duty is chargeable accordingly.For gifts to non-public or non-charitable institutions, the time frame is fiveyears.Under the Estate Duty Act, estate duty is not payable only for gifts of moneyto the National Museum; other than that only bequests to five institutions areexempt from duty. The National University of Singapore is one of the five,although strangely enough, the Nanyang Technological University is not.The term "bequest" means that it must be a gift under a will, to be givenafter death. Hence gifts during the lifetime of the donor are not exempt.Therefore, the donor's estate would be liable for estate duty if the donordies within the year!Fortunately (or unfortunately, depending on how you look at it), it isprovided that estate duty could be recovered from the recipient of the gift.In the case of a gift to a charity, it seems to me that it defeats the purposeof the gift if the recipient is required to pay the estate duty.This leads me to wonder whether the Estate Duty Act should be amended toexempt totally from estate duty gifts to any public or charitable institutionregardless of when the gifts were made. A bolder move could be to abolishestate duty altogether as Malaysia did several years ago.Perhaps this could spur more donations and help the Universities EndowmentFund meet its $1 billion target more easily and quickly as the Fund will nothave to wait till the demise of donors before getting the donations.GOH KOK YEOWCopyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996GRCs : Amendment Bill may be unconstitutionalfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96ARTICLE 12 (2) of the Republic of Singapore Constitution provides that "exceptas expressly authorised by this Constitution, there shall be no discriminationagainst citizens of Singapore on the ground only of religion, race, descent orplace of birth in any law or in the appointment to any office or employmentunder a public authority ..."This provision is in fact qualified by Article 39A which provides that GRCsmay be formed "in order to ensure the representation in Parliament of membersfrom the Malay, Indian and other minority communities ..."Another qualification to this is to be found in Article 152(1) which providesthat "it shall be the responsibility of the Government constantly to care forthe interests of the racial and religious minorities in Singapore".These are all very sound rules to ensure that no one particular majority willever come to oppress the minorities in Singapore.When Mr Lim Boon Heng, Minister without Portfolio, put forward the GRCproposal in 1987, its objective clearly was to give effect to the Government'sduty to protect minority interests in Singapore.It was a laudable effort and a sound attempt to maintain the racial andreligious harmony in the country.However, when the Prime Minister decided recently to introduce an AmendmentBill (which would become an Act of Parliament or "law" if passed by Parliamentand assented to by the President) to Article 39A, the manifest intention wasto facilitate the institutionalisation of community development councils.It is this novel rationale that may result in the constitutionality of theAmendment Bill being suspect.This issue must be examined carefully prior to the General Election, for itcarries with it serious consequences. Article 4 of our Constitution statesclearly that any "law" which is inconsistent with the Constitution is void.Prima facie, the GRC concept goes against the equality of race principleembodied in Article 12(2). The only reason the GRC scheme exists, since itsintroduction in 1987, is that the GRC concept seeks to protect the minorityinterest (as empowered by Articles 39A and 152(1) respectively). This, as Ipointed out, is of course desirable and legitimate. However, can the samenoble aspirations be ascribed to the recently proposed Amendment Bill?The Prime Minister's Amendment Bill seeks to decrease the minorityrepresentation in the GRCs from one-quarter to one-sixth. Can this Bill everbe described sensibly as "to care for the interests of the racial andreligious minorities" under Article 152(1)?Similarly, since the Prime Minister has already stated openly that the Billwas introduced to create the necessary critical mass for the CDCs to work, canthis rationale be described sensibly as "in order to ensure the representationin Parliament of members from the Malay, Indian and other minoritycommunities" under Article 39A?If the answers to the above two questions are "no", this Amendment Bill -evenif passed by Parliament -will be struck down by the courts as void for beingunconstitutional. It will certainly be a prima facie contravention of the"equality of races" principle embodied in Article 12.It will similarly be outside the scope of either Article 39A or Article152(1), and will therefore remain void since it does not appear to be anexceptional case sanctioned by Article 39A or Article 152(1).The only way to preserve the GRCs' legitimacy is to maintain the presentrationale to protect minority interests without any other extraneousconsiderations concerning the CDCs. Consequential to this, the number of MPsin each GRC should not be increased, otherwise the proportion of minority MPswould decrease, thus derogating from the original objective of Article 39A.I may be wrong in my assessment of the legality/constitutionality of thisBill, but I beg the Prime Minister's indulgence in re-examining it carefullyin order to avoid any unnecessary quagmire. The nation's stability might wellbe at stake should Parliament be forced to dissolve as a result.KELRY LOI CHIT FAICopyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Bourse fails to rally on back of Wall Street gains: Dow breaches 6,000 forfirst time in early tradingfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96Column:  Market ReportBy Tan Li EngTHE expected firming of the Singapore bourse on the back of strong Wall Streetgains last Friday failed to materialise, as the benchmark Straits TimesIndustrials Index sank 22.2 points to 2,126.66.Dealers attributed the bearishness to sustained underweighting activity andpoor sentiment."The climb in the Dow is not to our advantage because more money will bepoured into the US market rather than the Asian markets, said a dealer with aforeign brokerage. "Most of the liquidity will be sucked out to the USmarket."Even market newcomer Easyknit International Holdings was not spared theadverse sentiment, suffering the ignominy of becoming the second offering todebut below its offer price in a week.Shares in the Hongkong-based garment manufacturer dropped 5 per cent below itsinitial public offer price. It dipped as low as HK$2.60 in intra-day trading,with 1.74 million shares changing hands, before closing at HK$2.90.On Friday, Pacific Andes (Holdings) shares fell 6 per cent below its offerprice of 57 US cents. Yesterday, it continued to drift further, ending threecents down at 50.5 US cents.Property stocks as a whole also fell, with the SES Properties Index tumbling12.02 points to 644.59.News that third quarter private property transactions plunged by 75 per centfrom the previous quarter and comments by Minister for National DevelopmentLim Hng Kiang that property prices would "adjust downward" over the next sixmonths further eroded sentiment, said dealers.City Developments dropped 40 cents to $10.80 on 1.2 million shares traded,Wing Tai fell two cents to $3.42 on 2.4 million shares, while DBS Land eased10 cents to $4.52 on 1.3 million shares.Singapore Telecommunications was down 10 cents to $3.10, its lowest level innearly three weeks.The dismal trading story repeated itself across the causeway, as the benchmarkKuala Lumpur Composite Index fell 1.68 points to 1,148.5. The Second Boardindex fell 12.27 points, or 2.1 per cent, to 558.97."The 12-point drop on the Second Board may have caused quite a bit of jitterson the Malaysian side," said a remisier.But over-the-counter stocks dominated volumes and gainers here and the UOB-OTCindex closed up 2.89 points at 1,191.82.MBf Holdings topped the turnover list, rising two cents to 62.5 cents on 3.44million shares. Technology Resources Industries Bhd was the top gainer,soaring 32 cents to $4.02.Volume was 77.6 million shares worth $229.2 million compared to 92.04 millionunits worth $216.48 million last Friday. Losers swamped gainers 221 to 93,with 249 stocks unchanged. -TAN LI ENG.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996August manufacturing output dwindles 7.6%from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96SINGAPORE'S manufacturing output shrank 7.6 per cent in August, with thecritical electronics industry recording a 5.1 per cent fall in output from ayear ago."The output of chemicals (including pharmaceuticals, petrochemical andspecialty chemicals), transport equipment, plastic products and petroleumindustries also declined," the Economic Development Board (EDB) saidyesterday.Only industrial chemicals and gases and electrical machinery did not sufferfalls in output during the month, according to the EDB's industrial productionindex. The sectors grew 2.7 per cent and 0.8 per cent respectively.Cumulative manufacturing output for the first eight months of this year grew6.4 per cent year-on-year, the board said, with cumulative electronics outputgrowth of 12.6 per cent.The poorest performers were the paints and pharmaceuticals and transportequipment sectors, whose output fell 24.6 per cent and 18.5 per centrespectively.Output of plastic products and fabricated metal products slowed in line withthe decline in the electronics industry, falling 15.5 per cent and 7.2 percent respectively.The petroleum industry's output fell 9.2 per cent "due to lower output by amajor refinery which experienced technical start-up problems after itsshutdown for maintenance in July".The printing and publishing industry declined 3.7 per cent because of reducedorders from the commercial print media.The poor manufacturing output figures had been anticipated after August'sworse-than-expected 6.3 per cent fall in non-oil domestic exports.Commenting on those numbers two weeks ago, Trade and Industry Minister YeoCheow Tong said the Singapore economy was "on track" to achieve the 7 to 8 percent economic growth forecast for this year.He added that, based on feedback from industry, the Government expected to seesome recovery in the electronics sector in the first six months of next year.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Slower property investment sales in third quarterfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Kalpana RashiwalaBut sales so far this year hit record $9bPROPERTY investment sales in the third quarter slowed 17 per cent from thepreceding three months, due mainly to slower sales of land for residentialdevelopment, particularly in the private sector.Nonetheless, investment sales for the first nine months of this year reached$9.3 billion -exceeding the record $7.7 billion chalked up for the whole oflast year, according to Jones Lang Wootton (JLW) figures.Investment sales of property refer to purchases of development sites and enbloc sales, not single units bought by consumers. They are used as a gauge ofdevelopers' confidence in the mediumto long-term prospects of the propertymarket.Total investment sales fell in the July-September period to $2.5 billion -from$2.9 billion in the second quarter and $3.9 billion in the first quarter.The third quarter saw lower proceeds from sales of residential developmentsites -by both the state and private sector. The combined figure for the thirdquarter was $1.2 billion, down 30 per cent from $1.7 billion in the secondquarter and a heftier 43 per cent from $2.1 billion during January to Marchthis year.Government sales of housing plots in the third quarter totalled $731 million-compared with $837 million and $1.6 billion in the second and first quartersrespectively.Sales of private development sites -which include en bloc or collective salesof apartments with redevelopment potential -came off even more dramatically inthe third quarter, falling 46 per cent to $470 million from the secondquarter's $881 million. However, the figure was not far off the $488 millionin the first quarter."Sales of residential development sites still contributed 49 per cent tooverall investment sales for the quarter," noted JLW executive director StevenChoo.However, this was lower than 54.7 per cent and 58.3 per cent for the first andsecond quarters respectively.Analysts had expected the drop in investment sales of residential plots,particularly in the private sector.Said UBS Securities senior research analyst Soon Ching Voon: "Since themid-May property curbs were introduced, there had been many land tenders,mostly en bloc sales, for which results have not been announced, includingproperties in the Dunearn and Upper Thomson areas."It probably means that the owners found the bids below their reserve prices,or perhaps for some of the sites, no bids may have been received."Developers have become cautious." Analysts said the drop in sales ofgovernment residential sites had more to do with the timing of the sales.They noted that on the whole, the Government had been committed to increasingresidential land supply."However, tender prices have come off about 10-15 per cent since the propertycurbs," noted Mr Soon.There was a pick-up in sales of en bloc commercial properties in the thirdquarter.The Promenade along Orchard Road and Cockpit Hotel together with an adjoiningsite changed hands last month for nearly $271 million and $380 millionrespectively.Dr Choo noted that several freehold bungalow and condominium sites, such asCity Mansions at Paterson Road, had been put on the market."Paradoxically, the current softer sentiment may help to make deals as bothbuyers and sellers are more realistic about their expectations," he said.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996GE Life sales agents protest against plan to cut commission / Great EasternLifefrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96THE guild representing Great Eastern Life's sales representatives yesterdayspoke out against proposed cuts in their commissions.Mr Mohd Amin, president of the GE Life Sales Representatives' Guild, told apress conference: "It is a short-sighted policy to cut where it is easiest tocut. It's killing the goose that lays the golden egg."GE Life decided last month to reduce commissions for its 4,700 agents by anaverage of 20 per cent from Jan 1 due to declining investment income.Set against a competitive marketplace and low interest rates, the options opento the management were cutting costs and raising returns on investments.GE Life said in a rebuttal yesterday that the commission changes wereimplemented so that its product cost structure will be in line with that ofthe industry."Given the long-term nature of the life insurance investment, the companyneeds to take prudent measures to safeguard the long-term interests ofpolicy-holders," it said.The company also needs to ensure that its investment yield will be consistentwith the industry's long-term performance. It is hiring a chief investmentofficer to oversee its investments.Mr Amin said it was no fault of the agents that investment yields had beenbelow the industry average. Yet, the agents had to bear the brunt of reducedremuneration. "We hope they will rethink the firm's overall strategy and nottreat us as scapegoats," he added.Guild member Mervyn Goh pointed out that the company had been able to sustaincommissions for the past five years, when returns on investments were 4-6 percent.He asked why, if GE Life could project a 7 per cent rate of return, it couldnot maintain the established commission rates.The guild claims that the company's proposed changes involved cuts in agents'remuneration of between 15 and as much as 60 per cent on certain pay packages-more than the average 15 to 25 per cent range mentioned by the company.Changes in the agency structure hinder career advancement, it claimed. "Agentsmay be demoted, become part-time agents, leave the company or industryaltogether," it warned.However, the guild had encouraged its 3,565 agents and managers to stay onwith GE Life while it resolves matters with the management.Guild representatives said they hoped press publicity will help clarifymatters and restore confidence in the company and that the management willrespond by withdrawing the proposed package.They said their request to discuss the matter with GE Life's newly appointedchief executive officer Tan Beng Lee had fallen on deaf ears, but GE Life saidthere has been open dialogue.Mr Justin Lee, honorary secretary of the guild, said the company's suggestion-that agents change their strategy to promote more life policies to cushionpotential losses in earnings -was "improper and uncalled for".The guild has, therefore, written to the Insurance Commissioner about theirconcerns that this suggestion runs contrary to the code of conduct set out intheir agency agreement.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Delifrance issuing 45.16m shares at 78 apiece in IPO / Delifrance Asia,SES, Stock Exchange of Singaporefrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Freddie NgHOT on the heels of recent initial public offerings, French delicatessen chainDelifrance Asia yesterday launched its IPO of 45.16 million shares at 78 centseach for a mainboard listing.At 78 cents, the offer shares of par value 10 cents each are being issued at ahistorical price-earnings (PE) ratio of 17.26 times.The public offer consists of 29.9 million new shares and 15.26 million vendorshares, which are stock sold by the company's existing shareholders.Delifrance will not have a placement tranche.The public offer, representing 25 per cent of the company's enlarged sharecapital, will yield net proceeds of about $21.7 million. Up to 10 per cent ofthe offered shares will be reserved for the group's management, staff andbusiness associates.According to Delifrance, $10 million of the net proceeds will be used toupgrade and establish production facilities in Singapore, Philippines,Australia, Malaysia, Hongkong and China.Expansion of retail outlets in Singapore, Hongkong, Malaysia and Australiawill take up another $8 million and $3.7 million will be used as workingcapital.Analysts polled by The Straits Times generally agreed that Delifrance's mainstrength was its highly visible trade name, which bodes well for its IPO.They were, however, split on whether the relatively steep PE ratio of 17.26times was too high.One analyst from a local research house said the ratio was not high comparedto other food counters like Cerebos, Fraser & Neave and QAF Ltd which were allcurrently trading at more than 30 times.Two other analysts, however, said they had expected the ratio to be closer to15 times.Analysts also cited as a potential downside Delifrance's exposure to pricefluctuations of wheat flour and butter, the basic ingredients of its bakeryproducts.Delifrance Asia has grown considerably over the past five years. The groupreported net profits of $6.8 million on sales of $98.5 million for the yearended June. In 1992, it recorded $1.6 million net profit on sales of $37.1million.Delifrance, a subsidiary of French flour miller J-L Vilgrain Group, set upshop here in 1983. It has cafes and takeaway outlets in Asia, which make andsell French bakery products.This, said one analyst, was good for the group because it would enjoy lowerbusiness costs resulting from the vertical upstream activities.The IPO, which is lead managed and underwritten by OCBC Bank, closes on Oct 17and trading on a "when issued" basis starts on Oct 21.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996STIC to begin work on Wuxi park"s third phase by next September / SingaporeTechnologies Industrial Corporation, STICfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Tammy TanSINGAPORE Technologies Industrial Corp (STIC) expects to embark on the thirdphase of its Wuxi-Singapore Industrial Park (WSIP) project in China bySeptember next year.The next stage of development was expected to add another 100 hectares of landto the China project, STIC executive vice-president Goh Song How said in arecent interview.Phase one, covering 100 hectares, was completed in June and work on the 135 hasecond phase is underway and slated for completion by next year. Mr Goh said ateam of WSIP officials had started on the master plan for phase three of theindustrial park."As soon as the master planning is ready, our guys can go and start marketingit. We have already completed the preliminary master plan and will probablyfinish it by early next year," he said.WSIP, which is lead managed by STIC, has incurred a total development cost ofUS$120 million (S$169 million) to date. Other stakeholders in the developmentinclude the Wuxi government, JTC International Ltd and KMP China InvestmentsPte.Yesterday, the developers announced that 11 new tenants had been signed on.They will invest collectively an additional US$115 million, increasing totalfunding by park tenants to US$430 million. Ten of the 11 tenants will take upland plots ranging from one to eight hectares for their plants.The park has a total of 36 committed tenants. Of these, 17 have begunoperations, including Seagate Technology, Siemens Components and SumitomoElectric.They will employ a total of 6,000 workers by the end of the year and willaccount for a total production value of almost US$200 million this year.According to Mr Goh, occupancy rates for WSIP have been good. Phase one isalmost occupied fully while the second stage is nearly 40 per cent taken up.He said there were no plans to embark on a fourth phase of development yet,although the consortium had an option to develop up to 1,000 hectares of land."It's all a question of supply and demand. We have to stagger the developmentplan to meet the demand," he said.WSIP, which is one of three overseas industrial park projects STIC isdeveloping, incurred a small loss in the first half of this year. It is,however, expected to generate profits by the end of the year.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996TRI pays $63m for 15% stake in US satellite firm / Technology ResourcesIndustries, TRI, Orbcomm Global LPfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96MALAYSIAN-LISTED Technology Resources Industries Bhd (TRI) has invested US$45million (S$63.4 million) for a 15 per cent stake in US satellitecommunications company Orbcomm Global L.P.It has also been appointed Orbcomm's first service licensee in South-eastAsia, with rights to distribute Orbcomm services in Malaysia, Singapore andBrunei itself or through resellers."Another US$7 million to US$8 million will be invested to build an OrbcommGateway earth station and message processing centre in Malaysia, expected tobe completed in late 1997," TRI vice-president of new ventures Azhar Asmunitold a news conference here.The US$330 million Orbcomm system is the world's only operational low-earthorbit (LEO) satellite system which enables subscribers to send and receiveshort messages and identify their positions anywhere on earth at low cost,said Orbcomm president Alan Parker.Applications and services supported by the system include person-to-personemergency communications, remote industrial asset and environmentalmonitoring, stolen vehicle recovery, truck tracking and communications, andtwo-way e-mail links through personal portable subscriber communicator units."Through the earth station in Malaysia, subscribers in Singapore, Malaysia andBrunei will be able to obtain Orbcomm services in 1998," said Mr Azhar.The Orbcomm system's two orbiting satellites serve about 350,000 subscribersin the US with its limited communications capability, said Mr Parker."Real-time data communication will be available when 26 additional satellitesare launched and deployed next year."He estimated the potential global market at 168 million subscribers, of whichone-third are in the Asia-Pacific. "For the most part, this market is unservedor underserved by any other telecommunications technology."Orbcomm Global L.P. is a partnership owned by Orbital Sciences Corporation inthe US, Teleglobe Inc of Canada and TRI.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Quokka subsidiary buys Southcorp"s Rheem division / Quokka Investments,Rheem Concrete Industry Product, Cesco Australiafrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Florence Chong in SydneyA WHOLLY owned subsidiary of Australian-listed Quokka Investments -which is 47per cent controlled by Singapore-based Zicom Pte Ltd -has acquired RheemConcrete Industry Product (Rheem CIP), a division of the diversifiedindustrial group, Southcorp Holdings Ltd.Cesco Australia Ltd paid an undisclosed sum for the purchase of the businessin a deal finalised last Wednesday.Rheem CIP's new owners planned to expand exports into new markets in Asia,said the company's general manager (commercial), Mr Michael Mee.Rheem CIP manufactures, markets and distributes transit concrete mixers underthe trade-name "Rheem-Vulcan" and "Vulcan".More than two-thirds of its production of 900 units a year are exportedthrough Zicom Pte Ltd, mostly to Singapore, with some products also going toThailand, according to a statement by Zicom group managing director and CescoAustralia managing director Sim Giok Lak."We plan to increase our exports into other Asian countries in the next two tothree years," he said.Mr Mee said the company intended to export its concrete mixers to China earlynext year. It would probably export to Malaysia and Indonesia later in theyear.Rheem CIP plans to double production to 1,800 units a year in three years'time. The export value of the output would be A$40 million (S$44 million). Itscurrent turnover is less than A$20 million a year.Mr Sim also disclosed Zicom's plan to establish a joint venture in Malaysianext year. The company has tie-ups in China, Thailand and Indonesia. "We planto assemble Vulcan transit concrete mixer in all these countries," he said.Quokka, based in Perth, is a property and investment company with interests inAustralia and Singapore.Its major shareholder is Zicom, which is also the company's single largestoverseas customer.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Scotts hearing told about new documents / Scotts Holdings, ScottsInvestments (Singapore) Pte Ltdfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96NEW documents have surfaced which might invalidate the transfer of listedScotts Holdings shares to the holding company of the controlling Jumabhoyfamily, the High Court was told yesterday.The documents show that the grandson of family patriarch Rajabali Jumabhoy wasa trustee of a settlement he had made in 1957, it was claimed at the start ofa six-week hearing of a suit filed by Mr Rajabali against three relatives andthe family holding company.The 98-year-old Mr Rajabali is seeking to restore the benefits of his assetsto the entire family.Mr Rajabali's lawyer Lim Chor Pee told the court that because Mr AsadJumabhoy, as trustee, had not executed the transfer form in respect of ScottsHoldings shares transferred to the family company, Scotts Investments(Singapore) Pte Ltd (SIS), the transfer was not valid.Mr Lim said that, in fact, the trustees were not empowered to transfer ScottsHoldings shares to SIS and their action constituted a breach of the 1957settlement.Earlier, lead counsel Mr Harry Wee, told Justice Judith Prakash that MrRajabali was not claiming any money from the plaintiffs but that he wasseeking only to enforce the settlement made in 1957, whereby the benefits ofall his assets would go to all members of the family.Mr Rajabali filed a suit a year ago along with his sons Yusuf and Mustafa,daughter Perin, and grandchildren Anwar, Faez and Saleem.The defendants are his eldest son, Mr Ameerali R. Jumabhoy, who resigned lastmonth as executive chairman of listed property and hospitality group ScottsHoldings, grandsons Rafiq and Iqbal, former managing director and executivedirector respectively of the company, and SIS, which owns 42.5 per cent of thelisted entity.Mr Rajabali's main contention is that the family assets have been takencontrol of by the Ameerali branch of the family.In a day-long presentation, Mr Lim said that in 1957, Mr Rajabali made asettlement of his property, No. 8 Scotts Road, in favour of his four children.The object was to ensure that the property or its sale proceeds were notdistributed, but rather invested and the income accumulated for the benefit ofthe beneficiaries.The family formed Scotts Holdings Pte Ltd to develop their Scotts Roadproperty. The company was subsequently listed on the Stock Exchange ofSingapore.But the Ameerali branch of the family went ahead to pledge Scotts Holdingsshares to banks to finance activities of other companies, contrary to theintentions of Mr Rajabali, Mr Lim told the court.At the start of the hearing yesterday, Mr Rajabali was in court along withmost of the other plaintiffs.It has taken a battery of lawyers from Chor Pee & Company, representing theplaintiffs; Drew & Napier, representing Ameerali and Iqbal; Allen & Gledhill,representing Rafiq and Rajah & Tann, acting for SIS, a year to prepare for thehearing.Documents relating to the case run into 28 volumes.The hearing continues today.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Issues, rather than insults, take centre stage in lively debate: "Clintonparries Dole"s debate offensive", "Round One to Clinton-Careful, containedand mainly cautious"and "Round One to Clinton-Critiques and the occasionalbit of wit"from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Lee Siew Hua in Cincinnati, OhioIT WAS a night of issues, not insults, as US President Bill Clinton and hischallenger, Mr Bob Dole, faced each other in a debate which was far livelierthan expected and could help tighten the race in the days before the electionnext month.The 90-minute debate brought the defining campaign issues of tax cuts andstronger, safer families -elements of a gigantic spectrum of plans which willaffect Americans as they step gingerly into the next millennium -intimatelyinto the living rooms of an estimated 90 million people.In reality, both candidates were not strikingly different on a number ofpositions. Both proposed tax cuts, though in different forms and proportions.Both emphasised education, with Mr Clinton citing his support for aprogressive array of school programmes and his rival arguing that authorityshould now devolve from Washington to parents and schools. Mr Clinton, who hasshifted towards centrist politics during his presidency, has already beentough on crime and has also sought to downsize government, both traditionalRepublican concerns.But rather than spend time on repeating those central messages, both mensought to stress the subtle issue of trust.Each tried to persuade voters that he could be entrusted with the major taskof building a bridge to the 21st century.Mr Dole also sought to cast doubt on the President's trustworthiness, albeitin a civil way and with touches of wit.The challenger said that the President was scaring senior citizens by implyingthat he would cut Medicare.He also noted that Mr Clinton was prone to exaggerating his presidentialsuccesses, accused the incumbent of being a closet liberal and summoned upbriefly the Whitewater spectre.In many ways, Mr Dole relied on a highly negative strategy in the debate,though softening this with anecdotes which attempted to show his compassion.Mr Clinton, quick-thinking and a master of detail, sought to show that he wasa man of character who had kept his word on lifting the economy, reformingwelfare, fighting crime and other successes.Overall, the debate was close but was more critical for Mr Dole as it had beenregarded widely as his last chance to win over undecided voters and shrink hisopponent's substantial lead, averaging 12-15 per cent since the campaignbegan.Mr Clinton shone. The challenger shone too -but partly because expectations ofhim had sunk so low.Mr Dole did manage to show during the face-off that he would make a plausiblepresident. But many will question if that is enough to unseat an incumbentpresiding over an economic success story in a non-war situation.Polls suggest that most Americans have already made up their minds. Still,swing voters will have another chance to make a side-by-side comparison duringthe next debate -in San Diego on Oct 16 -which will use a cosier town-hallformat in which the incumbent excels.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Round One to Clinton -Critiques and the occasional bit of wit: "Issues,rather than insults, take centre stage in lively debate","Round One toClinton -Careful, contained and mainly cautious"and"Clinton parries Dole"sdebate offensive"from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96How the two presidential candidates faced up to each otherUS President Bill Clinton and Republican challenger Bob Dole drew sharpdistinctions in their appraisal of current world and national conditions onSunday night in the first televised debate of the 1996 campaign, outliningdifferent visions of the next four years.Three polls conducted immediately after the 90-minute encounter, held inConnecticut, showed that Mr Clinton won the debate. Here is a look at how theyperformed.HITS* He maintained a steady critique of the President from beginning to end,defining his challenger's posture crisply, snapping out critiques and easingup to find the occasional bit of humour.* His opening was more personal, designed to wipe away impressions of him asnegative or harsh, but did not lay out a vision of where he wanted to take thecountry.* He was forceful in criticising Mr Clinton's foreign policy and his record onthe economy.* He demonstrated a mastery of the details of government that easily matchedMr Clinton's.* He scored several times with his humour, teasing the President about hisweight and his cholesterol and himself about his fall from a campaign platformin California. He showed he is not just a grumpy old man, as some have said.* Viewers also saw Mr Dole's wit -a trademark of his Senate career but rarelyseen on the 1996 campaign trail.* He made an effort throughout the debate to portray himself as a caring,compassionate person, whose war wounds and family poverty had made sensitiveto the needs of people with problems.MISSES* Democrats contended that Mr Dole's negative tone, which became more apparentas the debate wore on, would come back to haunt him.* He barely mentioned the economic boom that his supply-side running-mate,Jack Kemp, contends would be set off by the Republicans' 15 per cent tax cut,and he said little about revolutionary change in the federal tax code.* He had trouble poking holes in Mr Clinton's economic record.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Round One to Clinton -Careful, contained and mainly cautious: "Issues,rather than insults, take centre stage in lively debate","Round One toClinton -Critiques and the occasional bit of wit"and"Clinton parriesDole"s debate offensive"from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96How the two presidential candidates faced up to each otherUS President Bill Clinton and Republican challenger Bob Dole drew sharpdistinctions in their appraisal of current world and national conditions onSunday night in the first televised debate of the 1996 campaign, outliningdifferent visions of the next four years.Three polls conducted immediately after the 90-minute encounter, held inConnecticut, showed that Mr Clinton won the debate. Here is a look at how theyperformed.HITS* His opening statement set the tone for much of the debate. He was upbeat andfuture-oriented, claiming the nation had made progress under his leadershipand that he needed four more years to continue the job.* He made his case calmly and with good humour, stating a credo that reflectedhis rediscovered centrism of the last year or so: "I believe the purpose ofpolitics is to give people the tools to make the best of their own lives."* So that he would appear more presidential, he avoided engaging his opponentdirectly on most issues, preferring to state his own position withoutreferring directly to Mr Dole's charges.* He kept his tongue when Mr Dole smilingly compared him to "the greatexaggerator", the senator's dead brother, Kenny. "Kenny was a great talker,and he used to tell me things that I knew were not quite accurate. So we had arule, we divided by six -in your case maybe just two."* His style emphasised butterfly over bee, a smile over umbrage, as when hegrinned in meeting the expected assertion from Mr Dole that "liberal" is theonly accurate description of the President.* His performance was much like his campaign has been: careful, contained andgenerally cautious.MISSES* He had little that was fresh to offer, returning several times to themetaphor he has ridden hard since the Democratic convention, the now-famous"bridge to the 21st Century".* "The President was on the defensive, and that was a strategic mistake, "said Senator Connie Mack, Republican-Florida, one of Mr Dole's debateadvisers.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996CPIB nabs two linked to Amcol"s Mauritius deal / Amcol Holdings, Sando &Ciefrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96TWO men were arrested by the Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau (CPIB)last week in connection with Amcol Holdings' aborted multimillion-dollarproject in Mauritius.Both men have been released, each on bail of $500,000.Meanwhile, Amcol, its Mauritian joint-venture partner Sando & Cie, andMauritian businessman Roland Maurel have entered recently into a freshagreement in which Mr Maurel agreed to buy out Amcol's 40 per cent stake inthe Mauritian venture.Price Waterhouse had pointed out in its report that the company seemed to haveoverpaid US$14 million (S$19.7 million) for its stake.Over on the Indian Ocean island, the controversial project had caused a publicuproar. This led Mauritian Prime Minister Navin Ramgoolam to order a probe bya high-powered fact-finding team, chaired by an influential retired ChiefJustice.In August, Amcol's interim judicial managers had sued former Amcol executivedirectors Lloyd Lochra and Ng Chee Kheong for "secret commissions and/orbribes received in connection with Project Mauritius".The suit was related to three separate payments of US$300,000 (aboutS$423,000) by Sando & Cie, which were mentioned in a report on Amcol by PriceWaterhouse.The interim judicial managers also obtained a court injunction to freeze theassets worldwide of Mr Lochra, who is an American.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Easyknit falls short of issue price on market debut / EasyknitInternational Holdings Ltdfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96MAINBOARD-LISTED garment exporter Easyknit International Holdings yesterdaybecame the second initial public offering (IPO) in the past week to closebelow its issue price on its trading debut.It ended its first day of trading at HK$2.90, 15 HK cents below its HK$3.05issue price.Easyknit's share price dipped to as low as HK$2.60 in intra-day trading, witha total of 1.75 million shares changing hands.Last Friday, another mainboard debutante, frozen seafood producer PacificAndes (Holdings), had closed 3.5 US cents below its offer price of 57 US centson its first trading day.A dealer attributed the poor performance of the Hongkong-based garment makerand exporter to the fact that "Singapore is simply not the choice market atthe moment".Furthermore, said another dealer, the stock market was averse to foreigncurrency-denominated listings, preferring instead to stick to Singapore-dollarcounters.Besides closing below its issue price, the public tranche of Easyknit's IPOwas 70 per cent undersubscribed at its close last Monday.However, all 25 million placement shares offered were taken up.Easyknit's IPO fared worse than the only other undersubscribed offering thisyear. Home decor distributor Roly International Holdings' IPO in February was14 per cent undersubscribed.A dealer said the subscription rate could be poor because Easyknit's offerperiod was too short. The offering, which was launched on Sept 27, closed onOct 1.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Dow breaches 6,000 for first time in early trading: "Overseas funds pourinto Hongkong bourse" and "Bourse fails torally on back of Wall Streetgains"from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96NEW York stocks surged in early trading yesterday, with the Dow JonesIndustrial Average breaking the 6,000-point barrier for the first time.It reached a high of 6,002.17 within the first hour.Meanwhile, Asian bourses closed mixed yesterday, following a strong rally onWall Street last Friday as fears of higher interest rates subsided.A surprisingly weak US September jobs report, released last Friday, quelledconcerns of rising interest rates, pushing the Dow Jones Industrial Average up60.01 points to a record close of 5,992.86.The Hongkong stock market was one of the main beneficiaries of the Wall Streetgains.The Hang Seng Index surged yesterday to record its biggest point gain sinceMarch as new records on Wall Street and strong interest in China countersspurred active buying.The market barometer jumped 227.56 points to 12,133.07. It now lies just 68points short of its record close of 12,201.09, which was reached on Jan 4,1994.Australian stocks also climbed, led by media group News Corp and banks, thanksto Australian bond yields falling to 2-1/2-year lows and the rally in USstocks.The benchmark All-Ordinaries Index rose 24.3 points to 2,339.8, a shade belowits all-time closing high of 2,340.6 in February 1994.Markets elsewhere in Asia, however, fell despite the sharp gains in New York.In Singapore, poor sentiment coupled with sustained underweighting activityled the benchmark Straits Times Industrials Index to fall 22.2 points to2,126.66.Across the Causeway, the benchmark Kuala Lumpur Composite Index shed 1.68points to 1148.50, while the Second Board index fell 12.27 points, or 2.1 percent, to 558.97.Indonesian stocks also declined, dragged lower by a 6 per cent drop incigarette maker PT Hanjaya Mandala Sampoerna on concerns about its US$400million (S$564 million) borrowings.The benchmark Jakarta Stock Composite Index slipped 2.03 points to 586.31.Likewise in Manila, Philippine stocks sank as some foreign funds off-loadedproperty counters on concern that the market was becoming saturated.The benchmark Philippine Stock Exchange Composite Index fell 10.11 points to3,121.03.Thai stocks were battered, plunging a sharp 6 per cent at the close oftrading.Big banks led the decline amid concern that annual economic growth of 8 percent was a thing of the past, analysts said.The Stock Exchange of Thailand Index finished down 60.26 points at 944.63.This was its lowest level since August 1993.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Property buyers becoming highly price-sensitive : Analystsfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Kalpana RashiwalaGovernment curbs "effective in pushing speculators out of market'PROPERTIES launched in recent weeks appear to have enjoyed reasonable success,particularly those priced competitively, say analysts.One of the most successful developments is Wing Tai's Sunrise Gardens off YioChu Kang Road. The 99-year project, with 252 condominium units, is about 65per cent sold three weeks after its launch in mid-September.Analysts credited its success primarily to its attractive average net price of$580 psf. Some market watchers had feared earlier that the project's 99-yearleasehold status and its location in an outlying area might impede sales.One market watcher noted that in contrast, Villa Azura was less than half soldalthough it was a freehold property in the prime Bukit Timah belt. VillaAzura's net average price is $1,150 psf."Buyers have become extremely price-sensitive," said UBS Securities seniorresearch analyst Soon Ching Voon. "In the past, people were more willing topay whatever price was asked as long as the project was freehold and had agood location. This is no longer true."He said the May 15 property curbs had removed speculators from the market."These people did not care about pricing. As long as the location was good andthe project was freehold, they knew there would be buyers, so they could churnthe property. Now the market is left with genuine buyers who know what theycan afford to pay every month."Other recent launches which have fared well include Pidemco's Hillbrookscondominium, launched a week ago.Eighty-four of the 120 units in the 299-unit project offered in the firstphase have been sold. The units are priced at $700 psf -lower than the$730-750 psf for two earlier projects nearby, The Amston and Merawoods.Ballota Park is also doing well, with 161 units of the 215 units launchedtaken up already. Far East Organization's Sherwood, selling at $800 psf, isabout 75 per cent sold.Edmund Tie and Co executive director Ong Choon Fah expects developers tocontinue pricing their projects "realistically", in view of the "currentmarket sentiment".About 1,600 private housing units have been launched since Sept 1, increasingthe total marketed so far this year to about 8,680 units, according to ET & Cofigures.Mrs Ong said another 4,000 units may be launched before the year is out,taking the fullyear figure to 12,680 -higher than about 10,000 units marketedlast year.However, the level of actual supply would depend on a few factors, likedevelopers securing the necessary approvals to launch the projects, she said.With most developers, particularly those with larger projects, seeking to selltheir properties in phases, there may be some overflow in the early part ofnext year.With showflats playing an increasingly important role in the marketing ofprojects, developers may wait for their showflats to be completed beforelaunching their projects."And if by the time this is done, it is approaching the Christmas season withmany people away, developers may want to hold back the launch," she said.Projects slated for launch include the 655-unit Guilin View at Bukit Batok,the 384-unit Trellis Park at Lorong 1 Toa Payoh and the final 110 units atArdmore Park.On the pricing of upcoming launches, Mr Soon said: "Developers will still tryto maintain their original (pre-speculation curbs) asking prices or cut themby about 10 per cent."So far we have not seen developers undercutting each other, althoughPidemco's $700 psf pricing for Hillbrooks raised concern among somecompetitors."This is clearly a buyer's market. Buyers can afford to do their sums, to seewhich projects they can afford ... and with more supply coming on, that's goodnews for home buyers."Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Doing the sums on Tampines Finance Park  - Will banks be sold on relocatingtheir operations?from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Lynn SeahThe buildings are coming up fast at Singapore's first finance park inTampines. The biggest leaseholder, Singapore Land, will have its TampinesJunction office ready next March, but so far, there have been no takers. LYNNSEAH checks out the prospects for the finance park, on Page Two.DOING THE SUMS ON TAMPINES FINANCE PARKIT IS lunch hour. Briefcase-toting executive types cram the eating places. Itlooks like Raffles Place, but wait, why are there so many grandmothers withtoddlers in tow, and children in school uniforms?But then this is a vision not of Raffles Place, but of Tampines in the future,when its Finance Park is fully developed.The park, which was mooted by the Monetary Authority of Singapore and theEconomic Development Board, is to be a key financial centre outside theCentral Business District. The Government wants to encourage banks andfinance-related businesses to re-locate backroom operations there.Six parcels of land totalling 1.94 ha in Tampines Regional Centre have beentendered out by the Housing and Development Board (HDB) in 1994 and last yearfor the development of the park. One condition was that developers must housefinance-related operations on at least 70 per cent of the floor space.Singapore Land's Tampines Junction will be one of the first developments to becompleted next March. The company is negotiating with some financialinstitutions, but no tenants have been confirmed yet for the nine-storeybuilding.Besides SingLand, which clinched three of the six plots through wholly-ownedShenton Holdings, the other successful bidders were Tat Lee Bank, OverseasUnion Bank and NTUC Income Insurance Co-operative.They will not be the first to bring financial institutions into Tampines,however.DBS Bank moved some operations to Tampines as far back as 1993. Itsautobanking centre, data centre, as well as administration, audit, humanresource and training functions are now housed in DBS Tampines Centre, anoffice and shopping complex.Standard Chartered has also moved some of its operations, now housed in theCPF Tampines building.However, Tampines Junction and the other SingLand developments are unique inthat they will not be owner-occupied. The developers of the other plots areall finance-related businesses.To fill the approximately 15,000 sq m of net floor space in Tampines Junction,SingLand is targeting multinational financial institutions which are heavyusers of space, but do not need much face-to-face interaction with customers."We are looking especially at those involved in international and regionaltrade financing because most of the transactions are done through computers,"said Mr Anthony Sim, SingLand's general manager for marketing.To the smaller users of space who will reap less in terms of rental savings,SingLand is trying to sell another idea -that of the benefits of having a fullback-up service in a different place."There is a trend now for banks to have a back-up office somewhere else, justin case the computer in the main branch fails to deliver," he said.So Tampines Junction offers features such as a back-up generator with enoughcapacity to power the air-conditioning and computers in the building if thereis a power failure.In its marketing efforts, SingLand is trying to encourage its potentialtenants to take a long view when deciding whether to re-locate."The selling point is actually mid-term savings. For multinatinal banks, whooccupy a number of floors, the saving over five to 10 years is substantial,"said Mr Sim.Monetary savings aside, companies have other concerns about moving, inparticular staff resistance.LAST year, a survey by property consultant Knight Frank and a former NationalUniversity of Singapore academic showed that only 3.8 per cent of 158respondents located in the CBD said they would move out in the immediatefuture. Respondents included financial institutions. Of those consideringdecentralising, about 60 per cent said they preferred fringe areas such asMarina Bay.Concerns about decentralisation centred on the fear of damage to businesscontacts due to "inappropriate location" and loss of the prestige attached tocentral addresses.Apart from Tampines Junction, Singland has two eight-storey office buildings,Tampines Plaza I & II, to be completed in 1998.Tat Lee Bank's eight-storey TLB Tampines Centre will be completed in mid-1997,but will be fully owner-occupied. Tat Lee will house backroom operations,recreational facilites for staff and a banking branch.NTUC Income plans to use 30 per cent of the space in its nine-storey TampinesPoint for its own operations.The other leaseholder, OUB, declined to reveal its plans.Whether or not more sites in Tampines Regional Centre will be offered forfinance-park development has not been decided, says the HDB.Keppel Bank is actively exploring the possibility of moving to the suburbs,but the cost has to be right, says a spokesman.The success of Tampines Finance Park will hinge on rents being attractiveenough. "Rental differentials have to be substantial to make it worthwhile fora company to locate there," said Ms Angela Tan, executive director withproperty consultant Edmund Tie & Company.Top office rents in the CBD are $9 to $10 per sq ft. Suburban rents are $4 to$6. SingLand's asking rental is about $6.SingLand explains that its rentals are high for suburban properties becausethe offices are as good as those in the CBD. The cost of Tampines Junction,including land cost, is more than $100 million.There is market talk that the developer may think of selling instead ofrenting but Life! could not get a comment from SingLand by press time. Oneproperty consultant felt the asking rent was unrealistic. "This is a newmarket. You cannot ask what you want. You have to sell the idea," he said.Consultants also point out that there are ample alternative locations forfinancial institutions if rentals in Tampines are unattractive.There is the fringe, the Marina Bay area where rents of $6.50 to $7.50 per sqft compare favourably with those of the suburbs. The upcoming developments inRiver Valley -Great World City, UE Square, Valley Point -will also becompeting with Tampines for tenants.Property consultants generally feel that for the Finance Park to take off, thegap between the rents there and those in the fringe locations will have to bewidened."Perhaps the Government can offer some kind of incentive, like rentalsubsidies, to help the landlords attract tenants," said Ms Lynette Leong,associate director at Jones Lang Wootton.BUT there is no question that the concept of a finance park is a good onewhich banks can benefit from.Mr Christopher Fossick, Richard Ellis' executive director for commercialleasing, said: "I think what is going to happen is that a few significantleases will be concluded, a critical mass will start forming and the idea ofgoing to Tampines will become more acceptable to banks and their employees."The pool of potential tenants for the park is also growing as more and moreforeign banks are using Singapore as a base, he adds.Besides, Tampines has a lot going for it -good transport and a good range ofeating, shopping, entertainment and other service outlets. These count towardsmaking re-location less painful for staff.Tampines is being built up as Singapore's eastern hub with facilities such asoffices and shopping complexes which will offer a range of jobs. There areplans to boost the commercial space at Tampines Regional Centre around theTampines MRT Station, now amounting to about 243,000 sq m, by another 79,000sq m. Some 176,800 people live in Tampines now.When DBS Bank made its move three years ago, the matter of some staff havingto travel further from home to office was anticipated. It was resolved bytranferring those who did not mind working in Tampines to the new offices andredeploying the rest elsewhere. People living around Tampines were alsorecruited for the new offices.Has the move been worthwhile? "The savings in rental far exceeds anyadditional expenses," said a spokesman.Will enough financial institutions feel the same way? There will be quite abit of space coming up in the park.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Two men, their friendship and passion for science: Computer science andbiology make good bedfellowsfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Lea WeeChildhood buddies Tan Tin Wee and S. Subbiah learnt the importance of sciencein school and have now joined forces to run the new Bioinformatics Centre hereTWO old friends are charting new courses in the use of computer science inbiological research and the development of drugs here.Dr Tan Tin Wee and Dr S. Subbiah -classmates since Primary 2 -played key rolesin setting up the Bioinformatics Centre at the National University ofSingapore, one of the few such centres in the world.The two are naturally excited about their project, which held its inauguralsymposium last week.The centre plans to help biologists and drug companies analyse and manage thehuge amount of genetic data which has been churned out at a fantastic rate inrecent years.Its development grew out of a friendship bound in great part by a deep passionfor science.Says Dr Tan, 34, the centre's acting director: "One of the things we learnt inschool is the importance of being creative in science, and not to be afraid totry out new things."Try out new things they certainly did.In a science project at Anglo-Chinese Junior College, they joined forces withtwo other students to show that human hair can be turned into food products.Chuckling, Dr Subbiah, 35, the centre's director for research, recalls: "Wewent to barber shops, told them we were doing some science project and grabbedthe hair off the floor."The collected hair was then boiled and stewed for two days in "various nastychemicals".Says Dr Subbiah: "We did not understand exactly how the whole thing worked.All we knew was that we wanted to boil the strands of hair into its basicbuilding blocks, which are amino acids."They showed that boiled hair can be used as plastic, glue, plant fertilisersand animal feed.The project, called The Possible Uses And Applications Of Human Hair Keratin,won them first prize in the pre-university chemistry section for the ScienceFair Project in 1978.They also produced a science documentary, which won the Best Production awardin the Innovators '79 TV series."We had a great time catching on camera how animals such as pigs, chickens andsea urchins do it," recalls Dr Subbiah with a grin.After junior college, the two friends went off down separate paths. Dr Tanserved his national service and later read natural sciences at CambridgeUniversity.Dr Subbiah went to do mathematical physics in the Imperial College of London.But they kept in touch and did not forget what they were taught in school.Dr Subbiah, after deciding that the job opportunities for a degree inmathematical physics were "not too great", went on to pursue a doctorate instructural biology at Harvard University."But I hated it," he says, grimacing at the memory.He decided to try something more theoretical and took a postdoctoral degree inbiocomputing at Stanford University.It was the right decision. He went on to file a few patents and co-founded abiotechnology software company in the United States.Today, he does research at Wistar Institute at the University of Pennsylvania,one of the foremost centres for bioinformatics.Meanwhile, after getting his degree, Dr Tan went on a masters degree inbiotechnology at University College London and later a doctorate at EdinburghUniversity.As part of his doctorate, he produced a genetically-engineered animal vaccine,which won the young researcher the United Kingdom's Vaccine Research Trust'sAnnual Prize in 1989.A year later, he returned to join the National University of Singapore'sbiochemistry department as a lecturer. Outside his working hours, he continuedto pursue his interest in biocomputing with the help of the Computer Centre atthe NUS.Dr Tan was also instrumental in introducing biocomputing as an elective forbiochemistry honours course in 1991.His work in Internet biomedical databases won him the prestigious Gold Medalawarded by the Council of the World Congress for Medical Informatics in 1992and the Singapore Youth Award in 1994.In 1994, he donned another hat, heading the Technet unit, the first localInternet service for research and development and took it to privatisation in1995.This later became the Pacific Internet.As early as 1991, Dr Tan and Dr Subbiah were already talking about introducingbioinformatics in Singapore.With the encouragement of the latter, Dr Tan proposed to incorporatebiocomputing as part of the Bioscience Centre. But this was dropped because ofbudget constraints. Says Dr Tan: "At that time, we commiserated with eachother but continued to float the idea to various funding bodies."One of these was the Economic Development Board.Their persistence paid off. Last year, the EDB agreed to pump $6 million toset up of a Bioinformatics Centre at the NUS.Says Dr Subbiah: "It is really exciting to be working in such a field, theopportunities are tremendous."Both credit their success today to their teachers at Anglo-Chinese Secondaryand ACJC.Says Dr Tan: "I remembered that before I left ACS, my principal wrote in mytestimonial that I would succeed in whatever I chose to do. His confidence instudents was shared by the teachers."This confidence has become a virtuous cycle, a self-fulfilling prophecy."Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Computer science and biology make good bedfellows: Two men, theirfriendship and passion for sciencefrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96IT MAY seem ironic that many of the staff at the newly-opened BioinformaticsCentre at the National University of Singapore are not trained specifically inbioinformatics.Instead, they are either biologists who have picked up computer science orcomputer scientists who have learnt biology.For bioinformatics, which marries biology with computer science, is still arelatively new discipline, explains the centre's acting director, Dr Tan TinWee.But it is beginning to be recognised slowly as a discipline in universitiesaround the world. In Singapore, it was introduced as an elective forbiochemistry honours students at the National University of Singapore in 1991.Says Dr Tan: "There is an increasing demand for people who are adept at bothcomputer science and biology."This is largely because of the explosive growth of genetic data generated bythe Human Genome Project which began in 1991.The ultimate aim of this global collaboration is to identify and analyse allthe three billion "letters" in a person's genetic make-up -known collectivelyas the human genome -by the year 2002.Biomedical researchers hope the analysed data can identify new genes which mayhelp in curing genetic diseases. Meanwhile, drug companies hope thisinformation can help them discover and develop new drugs.But the biological information is being generated at a far faster rate than itcan be analysed.Dr Tan points out, for instance, that the process of identifying DNAsequencing has reached an industrial scale today -about 10 million DNAsequences are being churned out each week.Flooded with this huge amount of genetic data, biologists and drug companiesalike are clamouring for people trained in both biology and computer scienceto help them retrieve and analyse the data.The resource unit at the Bioinformatics Centre, located at the NUS ComputerCentre, hopes to create a manpower pool to provide training. It also hopes toprovide facilities to assist biologists with their computational needs andprovide access to databases.Equally important is the need to carry out more basic research anddevelopment, says Dr Tan.The centre has a research unit located at the Institute of Systems Science.Its flagship project, spearheaded by the ISS and in collaboration with theUniversity of Pennsylvania, one of the foremost centres for bioinformatics, isBioKleisli.This is a sophisticated system which pulls relevant information from variousdatabases, integrates, crunches and analyses them, before giving them back tothe userHeading the project team is its inventor, Dr Wong Lim Soon, from the ISS, aLee Kuan Yew Fellowship holder.Says Dr Tan: "At present, the other available tools are not so sophisticatedand fast. They can pull information only from specific databases."To maintain the integrity of the information, the system will build anotherlayer to help resolve any conflicts found within it.Right now, the centre is negotiating with at least two pharmaceutical giantsto test the system on their network and to collaborate on projects. It is alsoconducting the virtual cell project. It represents biological knowledge in avirtual reality manner.Says Dr Tan: "At the click of a button, a person can navigate through a celland access information on the part of the cell he is interested in. He canalso get related information and communicate with people who are doingresearch in this particular part of the cell."This project will eventually merge with the BioKleisli Project.The Bioinformatics Centre's website is http://bic.nus.sg/biocompCopyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Two art auctions rake in $10 m and record pricesfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Claudette PeraltaART lovers and investors apparently worked up quite a thirst pouring moneyinto paintings from South-east Asia over the weekend.One bidder also uncorked $38,500 from his bank account for a lot of wines.The world's two major auction houses, Christie's and Sotheby's, raked incombined sales of nearly $10 million. More than 800 people attended theevents.By far the biggest chunk of money went for a piece by the German painter wholived and worked in Bali, Walter Spies. His View Across the Sawahs To GunungAgung alone fetched $1,048,750.That was more than twice the original estimate of between $500,000 and$700,000. It was sold on Sunday at the Christie's auction at the Hyatt RegencyHotel which grossed a total of about $5.5 million in sales.Other paintings fetched prices three to six times higher than their estimates.These included A Pasar by Singaporean artist Lee Man Fong which went for$146,750 against the original estimate of $25,000 to $35,000.Filipino artist Fernando Cueto Amorsolo's In the Shade Of A Mango Tree soldfor $119,250, well above the original estimate of $20,000 to $30,000.Kampong Tafereeltje by the Dutch painter Gerard Pieter Adolfs was estimated tobe worth $6,000 to $8,000 but sold for $19,550.Sotheby's debut sale in Singapore grossed a total of S$3,803,350. It soldalmost 80 per cent of the lots offered.A painting by A.J. Le Mayeur, Three Women Weaving in the Garden, fetched$333,750 against the original estimate of between $120,000 and $150,000.The Sotheby's auction, held at the Raffles Hotel Ballroom on Saturday, alsosaw a few world auction record prices for works by some artists. One of themwas Hendra Gunawan, whose Women At A Waterfall was sold for $245,750.Other records were chalked up by Emil Rizek and Widayat. Rizek's Cockfight InBali was sold for $141,250, while the latter's Manula Jogging Dikejar Anjingwent for $93,950.The lots which did not meet the organiser's expectations was a work bySingaporean artist Liu Kang titled Offerings and the work of Filipino artistJuan Luna. These were not sold.The sales included takings from the auction of South-east Asian paintings,Straits Chinese works of art and the auction of fine and rare wines.One happy bidder walked off with a Chateau Le Pin superlot of wines selectedfrom the 1985, 1986 and 1988 to 1994 vintages. These were sold collectivelyfor $38,500.Another highlight was the sale of a very rare famille rose coral-red-ground"in and out" Kamcheng and cover, originally priced at $18,000 to $25,000,which sold for $27,600.Mr Quek Chin Yeow, director of Sotheby's, Asia, noted that Singaporean,Filipino and Vietnamese artists generally performed well.But Indonesian art, both by native and foreign artists, were the starperformers and paintings with Balinese themes or subject matter found wideappeal among buyers.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Ovarian cancer girl may miss umrahfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Tuminah SapawiOVARIAN cancer patient Nur Atiiqah Johari, who is due to perform the umrah(minor pilgrimage) this month, may have to forgo the trip because of herdeteriorating condition.The nine-year-old girl's doctor, Dr Allen Yeoh, a child cancer specialist atthe National University Hospital (NUH), told Life! that her condition is notstable and she is unfit to travel."She is in great pain and right now, what is good for her is rest -she needsall the rest she can get," said Dr Yeoh, who declined to reveal more about hercondition.Nur Atiiqah was hospitalised about two weeks ago at NUH and is still beingtreated there.On learning of her condition, Syakira Travel & Tours, which is sponsoring hertrip, has decided to offer a cash donation of $4,600 instead. This is the costof a 12-day umrah package for two adults and one child.Late last month, the travel agent had agreed to sponsor Nur Atiiqah's parentsfor the trip as well.Said Syakira's managing director Ismail Angullia: "There were two things whichwe considered when we heard of her present condition. We could either postponethe trip until she gets better or we could give her cash instead."We chose the latter because we think the family needs all the financialassistance they could get."Nur Atiiqah's parents, Mr Johari Simum, 48, and Madam Sariah Samuh, 40, weretoo distraught to speak to the press.Mr Johari is a Malaysian who works there, and he visits the family from timeto time. Madam Sariah is a production operator.Nur Atiiqah is the third of their five children. The others are Siti Sholeha,14, Mohamed Hasbullah, 10, Ibrahim Abdul Karim, six, and Mohamed Adam, four.The girl, who was diagnosed with cancer in March this year, has had both herovaries removed and undergone chemotherapy.Ovarian cancer is more common among older women although the chances of ayoung girl getting it are one in 100,000 a year.Nur Atiiqah stopped attending school when she began chemotherapy treatment inthe middle of this year. Her weight has also dropped from 35 kg to 25 kg.In an earlier interview with the Malay-language daily Berita Harian, MadamSariah said her daughter can walk but is very weak.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Day when two Japanese bombs fellfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Wong Chee MengSPEAK MANDARIN CAMPAIGN THE reason Mr Teong Ah Chin remains a member of the Singapore Civil DefenceForce even at the age of 80 lies in his personal experiences during theJapanese Occupation of Singapore.The sprightly restaurant helper was then a patriotic young man selling flowersin the streets to raise funds for China's anti-Japanese resistance forces.One day, he was in the vicinity of the now-defunct New World at Jalan Besarwhen a Japanese bomber swooped past him suddenly and dropped two bombs as heran for cover."One of them landed where Sim Lim Tower stands today, and the other at JalanPisang where the coffeeshop belonging to my brother's father-in-law was," herecalled."When I reached there, the coffeeshop was already reduced to rubble. I had toremove the debris to rescue my brother."Mr Teong recounted this experience at a Mandarin storytelling competition,titled An Experience In Emergency, last Sunday.The contest, organised by the Civil Defence Association for NS (CDANS), LianheWanbao, Shin Min Daily News and 95.8 FM as part of the current Speak MandarinCampaign, was held at the CDANS Town Clubhouse in Marina Square.It attracted 35 participants, ranging in age from 15 to 80. About four of themrelated historical happenings, including the times when floods and racialriots gripped Singapore, while others told of personal tragedies resultingfrom traffic accidents or factory mishaps.Businessman Tan Jack Kwang, 37, remembered one weekend in 1978 when torrentialrains caused one of the worst floods on the island."The roads in Punggol and Potong Pasir disappeared under a sea of water.Chickens, ducks, cows, dogs and even crocodiles were seen floatingeverywhere."He was then a national servicemen and, together with his colleagues, they tookout boats to rescue the stranded residents.Painting sub-contractor Ho Kim Sian, 49, remembered the racial riots in 1964.For hours, he could not leave his workplace because of the curfew.Finally, on his way home, he saw a Chinese couple pleading in vain withrioters not to burn their motorcycle."During the racial riots, tension ran high. I could feel every minute andsecond ticking away," he said. "It just doesn't make sense for people to useviolence on each other."Equally instructive were the personal tales.System analyst Au Yong Keok, 35, shared a tragic incident close to her heart."My cousin's 30th death anniversary was just a few days ago, and I stillcannot forgive myself for having caused his death."I was five or six then and my cousin was nine years older. He had made me akite, and we were flying it when the string snapped and the kite flew to theroad. I bawled so loudly that he was forced to retrieve it for me."The next thing I knew, he was hit by a car. When I ran to the road, I saw apool of blood. The next day, I heard he had died. I cried."Like Mr Ho, Mr Tan and most other participants, Ms Au Yong wasChinese-educated and had taken part in several storytelling contests.Mr Teong, too, was not a newcomer to such competitions, but he did not have aformal Chinese education and learnt to speak Mandarin when he was in his 20s."I am a Fuzhou and I learnt Mandarin in a night school when I was 23," hesaid. "I decided to pick up the language because it was fashionable toconverse in Mandarin then. Besides, we had to sing in Mandarin as part of ourfund-raising activities."Generally, the contestants spoke in simple Mandarin, peppering their deliverywith an idiom every now and then.Twelve were chosen for the finals to be held at the World Trade Centre ExpoGateway on Oct 20.The top three winners will take home $500, $400 and $300 respectively. Thefourth and fifth winners will receive $200 each and the rest $100 each. Inaddition, all finalists will receive a trophy.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Sheer joy with Bartok showpiecefrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Terence DawsonMusicSINGAPORE SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA Victoria Concert Hall FridayTHERE are three ways of responding to adversity: one can succumb to it, onecan defy it, or one can seize it as an opportunity to discover new thingsabout oneself.Shaken by ill-health and the outbreak of World War II, Bartok had emigrated tothe United States. He was suffering from deep depression when the conductorKoussevitsky commissioned him to write a work for the Boston SymphonyOrchestra.The result was the Concerto For Orchestra, possibly the most accessible of hisworks because it gives such important parts to every section of the orchestra.It is often admired as a showpiece, but it is much more, representing one ofthe most impressive responses to adversity ever written: the transformation ofpersonality not into self-indulgent expressionism, but joyful affirmation.On Friday, the Singapore Symphony Orchestra under Choo Hoey gave it amemorable reading. Having performed it on the European tour in 1988, and againin 1991, it is a work it knows well. But since then, the orchestra has greatlyimproved.From the first shimmering of the violins against the steady cellos, everysection rose to its respective challenge, with the strings milking the musicfor all its Hungarian resonance and the glowing brass in particularly fineform.The whimsical East-European cartoon-humour of the second movement wascomplemented by a moving account of the scrupulously understated Elegy. Theebullient humour of the Intermezzo was followed by a thrilling performance ofthe alternately tender and joyful Finale.The performance of Beethoven's Fifth Piano Concerto, for which Choo Hoey optedfor a medium-sized orchestra, was equally impressive. The soloist was Kun WooPaik, a Korean now living in Paris. He is one of those relatively rarepianists prepared to take risks, to experiment with possibilities rather thanreproduce what the audience have come to hear.From the electrifying energy of his first entry to his gnomic cadenza, he keptone transfixed. Instead of the usual hymn-like melody of the Adagio, heemphasised the pathos of its insecure yearning: unstable and tender, but notcloying. The last dying strain before the final chords was pure magic.The evening also included the Overture to Schumann's rarely-performed operaGenoveva. The SSO gave a splendid account of the tumultuous passions of thethree characters on which it was based, with the work building up to amagnificent climax.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Souls in containers teem with secret livesfrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Susie WongArtDORRIT YACOBY: VESSELS OF THE SOUL By Dorrit Yacoby At Notices The GalleryTill Oct 26ONE is introduced to art that lies on the edge between conscious sanity andunconscious dreams in Dorrit Yacoby's works.The 70-plus assemblages, which are the accumulated debris of her life, arewrought with images of long-limbed women flying or raising their arms insalute or despair, or in an embrace of the vessel.Here, the vessel is one's heart, the container that may be filled withpurifying water for one's rebirth.The theme of despair and rejuvenation is inherent in this series of workswhich is, for the Israeli-Canadian, who has lived all her life in Israel, aslow process that embodies her own rejuvenation."When I do the paintings, I heal myself," explains the 44-year-old whose workswere exhibited earlier this year in Beijing, Japan and Bangkok, and willcontinue its tour from Singapore to India, Vietnam and Australia.Each work lies in a roughly-made "container" itself. Within it, the works teemwith life through the heavily pock-marked and textured surfaces, created fromsawdust and objects such as shards of glass or porcelain, pomegranates, orsomething as personal as her son's shoelace or a rope belonging to herdaughter.The objects, culled into the space within the frame, carry within them asecret life.As artist Kandinsky once wrote: "Everything that is dead quivers. Not only thethings of poetry, stars, moon, wood, flowers, but even a white trouser buttonglittering out of a puddle in the street ... Everything has a secret soul,which is silent more often than it speaks."The superimposed images of stars, ribbons, candles, vessels and women lend tothe coherence of that life; the works metamorphosise even as they hang there,drowned in and besieged by the tar that Yacoby has poured into the container.This struggle between the tar and the objects for "life" matches Yacoby'sconstant discovery and confirmation of symbolic meanings.Having studied Jewish mysticism, she has been surprised at how herself-created tales parallel folk-myths. For instance, the flying woman shedepicts in The Flying Woman and Golden Tree With Flying Souls, is symbolic offreedom. In mythology or folklore, a woman who had been fed with stones stillhas the ability to "fly".Overall, this exhibition is about the artist who, despite living in nearisolation, surrounded by the desert on three sides and a neighbourhood streeton the other, has the ability to "fly".Yet the profundity of her work speaks not only of the individual but also ofthe universal as it resonates within those of us who dare to look on whensomeone peels back the layer that covers the soul.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Jackson"s concert aims to make HIStory here: "Tickets selling well" and"Selangor bans concert by Michael Jackson"from SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96By Rebecca LimWith the logistics, nine shows can be put up in Singapore Indoor Stadium, saysproduction managerTHE Michael Jackson HIStory show, to be held at the National Stadium two weeksfrom now, promises to make history here as the biggest pop concert ever.It would be even bigger than the two staged by the self-proclaimed King of Popwhen he was here three years ago on his Dangerous tour, says Mr Peter Loh,production manager for the HIStory concerts in Singapore and Kuala Lumpur.Those previous concerts were, by far, the largest among pop concerts to havebeen staged here, says Mr Loh, who also worked on them. But the current showlooks set to dwarf them."With the logistics for the HIStory concert, you can put up nine shows in theSingapore Indoor Stadium," he adds. For example, five generators are beingshipped in to churn up 8,400 amperes of electricity needed to power theone-night show."The last time, the power generated was comparable to what was needed to lightup Ang Mo Kio," he says. "This time, we are using one more generator -enoughto light up another row of houses next to Ang Mo Kio."Some 500 tonnes of equipment and props, including 160 tonnes of steel for thestructure of the stage, will be shipped and flown here.It seems Jackson will cart in his own kitchen and air-conditioners to be puton stage to cool him down as he goes about his sizzling dance numbers.Over here, Mr Loh has to look for a host of equipment and material, includingtoilets, about 12,000 chairs and 36,000 sq ft of plywood.It will take almost a week to prepare for the concert, he adds.Work will begin on the Sunday before the concert on Oct 25, and a crane willhave to be moved into the stadium for the process.Mr Loh will be helped by 800 crew members, who will be working 10 hours eachover that period of time.On the day of the concert, 170 security men, 170 ticket collectors and 160ushers will be employed to ensure that things run smoothly when the expectedcrowd of 36,000 turns up.As a result of all the effort and the staggering logistics, the audience canexpect to see a lot of visual effects using video, virtual reality, lights andspectacular pyrotechnics, says Lushington Entertainments director MichaelRoche, who watched the MJ concerts in Amsterdam last week.His company is promoting the HIStory concerts here and in Kuala Lumpur."The consensus among those who saw it is that it is a much slicker show with alot more drama," he says."He only broke down to cry once," he adds.He observes that Jackson seemed "much more at ease" and was "having fun andenjoying himself on stage".Without revealing too much that will spoil the surprises, he says fans shouldwatch the guitarist closely and look out for some surprises when Jacksonperforms Beat It.He adds that there will also be a 60-minute countdown before the start of theconcert. Fans can look forward to fancy footwork from Jackson and his eightdancers.One can also expect some splitting images with the use of a big screen thathas a tracking system, called the Jumbotron, adds Mr Loh, who also went to theconcerts in Amsterdam."There is a lot of work which goes into ensuring that the images are alignedperfectly," he says.The opening sequence, which has been described in reviews on the Internet,uses a virtual reality film footage and has MJ bursting onto stage amidst muchpomp and pageantry in a gold spacesuit.Says Mr Roche: "I have been following concerts since I was eight or nine yearsold, and I still think there is something about Michael Jackson. His stagepresence is unbelievable."Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightSINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES                       via NewsNetOctober 8, 1996Tickets selling well: Jackson"s concert aims to make HIStory herefrom SINGAPORE STRAITS TIMES, 8 Oct 96ABOUT 4,300 tickets priced at $200 for the Michael Jackson HIStory concerthave been sold out.Certainly, Jacko's much-maligned reputation, with the reports of sex abuse ofchildren, has not had an effect on ticket sales.Concert promoters Lushington Entertainments say only limited tickets areavailable from the Overseas Union Bank, which has priority booking for itscard members.The majority of the $200 tickets for seats in front of the stage went on saleto the public on Sept 27. Those were sold out in two days.Tickets priced at $125, which are for seats in the sheltered grandstand arealso "moving fast". Also popular are the $55 tickets for the free-seatingsection in the gallery.Show promoters say tickets are also selling well to Jackson fans from theregion. One fan flew here from Indonesia to buy 100 tickets for friends andfamily members.Tickets at $55, $125 and $160 are available from Sistic outlets. OUB cardmembers are encouraged to call the Sistic hotline on 348-5555 soon forpreferred seats.Copyright, STP (1975) LimitedBack to Headline List WT03-B06-27IA087-000634-B043-161http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it99.html 205.156.212.5 19970122031656 text/html 18152HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:15:05 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:07 GMTContent-length: 17965Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it99.html Sample Issue Copyright SOURCEMEX -- ECONOMIC NEWS ON MEXICO via NewsNet January 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Political developments PRESIDENT ERNESTO ZEDILLO ANNOUNCES CONTROVERSIAL CABINET CHANGES (1159 words) Analysis & Commentary ZEDILLO'S FIRST YEAR: PRESIDENT, OR PRISONER OF CRISIS? (Part 1) (788 words) ZEDILLO'S FIRST YEAR: PRESIDENT, OR PRISONER OF CRISIS? (Part 2) (561 words) CopyrightSOURCEMEX -- ECONOMIC NEWS ON MEXICO via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996PRESIDENT ERNESTO ZEDILLO ANNOUNCESCONTROVERSIAL CABINET CHANGES    On Dec. 29, President Ernesto Zedillo announced the fifthcabinet reshuffle of his short tenure in office.  Among thechanges is a controversial decision to appoint Arsenio FarellCubillas--a close ally of former president Carlos Salinas deGortari--to head the comptroller's office (Secretaria de laControlaria Nacional de la Federacion y Administracion,Secodam).    Farell replaced Norma Samaniego, who was in the midst ofan investigation into the financial affairs of Raul Salinas deGortari, the brother of ex-president Salinas.  Raul Salinas isaccused of using high-level positions in government toillegally amass US$100 million in secret bank accounts inSwitzerland and other countries in Europe and the Americas.Some of the allegations also tie Raul Salinas to prominentMexican narcotraffickers (see SourceMex, 12/06/95).     The new charges of corruption against Raul Salinas comeon top of previous allegations that the former president'sbrother masterminded the assassination of Jose Francisco RuizMassieu, a high-level official of the governing InstitutionalRevolutionary Party (PRI) in October 1994.  In fact, RaulSalinas was already in federal custody, awaiting trial in theRuiz Massieu case when the new charges brought by Secodam andthe Attorney General's Office (PGR) were announced.     However, Farell's appointment to replace Samaniego hascreated strong skepticism that the full extent of corruptionalleged against Raul Salinas and other members of the family,including the former president himself, will ever be known.     As expected, Farell's appointment to head Secodamattracted immediate protests from members of oppositionparties and independent legislators in the Chamber ofDeputies.     "Now, with Farell, it is going to be practicallyimpossible for us to get the information," said Deputy AdolfoAguilar Zinser, an independent legislator.  "It is clear thatwe will face extraordinary obstacles to carry out theinvestigation."     This charge was echoed by Juan Guerra, a deputy for theopposition Democratic Revolution Party (PRD).     "I think Farell is being moved into the comptroller'soffice to cover up the tracks of the ex-president and hisbrother in the illicit enrichment scandal," said Guerra.     Farell served as labor secretary and as head of thecontroversial government security commission under Salinas,and he remains very close to the president.     Some political commentators suggested that Farell waschosen for the post to heal a split between Salinas andZedillo and within the PRI itself.  A major source of theconflict has been Zedillo's willingness to publicly blame ex-president Salinas for the devaluation of the peso in December1994.     Farell is said to have played a key role in trying tosooth a public dispute between Salinas and Zedillo early in1995, hosting a dinner for the two after Salinas ended a briefhunger strike in March.     Salinas has not only expressed strong resentment againstZedillo for linking him directly to the peso devaluation, butis also said to be very angry at the President for approvingthe arrest of his brother Raul in the Ruiz Massieu case.     Indeed, some political columnists suggest that as part ofthe truce between the current and former president, Zedilloagreed to back down on his vigorous investigation of theSalinas family.     "Raul Salinas has heard in prison that his family hasreceived guarantees of no further persecution," said columnistJose Urena in the daily newspaper La Jornada.  Urena, however,gave no further details of the alleged guarantees.     Some political columnists suggest that Farell'sappointment to Secodam, while easing tensions within the PRI,will also further erode Zedillo's credibility.     "This is a monumental error," said prominent columnistMiguel Angel Granados Chapa.  "Apart from signifying arevalidation of the Salinas system, there seems to be no logicin his appointment."     Despite all the criticisms, the Zedillo administrationattempted to cast a positive light on Farell's appointment.     "The new head of Secodam, with his ample knowledge of thelaw and ample government experience, will expedite themodernization of the federal government and take stronger andmore efficient action toward preventing and combatingcorruption," the administration said in a prepared statement.     The controversy over Farell's nomination as head ofSecodam appeared to overshadow Zedillo's appointment ofeconomist Jesus Reyes Heroles to head the Energy Secretariat(SE), replacing Ignacio Pichardo Pagaza.  Unlike the Farellcase, this appointment was met with very little opposition,and in fact was applauded by opposition legislators because ofPichardo's departure from office.     Pichardo, who was considered a member of the so-called"dinosaurs" or "old guard" of the PRI, will be reassigned toa yet-to-be-determined diplomatic post.     Reyes Heroles, who leaves his post as director of thenational public works bank (Banco Nacional de Obras Publicas,BANOBRAS), obtained a degree in economics from theMassachussets Institute of Technology (MIT).  According to anofficial statement, Reyes will "oversee the expansion andmodernization of Mexico's energy sector."  Among other things,Reyes will play a key role in the privatization of thecountry's petrochemical plants, which are currently operatedby the state-run oil company PEMEX.     Among other minor changes announced by Zedillo in theDecember cabinet reshuffle was the appointment of CarlosAlmada Lopez as his chief government spokesperson, replacingCarlos Salomon Camara.  This was partly seen as a move by thepresident to spruce up his image.  Salomon was widelycriticized for rocky relations with the Mexican news media.Meantime, Samaniego, who left the post as head of Secodam, wasnamed as a special adviser to Zedillo.     With the changes announced in late December, Zedillo hasreplaced almost one-half of his original cabinet.  The mostprominent departure was Jaime Serra Puche as financesecretary, who received a large share of the blame for thedevaluation of the peso (see SourceMex, 02/08/95).     Another major departure last year was that of Zedillo'sclose ally Esteban Moctezuma, who left the post of interiorsecretary in mid-1995.  According to political analysts,Moctezuma had proven ineffective in dealing with a number ofcrisis situations affecting the government, such as the lackof progress on talks with the Zapatista National LiberationArmy (EZLN) in Chiapas and the failed efforts to reachagreement with the two largest opposition parties on politicalreforms.     The resignation in mid-1995 of then-public educationsecretary Fausto Alzati also proved to be a majorembarrassment to the Zedillo administration.  Alzati wasforced to leave his post after admitting he lied about hiseducational background.  The departures of Moctezuma andAlzati were announced in July of last year (see SourceMex,07/05/95).     Political analysts suggest that the latest cabinetchanges announced in December are expected to greatly benefitInterior (Gobernacion) Secretary Emilio Chuayffet Chemor, whois close to many of the appointees.     "Chuayffet must be smiling from ear to ear," said Reformacolumnist F. Bartolome.  "His team and influence are expandingin the midst of the current administration."     Indeed, Zedillo's new spokesperson, Carlos Almada, is aclose ally of Chuayffet.  Almada left a high-level post in theInterior Secretariat (Secretaria de Gobernacion, SG) to takeover his new post.  (Sources: Agence France-Presse, 12/30/95;Excelsior, Reforma, Reuter, 12/30/95, 12/31/95; La Jornada,12/30/95, 01/03/96)Back to Headline List CopyrightSOURCEMEX -- ECONOMIC NEWS ON MEXICO via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996ZEDILLO'S FIRST YEAR: PRESIDENT,OR PRISONER OF CRISIS? (Part 1)                 By John Ross[The author is a freelance journalist who has written onMexican political and economic affairs for many years.]     When outgoing president Carlos Salinas affixed the sashwith the colors of the Mexican flag--red, white, and green--across Ernesto Zedillo's chest on Dec. 1, 1994, Mexicoappeared to be on the rebound after a nightmare year of Indianrebellion and political assassination.  The new presidentinherited an economy that appeared to hold great promise forMexico due to the enactment of the North American Free TradeAgreement (NAFTA).  Additionally, his long-ruling (66 years)Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) managed to win with50% of the votes in national elections in August 1994.     However, less than three weeks after his installation,massive capital flight and the time bomb of short-term debtobligations left behind by Salinas, forced Zedillo to devaluethe peso, triggering a chain reaction that quickly plungedMexico into an economic and social crisis which has coloredevery minute of the new president's first year in office.     Since the so-called "December errors," Zedillo hasstaggered from one crisis to the next, like a shipwreckedsoul, overwhelmed by the flood of events.  In February, as theeconomy crashed in flames, Zedillo bowed to the military andordered a full-scale offensive into the Lacandon Jungle baseof the popular Zapatista National Liberation Army (EZLN),setting off a worldwide tide of protest.     At the end of February, as public disdain for Salinasbegan to soar, Zedillo gave the green light to arrest theformer president's brother for masterminding the murder of thePRI's secretary-general, Jose Francisco Ruiz Massieu.     For his part, Salinas took umbrage, declared a hungerstrike, and flew off into self-exile in Canada, from where hehas unremittingly sniped at Zedillo's fumbling administrationever since.     Meanwhile, the PRI was losing state elections to thecenter-right National Action Party (PAN) by lopsided marginsand the bottom continued to fall out of the economy.  Indeed,a drop of 10.5% in the GDP during the second quarter was a64-year low.  So desperate has the economic slide become thatwhen the GDP tumbled only 9.6% in the third quarter, thenumbers were hailed by Zedillo's Finance Secretary GuillermoOrtiz Martinez as a sign that "the crisis was over."     In September of 1995, when Zedillo went before the nationto deliver his annual state of the union message (the shortestever), the words most used to describe Mexico's current stateof affairs were "grave" and "crisis."  These terms were useda total of 27 times.     From 1981 through 1989, Mexicans endured versions of "LaCrisis."  These were actually a series of crises associatedwith short-term debt obligations and the falling price of oil.Lyable.Moratoriums, led by debtors' unions like El Barzon, have soconstricted liquidity that some bankers admit privately theironly cash flow comes from money linked to narcotrafficking.     Zedillo's crisis is also a monetary crisis.  Since the"December errors," the peso has lost 55% of its worth and someanalysts predict the exchange rate will soon reach 10 nuevopesos per US$1.00.  Indeed, Mexico's currency has becomeextremely vulnerable to speculators, forcing the Banco deMexico (central bank) to intervene by spending hundreds ofmillions of dollars loaned last February by the US and theInternational Monetary Fund.     Despite the interventions, the peso is buying less andless every day.  Inflation is expected to reach 50% in 1995,a seven-year high, and it now takes two and one half minimumsalaries to buy the basic food basket.     Zedillo's crisis is not yet a debt crisis as was the casewith La Crisis of 1982.  However, default remains a strongpossibility in the near future.  The nation's combined publicand private debt ended 1995 at close to US$162 billion, 36% ofthe GDP and the highest dollar amount ever.  Mexico, which isnow banking export oil revenue in the US Federal Reserve ascollateral for the US-IMF bailout, transfered US$19 billion tothe exterior in debt service in 1995.  In 1996, the governmentis expected to pay out another US$25 billion to service thedebt.     Zedillo's crisis is a also a crisis for the super-rich.The economic boom under the Salinas administration created 24Mexican billionaires, but during 1995 only 10 of thosebillionaires remained in the rankings of Forbes magazine.     But Zedillo's crisis is mostly a crisis for the poor andthe extremely poor.  According to the Social DevelopmentSecretariat (Sedesol), 2.5 million poor are at risk of fallingfrom poverty to extreme poverty, which is defined by theUnited Nations as an inability to earn enough to meet one'snutritional needs.  Under Zedillo, nearly one-fifth of thepopulation is going to bed hungry every night.  (Cont.)Back to Headline List CopyrightSOURCEMEX -- ECONOMIC NEWS ON MEXICO via NewsNetJanuary 3, 1996ZEDILLO'S FIRST YEAR: PRESIDENT,OR PRISONER OF CRISIS? (Part 2)     Zedillo's crisis is a nutritional crisis for manyMexicans.  The price of tortillas has risen three times thisyear, for an accumulated 50% increase.  The government'snational nutrition institute (Instituto Nacional de Nutricion)reports 41% of all births in public hospitals are low weight,due to poor maternal nutrition.     The crisis is also one of health care.  Mexico hasregistered more cholera cases in 1995 than in any other yearsince reporting began.  A regional epidemic of dengue fever iswracking poor southern Mexican villages.     Zedillo's crisis has impacted education as well.According to one organization that advocates for the rights offamilies, 150,000 students have had to transfer from privateto pubic schools, straining facilities and exhausting schoollunch programs.     Zedillo's crisis is also an emotional crisis.  Accordingto statistics from Mexico City authorities, a record 40 peoplehave flung themselves before subway trains in the capital thisyear.  Meantime, El Barzon claims that 400 of its members,including its leader in Coahuila state, have committed suicidesince the crisis began, due to financial troubles.     Indeed, Miguel Garcia, a psychologist who runs a MexicoCity suicide hot line, established after the devastating 1985earthquake, says that La Crisis has taken a more severe tollthan the earthquake.  "For many, an economic crisis quicklybecomes an emotional one," Garcia said.     Zedillo's crisis has been worsened by natural disasters.As the peso skidded last January, the Popocateptl volcanobelched black smoke outside of Mexico City, causing thousandsto flee in panic.  Mexico has also sustained severe damagefrom two hurricanes in 1995, one of which knocked out 90% ofoff-shore oil production in October.  In addition, the countryhas had to cope with a series of frightening earthquakes,including a temblor on Oct. 10 that measured 7.2 on theRichter scale, and which leveled hotels and other tourist-related infrastructure in some areas of Mexico's PacificCoast.     Unlike the debt crisis of 1982, Mexicans have not quietlyaccepted the sacrifices imposed upon them.  Rebellion andsocial protest are thriving.  Indeed, Mexico City authoritiesrecorded an average of eight marches a day in 1995.Demonstrators daily block boulevards, banks, and even theMexican Stock Exchange (BMV), curtailing activity on thetrading floor.  When recruiters failed to appear for a jobfair this September, 20,000 professionals battled riot police,using their briefcases as weapons.     While the capitan president to consider stepping aside.     For some, such as the PAN, Zedillo's crisis has createdunprecedented opportunities in municipal and gubernatorialelections.  Indeed, Guanajuato's PAN Governor, Vicente Fox,describes the crisis faced by Zedillo and the PRI as a"pinata" for his party.  The PAN unseated the PRI from agubernatorial post in Jalisco in 1995 and managed to retainthe gubernatorial posts in Baja California and Guanajuatostates.  In addition, the PAN won a number of municipal racesin several large cities in Mexico, including Guadalajara andPuebla.     The crisis has also proven a boon for some in the US andMexico, including investors in Mexican mutual funds, foreigntravelers, and consumers who can afford to take advantage ofthe growing number of bargains offered by supermarket chainsand department stores.     Another major beneficiary of the recent economicsituation in Mexico is La Crisis editor Carlos Ramirez, whonotes sales of his bulletin have continued to grow steadilysince he started publication earlier in the year.Back to Headline List WT03-B06-28IA087-000634-B043-199http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/it87.html 205.156.212.5 19970122031717 text/html 56789HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:15:17 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:39:11 GMTContent-length: 56602Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/it87.html Sample Issue Copyright SOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SOUTH AFRICA'S FLYING START FOR 1996 (739 words) ZIMBABWE - STREET RIOTS AND FOREIGN JUNKETS (798 words) ADVERTISING PROSPECTS FOR 1996: "MINDSETS WILL HAVE TO CHANGE" (1002 words) EXPORT CREDIT & COLLECTION SURVEY (263 words) MEDIA EXPLOSION IMPACTS ON BRAND NAMES (797 words) INDIAN OCEAN STATES OUTSTRIP AFRICAN MARKETS (322 words) FEAR AND RESENTMENT OVER SA'S INCREASED DUTY (595 words) S A'S RUNAWAY TOURISM BOOM (845 words) INDUSTRIAL TAKEOFF AHEAD FOR SALDANHA BAY (474 words) SAA AIMS FOR NEW HEIGHTS (866 words) SA AGRICULTURAL PROSPECTS SOAR (432 words) SOUTH AFRICAN ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS (473 words) 12 MONTH EXCHANGE RATE FORECAST (107 words) INTEREST RATES AND YIELDS (101 words) NATIONAL ACCOUNTS (65 words) BALANCE OF PAYMENTS (24 words) INFLATION FORECAST (73 words) CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SOUTH AFRICA'S FLYING START FOR 1996It has been an incredible start to the year. After Christmas financialmarkets in Johannesburg stormed ahead as economic indicators and goldall turned in the right direction. For many fund managers only now backafter the year-end sojourn on the Cape beaches, it's been a difficultscenario to adjust to.Gold, as always a key factor in the SA economy, is at least part of thereason for optimism in financial markets. The price has been reachingfor $400 an ounce in recent weeks, which has led to a 17% gain in theJSE All Gold index since Christmas. Within this have been somephenomenal performances with certain shares rising more than 30%.The reason for gold's surge is, as always, rather difficult to pindown. Analysts have been pointing to the shortfall of new mined goldwhen compared with supply for some time. The year end report publishedby Gold Fields Minerals Services highlighted that demand reached arecord 3642 tons in 1995, while output was down with the SA mines'production falling 10% to 523 tons - the lowest level in 40 years.Not by gold aloneThat there was such large hedging activity in 1995 probably held thegold price back. With the massive forwards and option deals of the SAproducers now completed, the mood in the gold market has improved andsome analysts, mostly chartists, are talking a price well over $410 anounce for 1996 compared with the $380 level of 1995.But it has not just been gold which has buoyed the market and led torather optimistic forecasts for the year ahead. During 1995 SA'sReserve bank had notable success on the inflation front, with the ratefalling from 10% to under 7%. This contributed to a bull run in thebond market in 1995, with rates falling from nearly 17% to 13.6%.Foreign demand was in part behind the run. In 1995, foreigners were netbuyers of nearly R2bn of SA bonds on the JSE alone. This compares withR1.2bn in 1994. While there has been some profit taking in January, thedemand has contributed to large capital inflows and strength in therand. The rand is currently trading at 3.62 to the dollar, which isstronger than many analysts had forecast a year ago.Further rand strength is not being ruled out, and there is growingconsensus that further relaxation in exchange control will take place,possibly in the March budget. In the first quarter of 1995, thegovernment merged the financial and commercial rands and promisedfurther relaxation if capital inflows and inflation allowed. Later inthe year, asset swaps by local institutions were given the nod.Economic data suggest the Bank will be comfortably able to relaxcontrols even further. The sharp R2.2bn rise in December's gold andforeign exchange reserves - in a month normally characterised byseasonal outflows  - has pushed cover on imports to nearly two monthscompared with the Reserve Bank's three month target. Further inflows inthe next quarter should make three months cover possible.This strong reserve position and inflation being under control suggestthat local institutions may be granted further leave to investoffshore. Speculation is mounting that from March the Bank will allowthem to invest a proportion of their cashflows internationally.Other signs for a more liberal new year come from recent governmentstatements about privatisation. While labour has responded angrily, itappears that government is determined to sell some of the state'sassets to fund development. Deputy president Thabo Mbeki announced inDecember the state's intention to sell off part of SA Airways, Telkom,the airports company, Autonet and Transkei Airways.Labour's response was one of anger at a lack of consultation. Protestsand work stoppages will probably slow the privatisation process. Butthat it will go ahead is reasonably certain. At present the state islooking at ways to cushion the impact on labour of privatisation.With good economic news and booming markets, South Africa has entered1996 in good spirits and with the prospect that the economy will movefurther down the road of economic liberation to follow what hashappened on the political front in recent years.The major blight on the landscape, however, is the violence in KwaZulu-Natal and crime, neither of which seems much closer to resolution.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ZIMBABWE - STREET RIOTS AND FOREIGN JUNKETSThe year has begun with as much cheerful portent for Zimbabwe and itseconomy as the soothsayer who told Julius Caesar to keep his eye on theIdes of March.Within days of each other, the country's most authoritative economicperiodicals , issued by the Standard Chartered Bank (SCB) and AngloAmerican Corporation-owned First Merchant Bank (FMB), have expresseddisturbing misgivings over the country's deepening economic crisis, andthe government's apparent inability to grapple with it seriously.A promising start to the rainy season, says SCB, may provide gdp growthof at least 5%, if the wet weather holds out. But working against thekeenly-awaited rebound in agriculture, until now seen as the engine ofZimbabwe's growth, are high real interest rates that are unlikely todrop until, at best, the latter half of the year.Whether the punitive lending rates - a bank  overdraft attracts 41% -can be pulled down, depends on whether the government can reduce itsbudget deficit in a sustained manner, instead of its current ad hocstyle, the bank says. State spending cuts are in force, with realgovernment expenditure set to drop 10% in the fiscal year to June 30,but the main cuts have been in public sector investment, which, thebank says , "is precisely the wrong solution for a country inZimbabwe's situation."The cutbacks will add to 1995's "substantially lower"rate ofinvestment, and any recovery in the manufacturing sector, withproduction running at its lowest in 11 years, is expected to be"relatively weak"because of the deep-seated problems faced by thesector.The fundamental issue is the vigorous implementation of ESAP II, thesecond phase of the country's IMF-designed economic reforms, followingthe failure of the first, says the bank. At the top of the list ismacroeconomic stabilisation with critical reforms that includeprivatisation of state-owned companies, the establishment of exportprocessing zones and an industrial strategy.So far, the bank notes, there has not even been any hint of open debateon reform - in the way that South Africa published white papers anddraft programmes - being offered by the government. FMB attacks theissue of unemployment, and is rather less restrained in its commentthan SCB.In the six years since 1990, when ESAP I began, 820 000 people withfour or more years secondary school behind them, have entered a jobmarket that has been able to find work in the formal sector for lessthan 20% of them. By the year 2000, another 750 000 will have movedthrough the same educational process, but by then there will be as manyof them with the same qualifications in the ages of 17 - 30 but whohave no work, as there are no formal sector jobs.It is automatically assumed, says FMB, that the government is givingthe unemployment crisis its highest possible priority, but this hardlyappears to be the case.If the jobless crisis had been caused by deliberate measures taken by aforeign power, "we would consider them acts of war. But we are doingthem to ourselves,"the bank says.Export processing zones could have been one way of absorbing some ofthe surplus highly educated labour pool, says FMB. But it has taken thegovernment seven years to come up with legislation promulgating EPZs,and now, it adds, implementation is being delayed yet again, this timewith the trivial issue of who is going to be on the boards to run thezones. "We can already see signs of a potentially destructive coursebeing taken as the river of unemployed becomes a flood of angry,disillusioned people,"warned FMB.Mugabe shows no sign of sharing the concerns of the two bulletins.Hispreoccupation this year is to stand in presidential elections, and in aNew Year interview with the state-controlled daily The Herald, spoke ofhis vision in his imminent third term as head of state, of dramaticallyenhanced industrial development and heavy state investment ininfrastructure and agriculture. And anyone hoping for a New Year minicabinet shuffle bearing a new minister of finance - three months afterthe death of previous minister Aristson Chambati - to take charge ofthe reforms desperately needed, was disappointed.The last months of 1995 were marked by unprecented anti-governmentstreet riots.   Deep fissures also appeared in the monolithic rulingZANU(PF) party as voters put an independent MP and mayor into office inconstituencies where the party's dominance was previously unquestioned.The public perception of how Mugabe feels the situation is continualjunkets abroad with huge delegations of officials and members of hisfamily, and pay increases to himself and senior party members in theorder of around 130%.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996ADVERTISING PROSPECTS FOR 1996: "MINDSETS WILL HAVE TO CHANGE"At a time when new media opportunities continue to fragment thechannels of commercial communication, an alarming trend has appeared inSouth African media consumption: people are reading, watching andlistening less.This decline, in evidence over the last two or three years, poses thegreatest challenge facing advertisers as 1996 dawns.Simply put, not only is the pie getting smaller, but what is left isbeing cut into smaller slices. This makes it more complex and expensiveto reach the same audiences as before.Newspaper circulations have shown an average decline of 7% (for the 26leading urban dailies and weeklies between the first half of 1994 andthe same period of 1995.) But some have suffered significantly greaterlosses and over a longer period of time.Circulation of The Star, formerly the country's biggest daily, hasfallen 23% since its 1990 peak, from 235,000 to 182,000. Half the losswas experienced in the last year.Initially there was a hope that readership would not decline as well,but would be compensated for by greater pass-along readership --acommon response to economic hardship. But when the readership surveycame in ti showed a 21% decline in "reading events" since 1993: thenumber of times when somebody picks up a newspaper or magazine duringits issue period has fallen from 46.4 million in 1993 to 36.9 millionin 1995.This is of critical concern to advertisers, who are attracted toadvertise in a newspaper primarily by the number of readers it canoffer.TV viewing has also slumped, though recently the pace of the declinehas slowed. In the first half of 1995, peak-time audiences were 20%lower than they had been two years earlier. More recently, they havebeen running about 10% behind 1994's figures.The blame for this has been placed on the South African BroadcastingCorporation (SABC), which has converted its bias in favour of whiteAfrikaners into one in favour of black Africans.`What is clearly happening,' says Hennie van Deventer, chief executiveof the Afrikans publishing house, National Newspapers, "is thatAfrikaans people, estranged by the strange happenings at the SABC, areturning to newspapers to provide them with the information they need."His belief is supported by the fact that Afrikaans newspapers are amongthe handful of exceptions to the general decline in circulations.Adds Ken Owen, editor of the country's biggest newspaper, the 500 000 -circulation Sunday Times: "It's hard to escape the suspicion thatrightwing newspapers, including the Afrikaans press, succeed becausethey give dispossessed whites a voice."The picture is more erratic in radio listening, with some stationsshowing massive increases and others showing equally large losses.Among the services previously positioned to appeal to whites, declinesof up to 42% have been recorded. In the SABC's English-languagechannel, whose audience tends to be older and white, programmes andannouncers were changed to reflect the new political environment. Theaudience fell from 643,000 to 373,000 in a year.African language stations, on the other hand, have shown a slight butnot statistically significant fall. While some see this as evidence ofwhite racism, it is more constructive to view the issue in marketingterms."Strong newspaper circulations depend on a strong sense of community,"says Gail York, research manager at Times Media, one of the four bignewspaper groups. "The papers that appear to have held fast have asense of community. Those that have a vast demographic spread ofreaders appear to be the ones that have suffered the most."In addition to the Afrikaans newspapers, others whose circulations havenot declined include Business Day (serving the business community),local community newspapers and newspapers targeted at the blackcommunity.Noel Coburn, joint managing director of Caxton, the leading publisherof community newspapers, says declining circulations are attributableto a failure to remain "relevant" to their consumers.Numerous other factors probably play a part in the trend, includingdisaffection with an unvaried diet of "bad" news (particularly crime),a deterioration in news interest after the 1994 general election, anend to costly circulation wars in which sales were boosted bycompetitions and prizes and, of course, the proliferation of new media.Satellite TV damp squibA flood of new magazines and one new newspaper have been launched, 80community radio stations have been licensed (of which 56 so far are inoperation), and new satellite TV channels have also come on stream.(Although it must be said that the satellite TV era has thus far proveda damp squib because of production problems at the factoriesmanufacturing reception equipment and decoders.)What all this means is that advertisers are finding it harder and morecostly than ever to reach their markets. Says Chris Rainford, mediadirector of Bates South Africa, a leading advertising agency: "It usedto be possible to reach 60% or more of your target market through asingle TV channel. This is no longer possible.""Previously high reach was always a given" says Gordon Muller, mediadirector of Saatchi & Saatchi Klerck & Barrett. "I am telling myclients the party is over. You can no longer go on TV with anobjective of reaching 80% of your target market. Now we may set reachobjectives of 40%. With this lower level of exposure, marketers willwant their advertising to be more focused. Mindsets will have tochange."The good newsThere may be some considerable compensation, however. Economic growthin 1996 is expected to be at least 4.5%, and given the end of thedevastating drought of the last six years could be even higher.Advertising expenditure tends to be a highly volatile concurrenteconomic indicator, and it is likely to rise even more strongly. "Weexpect an excellent year"says Reg Lascaris, whose ad agency, HuntLascaris TBWA, is the third biggest in the country.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996EXPORT CREDIT & COLLECTION SURVEY                        Exchange                        Delays     Collection   Preferred   MinCountry                 (months)   Experience   Terms**     Terms***Southern AfricaAngola                  3          Poor-Fair    CLC         CLCMalawi                  3          Fair         CLC         ULCMauritius               2          Fair         ULC         SDMozambique              2          Fair         CLC         ULCSouth Africa            3          Fair         ULC         SDTanzania                3          Fair         ULC         ULCZaire - Old             5          Poor         CLC         CLC      - New             3          Poor         CLC         CLCZambia                  3          Mostly LC    ULC         ULCZimbabwe                2          Good         ULC         SDRest of AfricaBenin                   4          Poor         CLC         CLCBurundi                 9          Poor         CLC         CLCCameroon                4          Fair         ULC         CLCChad                    2          Poor-Fair    CLC         CLCCongo (PR)              4          Fair         CLC         ULCDjibouti (Rep of)       3          Fair         ULC         ULCEthiopia - Old         60          Poor         CIA         CIA         - New          7          Poor         CIA         CIAGhana                   4          Fair-Good    CLC         ULCIvory Coast             2          Fair-Good    ULC         SDKenya                   3          Fair-Poor    CLC         SDLiberia                 3          Poor         CIA         CLCMauritania              5          Poor         CLC         ULCNigeria                 3          Fair         CLC         CLCRwanda                  7          Poor         CLC         CLCSenegal                 3          Fair         ULC         ULCSeychelles              3          Good-Fair    SD          SDTogo                    4          Fair-Poor    ULC         ULCTunisia                 3          Fair         ULC         ULCUganda                  4          Fair         ULC         ULCCollection SurveyExchange Delays: time taken from due date for the importer todeposit local currency with the central bank or other authorisingbody and for hard currency to be transferred to the exporter.Collection Experience: the risk attached to exchange delays.** Recommended                    *** Most liberal acceptable termsCLC: Confirmed letter of credit   ULC: Unconfirmed letter of creditCAD: Cash against documents       CIA: Cash in advanceOld/New: pre/post-rescheduling    OA: Open AccountSD: Sight draft                   30/SD to 180/SD: days SDBack to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996MEDIA EXPLOSION IMPACTS ON BRAND NAMESCadbury's may not melt under an assault of Mars Bars, but SA hamburgershave become hidden under Mac's and Pepsi is trying to float Coke out ofthe market.While SA consumers are facing an unprecedented barrage of foreign goodscoming onto the market, SA manufacturers - in particular top corporateslike SA Breweries and the Rembrandt group - are waking up to the needto develop strong brand identities.Advertising - the media it supports, and the companies that supportboth, face challenging times in SA. Cape Town's 3-D advertising agencynotes that a media explosion, "unprecedented in history", is upon us.Consumers are also confronted with interactive TV, electronicnewspapers, advertising disks, selective binding magazines and theInternet.But Raymond Perrier, of Interbrand-Sampson points out that thisplethora of information may lead some consumers to retire to the safetyof well-known brands, "for example, faced with dozens of new computersand computer packages they may retreat to names they know well such asIBM, instead of experimenting."The value of brand equityThe value of brand equity, not well observed in SA, has increasinglybecome more tangible - when Philip Morris bought Kraft it paid fourtimes the book value and when Nestle acquired Wilson Rowntreeintangible assets represented more than 80% of the purchase price. Thevalue of a brand lies in its expected future earnings.Perrier suggests that part of the reason why SA's undervalue theirbrands and rely on advertising agencies for branding, is because mostmajor corporates lack marketeers on their boards. " A top businessman Irecently spoke to here noted that more time will be spent in boardmeetings discussing the position of a new plant, than how to advancethe brands it will produce."Perrier says a brand is more than just packaging and advertising, it isabout the adoption of a corporate culture. He suggests that the successof British Airways new branding was that it  not only looked atadvertising, it changed the tail design of aircrafts, uniforms andretrained staff, with company policy reflecting that they had 2500brand managers - or each staff member.The 50 biggest global advertisers spent more than R130bn on thepromotion of their brands during 1993 - or the equivalent of almost athird of SA's Gross National Product. The USA and Europe together spent80% of that total. Europe has 20 of the world's top spendingadvertisers, followed by Japan with 14, the USA with 13 - including topranked spender, Procter and Gamble (R16bn) - and South Korea withthree.Perrier says SA has to avoid what happened in Eastern Europe when thatopened up and consumers quickly switched to more effectively brandedwestern goods. What SA could become, he suggests, is a country likeSingapore which serves as a springboard to the rest of Asia, and SA toAfrica.3-D suggests that ads may become event or programme specific, or smallradio stations may - as some linked newspapers already do - grouptogether and sell advertising packages.The big unknown, however, is the Internet or the World Wide Web, itrelays information to around 50m computers and in SA - one of thefastest growing users of the net - there are an estimated 230 000users. 3-D Agency points out that it "is the first and only unownedmedium in the world. It is uncensored (and uncensorable), totallydemocratic and omni-directional. It is the fastest growingcommunication medium in history."But already major SA ad agency Hunt Lascaris is creating a divisionsolely to place advertising on the Internet for clients.More South Africans are becoming computer literate, even schools inremote areas have been funded by SA and foreign corporates who haveprovided solar panels for the generation of electricity and computersto advance skills of previously disadvantaged students.Research completed last year by Microsoft and Market Research Africashows that one in four SA homes in major urban areas have personalcomputers and at least a third of employees use a computer in theworkplace.  There is a strong awareness of the need to be techno-literate, with 85% of those surveyed saying computer skills wereimportant to achieve educational and business success.But it also showed that a third of South Africans are still intimidatedby computers, of whom over half were in the surprisingly young agegroup of 18 to 34. Hewlett Packard has noted that South Africans areturning over computers four times faster than any other nation in theworld at present.What consumers need in the huge tidal wave of information swamping overthem, is brands they can hold onto.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996INDIAN OCEAN STATES OUTSTRIP AFRICAN MARKETSIndian Ocean states in the form of Mauritius, India, Pakistan andSingapore offer far greater potential for South african trade in thenext few years than all its African markets.Figures released by the Indian Consulate in Durban indicate that thetwo-way trade in 1994 between India and South Africa accounted forR900m (#160m), while in the first nine months of 1995 alone it hadsoared to R780m.Trade with Mauritius is expanding even more strongly, and in particularexports from South Africa to this Indian Ocean island are soaring.Exports to Mauritius have grown from roughly 1bn rupees in 1991 to 5bnrupees in 1994 helped by the strong growth of the Mauritius economy,the relatively low value of the rand and the elimination of sanctions.This growth in exports is concentrated in the fields of iron, steel,chemicals, foodstuffs and beverages, and is expected to continueflourishing. Sharp rises in exports of building materials from SouthAfrica to the island are expected in view of the boom in hotelconstruction in Mauritius. At present, however, the rapid growth intrade between the two countries is overwhelmingly in South Africa'sfavour, with exports to the Republic from Mauritius amounting to only65m rupees in 1994.On the other hand, cooperation in foreign tourism between the twocountries could emerge on a significant scale in view of the plans todevelop foreign cruise tourism in Eastern and Southern Africa recentlyannounced by the Port Management Associations of Eastern and SouthernAfrica. It has been claimed that South Africa could double its worldmarket share of cruise vacations within two years.Indian Ocean states like Mauritius and India are important to SouthAfrica because of their rapidly growing economies, and the scope theyprovide for the sale of a broad spread of manufactured products whichis in contrast to the Republic's predominantly mineral exports to theindustrial countries.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996FEAR AND RESENTMENT OVER SA'S INCREASED DUTYThe decision of the South African government to introduce high duty ongoods of other countries passing through it is expected to affectmultilateral trade between SA and its neighbours.With suspicion growing in some trade circles of the Southern AfricaDevelopment Community  (SADC) to which South Africa is the latest andeleventh member, it is feared that the proposed 125% duty on customsclearance will stifle fair competition and the trade efforts of othercountries.The South African government has temporarily waived the introduction ofthe custom duty to February , anticipating trade protests from someSADC member countries who utilise its rail-road routes and seaports forboth their imports and exports.In fact, the 125% customs duty proposal has come at a time when someSADC member states are questioning the benefits they were deriving fromSouth Africa, which as they see it continues to pursue almost the sametrade practices as under the former apartheid regime.For example, some SADC countries suspect that South Africa wasdeliberately keeping them out of the Southern African Customs Union(SACU) arrangement in order for it to continue dominating tradebenefits with Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia and Swaziland. The SouthAfrican government has denied that this was the case with itstraditional partners in the customs union.However, South Africa's perceived intention to dominate the trade ofthe sub-region is expected to draw a backlash from other SADC membercountries, more especially those with a comparatively strong industrialbase and economic potential for growth. Already Zimbabwe has threatenedto retaliate over the withdrawal of some trade concessions by itssouthern neighbour.According to trade statistics, customs duty on a number of goods andservices between Zimbabwe and South Africa has increased some 200 to300% in the past six months.For Zambia which has been dependent on South Africa for almost 66% ofits trade since the dawn of multiparty democracy and economicliberalisation in 1991, the proposed rise in customs duty could beextremely serious for the country's tottering economy.The Zambia Association of Chambers of Commerce (ZACCI) is particularlyworried and said the bond requirement of 125% duty on customs clearancewhich South Africa wants to impose on its trade neighbours would havefar-reaching effects on the general conduct of trade in the sub-region.According to ZACCI executive director Mr Gideon Phiri, the trademeasure would have a negative effect on the embattled economy of hiscountry, more especially in the manufacturing, trading and agriculturalsectors.Landlocked Zambia, which at the moment moves 45% of its cargo throughthe port of Durban in South Africa, is likely to suffer the most shouldthe Pretoria government decide to stick to the new customs duty. Re-routing its goods through other countries would be too costly for itsrun down economy.A top government official in the ministry of finance in Lusakaexpressed the local feeling that South Africa owed his countrycompensation for the country's devastated economy because of the highprice that Zambia paid for South Africa's liberation struggle againstthe former apartheid administration when South Africa's AfricanNational Congress (ANC) operated its administrative office in Lusaka."We lost lives and properties to give freedom to our colleagues and isthis what we get in return?" the official asked.This is the general feeling among various Front-line states (Zambia,Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Angola, and Tanzania), that South Africa shouldcarry some responsibility for the damage their economies suffered insupporting its liberation movement.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996S A'S RUNAWAY TOURISM BOOMForeign tourism generated R7bn (#1.24 bn) in foreign exchange in 1994and probably reached R9bn in 1995. The boom in foreign tourism isexpected to be sustained in 1996, and the South African Tourism Boardclaims that the government is hopeful that this industry will overtakegold mining within four years to become the biggest earner of foreignexchange at around R20 bn a year.This phenomenal growth in foreign tourism has already meant that theSouth African hotel industry is enjoying a boom which is expected tolast for several years.Hotel bookings for the first nine months of 1995 were more than 33% upfrom 1994's figure of 7.6 m "bed nights" to more than 10 m "bed nights"according to the latest figures from the Central StatisticalService(CSS). The CSS figures indicate that the number of "bed nights"sold will have broken all records for 1995.In September 1995 alone, hotels in aggregate accommodated almost doublethe number of overseas visitors compared with the same month in 1994,with the figure up to 203 422 compared with 109 939. More than 50% ofthe foreigners who visited the country over the nine month period toSeptember 1995 came from Europe, led by the United Kingdom and Germany,followed by Africa with 17% and the Far East with 15%.For 1995 as a whole the number of foreign tourists is estimated to haveincreased by 45%.The boom in the hotel industry has spread to the bed and breakfastsector which has traditionally been an insignificant sector of themarket. This sector has now grown into an important segment of theaccommodation industry since the launch of John Read's pilot project inJohannesburg in 1984. Guest houses have also mushroomed, some of whichfocus on offering farm accommodation to tourists in various scenicparts of the country.Numerous new hotels are coming on stream, including the R180m ParkHyatt hotel of Hyatt International which has been built in Rosebank,Johannesburg, and opened in December 1995. In November 1995 the DonGroup launched a R35m expansion upgrading drive which will increase thecapacity of its executive apartment hotel chain by 10% by the end of1996.Sandton in Johannesburg is a particularly popular area for new hoteldevelopments. This is illustrated by the start of building by theHilton International group of a 324 roomed hotel costing R203m in thearea, while Stocks Hotels and Resorts plans to open the Sandton SquareMichael Angelo Hotel in May 1996, costing R130m. Rand Merchant Bank,meanwhile, has indicated that it is conducting negotiations with localand overseas  groups to build a hotel as part of its 8 hectare site inSandton.In addition, Golden Tulip International, the 10th largest hotel groupin the world, has established a South African operation which aims todevelop and operate 20 hotels in the next two years, starting off withthe signing of a management contract for the R125 m Spier hotel complexin the Western Cape, D'Owerse Werf in Stellenbosch and Sanbonani inMpumalanga.The boom in foreign tourism is such that domestic travellers at thisstage comprise only a small part of hotel occupancy, and businessmantravelling between Cape Town and Johanesburg are finding it difficultto book hotels.Boost for CoachesThe boom is also giving a much needed boost to the bus coachmanufacturing industry in the Republic. The industry produced only 288buses of more than 7.5 tons in 1993, 348 in 1994  and should havemanufactured roughly 400 in 1995.  Meanwhile , major airlines flying toSouth Africa claim that they cannot keep up with the demand for seats.Some analysts are claiming that, given the new hotel developments inthe pipeline, within a few years there will be a large oversupply ofhotels unless foreign tourism continues rising at around 25 % perannum. The optimists claim that this is easily within reach.The number of international airlines flying to Johannesburg has risenfrom roughly 19 to 50 in the last two years, and foreign tourism isgoing to continue benefiting from this trend. Caledonian Airlines isplanning to introduce charter flights to South Africa from March 1996 ,while Virgin Airways of Britain has filed a series of applications tothe Civil Aviation Authority for permission to fly from London toJohannesburg and Cape Town.Alongside these developments South African Airways has indicated thatits partial privatisation will furnish new opportunities to marketSouth Africa to foreign tourists, and thereby  generate higher traffic.Tourism industry spokesman have long expressed fears that crimedirected against both local and foreign tourists would have adetrimental effect on the growth of the industry. However, in an effortto address this problem tourist protection units have been establishedin the major centres to try and ensure the safety of tourists. TheDurban hospitality  industry plans to train hotel and restaurantpersonnel as police reservists to combat crime on the Durbanbeachfront.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996INDUSTRIAL TAKEOFF AHEAD FOR SALDANHA BAYThe Saldanha Bay area of the Western Cape is set to become a majorindustrial complex following Iscor's decision to establish a largesteel mill in the area.  A series of downstream industrial projects arelikely to follow the building of the steel plant, which will transformthe area and furnish a boost to the Western Cape economy.Iscor has finally given the go-ahead for the Saldanha Steel projectafter securing a new site which is 2 kilometres inland of thecontroversial Langebaan lagoon site, and after having reduced certaincapital costs of the project by R500 (#89m) with the total capital costnow estimated to be R6.8bn.Building will begin immediately and the plant will be commissionedearly in 1998, although it will take another 12 to 18 months beforefull capacity of 1.25m tons of hot strip steel is reached, which willbe mainly earmarked for export markets.The steel project, for which Iscor raised R1.3bn in a rights issueearlier in 1995, ran aground a few months ago due to opposition fromenvironmentalists, who criticised the proposed siting of the plant nearto the wetlands in Saldanha.  This opposition led to delays in startingthe plant, and the higher costs of the project associated with thedelay  prompted Iscor to withdraw from the scheme.The new arrangements.Under the new arrangements the Industrial Development Corporation, anequal partner in the project, has restructured the financing plans toinclude a greater element of gearing so as to enhance the return toshareholders.  The project has been further aided by special taxconcessions  by the government.The Saldanha Steel project itself could still be expanded by doublingthe hot rolled coil capacity of the steel mill.  This has apparentlybeen allowed for in the layout of the plant.  In addition, businessesrelated to the steel industry are now expected to be attracted to theSaldanha area.  Angola Alpha is reported to be considering building acement factory at Saldanha, using the  Corex slag from the steel plantas its major raw material.A steel pipe manufacturing plant geared to exporting is also on thecards since Iscor is prepared to make some of its steel outputavailable to local processors, and may indeed invest itself in such abeneficiation project.  A separate stainless steel mill is alsoenvisaged.  It is also speculated that once the gas field at Kudu offthe Namibian coast is developed, this will create opportunities fordeveloping new gas-based direct reduction iron, steel and relatedindustries in the Saldanha area.The Saldanha Steel project, together with the other potential newprojects, represents the largest industrial economic development phaseever in the Western Cape, and the expansion at Saldanha could be evengreater in view of the tourist potential of the area.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SAA AIMS FOR NEW HEIGHTSNineteen ninety five was the kind of year SA Airways (SAA) would liketo frame. It left the bad years of having to cope with sanctions and amoribund civil service attitude behind, moved from being a loss-makinglocal airline into profitability, and became a significant player onthe world stage. This year it will be looking for more partners.These are some of the year's highlights:* After four years of losses, which totalled R254m (#45m), it announcedat the end of its financial year on March 31 that it had shown a profitof more than R217m for fiscal 1995. In terms of sales that made it the35th biggest airline in the world, and the second biggest in terms ofprofit sales.* It was unable to cope fully with demand. From Germany load factorsaveraged 91% for the year. They were higher between SA and Britain. Toprovide more seats it bought a 767 and its fleet of 747-SPs, which wereon sale at bargain-basement prices, were taken off the market,refurbished quickly and brought back into service.  And in November itordered two new Boeing 747-400s and nine new Boeing 777s.* In the middle of December Deputy President Thabo Mbeke announced thatthe government was looking for a strategic partner for SAA. That'sanother way of saying the process of privatising the airline has begun,which pleased the private sector, but angered the unions who translatedit into job losses. They retaliated by calling a number of strikes.* Two days after the first strike SAA and Lufthansa, Europe's biggestairline, announced a partnership agreement (which does not, at thisstage, include taking equity in each other's operation) in Frankfurt.It will, says SA Airways' CE Mike Myburgh, boost his airline's bottomline. He claims that without it SAA would have floundered before theend of the century.Looking for a strategic partnerMyburgh is pleased - upbeat may be a better word - government islooking for a strategic partner for the airline, a partner that willtake equity.He explains: "Without it we would not be able to attract share capital.Government has been unwilling to increase its share capital in SAA. Weneed more capital to help us balance our debt and make it easier for usto pay for our new aircraft."In our present situation, where cash flows are high because our loadfactors are very high, and we don't have enough aircraft to take fulladvantage of our denser routes, it would be easy to finance thepurchase of those aircraft out of loans. But it would be very difficultto do that in leaner times."He thinks the timing of Mbeke's announcement was right. "We showed ahealthy profit last year and are likely to show another one this year,which makes us attractive to investors. Had the decision been taken inlean years we would have had to look for investors on their terms."We believe the economy will continue to grow for a few years and diponly in 1998. A partnership will give us access to the finance,technology  and expertise we were denied in the past."On the question of who SAA would choose as partners, he said: "Thestrong commercial alliances we have built up over the years with, forexample, American Airlines, British Midland, Ansett and very recentlyLufthansa, are important to us and we believe it would be advantageousto us if we gave them preference."We would rather have another airline than a financial institutionbecome our strategic partner. An airline can get more out of arelationship with another airline than it can with a financialinstitution which, of necessity, would be interested mainly in thegrowth of its shares and dividends. By working with another airline wecan do things together, we can build up routes together, even in leantimes, and we can use our combined equipment (aircraft) moreadvantageously."We would probably also go to the SA market, give black investors theinside track, and then go to the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE)."We would, obviously, make shares available for our employees. I havebeen working very hard at promoting emotional ownership of the airlineby getting staff involved in our gainshare scheme - we keep 70% ofsuper achievement (growth that exceeds a set target) and share theremaining 30% among staff members. If we can offer financial ownershipas well we will improve staff commitment to the airline."He understands why the announcement upset the unions. "It does seem asif the government didn't consult sufficiently with them before makingtheir intention public. From what Cosatu (the Congress of SA TradeUnions) has said it could lead to ongoing trouble, but if we talk tothe unions - and that's a very important item on our agenda for thenext few weeks - we can sort out the problem."They understood our reasoning for retrenching more than 2000 peopletwo years ago, why shouldn't they understand what government has inmind now?'Back to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SA AGRICULTURAL PROSPECTS SOARBoth general morale in the nation and the country's economic growthprospects for 1996 have ben materially boosted by the copious rainsexperienced over large parts of South Africa since early in December1995.Many water restrictions introduced in numerous areas in October lastyear affecting households have been lifted in line with the significantboost to dam levels, with the Vaal Dam now 100% full for the first timesince 1989. Underground water reserves have been replenished,irrigation dams boosted, and good grazing conditions in most areas areguaranteed for the next nine months or so.A few maize crops are waterloggied after the exceptionally heavy rains, but the overall picture is very promising, and if normal rainfalloccurs in the rest of January and February the national crop could wellexceed 10 tons compared with 4.23 tons last year.  A record crop,however, is unlikely since this year's maize area is around 3mhectares, which  is well below the past 10 year average of 3.5 m. Thisreflects diversification on some farms towards sunflower seed,groundnuts and wheat.The 1995-96 wheat crop is now estimated to reach some 2.28m tonscompared with 1.83m tons in 1994-95. The country will, however, stillhave to import some 360 000 tons to meet total domestic demand of about2.4 m tons.Meanwhile, the good rains should boost sugar output by about 25% to2.1m tons this season, and the amount available for export shouldroughly double this year. The country could have between 700 000 and800 000 tons of sugar available for export this year compared with lastyear's export yield of between350 000 and 400 000 tons.  The sugar industry is indeed looking forwardto its best season in four years.The agricultural sector now accounts for approximately 5% of the grossdomestic product, and since the output of the sector  could grow byaround 20% this year provided reasonable rains fall in the next monthor so, the overall economy could receive a boost of some 1% from thissource alone. Moreover, there are indirect benefits on top of this,since  agriculture has a number of important forward and backwardlinkages  in the economy. The purchase of tractors and fertilisers, forinstance, are boosted by a good agricultural season.Some economists are therefore, predicting growth in excess of 4% for1996, the best performance for 15 years. This in turn partly accountsfor the sharp advance in share prices on the Johannesburg StockExchange during the first week of the new year.Back to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996SOUTH AFRICAN ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS                                Month  Seasonally  Percentage change                                1994/  adjusted    One        One                                1995   figure      month/qtr  YearExternal TradeMerchandise imports (Rm) *  **  Nov      8337        -8.5      16.74Merchandise exports (Rm) *  **  Nov      8939       11.64       7.91Trade balance (Rm) *            Nov       602         N/A     -47.30Balance on current account (Rm) *                         Q3      -3547        5.22        N/ATotal capital movement (Rm) *   Q3       4034       -8.75        N/ACommodity prices (1985-100) *   Nov    116.08        1.97      -4.37Gold and forex reserves (Rm) - Reserve Bank only *          Nov     13436       12.29      43.13Spot gold price ($/oz) ^*       Dec    387.54        0.60       2.08Spot gold price (R/oz) ^*       Dec      1420        1.07       5.06R/$ exchange rate (US cents) ^* Dec        27       -0.47      -2.84Trade-weighted rand value (1990-100) ^                   Nov     69.69        0.23      -3.88MiningTotal sales value (Rm)          Jul      4266       -6.44       0.78Local mining sales value (Rm) * Aug    1016.8        0.53      14.33Export mining sales value (Rm)  Aug    3263.5        0.35       4.78Total production volume (1990 - 100)                   Jul      99.9       -4.31      -0.70Gold production volume (1990 - 100)                   Jul      87.5        0.45      -7.76Non-gold production volume (1990-100)                     Jul     109.8       -6.43       4.66CommerceRetail sales value (Rm) **      Nov     11027        3.73      20.62Retail sales volume (1990 - 100) **                Nov     103.3        1.06       7.91Wholesales (Rm) **              Oct     16936        2.97      14.11Wholesale volume (1990 - 100) **                Oct    111.26        2.57       5.55New car sales (units)           Nov     19380       -6.97       7.65New commercial vehicle sales (units)                        Nov     11051       -7.48      -4.78IndustryManufacturing sales (Rm) **     Oct     25609        1.83      14.32Manufacturing volume (1990 - 100) **                Oct     103.3        0.81       3.69Capacity utilisation (%)        Q3       82.9       -0.36       4.28Real estateReal estate turnover (1985-100) Sep       126       -5.07     -15.12Housing starts (units)          Oct      2295        5.99       8.51House prices (1990-100) *       Sep     155.9        0.40       5.10Price Indices (1990 - 100)*Consumer prices - all items     Nov     173.2        0.29       6.39(1990-100)*     - food          Nov     196.1        0.77       0.93                - commodities   Nov     178.1        0.28       4.52                - services      Nov     168.1        0.24       9.09                - housing       Nov     132.8        0.38      12.64                - excl. VAT     Nov     167.6         0.3        6.5Producer prices - all items     Oct     101.4        0.70       8.22(Jun 1995=100)  - domestic      Oct     101.8        0.89       8.76                - imported      Oct     100.3        0.10       6.70Financial IndicatorsMoney stock - M3*  **           Nov    274402        2.29      13.73            - M0 **             Oct     22202        2.21      26.63Money market shortage (Rm) *+   Dec      5022      -27.11      -1.34Total credit to private sector (Rm)                           Oct    303701        0.80      17.36JSE Actuaries index - overall *+ (1960-100)        Dec      6228        4.29       6.15 - industrials *+ (1960-100)    Dec      7987        4.78      14.36Government FinanceCumulative Revenue (Rm) *       Nov     81076         N/A       15.4Cumulative Expenditure (Rm) *   Nov     99371         N/A       12.1Cumulative Deficit before borrowing (Rm) *               Nov     18294         N/A       -0.7Other indicatorsInsolvencies **                 Sep       171      -14.57     -38.18Summonses for Debt              Oct    111495       12.68      20.39Non-farm payrolls ('000)        Dec      5219        0.71       6.64Real GDP (1990 Rm) ** #         Q3     288070        0.75       3.29Back to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 199612 MONTH EXCHANGE RATE FORECASTUpdated 14 December 1995                             1995                1996Average                      Q4        Q1        Q2        Q3$/DM                           1.42      1.48      1.45      1.40Stg/$                          1.58      1.54      1.55      1.58$/Yen                        102.00    106.00    104.00    100.00$/Rand                         3.65      3.69      3.68      3.67Gold ($)                        382       378       378       380Gold (R)                       1394      1395      1391      1395Rand/DM                      0.3890    0.4011    0.3940    0.3815Stg/Rand                       5.77      5.68      5.70      5.80Rand/Yen                     27.95      28.73     28.26     27.25Suggested 12 month trading range$/DM                    1.30 - 1.60Stg/$                   1.45 - 1.65$/Yen                     90 - 115$/Rand                  3.55 - 3.80Gold ($)                 365 - 395Gold (R)                1325 - 1475Rand/DM                 0.37 - 0.42Stg/Rand                5.60 - 5.90Rand/Yen                  25 - 30Back to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996INTEREST RATES AND YIELDS                                       Dec'95    Nov'95    Dec'94Interest Rates and Yields * +          % pa      % pa      % paTreasury bill tender rate              14.22     13.65     12.69Inter bank call rate                   15.00     14.25     11.753 mth BA's                             14.60     14.30     12.503 mth NCD's                            15.00     14.70     12.8512 months NCD's                        15.10     15.00     14.753 year RSA stock                       14.01     14.03     15.76Prime overdraft rate                   18.50     18.50     16.25Stock exchange - yield on industrials - dividend                             2.00      2.10      1.15 - earnings                             6.00      6.10      5.00Capital market - yield on long term RSA stock        14.38     14.50     16.68 - yield on long term Eskom stock      14.37     14.48     16.78Back to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996NATIONAL ACCOUNTSNational Accounts (constant 1990 prices)% change from previous year (Updated Sep 1995)                                       1993      1994      1995Private consumption expenditure         0.5       2.5       3.5Government consumption expenditure      1.8       4.0       0.5Gross domestic fixed investment        -3.4       7.1      11.4Change in inventories (1985 Rm)        1622      5732      7860Gross domestic expenditure              1.1       5.9       5.0 Exports                                6.0       0.8       8.1 Imports                                7.0      15.2      15.5Gross domestic product                  1.1       2.3       3.1Back to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BALANCE OF PAYMENTS                                            1993   1994   1995Balance on the trade account (Current Rm)   18872  12958    4563Balance on the current account (Current Rm)  5829  -2089  -11308Back to Headline List CopyrightSOUTHERN AFRICA BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996INFLATION FORECASTUpdated 24 November1995              1995   Q     1996   Q              % pa   Ave   % pa   AveJan            9.6*        6.2Feb            9.9*   9.9  6.2    6.1Mar           10.2*        5.9Apr           11.0*        5.3May           10.8*  10.6  5.8    6 .0Jun           10.0*        6.7Jul            9.0*        8.8Aug            7.5*   8.1  7.4    7.4Sept           6.4*        8.0Oct            6.3*        8.4Nov            6.4    6.4  8.5    8.5Dec            6.4         8.5Ave            8.6         7.0Highest       11.0         8.5Lowest         6.3         5.3* Actual figuresBack to Headline List