WT03-B09-1IA087-000629-B020-26http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/me07.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035026 text/html 42939HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:48:31 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:53 GMTContent-length: 42752Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/me07.html Sample Issue Copyright CTDNEWS via NewsNet January 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES '94 CTD cases continue trend, jump 10 percent CTDs as a percent of all injuries and illnesses also increase. (428 words) Big, small firms show how ergo programs make cents 2nd 'Best Practices' issue stresses cost savings, CTD cuts (270 words) California expects heated debate over new ergo rule (211 words) Charleston Forge welds homemade approach (1259 words) Ford: Where quality, ergonomics combine Automaker's program suited for even small,financially strapped companies (1395 words) Holloman's effort defies expectations (1449 words) Avenor's fitness a warm-up to ergonomics (1217 words) CopyrightCTDNEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1996'94 CTD cases continue trend, jump 10 percentCTDs as a percent of all injuries and illnesses also increase.Cumulative trauma disorders continued to ravage U.S. workplaces bygrowing 10 percent in 1994, refuting predictions by private industrythat CTDs would slow or decrease.The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reported in December "repeatedtrauma" cases logged by private industry in 1994 totaled 332,000, upfrom 302,400 in 1993. The BLS numbers are collected from theOccupational Safety and Health Administration 200 logs, which employersare required to complete when an injured or ill worker requires morethan cursory medical treatment.Not only did the number of repeated trauma cases increase, but so didtheir percentage of the overall injury and illnesses recorded by U.S.business. CTDs now account for about 5 percent of the nation's 6.8million nonfatal injuries and illnesses in 1994, up from 4.5 percent in1993.George Brogmus of Liberty Mutual Research Center for Safety and Healthhad predicted the rate of increase for workplace CTDs would slow down ordecrease. His findings were based on Liberty Mutual numbers and BLSstatistics showing the CTD claims and CTDs cases as a percent of allclaims and cases."They aren't in the same pattern I reported," said Brogmus. "However,the growth rate (the change from one year to the next) is still not ashigh as it has been in previous years." Three-fifths of all the new repeated trauma cases come from themanufacturing sector, according to the Survey of Occupational Injuriesand Illnesses, 1994. Meatpacking and knit underwear plants recorded thehighest incidence rates while motor vehicles and car bodies and poultryslaughtering and processing logged the most repeated trauma cases.(The incidence rate represents the number of injuries and illnesses per100 full-time employees times 200,000.)  Repeated trauma also accounted for nearly two-thirds of the workplaceillnesses. Skin diseases and disorders ranked second with 13 percent."We are gravely concerned about the growing number of new cases,"  saidCheryl Bryne, OSHA's spokesperson. She would not speculate on what thenew numbers meant to the agency's attempt to produce an ergo standard.Congressional conservatives have stymied attempts by OSHA to publish andconduct research on a proposed ergonomics standard. This effort has beenpart of an overall antiregulatory agenda that has been successful in theHouse but mixed in the Senate.In the spring, the BLS will release survey results detailing theworker's occupation, nature of the injury or illness and how the injuryor illness happened.-  For more about the Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses,1994, contact the office of Safety, Health and Working Conditions at202-606-6179. Back to Headline List CopyrightCTDNEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1996Big, small firms show how ergo programs make cents2nd 'Best Practices' issue stresses cost savings, CTD cutsNow, more than ever, the efficacy of ergonomics and ergonomics programsis being scrutinized by company presidents and financial officers.Ergonomics efforts not showing measurable savings often are frozen orcut.As a result, practical information detailing ergonomics interventions,costs and savings continues to be a commodity in high demand and thebasis for CTDNews' 2nd Annual Best Practices issue.Once again, we chose the featured companies after surveying U.S. andCanadian corporations, ergonomics consultants, labor organizations andhealth and safety associations and researchers.This year, CTDNews' ergonomics honor roll includes Ford Motor Co. ofDearborn, MI; Charleston Forge of Boone, NC; Holloman Air Force Basenear Alamogordo, NM; and Avenor Inc. of Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada.The variety of problems addressed and savings realized should be usefulfor an equal variety of businesses. Through these four companies, thevalue of formalized ergonomics programs to homemade quick fixesillustrates the impact of ergonomics on the workplace.Each of these companies agreed to provide information about the genesisof its ergonomics programs and the pitfalls they encountered whileimplementing and maintaining the program. They also volunteered somedetails on the health and safety costs of doing business.While the thirst for program costs and savings is great, many companiesgenerally do not provide complete financial information for manyreasons, including fears that some details could be used against them inworkers' compensation lawsuits or that it would give their competitorsan advantage in the marketplace.In any case, company officials quoted have agreed to share theirexperiences and results with anyone interested in more information.Telephone numbers are provided. Back to Headline List CopyrightCTDNEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1996California expects heated debate over new ergo ruleAlthough the newly proposed California ergonomics standard is only 1 1/2pages, there apparently is plenty to talk about as state officialsprepare for two public hearings later this month.This is the second attempt at a standard since the state OccupationalSafety and Health Standards Board unanimously turned down Cal/OSHA'sproposal in November 1994. The new proposal would take effect when a musculoskeletal injury to morethan one employee has been "diagnosed and objectively identified" withinthe last 12 months. Worksite evaluations, hazard control and trainingare included in an ergonomics program.The proposal also includes three simplified worksheets to assist in theprogram's development.Scaled down from the original 26-page proposal, the Standards Board'seffort will impact about 14,000 businesses. No financial impact wasgiven since "costs can vary widely and are dependent on the steps thathave already been taken to reduce repetitive motion injuries."Public hearings for the first proposal drew more than 1,000 comments andpublic demonstrations by organized labor. Hearings are scheduled for Jan. 18 at 9 a.m. at the Airport MarinaResort Hotel in Los Angeles and Jan. 23 at 9 a.m. at the SacramentoConvention Center.-  For more about the hearings or proposal, contact the OSH StandardsBoard at 916-322-3640.  Back to Headline List CopyrightCTDNEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1996Charleston Forge welds homemade approachCharleston Forge doesn't have a textbook ergonomics program. However,its approach works in reducing cumulative trauma disorders and inincreasing worker productivity without sacrificing the company'sfinances.By conducting basic workstation surveillance and consulting with localmedical and physical therapy experts, the manufacturer of decorativehome and office steel furniture dramatically reduced ergonomic-relatedinjuries  --  and increased workers' productivity and efficiency.The firm's lost days from carpal tunnel syndrome, back strain and otherCTDs have been cut to zero this year, down from as many 176 lostworkdays in 1991."Some of the fixes, specifically equipment purchases, have been veryhigh dollar," said Jo Spiceland, Charleston Forge's human resourcesdirector and safety and environmental compliance officer. "But, wedidn't make the changes just for ergonomics reasons. Increasedproductivity played a major role."Spiceland said the company's productivity increased by about 25 percentin three years.Charleston Forge of Boone, NC, employs about 150 people and is locatedabout 85 miles west of Winston-Salem. In manufacturing steel furniture, employees must carry, shape and cut20-foot lengths of steel in various shapes and sizes, weld the piecesinto products and pull or carry the finished products that weigh as muchas 150 pounds to finishing, painting and the shipping area.Carpal tunnel main CTDBecause of the fine and repetitive handwork involved in many of theplant's jobs, Spiceland said carpal tunnel syndrome and tendinitis hadbecome serious problems. "The company's owner saw the inefficiencies ofthe old (manufacturing) system and knew about the carpal tunnel problemswe were having."So the decision to make changes wasn't difficult," continued Spiceland."Also, money has not been a big roadblock due to the success of thecompany. We knew we had to improve the process to decrease CTDs and toincrease productivity."In addition, many workers throughout the plants have suffered backstrains from handling the products.The problem-solving approach in the early 1990s included encouraging the"buddy system," according to Spiceland. Employees were told not to liftanything beyond their capability. Limited job rotation was used. Thecompany also provided back belts to interested employees, conditionalupon the worker attending a seminar on proper body mechanics and liftingtechniques. Spiceland said back belts are rarely used now.With cases of CTDs and lost workdays due to CTDs failing to decline,Charleston Forge enlisted the help of a local physical therapist andloss-control representatives from the company's workers' compensationinsurance carrier. After several walk-through visits, they recommendedfixes for specific jobs.Changes start in 1993"In 1993, we began to make specific fixes, without really forming aformal program," said Spiceland, who spends only about 10 percent of hertime addressing ergonomics concerns. "We were a small company withmanagers wearing many hats. A formal program will come, but therehaven't been the human resources or time available to devote to it yet."Spiceland said her knowledge of job evaluation came from seminars andfrom becoming familiar with OSHA's proposed ergonomics standard.The finishing area was one of the first to be fixed. For example, once abaker's shelf made of steel has been welded together, employees withpneumatic wire brushes removed burn marks and welding splashes and thenwashed the product. At one point, 25 people spent eight hours a daywire-brushing and washing them.The risk of carpal tunnel and tendinitis has since been eliminated byautomating the process through the purchase of an enclosed shotblastermachine, which is similar to a sand blaster, to polish the steel. Thecompany also purchased an automatic washing system. Now, only threepeople spend two hours a day brushing. Exposures to carpal tunnelsyndrome and back injuries (from awkward postures) were greatly reduced.Also, in this and other areas in the plant, improved lighting placementand brightness has decreased many of the awkward postures required toinspect and brush the products. These combined to greatly reduceexposures to CTS and back injuries.Spiceland said automating this part of the process did not cause thecompany to lay off anyone. Instead, these employees now operate thewashing and shotblaster machines or work in other departments.The consulting physical therapist also targeted the welding operation.Employees placed parts in a fixed jig or template for each of thecompany's products. Many workers had to stretch, turn and assume awkwardpositions to place all the parts into the jig and then remove them afterwelding.As a result, Charleston Forge made many of the jigs adjustable. Sometilt to make the product easier to remove. This change reduced many ofthe back problems for the company's 20 welders. Even though workers usea handheld welder, Spiceland says it has not posed any problems becauseit is light and without vibration."The welders were purchased before we had a real awareness of CTDs. Wewere just fortunate that the welders had these features," Spicelandsaid.Ergonomic changes, aside from the shotblaster and washing systems, havecost the company about $3,500. This includes the training and purchaseof back belts and labor and materials for jig adjustments and lightingimprovements.Problems still presentWhile the company has made significant gains in many areas, others suchas packaging and moving the product out the door still pose challenges.The product is pulled along the floor to several stations by hand. Thereare no wheels on any of the products. Currently, employees lift the products into cardboard boxes and thoseboxes are then moved to trucks by way of hand trucks.The physical therapists and physicians, who provided their ergonomicsconsultations free of charge, have recommended the company buy hoists toeliminate the problem. But, Spiceland said, the cost for hoists isprohibitive because of the large area involved.Instead, they're trying a less costly approach. "We tried apropane-powered shrink wrap system that would have reduced the amount oflifting involved in packing our products. However, the results weredisappointing."Shrink wrapping slowed our packaging time from about 1 1/2 minutes peritem to almost seven minutes," Spiceland said. "We're experimenting withother interventions now."Spiceland said the company also has the capabilities to make a lot oftooling, and tends to look to homemade solutions.Informal problem solvingShe uses an informal team approach to resolving problem jobs.Spiceland, an engineer, the employees and supervisor put their headstogether when the need arises to come up with the interventions.Charleston Forge's approach is even more unique because employeesundergo almost no ergonomics training. But, Spiceland admitted, when thecompany added another shift in 1994 and hired about 40 new workers, "Welearned the hard way that we didn't do enough training and supervision,and we're paying for it in workers' compensation premiums."The company is developing a thorough training program for supervisorsand employees of which ergonomics and basic safety will be majorcomponents.For small companies wanting to encourage a healthier and more productiveworkforce, Spiceland strongly recommends developing a workingrelationship with local health professionals and utilizing theirexpertise. Because the physical therapists and physicians were local healthprofessionals, they already were aware of Charleston Forge. Theirservices had been used numerous times to treat workers' compensationinjuries."I simply asked them if they could help us reduce our CTD risk. I didn'treally ask for anything beyond specific interventions," said Spiceland."When I approached our local health professionals, they were eager toshare their knowledge and experience to improve our workers' health andcomfort," she said. Back to Headline List CopyrightCTDNEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1996Ford: Where quality, ergonomics combineAutomaker's program suited for even small,financially strapped companiesThere's a recurring theme in the occupational safety and healthcommunity: larger companies  --  like Ford Motor Co.  --  are more successfulat eliminating workplace CTDs than many smaller companies with limitedresources.With billions in resources, unfortunately, "bigger doesn't mean better,"according to Bradley S. Joseph, Ph.D., a Ford corporate ergonomist. "As a practice, we cannot throw resources and people at a problem. Webelieve in transferring technology and information to people who can useit best. Smaller companies can do the same," said Joseph, whose companyhas spent about $35 million in industrial ergonomics interventions in 60manufacturing and assembly plants since 1990.Despite what Ford is spending on ergonomics interventions, the U.S.Bureau of Labor Statistics reports motor vehicles, car bodies andvehicle part and accessories record the most "repetitive trauma" cases.Instead, Ford's size requires considerable advanced preparation for astandardized ergonomics program for all of its U.S., Canadian andMexican plants. This strategy   --  including devoting considerableresources to planning and recordkeeping  --  has its long-term rewards.Commitment the key"Much of an ergonomics program's success is based on the plant'scommitment  --  everyone from the plant manager down to hourly workers,"said Joseph. "Without the time and effort to determine who you are andwhat you want to do, the results cannot be as good."By that, Joseph means securing the support of management and labor toensure the ergonomics program's and committee's legitimacy. If the topofficials from both sides cannot be full-time committee members, theninvite them to all meetings, ask for their help and let them be thefirst to hear about successes.Beyond the management and labor commitment, Joseph emphasized theimportance of making the ergonomics process inclusive and plantwide."A program is likely to be more successful if the ergonomics process isa team effort. Don't outsource (the ergonomics decision making) to thirdparties like consultants or put it into the hands of a plant ergonomistonly. This focuses the responsibility on an individual, not a team,"said Joseph.But what about the small company that doesn't have the expertise ormoney to hire an ergonomist to help with the program?"Some of the best programs are run by people without traditional, formalergonomics and health and safety knowledge. They know  --  better than me  -- how the plant works," Joseph said. "But they do need training, knowledgeof ergonomics and to know when to seek help." Ford's ergonomics process, developed by the United Auto Workers-FordNational Joint Committee of Health and Safety and the University ofMichigan, recommends an ergonomics committee of eight people  --  four eachfrom labor and management. These members receive basic training inergonomics principles, techniques for job evaluation, recordkeeping andmonitoring and refining the process.Once assembled, the committee members must write a mission statement toensure each member understands the goal(s) and has the same purpose. Inaddition, the ergonomics process guide also recommends committee membersbe released from regular assignments to attend ergonomics committeemeetings and accomplish tasks. There should be meeting agendas andminutes to emphasize the work's importance.(See "Making the mission possible" on this page for key elements to amission statement.)Not just costs"Money is very important for plant operations. Cost-benefit analysismust be used to justify changes," said Joseph. "Ergonomics can beimplemented using traditional cost benefits. But you have to balance itwith the social aspects of health and safety and what's correct to do."On average, the committee solves 20-30 ergonomics problems a year. Ofthe 60 plants the company currently is tracking, about 7,200ergonomics-related problems have been fixed since 1990  --  1,067 betweenJanuary and June 1995.   Standardized recordkeeping includes detailed ergonomics concerns logs,intervention tracking and follow-up worksheets. Joseph said, "We don'twant one plant to differ greatly from another even though they arehundreds of miles apart."(See examples of Ford's worksheets)"That way if one Taurus assembly plant is having a workstation problemon the assembly line, they could check with another Taurus plant to seeif its ergonomics concern logs showed a similar problem and how it wasresolved," continued Joseph. Ford's preparation is illustrated best at its new Cleveland engineplant. Eighteen months ago, the company finished rebuilding an engineassembly plant designed with ergonomics in mind.For example, the local committee designed machine tools to allow easyaccess to metal cutting blades. Articulating arms were added when themachines were designed to eliminate exposure to extended reaches andback and shoulder stress.Another example was installing a roller conveyor system to bring partscloser to operators. The new system eliminated lifting and carrying ofparts.To date, there have been no ergonomics-related injuries. The localergonomics committee has responded to four concerns logged in the firstsix months of 1995 and spent about $17,000.Benefits of proactive changesCompare those numbers to Ford's other Cleveland engine plant, wherechanges have been made to the existing assembly processes. The logs showseven concerns, costing about $200,000 over the same time period. Thisshows how much more cost effective it is to make change during theplanning stages.Although the company has dramatically reduced its cost for ergonomicsintervention in the modern plant by being proactive, problems stillexist. Joseph said the local ergonomics committee is responding to them.The committee is examining how workers install spark plug anddistributor wires. Workers are exposed to repetitive, high-force pincheswith awkward wrist postures. The company has joined forces with theUniversity of South Florida to resolve the problem. But few companies have the wherewithal to gut factories and redesignmanufacturing processes. For those, Ford often has relied on homemadesolutions. In the Sharonville Transmission Plant in Sharonville, OH,employees were having to carry a 35-pound clutch about 10 steps to theassembly line and insert it into the transmission housing. They alsowere required to walk back to parts bins and pick up several othercomponents to be installed in the housing.Outside equipment vendors recommended hoists or articulating arms, butbecause the clutch mechanism easily separated, it really had to beinstalled by hand.Homemade remedyAs a result, the local ergonomics committee developed a portableworkstation on wheels that would carry all the parts  --  for more than onetransmission  --  on a tray with rollers and Lazy Susans. The workers thenwould bring all the transmission components to the assembly line andavoid the repetitive lifting and walking back and forth.The company also has utilized plastic part kits in the assembly processto reduce excessive reaching, bending and turning. At Ford's Van DykePlant in Sterling Heights, MI, transmissions move through some of theassembly process on a pallet with these plastic kits  --  which hold about20 parts  --  atop the assembly fixture. The kits are made of moldedplastic so each part is separated  --  like the plastic packing in amultipart child's toy  --  and easy to reach. Workers no longer turn aroundand reach for parts in bins behind them.In addition, to make the assembly process more comfortable, the assemblyline was raised about nine inches and a composite floor of recycledtires was installed to provide cushion and relieve strain and stress onthe back.At some Ford plants, the decision to change a job depends on analysis ofexisting data, informal reports from workers or proactiveidentification. For example, workers' compensation costs and lost worktime are calculated for specific health hazards and then multiplied byfour to cover any hidden costs."Many times, that number is more than the cost of the change and isapproved," said Joseph. "Other changes are harder to justify and othermethods of analysis or justification may be required."Ford's accomplishments are attributed to the partnership between laborand management and the preparation and experience of the localergonomics committee, according to Joseph.The keys to building a similar process are not proprietary information.Indeed, Joseph said, "There's no need for other companies  --  big or small --  to try and reinvent the wheel."-  The Ford program, "Fitting Jobs to People: An Ergonomics Process," isavailable through the Center for Ergonomics, University of Michigan,1205 Beal, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2117; phone 313-936-0147. It costs $125. Back to Headline List CopyrightCTDNEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1996Holloman's effort defies expectationsDefying a perception that the federal government can do nothinginexpensively, Holloman Air Force Base has successfully implementedergonomics changes on a shoestring budget.The changes, instituted over two years, dramatically cut the number ofCTD-related injuries through assessments, job modifications, some newequipment and training."The administrative and engineering changes represent the 'goldstandard' OSHA was looking for," said Major Alan Berg, commander of the49th Aerospace Medicine Squadron and base ergonomics manager. "We gotrid of our injuries and showed that the civilian industry doesn't haveto worry quite as much" about the prospects of an ergonomics standard.The improvements started after Holloman Air Force Base, near Alamogordo,NM, was inspected by the Occupational Safety and Health Administrationin August 1992. An employee reported the base to OSHA. Four monthslater, Berg and the base received a 22-page citation under the generalduty clause and an order to fix a variety of ergonomic hazards withinone year.The base employs over 6,000 military and civilian personnel in supportof the F-117A "Stealth" aircraft and associated training requirements.The shop inspected by OSHA performs survival equipment maintenance,sewing operations and parachute packing. Parachutes were either forpersonnel, aircraft braking systems (drag chutes) or heavy equipment(drone chutes), which can be up to 120 feet in diameter and weigh over150 pounds.In the parachute shop, OSHA noted ergonomics hazards related toinadequate lighting, poorly designed workstations and awkward, forcefulbody positioning affecting the back and arms. Specifically, OSHA focusedon tasks that required excessive lifting, bending and repetitive armmotions."Over a four-year period (1990-1993), we had 15 people with confirmedCTD cases. And the shop employs only 25," said Berg. "These were notweak or small people. At one point (spring of 1993), 11 out of 19 peoplewere on limited duty because they couldn't do the more stressful jobs."But more than just fixing the one shop that OSHA had inspected, Bergwanted to be proactive and develop a program that would addressergonomic stresses throughout the base."To address all those problems and set up a base-wide ergonomicsprogram, I needed more than a year," Berg told CTDNews. "OSHA agreed topostpone the deadline so long as the base was pursuing a comprehensiveergonomics program."Where to find helpWithout a national ergonomics standard, Berg found the assistance anddirection to create an ergonomics program from OSHA's "Guidelines forEstablishing Ergonomics Programs in Meatpacking Plants." "I had noproblem convincing my superiors that we needed to make changes," Bergquipped. "I just used the four-letter word, O-S-H-A."  Seriously, he added, "When I showed them the impact of ergonomicproblems in this one shop, I received full support from the commander ondown to the workers to make changes happen."So in 1992, Holloman established an ergonomics committee to identifyworkplace ergonomics stresses from injury logs, evaluate high-risk workareas and prevent future injuries. The committee consists ofrepresentatives from civil engineering, aerospace medicine, maintenance,ground safety and others.It operates with no annual budget, but used safety and health promotionfunds to purchase literature and video training programs. Actualimprovements in the shop, including tool purchases, came out of theshop's operating funds.Focusing first on the parachute shop, Berg set into motion a series ofworkplace changes that would reduce dramatically the CTD-relatedinjuries. Many of the interventions in the shop's sewing operation werebasic and low cost.Basic, low-cost changesTraditional scissors were replaced with spring-loaded models to reducesome repetitive motion. Electric scissors that cut through five layersof the heaviest fabric were purchased to reduce repetitions. Sewingtables and table edges were padded. Task lighting was provided withadjustable arm desk lamps. And to address OSHA's recommendation toprovide adjustable table heights, Berg directed that tables be raised toaccommodate taller workers and that inexpensive, plastic stair-stepplatforms be bought to make the job easier for shorter workers. Storage space was moved from underneath work tables to separate shelvingunits, eliminating some bending and lifting.  To reduce lifting andhauling, they relocated some packing operations closer to where thechutes are stored. Electric lift tables with wheels were added to permiteasier movement of parachutes and to eliminate the vertical component oflifts and carries.Electric hoists replaced a hand-over-hand pulley operation used to hangwet parachutes in a drying tower. Workers had been experiencing shoulderand back discomfort that was totally eliminated by the mechanization ofthe job. Yet, the actual chute repacking remains Berg's most dauntingintervention. Employees with steel bats weighing over 20 pounds mustrepeatedly pound the folded chute into its container. A worker tookabout 45 minutes to pack a single chute, with the entire shop packingabout 500 per week. With the limited duty of many shop workers, theremaining workers had to pack as many as 50 in a week.Attempts at reducing the pounding operations included pneumatic toolsand complex overhead suspension systems. But efforts either damaged theparachute material or failed to pack it properly. Job rotation wasnearly impossible with the limited number of workers physically able toperform the packing operation.With no real alternative to the packing process, Berg decided to reducethe workload and convinced supervisors to limit the employees to packingno more than 20 per week.  Additional parachutes were purchased to buffer the need to repack themquickly during surge flying operations. The workers also found relief asa change in aircraft landing procedures halved the number of drag chutesused. The shop now packs about 250 chutes per month.Berg hasn't given up on the idea of mechanizing the pounding operationwhich he calls, "ergonomic enemy number one." However, with the packinglimit, he now has all but one worker returned to full duty.Considering that some of these workers had performed these jobs for overtwenty years, many of them were resistant to the changes. Some claimedthe changes would make the job harder. "But I asked them to go alongwith the changes for two weeks," said Berg, "after which the workers hadthe option to go back to the old way. But they liked the new ways, oncethey got used to them, and reported less leg and back soreness at theend of the workday." The changes in the parachute shop cost about $25,000. The Holloman Ergonomics Working Group's program includes an educationalcomponent to teach workers that awkward posture plus forcefulrepetitions equals risk of CTDs.A positive message "The message was delivered in settings that encouraged workerparticipation," said Berg. "And once trained, we found that the workerswho know their job best are the greatest resource for simple ways toimprove the workplace."The training takes two to three hours and focuses on giving workers theability to identify ergonomic stresses in their workplaces, share theirfindings with their supervisors, and work together to fix themthemselves. High- and moderate-risk workers are required to attend thetraining, but it is open to all base personnel.Supervisors can request the Holloman Ergonomics Working Group to visittheir shop to help in assessing and resolving ergonomically stressfuljobs.The base program also includes an occupational medicine program tomonitor workers in high-risk jobs. Workers are examined at leastannually by a physical therapist who can suggest ways to modify howworkers do their jobs and can develop individualized exercise programsto build up a worker's strength.For the parachute shop, active-duty military personnel are mandated andcivilians are invited to participate in an exercise program as part oftheir duty day."The biggest concern in U.S. business and industry is that an ergonomicsstandard will close businesses," said Berg. "I tell people that idealergonomic solutions come when you don't think of Fred Flintstone with ahammer and chisel, but instead you think of George Jetson, whose totaljob is to a push a button."But it could cost millions," continued Berg, "to totally mechanize aworkplace, so the goal is to find reasonable solutions in acost-effective manner."Other ergonomics problems addressed around the base included lettingeach of the base telephone operators pick out ergonomically designedseating and giving aircraft maintenance workers sit/stand workstationsand adjustable chairs.In all, Holloman AFB spent about $50,000 to implement its program overthree years, according to Berg.  As a result of these efforts, the basedramatically reduced its CTD exposure. An unexpected benefit was aseries of certificates from the U.S. Department of Labor acknowledgingit for valuable contributions in the promotion of occupational safetyand health programs in the field of ergonomics. Back to Headline List CopyrightCTDNEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1996Avenor's fitness a warm-up to ergonomicsAvenor Inc. sees its 10-year-old employee fitness programs as theimportant warm-up to its newer ergonomics campaign. The two work inconcert, much the way cardiovascular exercise goes with a stronger andhealthier heart.The results: The pulp and paper mill in Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada,reduced direct costs of injuries, including workplace CTDs, by 94percent, when the ergonomics improvements began. The fitness program has involved an on-site fitness facility, dailywarm-up exercises, employee fitness challenges between divisions,exercise rehabilitation and special educational efforts. While theergonomics improvements have meant substantial educational efforts, jobmodification and workstation adjustments have been picking up momentumsince 1992.The fitness center, which is attached to the plant's health center tofacilitate referrals, includes a universal weight machine, free weightsand exercise bikes. The ergonomics evolution"The fitness program evolved into ergonomics because we needed to. Youcan only get so much benefit out of increasing employee resistance towear and tear until you have to reduce the load of the job and helpemployees work smarter, not harder," said Francis Puchalski,kinesiologist for Avenor. Avenor, which was named the safest mill by the Canadian Pulp and PaperAssociation last year, employs about 1,500 people who produce newsprint,magazine stock and tissues from wood chips. It also converts recycledpaper into a variety of products.One of the company's ergonomics successes involves the recyclewarehouse, where injuries to wrists and elbows were a concern. In thearea where large bails of recycled paper are loaded off trucks,employees have to cut off heavy wire wrappings with bolt cutters, pullthe wire off the bails and use a fork truck to push the paper ontoconveyor belts.The wire wrappings were of various hardness and strength, so the numberof repetitions and the amount of stress the hand absorbed varied.  Inthe fall of 1993, according to Puchalski, the wrist and elbow problemshad reached a "virtual epidemic."About 20 percent of the 20 employees were reporting CTD-related symptomswhile many others were experiencing pain but not reporting it. The employees and supervisors pointed to the bolt cutters as the mainproblem. However,  further analysis quickly revealed that it was therequired firm gripping and pulling of the wires, often in difficultpositions, that was the more serious issue. The wire wrapping also gotcaught on the bails and transferred the sudden stop force to theemployee's hand, wrist, elbow shoulder and back.As a result, Puchalski and his colleagues instituted a number ofactions:-  Education sessions covering CTD issues and avoiding awkward postureswere held at the worksite.-  On-site interviews and job analysis were conducted.-  The work process was reviewed and some modifications were made.-  Suppliers of the recycled paper bails were encouraged to reduce thenumber of wires per bale and some were able to accommodate the request.-  Different cutting systems and fully automated bail handling systemswere investigated.-  The bolt cutter handles were padded.-  Upper limb range of motion and strengthening exercises wererecommended.-  Wrist supports with palm padding were made available to interestedemployees. In a six-month follow-up to the interventions in the recycle warehouse,surveys and worker and supervisor interviews showed that the issue ofwrist and elbow problems was gone, according to Puchalski. To date,there have been no additional CTD-related claims.In the pulp and paper industry, there are plenty of physical jobs in themaintenance department, which is responsible for keeping the pulp andpaper machines  --  some old and new  --  in good running order. Like manymanufacturing industries, back problems have been an issue over theyears. In the last few years, more safety and educational efforts havebeen yielding good results, according to Puchalski.Attention to back injuriesMorning exercises, fitness initiatives and extensive educational effortswithin the department have gone a long way toward reducing the number ofback injuries. Providing better lifting devices, increased training onequipment use and better body mechanics as well as ensuring that allemployees know they are responsible to get help when necessary havecontributed to the improved situation.Maintenance employees used to work on the three large paper machines.Now, workers are assigned one machine in order to become familiar withits operation and quirks.Machine maintenance occurs at specific intervals and for a limited time.Workers often must assume awkward positions to replace parts in confinedspaces. In dealing with the older paper machine, some of the riskexposures cannot be designed out of the job. Therefore, Avenor's programemphasizes ongoing training and education to work better and smarter inrestricted conditions.The maintenance department also has developed a successful job-approachprogram that reminds employees of nine different questions to askthemselves each time they approach a job.Not all of Avenor's efforts have been reactive. "We try to be proactive.If we are aware of some changes coming to an operation, we will try toget in there to make some recommendations," Puchalski said.Getting in on the designAvenor currently is building the latest, state-of the-art control roomfor one of its pulp operations. The employees assigned will be operatingdigesters, bleach plants and a chemical plant on VDTs in an office-likeenvironment.Puchalski, along with an optometrist, made recommendations on the screensize, icon and warning signal coloring on screens, location and type ofdisplay units, data entry tools and workstation layout. They recommendedtrackballs over mice, a C-shaped workstation large enough to seat twopeople and quality adjustable ergonomics chairs. Color and eye acuitytesting will be an ongoing program.There also have been some discussions regarding an exercise bike in thecontrol room and a satellite wellness center to help with employeealertness, fitness and exercise maintenance.Puchalski would not reveal the cost of the new control room.When to investigate jobsSignals to investigate jobs for ergonomics risks come from a variety ofsources, including employees, supervisors and the on-site nurse. But thedecision to pursue ergonomic changes rests with department heads."Our company has moved to a business division style of operation, andoccupational health and safety is increasingly looked at as a serviceprovider to these divisions," said Puchalski. "If we are involved inrecommendations for an exercise program or ergonomic changes, the OKmust come from division heads."Employee education and training also is determined by the department.While everyone receives instruction in occupational health and safety,employees in jobs where there are higher CTD risks get more informationon ergonomics, injury prevention and self-management. Puchalski said the company also is considering a more formalizedergonomics program, including more employee training and creating amill-wide ergonomics team to do job analysis and interventions.So far, said Puchalski, "Senior management has been supportive of allour efforts to help employees, including the budgeting to expand theon-site fitness facility."Ten years ago, Avenor Inc.'s chief executive officer wanted to dosomething to help employees with back injuries. He decided to provide afitness center. Over the years, said Puchalski, it has become moreapparent that employee wellness and ongoing safety efforts includingergonomics have much to offer to provide the workplace with thehealthiest employees. Back to Headline List WT03-B09-2IA087-000629-B020-55http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/me19.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035049 text/html 43539HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:48:54 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:52 GMTContent-length: 43352Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/me19.html Sample Issue Copyright THE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNet May 6, 1994 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Mass General Pharmacy Slashes Zofran Costs, May Drop Drug From Its Formulary (329 words) PBM Mania Erupts (115 words) Diversified To Go Global With SmithKline (685 words) Risk Sharing a Tough Proposition, Says Fallon Exec (367 words) Turf War Brewing Over Federal Role In Cost-Effectiveness Data (257 words) A Hopes To Develop Cost-Effectiveness Policy by Year's End (305 words) About Your newsletter (159 words) Value Health and Pfizer Alliance: A Powerful Attack on the Outcomes Front (354 words) FoxMeyer Aims To Play With the Big PBM Boys (174 words) Caremark To Add Fourth to Alliance (297 words) Makers and Shakers -- ValueRx's Stephen Linehan: Putting Politics To Work (1704 words) The Drug Industry Puts on a Kinder, Gentler Face (301 words) Merck Wants Medicare Action -- If There Is Any (152 words) Salable (322 words) Notable (358 words) Roche's Syntex Buy Will Raise Outcomes Profile (256 words) CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994Mass General Pharmacy Slashes Zofran Costs,  May Drop Drug From ItsFormularyTo Harold Demonaco, pharmacy director for Massachusetts General Hospital,there's no real question that Glaxo's Zofran (odansetron) effectivelycombats the nausea associated with chemotherapy. But it's such a good drugwith so few side effects that oncologists have been prescribing it foralmost every cancer patient in the hospital since its introduction in 1991.And that's busted Demonaco's pharmacy budget.In fiscal 1993, Mass General spent $900,000 on Zofran, making it thecostliest item in its medicine cabinet. Facing a potential outlay of $1.4million in FY94, Demonaco took action.First, he and his staff sat down with the oncologists and hematologists whotypically prescribe the anti-emetic and showed them that there were lessexpensive, equally effective drugs available.Next, they focused on getting doctors to use an appropriate amount of thedrug.  Most patients were getting between 30 and 40 mg a day, whichwasn't very cost-effective because the drug came in a 30-mg vial.Mass General did its own studies and determined that anything beyond 24 mga day would not create any additional response. In late 1993, Demonacoissued guidelines calling for a 24-mg daily dosage.Since the dose is being cut by almost a quarter, Demonaco predicts thatMass General's Zofran expense should be equally reduced -- savings ofabout $250,000.  That's impressive, but costs may come down even further.A competitor has hit the market, and is making things attractive enoughthat Mass General is "seriously considering dropping Zofran from theformulary," says Demonaco.SmithKline Beecham's anti-emetic drug Kytril (granisetron) was launched inlate March. Demonaco says that according to Mass General's reading of thedata, "these two drugs are exactly equal."However, Glaxo disagrees that the two drugs are the same, and has refusedto enter into a contract with Mass General. SmithKline, however, isoffering a discount.  Although Demonaco won't divulge that price, he saysthe hospital expects a 50 percent reduction in costs for each chemopatient.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994PBM Mania EruptsAs fashionable as cafe lattes, pharmacy benefit management firms (PBMs)have become the rage among drug manufacturers looking to expand marketshare and pharmaceutical distributors hoping to add to their service line-up. In the last six months, the sector's been abuzz as new PBMs werecreated and many were bought by or entered into strategic alliances withdrug makers.Witnessed so far: Cigna buying a PBM; the drugstore chain Rite Aid forminga PBM; the National Assn. of Chain Drug Stores forming its own PBM; andCaremark allying with three major drug makers. Last week, two more drugmakers took the plunge. For details, see the story below and other storieson page 4.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994Diversified To Go Global With SmithKlineFollowing in the footsteps of Pfizer, Merck, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, andBristol-Myers Squibb, SmithKline Beecham has marched into the pharmacybenefit management arena in the hopes of gaining market share for itsproducts in the short term and steering R&D in the long term. SmithKlinesays it will pay $2.3 billion for Diversified Pharmaceutical Services, in amove that will more closely emulate the Merck-Medco merger than strategicalliances favored by the other drug makers getting into the area.For Diversified, a pioneer in the management of drug costs and in theoutcomes research area, the link with a global drug manufacturer gives itthe opportunity to offer its expertise worldwide, says DiversifiedPresident Henry Blissenbach.  SmithKline "has a real appetite to see if the[pharmacy management] concept is applicable in Europe," says DiversifiedCOO Terry Wills. In fact, DPS and SmithKline have already gotten started onthat project. Blissenbach sees the deal as having long term strategic reach-- in gaining new clients and strengthening the sales and marketing ofSmithKline and Diversified products and services, and in managing theoverall cost of disease.Diversified, a division of the HMO United Healthcare, currently managespharmacy benefits for 11 million people and has a 30,000-pharmacynetwork; its clients -- the majority being United-owned HMOs and othermanaged care entities -- spent about $2 billion in 1993 on drugs.SmithKline had sales of about $6 billion in 1994, half frompharmaceuticals. The firm is also a player in the generic field.NO DRAWBACK SEENMany see selling out to a drug company as a competitive disadvantage, butBlissenbach disagrees. Even though he was among those initially warningabout the conflict a Merck-Medco merger entailed, he says "we did not gainone client because they left Medco because of the arrangement with Merck."In fact, in a DPS survey of employee benefits managers, the firm found thatmost didn't know that Merck owned Medco; once they found out, most werepleased to know that Medco could draw on Merck's assets and R&D know-how,says Blissenbach.Now he's a believer that it is possible to be owned by a drug maker andstill give the client the best deal. However, Blissenbach does say thatdrug makers are using the acquisitions to buy market share. "Merckpurchased Medco and SmithKline [bought] us for our ability to marketpharmaceuticals.  They fully expect us to market SmithKline drugs inpreference to others when everything's equivalent," says Blissenbach.But that conflict is not as troublesome as it might appear; in reality SKBonly makes about 5 percent of the drugs currently on the DPS formulary."There's an enormous amount of drugs that are needed to put a competitiveformulary on the street," says Wills. "It's foolish to think we'd push themoff in favor of SKB products." He also notes that DPS has no control overits HMO clients' formulary committees.ACCESS TO HMO DATAThe HMO element will be key in the SmithKline/DPS deal; SmithKline willhave exclusive access to medical data of the 1.6 million members of UnitedHMOs. DPS already has the ability to link the information from the HMOmedical claims to the HMO pharmacy claims. In that way, DPS can tellSmithKline what impact its drug therapy has on cutting the cost ofhospitalization or other treatment.The two will also pursue outcomes research and disease management.Blissenbach thinks that no PBM will turn away a chance to work with non-affiliated or non-owner drug makers, and he says that DPS will work withothers. But he thinks that PBMs will be extra attentive to owners orpartners. "There will be very preferred and less preferred -- that's whereyou'll see different formulary concessions and different researchpriorities," he says.However, until the dust settles from all the earthshaking activities in thedrug sector, it will be hard to tell where everyone stands exactly.That's okay with DPS. "A deal like this is made looking futuristically,"says Blissenbach. But, he adds jokingly, "the "future" in this businessis only two or three years."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994Risk Sharing a Tough Proposition, Says Fallon ExecMany drug companies say they want to help large drug buyers keep costs downthrough risk-sharing contracts, but at least one HMO executive says thathasn't worked for his health plan. According to P. David Jarry, MD,clinical director of pharmacy for the Fallon Clinic, his HMO has beenapproached numerous times by pharmaceutical companies to enter intocapitated contracts or other risk-sharing agreements. There have been lotsof negotiations, but no one's ever signed on the dotted line, he says.Fallon is one of the more innovative HMOs in the country. With 165,000enrollees, a 483-bed hospital, and 23 clinic locations, the Worcester MA-based HMO doesn't have a huge nationwide presence but is often cited as anexample of what the future will look like. Fallon is a perfect lab forcontractual arrangements. As a group model HMO, its physicians areemployees, which gives it a lot more control over its doctors' prescribing.It also uses a closed formulary and buys directly from drug makers.Explaining Fallon's inability to come to terms with any drug companies,Jarry cites terminology as a major stumbling block; everyone's definitionof capitation is different, he says. Drug makers have approached Fallonwith deals to give Fallon a price for a drug based on the number of HMOenrollees and the expected use by that population. Or they have suggested"capitating" an entire therapeutic class. The idea is that both partieswould reap savings for lower-than-expected utilization and converselywould pay a penalty for higher-than-anticipated utilization.But, Jarry says, "with a changing market, people are reluctant to commit toprice or volume for any long period of time." From the purchaser's point ofview, "for this to work you have to have some kind of time factor that'sreasonable." A short term contract doesn't give the HMO time to analyze oradjust utilization.For now, Jarry says, "I don't think we'll see good capitation arrangementstoo quickly because there are so many variables that have to be workedout." In the meantime, he expects buyers and sellers to "stick to the oldstandards": direct discounting, rebates, bundling, direct buying, and useof generics.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994Turf War Brewing Over Federal Role In Cost-Effectiveness DataAction in Congress on the health reform plan may create a turf battle overwhich federal agency should dispense quality and cost information on drugs,medical devices, and procedures. In its health reform mark-up, the HouseCommerce Committee is likely to propose an expanded federal role inplanning, assessing, and implementing guidelines. Chairman John Dingell (D-MI) is likely to include a bid by Rep. Ron Wyden (D-OR) that would givemore power to the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (AHCPR).Dingell is also considering a proposal by four outcomes gurus that wouldcreate a new federal agency for quality, panel sources said last week.Wyden's bill would steal a lot of FDA's fire by having AHCPR or some otherfederal agency set national research priorities and give prior approval forcost-effectiveness studies. The bill also would expressly limit FDA's powerto regulate cost-effectiveness claims made by manufacturers in advertising.An even more aggressive agenda is being pushed by RAND's Robert Brook, MD,Dartmouth's John Wennberg, MD, Duke's David Eddy, MD, and Harvard's PaulCleary.  In late April, they outlined for congressional staffers what oneattendee called an "FDA for guidelines." Under the policy, the new agencywould identify wasteful spending and establish national clinical trials.FDA staffers however, are bristling at the notion that their agency can'tbe the source of outcomes and effectiveness data for the public since it islikely to begin getting that from manufacturers who will submit itwith applications for FDA approval on devices and drugs.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994A Hopes To Develop Cost-Effectiveness Policy by Year's EndWhile drug makers use more and more cost-effectiveness claims inadvertisements for their products, FDA is still struggling to developguidelines on the use of such data in promotions. Drug makers often claimtheir products cut hospitalization days or reduce need for additionaltherapy, but usually the claims are based on comparisons to placebos, notother drugs in the class. For now, such claims will continue to be reviewedon an ad hoc basis, say FDA staffers.FDA has put on hold its plans to hire an economist to help develop cost-effectiveness claims guidelines. Drug advertising division people say theyhave talked to some outside experts, but "our scheduling needs andexpectations didn't jibe with theirs." So agency personnel will write theguidelines themselves; they hope to have a preliminary policy in place byyear's end.That doesn't mean there won't be a lot of "outside input," the agencynotes.  FDA staffers have been meeting and talking to many interestedgroups -- drug manufacturers, managed care representatives, and others.Officials have also attended conferences and industry meetings and heldsmall seminars at which experts in the field presented information.FDA is finding itself in the midst of a storm of confusion over who cangive out what information to whom in the cost-effectiveness arena.At a recent meeting of the National Health Lawyers Assn., an attorneywarned that FDA may be considering regulation of the pharmaceuticalinformation disseminated by HMO pharmacy & therapeutics committees totheir doctors. The information often makes superiority claims for onetherapy in a class over another.  However, an agency official says, "Wehaven't even been talking about this internally." But, he says, if drugcompanies prepare the material for distribution to HMO doctors -- inparticular if it mentions unapproved uses of the drug -- "we would look atit."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994About Your newsletterAs you've noticed, there's new terrain for drug buyers -- and sellers -- astraditional markets are being shaken up by powerful, shifting, forces. It'sno longer enough just to know what drugs are being marketed -- it's moreimportant to know in advance what discounts might be offered, what dealsare being struck, and which outcomes studies are showing favorable cost-benefit results.The New Drug Buyer goes beyond the news to deliver insider intelligence,practical insights, and action-oriented analysis on what's really happeningin the fast-changing pharmaceutical marketplace. The editors have broadexperience in covering the health and drug industries and are supported byFaulkner & Gray's Healthcare Information Center, with its unparalleledresources in the outcomes research field, access to high level healthpolicymakers, and renowned legislative and regulative coverage. We at F&Gare proud to bring you this groundbreaking newsletter -- we know it's goingto make the road ahead smoother for you, the reader. -- The PublisherBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994Value Health and Pfizer Alliance: A Powerful Attack on the Outcomes FrontWhile other drug companies talk about developing outcomes studies andtreatment guidelines in their alliances or acquisitions of pharmacy benefitcompanies, Pfizer hopes to be acting. Hooking up with Value Health will letPfizer take the short cut, says ValueRx president and COO Steve Linehan(see profile). The ability to have cost-effective data in hand and toeventually manage the cost of disease will be the key to thriving long termin the drug industry.The Pfizer deal with Value Health has several components: ValueRx willaggressively promote Pfizer products on its formulary in exchange fordiscounts; Value Health Sciences, a pioneer in outcomes research andguidelines, will develop such data on Pfizer products; and Value Health andPfizer will set up a $100 million joint venture to manage care in certaindisease states.Value Health has long been respected in utilization management, outcomesresearch, pharmacy benefits management, and managed care for mentalhealth.Other PBMs, such as Caremark or Medco, while having sophisticated datacollection capabilities, do not have lengthy experience in developingtreatment protocols, says Linehan. That gives his company, and Pfizer, anedge, he claims.Linehan says ValueRx has another edge in that it, unlike DPS and Medco,won't be owned by a drug company. ValueRx will aggressively push Pfizerdrugs to its clients but only where and when it is appropriate, he says,adding that ValueRx is likely to ally with several drug makers.ValueRx isn't alone in trying to forge multiple alliances, as many see itas the best way to guarantee the drug buyer that it will get the widestselection of pharmaceuticals at the best cost and with the best range ofvalue-added services.  But Linehan says that "it will require finesse toput together a multiple alliance of manufacturers."Pfizer, for its part, is satisfied with partnerships, as it has also struckone with Caremark. "Acquiring a PBM is a huge cash outlay," says a Pfizerspokesman.  "We think our strategy allows us to be very flexible; it's ahighly complex, fluid marketplace, and if it does change tomorrow we'rein a better position."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994FoxMeyer Aims To Play With the Big PBM BoysFoxMeyer Corp., which claims to be the nation's fourth largestpharmaceutical distributor, is beefing up its PBM operations, with a buy ofScrip Card Enterprises, a Salt Lake City firm that has managed prescriptionbenefits for small to medium-sized employers. Pharmacies that participatein Scrip Card will get a complete marketing package that they can presentto the managed care buyer that includes competitive prices, generics, andutilization review, says FoxMeyer VP Bob Davis.Also in April, FoxMeyer launched FoxCare Network, aimed at giving thecompany's 4,500 independent pharmacy customers wider exposure to managedcare. The network, says Davis, will also let pharmacists use "the medicaloutcomes management programs developed for [FoxMeyer's] existing pharmacybenefit management company, Health Care Pharmacy Providers." No mail orderservices are planned for FoxCare, but it may be provided through ScripCard. FoxMeyer will offer its help free to pharmacists, but hopes to getmore pharmacists to buy more drugs from FoxMeyer.  "I can assure you we'llbe more supportive of those who buy from us," Davis says.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994Caremark To Add Fourth to AllianceA few weeks ago, drug makers struck their first blow against the Merck-Medco powerhouse, when several teamed up with Caremark's PrescriptionService division.  In the war to maintain and gain market share, drugmakers have come to realize that prescription drug management firms can bepotent allies. "Our goal with Caremark is to become a bigger player fasterin this emerging health care arena," says a spokesman for Rhone-PoulencRorer, one of Caremark's partners.Caremark, which covers 28 million people through its pharmacy managementprograms, has also snagged Pfizer and an unnamed company assumed to beBristol-Myers Squibb, and says it is about to announce an alliance with afourth drug maker.In the short term, Caremark will have an incentive to shift market share topartners' drugs, says Caremark Prescription Service corporate VP KrisGibney.  Caremark will give partners' products preferential treatment onits formulary in exchange for discounts. The more lives switched and thegreater market share gained, the better pricing Caremark gets, says Gibney.Long term, the goal is to steer data on patient utilization and outcomesback to the partners.  The Caremark partners will have exclusive access toCaremark information.  Caremark has just hired former MediQual CEO JohnKordash to head information strategy.  Caremark will also collaborate withits drug partners on developing treatment guidelines. Eventually, Caremarkwill offer capitated arrangements, but Gibney says that the deals are socomplex that none have been successfully put together yet. Caremark willrely on drug companies to supply educational material and guidance ontherapy and, most importantly, financial backing. But the firm willcontinue to act as the middleman -- the "Chinese Wall," as Gibney likes tosay -- between employers and the drug maker. Caremark, like other PBMs,will profit from that arrangement.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994Makers and Shakers --ValueRx's Stephen Linehan:  Putting Politics To WorkBeing the head of the nation's third largest drug benefits managementcompany has its headaches, but it beats being a small-town politician. Atleast that's what Stephen Linehan, president and COO of ValueRx, hasconcluded now that he's taken a stab at both. With $300 million in salesand 500 clients, ValueRx has Linehan racking up the frequent flyer milesand constantly chatting on the cellular phone. Linehan, who was named torun ValueRx's day-to-day operations in November 1993, has no regrets aboutending his foray into politics. In fact, his experience should come inhandy when it comes to implementing ValueRx's goals, which includebrokering strategic alliances with drug makers.In the late 1970s, Linehan was on the board of aldermen in Lake Saint LouisMO.  At first he was content in that role, but like every politician, hethought he could do a better job than the guy in office. He won his racefor mayor his first time out in 1980, and stayed in for a second term.Looking back, he can't point to any major disappointments in his mayoralcareer, and unlike many short term politicians he doesn't harbor muchbitterness over the experience. He proudly notes that while mayor, hehelped bring the town its first hospital and helped settle a lawsuit thatpaved the way for more growth in the community. But he eventually decidedthat "over the long run I'd rather be successful in business than inpolitics."Armed with undergraduate and graduate degrees in business administration,he moved in 1985 to MetLife Health Care Networks, where he became CEO.After five years with MetLife, he spent a year as senior VP for ManagedCare at Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kentucky. Then, in early 1991, hemoved to Value Health's American PsychManagement unit in Washington DC.When Value Health merged American PsychManagement with another provider,Preferred Health Care, Linehan was offered the presidency at BloomfieldHills MI-based ValueRx. He was happy to move away from the politics-infested DC area. Value Health, based in Avon CT, is a pioneer in themanagement of mental health and substance abuse costs, workers' comp costs,and in the field of outcomes research through its Value Health Sciencesunit. However, the company was initially built around ValueRx, which wasestablished in 1985. By 1990, ValueRx accounted for 70 percent of thefirm's revenues, says Alex. Brown managed care analyst Eleanor Kerns.But in the interest of diversification -- thereby cutting risk forinvestors -- Value Health has expanded and continues to expand into otherbusinesses.  Kerns gives the firm high marks for lowering its exposure onthe prescription drug side. But ValueRx still accounted for a little morethan half Value Health's revenues in 1993.A Perfect FitDespite Linehan's lack of direct experience in the prescription drugmanagement area, he feels that his background in managing health plans andmental health care costs prepared him well for dealing with pharmaceuticalcost containment.  As a managed care executive trying to hold downexpenditures, "typically, there were two costs that stuck out -- mentalhealth and prescription drug benefits." That meant that he had to "becomeexpert in those areas," says Linehan.At American PsychManagement, he was given the opportunity to hone hisskills at managing the tricky area of psychiatric care and substance abusetreatment. Large self-insured employers and insurers came to AmericanPsychanagement expecting to see costs in those areas reduced. Linehan andhis crew delivered. According to Value Health, while Linehan was in charge,revenues at American PsychManagement grew from $30 million in 1990 to $90million when he left in late 1993. Also under his tenure, Value Healthsuccessfully negotiated a merger with another huge player in the field,Preferred Health Care Ltd.Linehan says that demand for prescription drug management carve-outprograms is being driven by the same dynamic that led to contracting formental health benefits management. Purchasers "want more cost-efficiencyand better care," he says. Already familiar with that desire, Linehanthinks it will be short work to apply the lessons he learned at AmericanPsych to helping ValueRx clients.Riding the CrestLinehan is taking over at a time of explosive growth for the drug benefitsmanagement industry. Once, there were only a few major players: Medco wasthe king of mail order, United Healthcare's Diversified PharmaceuticalServices was tops in the HMO sector, and ValueRx was among the leaders incontracting with Fortune 500 self-insured employers. Drug costs were anannoyance, but not enough of a concern for many employers to spend themoney on a separate benefits management program. But the demand for suchservices has grown as drug costs have risen, leading to a vastly changedmarketplace.There are hundreds of players now, from small private firms to subsidiariesof HMOs to wholesaler-owned benefits managers. Even Rite Aid, a chaindrugstore, has thrown its hat into the ring. Now, with drug costs in thenews and employers getting more accustomed to hiring experts to help inproblem areas, drug benefits management has become trendy, if notessential. Not all benefits managers will survive; consolidation has hithealth services and will soon make its mark on the drug benefits managementsector.Making A MarkIt will be Linehan's job to assert ValueRx's role as a full-serviceprovider and ensure that it grabs a leadership position in thisincreasingly sophisticated market.ValueRx itself has been growing by leaps and bounds. In 1991, Value Healthbought a drug benefit management and a mail-order company, and added moremanagement businesses in 1993. Revenues skyrocketed in the ValueRx divisionfrom $177 million in 1992 to $364 million in 1993. Clients include AlliedSignal, American Express, Federal Express, Rockwell, Tenneco, and UnitedTechnologies. In August 1993, the firm won a contract from the state of NewYork to manage the benefits of 700,000 employees, retirees, and dependents.One of ValueRx's biggest coups so far was winning a contract forFord/United Auto Worker employees in January. Medco and PCS also had beenbidding on the contract, which covers 275,000 workers, retirees, anddependents. ValueRx expects the deal to add about $90 million a year inrevenues.As part of the contract, ValueRX will develop a formulary, offer concurrentand retroactive drug utilization review and profiling of physicianprescribing patterns. The Ford pharmacy network is closed -- meaningworkers can only go to the designated pharmacies. More importantly, Fordwill be the first major employer that has signed a capitated agreement withValueRx. "We're delighted to have their business," says Linehan, who callsthe contract a "win-win for us, Ford, and the UAW."However, ValueRx will assume a great deal of risk. The firm assured Fordthe auto maker would only be liable for fixed costs involved in deliveringpharmaceuticals and managing the use of drugs to the workers. The downsidefor ValueRx: It will have to absorb any overutilization or variability indrug pricing.Linehn says the way to beat that is through strategic alliances with drugmakers, such as the one it just signed with Pfizer. And ValueRx will beworking directly with Ford and UAW on getting workers to be bettereducated drug consumers.  "Ford's not just interested in controlling costsfor the three-year agreement, but extending it into the future," saysLinehan, who adds that ValueRx is "doing what we can to ensure quality andto work together to contain costs. The recognition is that they're not justdumping off risk; it's all three parties working together."Focus on Outcomes and AlliancesAs Linehan well knows, the future of prescription benefit management isentangled with the interests of drug manufacturers. Thus, ValueRx, likemany other PBMs, is focusing on developing its data and outcomes researchcapabilities.Although he still thinks there's a lot of ground to be gained with the manyemployers and payers that still do not carve out drug benefits, once theyare under a plan, those payers are going to want to see continuousimprovement in their savings, says Linehan. The key to eking out furthersavings will be effective alliances with drug makers.ValueRx, however, will only strike deals with drug makers if it canmaintain control, says Linehan. "We feel we have to represent employers'interest first because they're the ones paying the tab," he says, notingthat Merck's ownership of Medco has created the concern among buyers thatthe focus for Medco will be to push Merck therapies.And he says that it will be hard to give clients a full range oftherapeutic options if the company is owned by one drug maker. ValueRxwill forge alliances with several drug makers "and get the best drugavailable for the person at the most cost-effective rate," says Linehan."No drug should be dispensed or prescription switched or changed unless thedata supports that it will be equal or better in terms of results forpatients."Another important aspect of benefits management will be outcomes research,and Linehan sees ValueRx as uniquely positioned for that job. Value Healthhas two units that are intimately involved in outcomes research; ValueRxwill draw upon that expertise. "There's a real potential to demonstratethat drug therapy delivered at the right amount and the right time willsave in medical expenditures," says Linehan. But even he admits that itwill take some convincing of clients."You have to work with an employer and tell them that spending an extra $5million this year could save $20 million in other expenses." ValueRx hopesto have the research in the future to do the convincing. But it will stilllikely need some financial help from drug makers, says Linehan. He seesValueRx doing outcomes research in partnership with employer customers anddrug makers. The goal is to position ValueRx as the quality expert. Then,"as the marketplace evolves, it should get us more business," says Linehan.It will definitely take a politician's instincts to balance the competinginterests of drug maker, drug buyer, and drug benefits manager. SteveLinehan's experience should help him navigate these tricky and untestedwaters.--Alicia Ault Barnett, editor.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994The Drug Industry Puts on a Kinder, Gentler FaceCovering up Armani suits with lab coats, the Pharmaceutical ManufacturersAssn.  (PMA) hopes to change its image with a new name and a new missionthat emphasizes its role as developer of "90 percent" of the drugs thatcome to market. PMA will now be known as PhRMA -- the PharmaceuticalResearch and Manufacturers of America.  "The public relations spin is verydirect," PhRMA president Gerald Mossinghoff told executives attending theassociation's annual meeting May 2. Outgoing PMA chairman William Steere(chairman and CEO of Pfizer) spelled it out: "Our mission is research. Itis the defining characteristic of our industry."The unveiling of the new improved trade group followed months of internalsoul searching driven by a failure to convince Congress, the Clintons, andthe public that drug firms aren't money-grubbing price gougers. Althoughnew PhRMA chairman Sheldon Gilgore (chairman and CEO of Searle) said thatPMA had made some strides in improving the industry's image, it wasn'tenough.  A year ago, said Gilgore, "we were a demonized industry"; today,"we are less demonized."PMA hired McKinsey & Co. to help the trade group become a better lobbyistfor its 100 member companies and win more points in the health reformdebate. Now the group will focus mainly on lobbying against pricecontrols, rebates, and other threats to profits. PhRMA has also hiredformer Pfizer Washington office head and Glaxo exec Stephen Conafay to beits new superlobbyist.However, PhRMA still has an uphill battle convincing the federal governmentthat price controls are not necessary and large drug buyers thatmanufacturers are ready to negotiate on price. The association's newimage was bolstered by holding its meeting at a staid Washington DChotel, not a lavish tropical resort. But Gilgore was seen getting into alimo after a press conference.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994Merck Wants Medicare Action -- If There Is AnyTrying to get in on the ground floor of a Medicare prescription drugbenefit, Merck sent a proposal to HHS and the White House last weeksuggesting that the government allow private pharmacy benefits managementfirms to use their tactics to control expenditures and quality for thefeds. However, it's not even certain that a Medicare drug benefit willsurvive the grueling beating the Clinton health reform plan is taking onCapitol Hill.Under Merck's plan, Medicare would select up to three PBMs per region,through competitive bidding, to manage drugs costs and quality for Medi-care beneficiaries. Surprisingly, Merck advocates an "open" pharmacynetwork; allowing any pharmacist who meets the terms to participate. ItsMedco business has used closed, exclusive networks.So far, competitors haven't weighed in on Merck's proposal, but one saysthat on the surface, "anything that applies the principle of competitionand private industry to government is good."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994Salableo FDA has cleared Bristol-Myers Squibb's Taxol (paclitaxel) for treatmentof breast cancer following failure of chemotherapy for metastatic diseaseor a relapse within six months of chemo. Bristol claims that since the drugcan be administered in an outpatient setting that "this can eliminate theneed for an overnight hospital stay, resulting in greater convenience tocancer patients, and potential cost savings to the health care system." Thedrug was approved last December for ovarian cancer not responsive toinitial chemo.o Prozac may get FDA's okay for a new indication, which should driveformulary managers mad. The widely-used antidepressant has gotten an FDAadvisory panel's okay to treat bulimia.o Adding another notch in its belt, Coumadin (crystalline warfarin sodium)can now be used to prevent and treat blood clots associated with artificialheart valve replacement. Clinical trial data collected from 1967 to 1990show that "long term oral anticoagulation therapy significantly reduced theincidence of thromboembolism" in heart valve patients, says the drug'smaker Dupont Merck.  However, the benefits need to be weighed against therisk of bleeding, says a company press release.o Minneapolis-based MGI Pharma launches its Salagen tablets for treatingradiation-induced dry mouth in head and neck cancer patients. The firm willbe handling its own sales and marketing, initially targeting doctors,nurses, and hospital-based dentists. The factory price to wholesalers is$89.50 per 100; patients should expect to pay between $2.68 and $3 a day,says the firm.o Pfizer will start immediately marketing Glucotrol XL, a once-daily oraldrug to control blood sugar levels in diabetics. Pfizer says the single-dose regimen should "markedly increase patient compliance" and that "strictcontrol of blood sugar levels may delay the onset of eye, kidney, or nervecomplications of diabetes."o A new generic form of Ativan is available. Schein Pharmaceuticals hasreceived FDA approval of its ANDA for lorazepam injection.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994Notableo Prayers for a cheaper alternative to the expensive H2 antagonists areabout to be answered -- and the war for the billions spent on them hasbegun.  Mylan Labs, in conjunction with Eli Lilly, is set to beginmarketing the first generic form of SmithKline Beecham's Tagamet(cimetidine). Tagamet is losing its patent exclusivity on May 17; Mylan'sgeneric goes out the door May 18. Mylan will sell to wholesalers and Lillyto managed care at about 30 percent off the brand name price. Lilly willseek risk-sharing or capitated arrangements and will help develop ulcertreatment guidelines. More generics are expected before year's end, andsome formulary managers suspect they haven't heard the last from Glaxo;that firm will probably weigh in with some offer to maintain its virtualdominance of the H2 class.o Kodak bucks the merger and acquisition trend in the pharmaceutical field.The company announced last week that it will sell its Sterling Winthropdrug unit.o A coalition of hospitals, insurers, HMOs, and other drug buyers,including Kaiser, United Healthcare, and Premier Hospitals Alliance callingthemselves the "Coalition of Health Care Providers Concerned About RisingDrug Costs," wrote to Rep. John Dingell (D-MI) May 3 seeking to ax theHealth Security Act provision that would extend equal discounts to all drugbuyers. The provision has been seen as a political favor to pharmacists,but the coalition said that if approved, manufacturers "are likely torespond by limiting discounts to all purchasers."o Initial results from the AHCPR-funded five-year Stroke Prevention PatientOutcomes Research Team (PORT) study being conducted by researchers at DukeMedical Center found that the cost of stroke is closer to $30 billion ayear than previous estimates of $15-20 billion. The study also uncoveredhuge regional variations in cost and success of treatment.o With five new products, Merck's West Point Pharma now offers genericsthat account for 20 percent of a typical drugstore's dollar volume ingenerics.  The new products: alprazolam, carbidopa/levodopa, gamfibrozil,ketoprofen, and naproxen. The products will be made by "several leadinggeneric manufacturers" and sold under the West Point label.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE NEW DRUG BUYER via NewsNetMay 6, 1994Roche's Syntex Buy WillRaise Outcomes ProfileWith its impending acquisition of Syntex, Roche will gain greater entreeinto the world of outcomes research, where Syntex is acknowledged as one ofthe leaders.  The firm has been using outcomes to determine whether tocontinue clinical trials on its own products for the last several years.But Syntex's relatively paltry pipeline and the fact that most of its majordrugs are facing generic competition has made it an acquisition candidatefor those same several years.Roche is paying $5.3 billion, or $24 a share, for the Palo Alto CA-baseddrug concern.  That's a 57 percent premium over Syntex's closing stockprice the last trading day before the announcement, but seems small whencompared to the billions being tossed around to acquire pharmacy benefitmanagement firms that have no R&D capability.The Syntex buy is another example of the consolidation trend in the drugsector as manufacturers look for ways to streamline operations in the wakeof declining profits.  If Syntex shareholders tender a majority of theirstock and vote to approve the deal, Roche will become the fourth largestdrug company in the world.  Syntex will gain a presence win South America,Japan and the Middle East.  Roche gains not only Syntex's outcomesexpertise but its strong marketing organization, which has successfullybuilt a franchise around the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories Naprosyn (A$700 million drug), Anaprox, and Toradol.To hang on to Naprosyn sales, Syntex formed a generic unit, HamiltonPharma; it also recently got FDA approval to take Naprosyn over-the-counter.Back to Headline List WT03-B09-3IA087-000629-B020-91http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/me24.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035125 text/html 120435HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:49:18 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:51 GMTContent-length: 120247Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/me24.html Sample Issue Copyright MEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet March 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES EUROPEAN APPROVAL TIMES LEAVE US LAGGING BEHIND (651 words) IN VITRO DIAGNOSTIC DIRECTIVE CLEARS EP FIRST READING (1079 words) GRACE MERGES NMC WITH FRESENIUS REJECTING BAXTER'S $3.8 MILLION BID (829 words) SMITH & NEPHEW PROFITS UP IN 1995 (407 words) ANGEION EXPANDS EUROPEAN DISTRIBUTION (120 words) ESAOTE SEES INCREASED SALES, HOPES TO GO PUBLIC (233 words) PRIVATISATION ON AGENDA FOR ORTOPEDICHE RIZZOLI (259 words) INCENTIVE SECURES OWNERSHIP POSITION IN GAMBRO (393 words) GEHE CONSIDERS TAKEOVER BID FOR HAFSLUND-NYCOMED (207 words) LEIRAS SET TO BE SOLD (500 words) SPECTRAL DIAGNOSTIC DISAPPOINTED WITH US SALES EFFORTS (271 words) ESCALON SIGNS DISTRIBUTION ACCORD (111 words) NOVATECH/MEDICAL PRODUCTS MERGE (238 words) TERUMO EXPANDS IN SE ASIA (134 words) I-TA SWINDLES INVESTORS (205 words) WIPRO TO DISTRIBUTE GERMAN PRODUCTS IN INDIA (130 words) EBOS TURNS PROFIT IN 1995 (105 words) FAULDING SEES MIXED RESULTS (189 words) FIRST HIV ANTIGEN TEST APPROVED (226 words) NEW DEVICE CAN WRITE WITH EYES (253 words) CE MARK FOR INTRAVASCULAR DEVICE (138 words) LASERSCOPE SEEKS BRAND RECOGNITION IN EUROPE (190 words) CORTECS MEETS QUALITY STANDARDS (125 words) BASF GENERICS LAUNCHES INHALER (74 words) FDA APPROVES CHOLESTEROL SYSTEM (254 words) FDA REJECTS NON-INVASIVE BLOOD SUGAR TESTING DEVICE (371 words) MIDAC RECOMMENDS IN FAVOUR OF IMMUNOMEDIC'S CEA SCAN (158 words) FDA CLEARS PHADIATOP ALLERGY TEST (180 words) GUIDANT TO SELL CATHETER (65 words) VITRASERT CLEARED FOR MARKETING (121 words) SLEEP DISORDER DEVICE RECEIVES 510 (K) MARKET CLEARANCE (104 words) SCALAR LAUNCHES SKIN MOISTURE TEST (184 words) OMRON'S BLOOD PRESSURE MONITOR (159 words) SMARTLIGHT ATTRACTS INVESTMENT (198 words) EUROPEAN STANDARDS TRY TO BREAK LANGUAGE BARRIER (233 words) NEWS EU SETS STANDARD CONDOM SIZE (74 words) UK GROUP TO SHOW TECHNOLOGY OPPORTUNITIES TO US COMPANIES (151 words) PRODUCT LIABILITY BILL HAS A CHANCE TO BECOME LAW (622 words) FDA TO EASE RULES FOR LOW-RISK DEVICES (314 words) 1996 PASSAGE OF FDA REFORM BILL IN QUESTION (362 words) UNCERTAINTY OVER MRI ORDER (106 words) MEDICAL DEVICE MAKERS URGED TO LOOK EAST FOR NEW BUSINESS (324 words) TURKMENISTAN REQUIRES LICENSING OF MEDICAL EQUIPMENT (93 words) SECTOR TO SEE "MODEST GROWTH" (309 words) AUSTRALIA HELPS CHINA ESTABLISH AUDIOLOGY TECHNOLOGY COURSES (282 words) INCONTROL TO START CLINICAL TRIALS (142 words) PORTABLE DIALYSIS MACHINE PROVES "SMOOTHER & GENTLER" (210 words) ST JUDE MEDICAL AND HEARTPORT TO TEST MITRAL VALVE REPAIR SYSTEM (252 words) PERCLOSE TO START CLINICAL TRIALS (202 words) IDS TO CLINICALLY TEST CTLM (174 words) SLIGHT RISK FROM BREAST IMPLANTS (372 words) RECENTLY ISSUES MEDICAL DEVICE PATIENTS (1147 words) IT TO CAPITALISE ON EXPERTISE IN POLYMER-BASED PRODUCTS (772 words) DEVICES SECTOR SETS SIGHTS ON MARKET AND INDICATION EXPANSION (714 words) CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996EUROPEAN APPROVAL TIMES LEAVE US LAGGING BEHINDBRUSSELS - A study on European approval times for medical technologyhas revealed that patients in the US wait up to three times as long astheir European counterparts for government approval of new medicaldevices.The study, conducted by Medical Technology Consultants Europe Ltd(MTCE, Brussels), found that higher-risk, breakthrough medical deviceswere approved in European Union (EU) within 80-120 days, provided themanufacturer passed a European Union facility inspection (which iscompleted within 120 days).  The study also found that new lower-riskdevices entered the European market with no delay once a manufacturerpassed the initial facility inspection.  Similar devices take anaverage of 178 days to be approved in the US.One reason for the speedier approvals, noted the study, is the numberof authorised bodies that can carry out the approval procedure.  "Theapproval procedures are carried out by a number of authorisedcertifying bodies spread throughout Europe, rather than the oneauthority in the US [the Food and Drug Administration]." MTCE said thatthere are 35 third-party organisations, known as authorised bodies tocarry out the approval procedures for medical devices throughout theEU.Point of contentionThis is a particular point of contention, with the US Food and DrugAdministration.  In testimony before the US Congress, FDA commissionerDavid Kessler recently criticised key provisions in FDA reformlegislation allowing third parties to take part in the review process.However, US device manufacturers are citing the European study'sfindings as additional proof that FDA reform is essential.Maurice Freeman, MTCE's principal and a former European Commissionmedical device official, said, in a statement prepared for the USSenate Committee on Labour and Human Resources (which has jurisdictionon FDA reform legislation), "Many patients who benefit from theapplications of such new devices in Europe would have [under USapproval times] either not received the benefits from the use of suchdevices or in many cases would have died."The FDA takes four times as long to approve breakthrough medicaldevices than is allowed by US statute, according to the Health IndustryManufacturers Association (HIMA - the US trade group for medical deviceand diagnostic manufacturers).  HIMA says the approval times for thesedevices have nearly doubled since 1990 and; the FDA's record onapproving incremental improvements to existing devices is similar, withapproval times also nearly doubling since 1990."Manufacturers simply aren't as eager to research and develop devicesin the US knowing that they'll face these egregious delays," said HIMApresident Alan Magazine.  "It's a double whammy - the patients wait fordevices stuck in the FDA's pipeline, and manufacturers have littleincentive to bring new devices into that pipeline in the first place."The difference between the US and EU review process for medical devicesis not a matter of safety, Mr Freeman said.  "The European route isextremely rigid in its requirement for the manufacturer to providesuitable evidence as to the development process, to verify the designby comprehensive review process and to manufacture under controlledconditions," he added.  The current EU review process for breakthroughmedical devices was implemented in 1992.Both the American and European systems contain sound elements that areessential in protecting public health, notes HIMA.  "We are aware of nostudy that shows that medical devices on the market in Europe are lesssafe than those in the US," Mr Magazine said.According to another recent study conducted by The Wilkerson Group, aNew York-based independent consulting firm, FDA delays in approvingdevices will lead to the loss of US jobs to nations where approvalprocesses are more streamlined - an estimated 50,000 over the next fiveyears.  Governments in the UK, Ireland, the Netherlands and elsewherehave already begun to highlight the impediment of FDA regulatory delayin their marketing materials to attract US businesses overseas.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996IN VITRO DIAGNOSTIC DIRECTIVE CLEARS EP FIRST READINGSTRASBOURG - European Union (EU) proposals to extend legislation on thesale and use of medical devices to in vitro diagnostic equipmentcleared its first reading in the European Parliament on 12 March.However, the assembly's endorsement was heavily qualified by 50amendments, many of which were accepted by Industry Commissioner MartinBangemann.Among the key issues that emerged were compulsory use of "local"language - resisted by industry - and whether the EU should operate acentral data bank to aid monitoring.  Ethical aspects of devices usinghuman substances were another area of concern, with several speakerscalling for these to be dealt with under separate procedures.Commissioner Bangemann said he was prepared to take on board 47 of the78 amendments originally tabled, although a dozen involved linguisticproblems and were not put to the vote.  Among the accepted amendmentswere those concerned with safety, protection and quality.  There wereaccepted provisions concerning incidence reporting and use of a database for medical devices on the market.  One change placed theCommission in the reporting loop with member states and may mean apossible role in decisions to withdraw problematic devices.Commissioner Bangemann also accepted an amendment making it clear thatthe Directive would not affect "national laws which provide for thesupply of diagnostic medical devices and products by a medicalprescription".Accepted amendments also clarified definitions and made wordingchanges, such as "clinical laboratories" being called "medical analysislaboratories".  In those provisions that pertained to human tissues andsubstances produced from such tissue, the word "cells" was added.Additionally, "packaging" was added to items that discussed standardsof design and manufacture.Much of the debate centred on those amendments that the Commissionerwas not prepared to accept.  Chief among these were language andlabelling concerns.Labelling could involve major costsOn use of languages, Commissioner Bangemann accepted it would normallybe self-evident that the language of the country of intended saleshould be used.  "However, in this specific case, this is not sological because 95 per cent of these products are for use by experts,people who as a general rule are familiar with two or three languagesused in medicine.  It's not just a matter of labelling but alsohandbooks and software, which are becoming increasingly important inthe use of these devices.  Therefore, it would involve major costs,particularly in the case of smaller member states," he said.Producers in smaller states, seeking to release their products on thesingle market would be forced to have information translated into the11 principal languages used in the 15 EU member states.  CommissionerBangemann insisted that the proposals would not preclude member statesfrom introducing a rule to that effect for its own producers.  However,the Commission was prepared to re-examine the idea if it attractedsupport in the Council of Ministers.  The original text of Article 4(3)provides that member states may require information to be provided "intheir national language(s) or in other Community language(s) to theextent that it is needed for safe and correct use of the device".He also rejected Scottish Nationalist member Mrs Winnie Ewing's(successful) Amendment 71, which would add "reagents and reagentproducts of biological origin for the diagnosis of genetic diseases,the detection and dosage of tumorous markers and the dosage ofhormones" to the Directive's annex listing of reagents and reagentproducts for which conformity assessment procedures would be required.In the Commission draft, this listing is limited to blood grouping anddetection of markers of HIV infection, Hepatitis B and C.  TheCommissioner also said he would be prepared to revisit this question.As drafted, the Directives will cover reagents, instruments andequipment for examining tissues or substances from the human body formedical purposes and would include kits for conducting pregnancy orcholesterol tests.  Currently subject to national rules, these deviceswill have to comply with EU safety requirements before being marketed.Time schedules complicatedThe time schedules involved are complicated: the Directive will becomelaw 20 days after publication of the final, definitive text.  Butmember states will have to allow continued marketing of devicescomplying with current, national rules for a period of four years afterthat act of final adoption.  Meanwhile, member states will then have totranspose the Directive's requirements into national law by April 1998.The proposals now go to the Council of Ministers, so that the 15 EUmember state governments can agree their own "common position" on theproposals from the European Commission.Rapporteur for the assembly's committee on industrial policy, Frenchparliamentarian Alain Pompidou, himself a professor of medicine, notedthat the legislation was a follow-up to two medical device directivesdating from 1990 and 1993.Like several other speakers, Prof Pompidou was uneasy about the "hands-off" approach followed by the Commission.Procedures leaving quality control as a matter for manufacturers mightbe justified for instruments using stable materials and electroniccircuits.  Prof Pompidou said the use of diagnostic medical devicesinvolved two major problems: stability of biological reagents, in thecase of 35 per cent of devices using immunological or other typereagents, and the "potentially dramatic and tragic consequences ofdiagnostic errors".Arguing the case for EU monitoring and a requirement for defectiveequipment to be recalled, Prof Pompidou said procedures had to be putin place to identify and react to problems.  He described amendmentscovering use of local language as "superfluous as far as healthprofessionals were concerned, but vitally important for self-testingkits".While Commissioner Bangemann was not prepared to go along with callsfor a full-blown, centralised EU monitoring system, he indicated thatthe Commission might be prepared to adopt some points from milderamendments.Pending creation of a central EU database to which national authoritieswould have access, transitional arrangements might entail manufacturersbeing required to make notifications not just to the authorities oftheir "home" state, but also to those of each member state targeted forsales.He also accepted that states should be under a duty to monitorcontinuously devices and "take all necessary steps to ensure thatdevices may be placed on the market and put into service only if theycomply with the requirements laid down in this Directive when properlysupplied, installed, maintained and used in accordance with theirintended purpose".Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996GRACE MERGES NMC WITH FRESENIUS REJECTING BAXTER'S $3.8 MILLION BIDDEERFIELD, IL - Baxter International has withdrawn its $3.8 billion bidfor Waltham, Massachusetts-based National Medical Care (NMC), WR Graceand Co's dialysis services unit.  Baxter's bid for the business wasrecently rejected by Grace, which favours the merger of NMC with thedialysis products business of Fresenius AG (Germany), though the doorthrough which Baxter could have waved an increased bid was never firmlyclosed.Under the agreement, NMC will make a $2.3 billion payment to Grace(Boca Raton, Florida), whose shareholders will get a 44.8 per centholding in the company, Fresenius Medical Care.  Fresenius USA, theGerman group's US business (which manufactures and distributes productsfor treating renal failure), will become a subsidiary of FreseniusMedical Care, with the new company based in Germany and operating itsUS business out of Waltham.  NMC, which operates 549 outpatient kidneydialysis treatment clinics in the US and 75 abroad, plans to borrow$2.3 billion for the transaction.The deal should be complete by the third quarter of 1996, and willresult in the formation of possibly the largest integrated kidneydialysis company achieving 1996 sales estimated at around $3.5 billion. The agreement will net Grace an equity gain of $700 million, asignificant portion of which it hopes to use to purchase as much as 20per cent of its common stock.  Fresenius Medical Care is expected to betraded publicly on the New York and European stock exchanges.The withdrawal of Baxter's offer ends analyst speculation about whetherthe company would raise its bid, especially considering the formidablecompetitive strength of a Fresenius-NMC merger.  Baxter, however,believes the impact on its own renal business will be limited.  Evenso, Baxter remains confused by Grace's flat rejection of what itconsidered a "fair" offer and was reluctant to sit and negotiatefurther.Baxter had been in discussions with Grace since December 1995, andstands by its bid to buy out NMC (the $3.8 billion deal would haveinvolved a straight $2 billion payment to Grace and a $1.8 billion inBaxter common stock).Early in February Baxter made its offer public, a move widely agreed torepresent a forceful invitation to push Grace into formal negotiations.Baxter's chief executive, Vernon Louks, described the bid in a letterto Grace counterpart, Albert Costello, as "substantially morefavourable to the Grace shareholders than the Fresenius proposal." Headded: "We will not increase our offer...since Grace managementcontinues to refuse to discuss our proposal and has determined to goforward with the Fresenius transaction, we hereby withdraw ourproposal."Last year, Baxter, with annual sales of $10 billion overall, including$1.3 billion from its kidney therapy products, announced its intentionto split the company by spinning off its hospital supply division.  The"new Baxter", essentially its medical specialities operations (withannual sales of about $5 billion), includes its renal business.  If theacquisition of NMC had gone Baxter's way, it was expected to havediluted earnings by less than 5 per cent in the first year, and startedto add to earnings after about 18 months.WR Grace, with interests lying foremost in specialty chemicals,originally proposed to spin-off the NMC business to stockholders latelast year, after rejecting a $3.5 billion takeover bid for NMC by theunit's chairman, Constantine Hampers (who will stay with the company ifthe merger goes ahead).  Plans were delayed, however, by US federalinvestigations into NMC's billing practices.Fresenius will assume NMC's legal obligationsAs part of the merger deal, Fresenius will assume all of NMC's legalobligations from on-going government investigations.  The company isthe subject of three federal investigations.  Most recently, The NewYork Times reported, the company received a letter from the USAttorney's office in New Jersey stating that NMC was the target of aNew Jersey grand jury investigation.Meanwhile, a separate inquiry into contracts between NMC's dialysissubsidiaries and physician supply and service companies is underway bya grand jury in Virginia.  Moreover, a US attorney in Massachusetts hasissued five subpoenas for NMC records in connection with aninvestigation into a number of management, employee and accountingpractices.NMC's three divisions achieved sales of $2.1 billion overall last year;divided between its dialysis services division, providing outpatientand inpatient hospital dialysis services ($1.5 billion), its homecaredivision, offering home treatment services ($327 million), and itsmedical products group, which manufactures dialysis products ($300million).  The world market for dialysis products is estimated to be$3.1 billion, with the major players being Baxter (holding 42 per centof the market), Fresenius AG (13 per cent), and Gambro AG (32 percent).Meanwhile, Baxter recently opened its second medical products factory,Eurovac Ltd, in Malta to manufacture CRD flex suction canisters.  Thecompany expects the plant to export 3.7 million units, valued at $3.4million.  during its first year of operation, primarily to Germany andItaly.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996SMITH & NEPHEW PROFITS UP IN 1995LONDON - Healthcare group Smith & Nephew Plc (S&N) announced pre-taxprofit before exceptional items up by 5 per cent to #180.4 million($275.7 million) for the year to 31 December 1995.  Exceptional chargesof #14.6 million stemming from the integration of acquisitions werelargely offset by #11 million in gains from disposals.Turnoverincreased from #965 million to #1.02 billion despite much toughermarket conditions, including pressures on healthcare budgets worldwide.Chairman Eric Kinder said: "We do not expect any easing of thedifficult market conditions in North America, but further improvementin Europe is likely together with continued progress in the Far East."Turnover rose from #173.1 million to #186.1 million in Africa, Asia andAustralia.  With a rapid increase in sales for the second half of theyear, Asia and Japan experienced particularly strong growth at 30 percent and 25 per cent respectively.  Sales in the UK grew by 12 per centto #175 million, attributable to the establishment of a single salesforce for healthcare products which generated substantial orders fromthe National Health Service, combined with a strong performance fromthe consumer healthcare sector.  In Continental Europe, sales expandedby 8 per cent to #230.3 million; the markets in France and Spain hadrecovered in the second half of the year, while S&N was beginning tobuild a stronger position in Germany.In North America the expansion of managed care combined with theconsolidation of hospital groups and the increase in co-operativebuying organisations meant that S&N had to deal with a smaller numberof professional buying groups.  Sales slowed in the second half, butstill rose by 5 per cent to #404.7 million for the year.Strong product lines during the year included chronic wound dressingAllevyn, wound cleanser IntraSite Gel and IV3000, an intravenouscatheter dressing.  Rehabilitation products, extended by theacquisition of Homecraft for #29 million during the year, alsoperformed impressively.  The slowdown in the US market had retarded thegrowth of trauma, endoscopy and orthopaedic implants, although theycontinued to do well in other markets, achieving sales growth ofbetween 4 and 6 per cent.On the whole, selling prices were expected to remain "at best static",but Mr Kinder believed the strengths in S&N's marketing and research-backed innovation "will enable us to drive forward the competitivenessof our product range to achieve steady growth and to outperform globalhealthcare markets".Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996ANGEION EXPANDS EUROPEAN DISTRIBUTIONEDINBURGH - Angeion Europe Ltd, a wholly-owned subsidiary of AngeionCorp (US), has signed an agreement with Caledonian Medical Ltd to serveas its distributor in the UK for the company's Sentinel ImplantableCardioverter Defibrillator (ICD) system.Based in Scotland, Caledonian Medical is a manufacturer and distributorof numerous medical devices including heart valves, catheters andartificial hearts.Meanwhile, Angeion also has signed an agreement with Ries MedizinTechnik GmbH for exclusive distribution of the Sentinel ICD system inAustria.  Ries Medizin Technik is a distributor of cardiovascularproducts including pacemakers and leads in Austria, The Czech Republic,Slovakia, Slovenia and Hungary.Minnesota-based Angeion Corp develops and markets devices to treat life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias (irregular heartbeats).Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996ESAOTE SEES INCREASED SALES, HOPES TO GO PUBLICGENOA - Spurred by exports, the Italian company Esaote reportedincreasing sales of electro-medical devices in 1995 with plans to bequoted on the stock market later this year.The Genoa-based firm put its 1995 sales at L258 billion ($1.6 million),up 11 per cent from the previous year, with its net income rising fromL4.8 to L8 billion.  Esaote will hold an extraordinary meeting of itsshareholders to decide its entry into the stock markets, possibly inJuly 1996.The company, characterising internal demand as "stalled", said itsoverseas business now accounts for 53 per cent of sales, doubled fromtwo years ago.  In addition, the position of its overseas affiliates -the US Biosound, Esaote France and Esaote Deutschland - are alsoreported to have improved."The salient point of our growth", says Carlo Castellano, president andchief executive officer of Esaote, "is our increasing global role inthe strategic sectors such as ultrasonic devices, tomography anddedicated magnetic resonance."Once a government-owned company and privatised in the recent flurry ofdivestments by the state, 15 per cent of Esaote's shares were bought bythe Italian pharmaceutical group Bracco last year for L18 billion.Bracco together with other major shareholders, such as AdventInternational, Electra Investment Trust, Ipef-Euroventures Italia, ArcaMerchant and Sofipa, control 71.8 per cent of the company's shares.The remainder belongs to Esaote's managers.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996PRIVATISATION ON AGENDA FOR ORTOPEDICHE RIZZOLIBOLOGNA - Officine Ortopediche Rizzoli, one of Italy's prominentproducers of artificial limbs, is considering privatisation to breakout of its current slump and is thinking about changing its focus tohigh-technology products.Ortopediche Rizzoli, which began producing wooden limbs in Bologna 100years ago, is still a prestigious name in the production and sales oforthopaedic artificial limbs.  In addition, the company producessurgical equipment, wheel-chairs and other rehabilitation products(some of it by handmade methods).Its privatisation - the company is 94 per cent publicly-owned includingpartial ownership by the city of Bologna - is expected this year.Giuseppe Gazzoni Frascara, a local entrepreneur who owns the Bolognafootball team, has offered Ortopediche Rizzoli some L11 billion ($6.8million), according to La Repubblica (the Italian national daily).  MrFrascara told La Repubblica he believes he could double the company'ssales.Last year, the company's sales remained constant at L43 billion and itbroke even, although a net loss of about L1 billion is predicted for1996.  Sales of orthopaedic devices account for 85 per cent of itsbusiness, with 70 per cent of its total production going to Italianhospitals and 30 per cent to private institutions and citizens.In one high-tech venture, the company shot to fame at home and abroadthrough its pioneering work in mioelectric hands capable of interactingand amplifying cerebral impulses through receivers.  It also introduced"intelligent" prosthesis to Italy.  One of its products is the "BolognaBoot", which assists persons with spinal defects to walk with ease.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996INCENTIVE SECURES OWNERSHIP POSITION IN GAMBROSTOCKHOLM - Incentive Ab has consolidated its ownership position inGambro, the Swedish manufacturer and supplier of dialysis systems,acquiring the outstanding 25 per cent of shares in the company frompension funds, financial institutions and private owners in Sweden.Incentive shareholders accepted the offer to such an extent that itheld 99.4 per cent of the capital and 99.7 per cent of votes.Incentive's push to streamline its hold on Gambro came less than eightweeks after the company presented a bid worth SKr10.3 billion ($1.4billion) for the outstanding shares in Gambro.  Incentive's pre-bidstatus was already strong, with the investment company holding 42 percent of shares and 58 per cent of votes.A significant factor in the success of the bid was the acceptance ofthe Crafoord Foundation, which was the second biggest owner in Gambroafter Incentive, with 2.2 per cent of shares and 11.3 per cent ofvotes.Gambro was founded by Holger Crafoord in 1964, and was initiallyfocused on the development of kidney dialysis machines and after careproducts, areas in which the company still holds a strong marketposition worldwide.The bid emerged as Gambro issued an updated profit forecast for FY1995,projecting earnings of SKr1.5 billion for the year, that was below whatsome analysts had been anticipating.Incentive's action in bidding for Gambro signals a change in thecompany's strategy, which has been focused on acquiring minority andstrategic holdings in many of Sweden's leading industrials.  Thecompany's portfolio includes large shareholdings in Ericsson, AseaSweden and Electrolux.Incentive is now expected to divest these shares as part of a newpolicy of developing into a healthcare and energy systems group.Resultingly, analysts forecast the company will divest non-coreinterests in 1996."Once the Gambro acquisition is complete, more than half of theIncentive group's annual sales will be generated from activities linkedto medical and diagnostic systems.  We intend to invest more heavilyinto this business segment and sell-off non-core activities in thefuture," said Incentive's chief executive officer Mikael Lilius.The takeover is expected to boost Incentive's profit per share by aboutSKr7 to SKr10 in the short-term.  "The long-term picture is more rosy,and we expect a goodwill gain from the takeover of SKr8 billion andincreased profitability," said Lilius.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996GEHE CONSIDERS TAKEOVER BID FOR HAFSLUND-NYCOMEDBONN/OSLO - Gehe, the German medical technology systems group, isreported to be considering a hostile takeover bid on Hafslund-Nycomed,Norway's leading supplier of healthcare products and hospitalequipment.  Gehe, which had revenues of $10.4 billion in 1995, isstated to be particularly interested in acquiring the Norwegiancompany's highly-profitable and international X-ray contrast fluidsdivision.Hafslund-Nycomed will, under a plan approved by its board at the end of1995, be split into two companies - medical products and powerproduction/distribution - both of which are to be listed on the OsloStock Exchange in 1996.  Hafslund is also examining a possible listingin Stockholm.Gehe is in an acquisitive mood at present.  The company recentlypresented a #5/share offer to acquire UK pharmaceuticals company LloydsChemists, which has a market value of #6 billion ($9.5 billion).The Norwegian group has been looking for an international partner since1994.  Its search was nearly realised in 1995, when Hafslund signed aletter of intent to merge with the US company Ivax.  This deal fellthrough when Hafslund's Norwegian shareholders held out for a higherprice which Ivax refused to pay.  Although the merger was abandoned,both companies agreed to enter into a long-term co-operation deal.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996LEIRAS SET TO BE SOLDHELSINKI - Leiras Oy, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Huhtamaki groupand Finland's second biggest manufacturer of medical products, hasdenied any connection between its intended sale and recent negativepublicity surrounding controversial tests carried out for the company'scontraceptive implant, Norplant, in Africa.Huhtamaki is holding talks with at least four potential buyers,including Astra, Ciba Geigy, Upjohn-Pharmacia and Bayer.  Orion,Finland's largest pharmaceuticals manufacturer, is reported to belooking for an international partner ahead of tendering a bid forLeiras.Huhtamaki's chief executive officer Timo Peltola said the group'sdecision to divest Leiras was based on the need to restructure andconcentrate its future business around a single core division, foodsproduction and marketing."Our conclusion has nothing to do with the recent publicity involvingNorplant.  The simple truth is that Leiras is not large enough tosupport the heavy investments in research and development (R&D) itneeds to make in future years" said Mr Peltola.  Leiras specialises indeveloping and producing bone metabolism and ophthalmics as well asoral contraceptive pills and implant devices.The negative publicity that surrounded Leiras emerged following aBritish television programme's (BBC's Panorama) investigation intotrial tests of Norplant within the framework of a tribal village inwest Africa.  The programme, which focused on the alleged unsystematicnature and side-affects emanating from the tests, quoted internationalresearchers from the US and elsewhere who questioned the product'sreliability and innocuousness.The negative publicity affected the value of Huhtamaki's shares andcaused much discussion within senior company circles, despite a companydeclaration that associated tests in Africa had been conducted undercontract with a research firm outside the group."The rising trend in R&D expenditure, coupled with the downwardpressure on drug pricing due to cost savings programmes launched byhealthcare providers, is forcing the industry to seek greater economiesof scale from larger unit sizes.  The wave of mergers which hasaffected the top 40 companies globally is now making itself felt amongsmaller firms too," said Mr Peltola.Describing Leiras's profit and R&D track-records as "excellent", MrPeltola said that the cost benefits to the company of remainingindependent were rapidly disappearing.  The company's R&D outlayamounted to 20 per cent of net revenues in 1995, while the companywould find it increasingly difficult to find sufficient resources tomarket its products internationally."We feel that Leiras's potential will be best realised as a specialisedunit within a major international pharmaceutical company.  Thedivestment has attracted a lot of attention, and we expect to close thesale during the spring," said Mr Peltola.Leiras reported operating earnings of $32 million on revenues of justover $204 million in 1995, in a year when the firm accounted for 11 percent of Huhtamaki group's total sales volume.  Some 51 per cent ofLeiras's production was exported.  The company operates threeproduction plants in Finland, with sales subsidiaries located inSingapore, Sweden, Norway and Denmark.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996SPECTRAL DIAGNOSTIC DISAPPOINTED WITH US SALES EFFORTSVANCOUVER - Everyone says that Spectral Diagnostics Inc of Toronto (SDIon the Toronto Stock Exchange) has a good product.  It's a credit-card-sized diagnostic kit that can determine in seconds from a blood samplewhether an emergency room patient has, or has not had, a heart attack.Approved by the US Food and Drug Administration in March l995, Spectralexpected hot sales of the product to hospitals and emergency carecentres across North America.It chose Dade International of Deerfield, Illinois (a Baxtersubsidiary) as its US marketing partner.  However, sales revenue sinceproduct launch a year ago has been disappointing: C$400,000 ($289,855)in April-September l995, and only $70,000 in the last quarter of theyear.  Share price, which had boomed up to C$40 on news of the FDAapproval, has slumped, and is bumping along this year in the C$10-12range.Spectral appears to be less than satisfied with its US partner'sefforts.  It recently reorganised its arrangement with Dade, allowingit to find additional marketing partners, or even replace Dadeentirely.Chris Plaxton, Spectral executive vice-president said: "We wanted tosee sales increase at a faster pace than we thought we were going tosee them increase with just the Dade International sales force.  Also,Spectral is prepping a new diagnostic product for the marketplace.  Asuccessor to the CK-myoglobin test kit now on the market, this would bea four-component test, refining the diagnosis by adding two morecardiac markers."So far, however, Spectral has not announced any new marketingarrangements, nor has the filing process for the new test yet beencompleted.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996ESCALON SIGNS DISTRIBUTION ACCORDSKILLMAN, NJ - Escalon Medical Corp has signed a distribution agreementwith Wallach Surgical Devices to exclusively distribute Wallachcryosurgery products to ophthalmologists in the US.Wallach's cryosurgery products are used by vitreoretinal and otherophthalmic surgeons in a variety of procedures.  Escalon intends toutilise its existing sales force and national marketing effort toexpand the Wallach business.Located in Milford, Connecticut, Wallach Surgical Devices is aprivately-held company, specialising in cryosurgery products andoperating microscopes and is the leading developer and marketer ofthese products in the gynaecology and primary care markets.  Wallachwill continue to serve these latter markets while Escalon focuses onthe ophthalmic market.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996NOVATECH/MEDICAL PRODUCTS MERGEBOYNTON BEACH, FL - Novatek International Inc has completed a mergerwith Medical Products Inc for $72 million.  The terms of the agreementincluded payment of $3 million in cash, 7.2 million shares of commonstock, and a $36 million convertible debenture.After the merger, Vincent Celentano was appointed to the board ofdirectors, and Theodore Thomas and Brigitte Cooney have resigned asdirectors.  Frank Cooney will remain president and chief executiveofficer, with the remainder of the board unchanged.  Celentano'sbackground includes extensive work in medical diagnostic companies.Medical Products holds an exclusive license to market and distributeMedical diagnostic devices in South America and the Bahamas.  Thedevices are produced by Universal Health Watch Inc, a Maryland-basedcompany that holds the patent rights to 12 diagnostic devicesclassified as Rapid Detection Medical Screening Devices.  The devicesinclude rapid tests for HIV 1 & 2, pregnancy, hepatitis, cholera,diabetes and other communicable diseases.Medical Products is currently negotiating long-term contracts in SouthAmerica to distribute its licensed products.  Novatek will beconcentrating its construction and manufacturing efforts towardsupporting offshore projects which have proven to be more profitable inthe past.Novatek recently purchased the rights to the Bahamas for the RapidDetection Medical Devices in an exchange of license agreements withMedical Products Inc.  This license was subsequently resold by Novatek. This transaction will be reflected in the first quarter of 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996TERUMO EXPANDS IN SE ASIAKUALA LUMPUR - Terumo Corp, a major Japanese manufacturer of medicaldevice and pharmaceutical products plans to open two new sales officesin Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia and Manila, the Phillipines on 1 April.Terumo said it will take over sales in the two countries from theSingapore branch to meet local demand for medical equipment.  Thecompany said it expects the move will boost its sales by 20 per cent inthe first year.  It expects sales of $4 million in Malaysia, which willaccount for 17 per cent of the market, and $3 million in thePhillipines, a 15 per cent share in the Phillipine market.Terumo has 22 overseas sales offices (not including the two new ones),five factories in Japan, and one factory each in the US and Belgium.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996I-TA SWINDLES INVESTORSTAIPEI - The financial slump that has hit Taiwan's businesses hardrecently claimed a local medical instrument company as one of itslatest victims.  However, instead of down-sizing operations andapplying to the banks for loans, the company's operators "swindled"their investors.Chen Hsi-i and Hsueh Kuan-tsu, I-Ta medical instrument company'sgeneral manager and owner, have been charged with fraud by Wu Yin-chih,as well as two men surnamed Hung and Kuo.Chen and Hsueh apparently approached the three investors with abusiness proposal to expand the company's operations into mainlandChina.  Chen and Hueh reportedly then deceived the investors intothinking the I-Ta company was stable and had plenty of finances.The pair wrote cheques to guarantee a NT$2 million ($7million) loan toHung, and asked Kuo for NT$1.2 million as a bidding deposit.  Theyasked Wu to give them NT$1.5 million to finance the project andpromised that the money would soon be repaid.After giving the pair a total of almost NT$5 million, Wu, Hung and Kuorealised their money had gone to saving the financially crippled I-Ta.They filed charges with the Taipei District Prosecutors Office on 29February.Chen and Hsueh have denied any wrongdoing.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996WIPRO TO DISTRIBUTE GERMAN PRODUCTS IN INDIANEW DELHI - Wipro Bio-Med, a business unit of the Rs1100 million ($32million) Wipro Corp has launched the complete range of products fromthe orthopaedics division of Germany's Aesculap in the Indian market.The products include motorised systems for sawing, drilling, implants(such as artificial hips and knees), spinal surgery and traumatologycomponents and orthopaedic treatment devices.This is not the first time Wipro Bio-Med has collaborated with Aesculaporthopaedics division.  In 1995, Wipro Bio-Med agreed to sell Aesculaparthoscopy products in India.Under the current agreement, Wipro will provide the technical, clinicaland logistical support to customers across the country in associationwith Aesculap.Wipro Bio-Med is a distributor of medical, diagnostics, bio-researchand analytical systems for major manufacturers like Beckman, Hellige,and BioChem Immunosystems.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996EBOS TURNS PROFIT IN 1995AUCKLAND - Ebos, New Zealand's largest device manufacturer anddistributor, turned in a 51 per cent increase in after-tax profit toNZ$1.34 million ($864,516) in the six months to 31 December 1995.Sales were up 19.7 per cent to NZ$16.08 million in the first sixmonths.  The directors of publicly-listed Ebos expect profit momentumto be maintained in the full year to June 1996.Full-year results will receive a one-off boost after tax of someNZ$600,000 following the sale last year to Johnson and Johnson ofEbos's orthopaedics marketing business in Australia.  Ebos will handover management of this business in August this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996FAULDING SEES MIXED RESULTSSYDNEY - Australia's Faulding has reported mixed results for itsdevices business in the six months to 31 December 1995, with betterthan expected profits at Faulding Imaging and a loss at SelbyScientific.  Primarily a drug distributor, Faulding, the largestAustralian pharmaceuticals company with first-half revenues of A$781million ($582 million) up 13.8 per cent, also is a distributor ofdevices.Faulding Imaging's main activity is distribution in Australia of themedical equipment and microscope lines of Olympus Optical of Japan.Selby supplies scientific equipment and laboratory consumables inAustralia and New Zealand.Sales figures for individual subsidiaries are not released, but thecompany says sales at Faulding Imaging were marginally below those forthe previous corresponding period.  Profit contribution, on the otherhand, was ahead both of the 1994/95 first half result and budget.At Selby Scientific sales matched the result for the same period in1994/95, but the division recorded an after-tax operating loss of NZ$1million ($645,161), which comes on top of an A$1.9 million loss in the1994/95 year.  Faulding hopes for improved profitability following arecent restructuring of the group.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996FIRST HIV ANTIGEN TEST APPROVEDROCKVILLE, MD - On 14 March the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)approved the first antigen test kit to screen blood donors for HIV-1.The new kit was also approved for use in diagnosing HIV-1 infectionsand monitoring the progress of the disease itself.The screening kit, manufactured by the Coulter Corp of Florida, isknown as the Coulter HIV-1 p24 Antigen Assay.  Based on an 8 August1995 FDA recommendation to all registered blood and plasmaestablishments, the test can be used within 90 days of the approval.The Coulter test uses antigens (the virus' own proteins) which candetect the virus about a week earlier than the antibody tests usedcurrently.  By reducing the "window period", when donors may be HIV-infected but still have negative antibody tests, it has been estimatedthat HIV-1 antigen screening could prevent around 25 per cent of thecurrent cases of Aids transmitted by transfusion.Although the FDA has recommended that the test be used to screen blooddonations, it does not recommend that it replace the HIV antibody testfor routine patient testing and counselling in a medical setting.The kit will be marketed to blood establishments by Ortho DiagnosticsSystems Inc, a subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson (New Jersey).  There areabout 14 million blood donations processed annually in the US.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996NEW DEVICE CAN WRITE WITH EYESPARIS - Scientists at the National Health and Medical ResearchInstitute in Lille, France have developed a device that will assistquadriplegics who cannot communicate.  The device allows them to writewith their eyes.As the patient looks at a special keyboard, a laser-guided camerarecords the stare as the patient's eye moves from letter to letter.The camera feeds the selected letters into a computer, and the textappears instantaneously on a computer screen.The device, which is the result of five years of research, wasdisplayed at a recent Paris exhibition on language-learning techniques. Within a year, researchers expect that the device, called Deltavision,will be fine-tuned and ready to market.Delta 7, a humanitarian group that represents the interests ofparalysed people, organised funding for the project.The Deltavision device is simple to use.  A camera in the middle of avisual keyboard facing the patient focuses on the eye.  A red beamreflects eye movement back to the machine.  Users need only look at akey for less than a second for it to register, and can write about 50characters per minute.  However, the system will only work forquadriplegics with eye movements that are normal.The technique has been successfully used by 100 quadriplegics in pilotprojects at rehabilitation centres in Nantes, Le Mans and Bordeaux.The prototypes cost $20,000, but once the device is marketed, possiblynext year, Association Delta 7 expects the price to go down because oflarger-scale production.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996CE MARK FOR INTRAVASCULAR DEVICEBRUSSELS - Cardiometrics Inc of California received the ConformiteEuropeene (CE) mark approval for its intravascular medical devices."This approval allows us to market our FloWire and SmartWire guide wireproducts in all countries of the European Union without the need foradditional regulatory approval from any country," said Menahem Nassi,president and chief executive officer.  "We believe that the CE markwill streamline future product approvals, thus impacting the time tomarket for our devices in key European markets."Cardiometrics' products have been approved for use in most Europeancountries, and, to-date, more than 44,000 FloWire devices, thecompany's lead product, have been sold for use in more than 300 medicalcentres worldwide.  International sales currently account for about 75per cent of Cardiometrics' revenue, as recently reported by the companyin its year-end earnings.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996LASERSCOPE SEEKS BRAND RECOGNITION IN EUROPELONDON - Laserscope of California has received the Conformite Europeene(CE) and International Standards Organisation (ISO) 9001 registrationfrom the British Standards Institution.  Robert McCormick, Laserscopepresident and chief executive officer said, "These certifications willallow us to compete more effectively in Europe and other internationalmarkets by greatly simplifying the regulatory approval processes.""Because the CE mark allows us to market the same model product in eachEuropean nation," he said, "Laserscope brand recognition should grow.From a manufacturing standpoint, we will no longer be compelled todesign, build and inventory different product configurations for eachindividual country."In 1995, international revenues represented 23 per cent of Laserscope'stotal revenues, compared to 17 and 13 per cent of total revenues in1994 and 1993, respectively.Laserscope designs, manufactures, sells and services an advanced lineof medical laser systems and energy delivery devices for the hospital,outpatient surgical centre and physician office markets.  It sells itsproducts in the US, the UK and France through its own direct salesforce and serves 20 other countries in Europe, the Middle East and theAsia-Pacific region through regional distributors.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996CORTECS MEETS QUALITY STANDARDSDEESIDE - Deeside-based Cortecs Diagnostics, which manufactures rapiddiagnostic kits, has been approved by Lloyds Register Quality Assurance(LRQA).The Quality Management System is applicable to the manufacture of invitro diagnostic test kits for the food, medical and pharmaceuticalindustries.Dr Geoffrey Hill, managing director of Cortecs Diagnostics, commented:"The Deeside site has recently been expanded in anticipation of demandfor Helisal Rapid Blood kits, and to cater for the research anddevelopment and manufacture of further rapid tests kits for thedetection of bone breakdown (osteoporosis) and for the monitoring ofmedium-term and long-term control of diabetes.  Clearly this award isimportant and signals that the division is geared to producing ourincreasing range of rapid tests to internationally approved standards."Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996BASF GENERICS LAUNCHES INHALERLUDWIGSHAFEN - BASF Generics GmbH, the German generic company of theIvax-Knoll joint venture, launched its first respiratory product inMarch - a breath activated inhaler.The Easi-Breathe inhaler is a proprietary product of the respiratoryfranchise of the Ivax Corp (US).  With this inhaler, the company saysthe patient does not need to co-ordinate inhalation with actuation,because the active ingredient goes directly to the lung, not to themouth or throat.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996FDA APPROVES CHOLESTEROL SYSTEMNEW YORK, NY - The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approvedLiposorber LA-15 System, a medical device manufactured by KanekaAmerica Corp of New York to lower cholesterol in people who, because ofa genetic disorder, have extremely high cholesterol levels and are atvery high risk of heart attacks early in life.  This small group ofpeople, about 4,000 in the US, is not helped by low fat diets andcholesterol lowering medications.The device is a filtering system that removes low density lipoprotein(LDL) from the blood via a plastic tube inserted into the patient's armand connected to the filtering machine.  The process, similar to kidneydialysis, is performed at a medical facility and takes about threehours to remove the "bad" cholesterol and must be repeated every one totwo weeks.A clinical study of 74 patients, who were on cholesterol lowering drugsand diet, were treated with the device at 11 US sites.  After eachtreatment the LDL levels in all patients were immediately reduced;however, after 14 to 30 days, the LDL rose to levels that were apparentbefore treatment.  Long-term benefits of the treatment, such as whetherit reduces angina, heart attacks or death, were not shown.FDA is requiring the manufacturer to establish a patient registry totrack patients who receive this treatment in order to help determinelong-term risks and benefits.  Patients who receive this treatmentshould remain on a low fat diet and continue to take cholesterol-lowering medication.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996FDA REJECTS NON-INVASIVE BLOOD SUGAR TESTING DEVICEPITTSBURGH, PA - The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)'s ClinicalChemistry and Clinical Toxicology Devices Panel did not recommend forapproval Biocontrol Technology's non-invasive glucose sensor fordiabetics.  The meeting held in late-February 1996 was sparked withemotional, fiery and combatant exchanges by the public and the sponsordirected against the advisory panel.The non-invasive glucose sensor is a spectrophotometer which iscalibrated in a four hour process to recognise the individual user'sparticular glucose pattern by calling on internal algorithms.  Once thecalibration has been completed, the forearm is placed on the sensor,the start button pushed, and infrared light passes through the skininto the blood and is reflected back to the sensor's computer.  Thepattern is analysed, converted to a blood glucose level, then displayedon a digital screen quickly.The company's device, if it was approved, would most likely havereplaced the current monitoring devices on the market today.Presently, all devices that are on the market require an invasivepricking of one's finger up to 10 or more times a day to monitor andmaintain accurate control of diabetes.  This is a painful anddebilitating experience for diabetics, especially children.The meeting was marked by passionate pleas to the panel for approval ofthe device during the open public session by mothers of diabeticchildren and young and old diabetics.  Each speaker had a story of thehardships of invasive testing and the resultant physical andpsychological injury suffered.  Even the company was engaged in heatedexchanges with members of the panel.The main reasons for not recommending approval of the device were basedon the fact that the clinical study data presented by the company donot support the intended use of the device.  There were 85 personsinitially enrolled in the clinical study but only eight were able toqualify and complete the study.  The scale used to access accuracy ofthe data was not acceptable because it was not considered an accuratemeasure of error, said the panel.The committee said more data are needed over a longer period of time,and further study is needed with an increased number of patients,including pregnant women and children.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996MIDAC RECOMMENDS IN FAVOUR OF IMMUNOMEDIC'S CEA SCANROCKVILLE, MD - Immunomedics Inc of New Jersey announced that theMedical Imaging Drugs Advisory Committee (Midac), an external advisorypanel for the US Food and Drug Administration, unanimously recommendedapproval for CEA-Scan, the company's diagnostic imaging product forcolorectal cancer.The FDA will now review the panel's decision."We are delighted that our first cancer imaging and diagnostic productis in the final stages of the regulatory approval process and that thepanel recommended CEA-Scan's use in several settings," said Dr DavidGoldenberg, chairman of Immunomedics.CEA is expressed by more than 90 per cent of colorectal cancers, aswell as by a large number of other carcinomas, including lung, breast,pancreas, uterus, and ovarian, and it has been show that this tumourmarker can serve as a useful target for radiolabeled antibodies.In addition to CEA-Scan, the company's infectious disease imagingagent, LeukoScan is undergoing regulatory review in Europe for imagingosteomyelitis (bone infections).Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996FDA CLEARS PHADIATOP ALLERGY TESTLONDON, CO - Pharmacia & Upjohn Inc received US Food and DrugAdministration clearance to market Phadiatop, a yes/no blood test todetermine whether a patient has an inhalant allergy.  Physicians usingthe test take a blood sample to run through Phadiatop system to testfor a variety of different substances that may cause allergies.  Theresults are obtained within hours.  The test is an alternative to skintesting.Mark D Myslinski, general manager for the Diagnostics Division ofPharmacia & Upjohn, said that the Phadiatop system offers "physiciansand laboratories a blood test that may determine whether a patient'ssymptoms are being caused by allergy or by a cold".  He noted that byaccurately diagnosing the cause of symptoms that are so similar,appropriate treatment can be provided within a short time.  It isestimated that 30 per cent of the US population suffers from allergysymptoms.Phadiatop is the latest in a panel of allergy tests that are offered inthe company's Pharmacia CAP System.  This system is currently beingused in over 2,000 laboratories worldwide.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996GUIDANT TO SELL CATHETERMINNEAPOLIS, MN - Guidant Corp has been given approval by the US Foodand Drug Administration to sell ACS Endura Coronary DilatationCatheter, which features non-compliant, high pressure balloon materialthat inflates with minimal expansion.The device can be used to open blocked heart arteries in the nearly750,000 people worldwide who undergo percutaneous transluminal coronaryangioplasty, atherectomy or coronary stent procedures each year.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996VITRASERT CLEARED FOR MARKETINGEMERYVILLE, CA - Vitrasert, an intraocular implant system to deliverganciclovir directly to the eye for the treatment of cytomegalovirus(CMV) retinitis in people with Aids, was cleared for marketing by theUS Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  Manufactured by Chiron Corp(California) the device will be marketed and co-promoted by ChironVision and Roche Laboratories, producer of Cytovene-IV (ganciclovirsodium).The Vitrasert implant is surgically placed in the posterior portion ofthe eye through a five to six millimetre incision and allows thesustained diffusion of ganciolovir locally for five to eight months.The implant can be removed and replaced, after drug depletion.  Theimplant procedure is undertaken in an out-patient setting and usuallytakes less than one hour.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996SLEEP DISORDER DEVICE RECEIVES 510 (K) MARKET CLEARANCEYORBA LINDA, CA - Non-Invasive Monitoring Systems received US Food andDrug Administration 510 (k) market clearance for its Respitrace PTrecorder, trade name SomnoStar PT, and RespiEvents software package.The two products are used for sleep disorders and will be marketedworldwide by SensorMedics Corp (California).The device incorporates respitrace technology that detects all types ofapneas, including Sudden Infant Death and Sleep Apnea Syndromes.  Thesoftware package assesses breathing, heart rate and arterial oxygensaturation data and can perform analyses for more than 150 parametersand reports.Over 30 million Americans are said to have some type of sleepdeprivation.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996SCALAR LAUNCHES SKIN MOISTURE TESTTOKYO - Scalar Corp, a Japanese maker of video microscopes for medicaland industrial applications, has developed an inexpensive and light-weight moisture checker.  According to a company spokesman, patientsplace one end of the device on their skin, usually the face.  Afterfive seconds, the Scalar Moisture Checker beeps and gives a read out ofmoisture content.Scalar Corp hopes to expand the market for moisture checkers with itsnew product.  The company claims conventional models are relativelyexpensive so they are rarely installed in places other than alaboratory.  However, the Scalar's device weighs 85 grams and sells forY12,800 ($134).A prototype of the Scalar Moisture Checker was completed in March andmass production is expected to commence in the near future at thecompany's factory in Kanagawa Prefecture, Japan.The spokesman expects beauty shops and department stores to be thefirst customers.Scalar Corp also believes the product will be a success amongstdermatologists.  It is investigating worldwide regulations, after whichit will make a final decision about how and when to approach themedical community.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996OMRON'S BLOOD PRESSURE MONITORTOKYO - Omron Corp, Japan's largest maker of blood pressure monitors,recently launched what it calls the world's smallest and lightest hand-held blood pressure monitor.The digital blood pressure monitor HEM-808F uses a small optical sensorin a finger cuff to measure blood flow.  The cuff collapses into thebody of the device after use.  It measures only 9x6x3 cm - about thesize of a pack of cigarettes, so customers can carry it with them atall times.A company spokesman reports that Omron developed the product becauseconventional models are too large for portability.  "Patients should beable to take a reading whenever they feel the necessity to do so," thespokesman said.The company plans to launch the monitor in all major internationalmarkets by end-1996, if the time required for satisfying localregulations of each country permits.Production of the HEM-808F is underway at Omron's plant in MiePrefecture, Japan.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996SMARTLIGHT ATTRACTS INVESTMENTHAIFA - A group of Israeli investors including the Walden Israel Fund,the Mofet Fund, and Quantum and Evergreen, invested $1.6 million inSmartlight, a high-tech medical device company.Smartlight has developed a sophisticated light box that enhances thereading of X-rays.  The system is based on electro-optics technology.Dan Inbar, one of the company's founders and vice-president of researchand development, explained to MDBN that the light box extracts thepicture at a much deeper resolution than the standard light box used byhospitals.  He says the box will greatly reduce the 30 per cent marginof error currently found in radiological studies."We studied the psycho-physic limitations of the human eye anddeveloped a light box that works with those limitations," he said.The light box was introduced last year in the US, "with great success",said Mr Inbar.  The company, which plans to produce the product inIsrael, has already started to sell it in the southwest region of theUS and has further plans to expand in Europe.This is the second time Walden has invested in Smartlight.  It now ownsa 12 per cent stake in the company.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996EUROPEAN STANDARDS TRY TO BREAK LANGUAGE BARRIERBRUSSELS- New European standards on the information to be provided bymanufacturers of medical devices and the graphical symbols which may beused are expected to be published before the end of this year.  JohnWebster, who chairs the European working group responsible for thestandards, believes the adoption of new symbols for use on medicaldevices will greatly assist manufacturers in marketing their productsthroughout Europe.He says the European Committee on Standardisation (CEN) is likely toadopt standardised symbols for "do not reuse" (the number 2 with a linedrawn through it), a "use by" symbol showing an egg timer, and othersymbols for sterile, date of manufacture, serial number and batchnumber.The new symbols are likely to be welcomed by an industry for whichlanguage requirements are becoming an increasing burden.  More and moreEuropean Union member states are insisting that devices be in locallanguage packaging.  Some countries which once accepted English, suchas Sweden and Norway, now require the instructions for use to be intheir own language.  Others are considering adding a second or thirdlanguage requirement.Mr Webster says this causes problems for manufacturers, as some wordsand phrases do not easily translate into other languages.  He believesthe new language requirements are pushing up the cost of medicaldevices - at a time when governments are struggling to containhealthcare costs.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996EU SETS STANDARD CONDOM SIZEBRUSSELS - Condoms marketed as contraceptives in the European Unionmust meet the newly agreed common standard by June 1998, New Scientistreports (2 March).  Under the new standard all condoms must be aminimum of 170 millimetres in length.  They may be any width, but ifthis differs from the "regular" width of 52 millimetres, the packagingmust say what the dimension is, and whether it is over or under theregular width.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996UK GROUP TO SHOW TECHNOLOGY OPPORTUNITIES TO US COMPANIESLONDON - Officials of the County Durham Development Company (UK) metwith representatives of more than 25 Indiana-based medical devicemanufacturers to encourage them to do business in the UK.As part of the effort to attract US investment, the CDDC is sponsoringa medical technology fair in late-May to show the US companies whatthey have to offer.  The event, which will exhibit over 100 new medicaldevices, will seek to license the inventions to medical devicemanufacturers in the US and Europe.Rob Allaker, international marketing executive for CDDC, told MDBN:"The market is huge in Britain, the National Health Service imports 75per cent of the medical devices it uses."* For more information on the Medical Device Technology Transfer Fair,contact Rob Allaker.  Tel: +44 (0)191 383 2000.  Fax: +44 (0) 191 3862974.  (See more details in Conference listing section on page 20).Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996PRODUCT LIABILITY BILL HAS A CHANCE TO BECOME LAWWASHINGTON, DC - The US Senate is expected to pass by end-March acompromise bill that would reduce somewhat the potential legalliability of companies selling medical devices in the US.  The House ofRepresentatives, however, has not yet scheduled a date forconsideration of the measure.The compromise bill was worked out by a conference committee, composedof members of the Senate and House.  That committee was charged withresolving the major differences between the House bill that was highlyfavourable to industry and the more narrow Senate bill that passed therespective chambers last year.  If the compromise bill is passed byCongress, it is expected to be signed into law by President Clinton.Some good news for industryThe bill does provide some good news for the medical device industry,although provisions most sought by the industry are missing.  The billseverely limits the liability of biomaterial suppliers for injury froma medical implant or device.  Biomaterial suppliers would be liableonly if a claimant establishes that the supplier failed to meet thecontract requirements or specifications for the implant, or failed toproperly register the implant with the secretary of Health and HumanServices.  In addition, the bill provides an expedited dismissalprocedure for medical device defendants.Absent from the bill, however, is language that would bar those whoclaim they were injured by medical devices from winning punitivedamages if the product had been approved for sale by a regulatoryagency except under extremely limited circumstances.  The legislationdoes limit punitive awards assessed against those found liable in courtfor selling products that injure consumers and ends joint and severalliability for injuries.  It also bars suits for products sold more than20 years before the injury is claimed and gives consumers only twoyears after they suffer an injury to claim damages.In general, the cap on punitive damages is the greater of twice thecompensatory (economic and non-economic) damages, or $250,000.  This isa cap that pre-empts state laws to the extent that they are morepermissive.  Moreover, sellers may not be held strictly liable orliable on the basis of a breach of an implied warranty.  This billwould also extend this standard to any entity that rents or leases aproduct by providing that such an entity shall not be liable for theact of another, solely by reason of ownership of such product, butshall be liable under the same standards as applied to product sellers.Actions for commercial loss are excluded from the scope of the bill.Thus, the bill does not apply to a business seeking its lost profits ifa defective product causes a work stoppage.The fact that the bill was near passage prompted consumer groups tolaunch a last-minute public campaign to pressure members of Congress tovote against it.  Officials of Citizens Action and the Consumers Union,at a news conference on 7 March said: "The legislation would gut thelaws that now protect Americans from defective and dangerous productsand let manufacturers that put profit before safety get away with theirmisconduct."Steven Spiel, associate vice-president for policy and communicationsfor Health Industry Manufacturers Associations, however, said this isnot the case.  "This bill will do a great deal to encourage companiesto continue to invest in new innovative products for US patients andwill help keep jobs in the US as well.  In fact, this bill is greatnews for consumers.""It will only limit punitive damages, and it will eliminate the lottery-like system which serves no one," Spiel said.  "In many instances, thereward has little relationship to the damage alleged," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996FDA TO EASE RULES FOR LOW-RISK DEVICESROCKVILLE, MD - The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is exempting122 categories of low-risk medical devices from pre-market review,adding to the 450 categories already exempted from such review.The agency, in an "FDA Talk Paper", states this action is part of thedrug and medical device reforms announced last spring as contained inthe Clinton Administration's National Performance Review.  The agencyalso said it is in line with its commitment to speed up patient accessto new medical devices.The devices to be exempted from the review include: gas pressuregauges, oxygen masks, pacemaker chargers, dental floss, pneumatictourniquets, patient scales, examination lights and therapeuticmassages.These products will continue to be regulated by the FDA and remainsubject to good manufacturing practice regulation, FDA factoryinspections, and other general reports.  However, the exemption meansthat manufacturers will be allowed to market the products withoutgetting prior clearance from the agency.To exempt the products, the agency reclassified three categories ofdevices from Class II (medium risk) to Class I (low risk).  Inaddition, the agency exempted two categories of devices already inClass I.  The medical devices amendments to the Food, Drug and CosmeticAct and FDA regulation allow certain types of Class I devices to beexempted from pre-market review.With this action, notes the FDA, nearly 75 per cent of all Class Idevices are now exempt from pre-market review.  This represents one-third of all classified medical devices.The final regulation listing the 122 exempted device categories becameeffective on 15 February.  All manufacturers who had pre-clearancesubmissions pending FDA review on 15 February should have been notifiedby letter that their device is exempt.Meanwhile, the FDA has just published a proposed rule in the 14 MarchFederal Register for analyte specific reagents to be reclassified asrestricted devices.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 19961996 PASSAGE OF FDA REFORM BILL IN QUESTIONWASHINGTON, DC - Despite strong support from the US medical deviceindustry, it remains uncertain whether legislation mandating promptFood and Drug Administration action on applications for new deviceapprovals will win congressional support this year.  Senator NancyKassebaum (R-Kansas) chairman of the Senate Labour and Human ResourcesCommittee, has called for a mark-up late this month on her FDA reformbill, S.  1477.Because of a heavy congressional schedule and the fact that it is apresidential election year, some observers say the legislation will notbe passed.Moreover, Representative Thomas Bliley (R-Virginia), chairman of theHouse Commerce Committee, has yet to introduce his version of the FDAreform bill, nor has he indicated when he could possibly introduce suchlegislation.Also, the opposition of FDA Commissioner David Kessler to the Kassebaumbill has dampened its chances for passage.  In testimony beforeKassebaum's committee Mr Kessler said he backed the principles of theKassebaum bill, but called for changes in the legislation to ensuresafety.  He criticised key portions supported by the industry,including provisions to set shorter timetables for approval of devicesand allowing third parties to take part in the review process.Mr Kessler told the panel: "Improvements also have been made in thetimetable for the review and approval of medical devices.  With respectto the 510(k) process, through which 98 per cent of all medical devicesevaluated by FDA reach the market, the average review time in fiscalyear 1995 was 137 days, down 24 per cent from the 184-day average infiscal year 1994.  The average review time for those devices needingpremarket applications is still too long, but we are making progressthere as well.  The average PMA review in fiscal year 1995 was 20months."Mr Kessler proposed to Congress on 12 March, that user fees be imposedon the industry to permit the FDA to hire more people to expedite thereview of new products.  While several medical device companies favourthe fees, the two major trade associations representing large and smallmanufacturers strongly oppose such action (the Health IndustryManufacturers Association and the Medical Device ManufacturersAssociation).Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996UNCERTAINTY OVER MRI ORDERVANCOUVER - Ontario radiologists still hope that the Ontario governmentwill honour a promise to approve the addition of 23 more magneticresonance imaging (MRI) scanners to the province's present 12 inservice, even though the commitment dates back to November l994, beforethe present provincial government was elected.  So far, the HealthMinistry has given no word.Desmond Walker, president of the Ontario Association of Radiologistssaid, "The approval of these MRI scanners would dramatically reduce thenine-month waiting lists which are believed to be the longest in theindustrialised world." Turkey, he noted, has more MRI scanners permillion people than Canada does.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996MEDICAL DEVICE MAKERS URGED TO LOOK EAST FOR NEW BUSINESSWASHINGTON, DC - The US Commerce Department's export promotionofficials are telling US medical equipment makers to look to Asianmarkets for medical devices.  Asian markets are growing at double-digitrates, much faster than the traditional markets of North America,Europe and Japan, reported the US Journal of Commerce.Global trade patterns are shifting and "we are encouraging (the US)industry to focus more on Asia" as well as Latin America, said JeffreyGren, director of Commerce's Office of Microelectronics, MedicalEquipment and Instrumentation.Besides supplying US medical device makers with market data, Commerceofficials help arrange trade missions, exhibits and seminars key to theAsian market.  They also work directly with foreign governments toimprove market access.The US represents roughly half of the world's $90 billion a yearmedical device market, but its share is shrinking, as Asia and LatinAmerica's shares rise, Mr Gren said.In China, said Commerce analyst Paul Barry, "We expect sales toincrease dramatically over the next couple of years", as China embarkson a new five-year plan.Help manufacturers cash inTo help US manufacturers cash in, Commerce is arranging a US visit bymembers of the People's Liberation Army, which operates hundreds ofhospitals and thousands of clinics in China.In May, a US medical-dental industry trade mission will visit China,and in June, the United States plans to take part in a BeijingInternational Medical Equipment Exhibition.South Korea, Taiwan and India also are among other fast emerging Asianmarkets.  Boosting US sales prospects, South Korea's Health Ministry isdue to announce guidelines simplifying its testing and other medicaldevice regulations.  Taiwan is moving to a "universal coverage" healthsystem, though it may soon issue new rules that could force down USmedical device prices.In India, said a Commerce analyst, "we see rapid growth for high-endmedical products, such as diagnostic and imaging equipment".Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996TURKMENISTAN REQUIRES LICENSING OF MEDICAL EQUIPMENTASHKHABAD - As part of its new healthcare reforms, Turkmenistan hasintroduced new rules for registration of medical equipment andpharmaceuticals.  Under the rules, implemented on 1 March, allproducers and suppliers of the medical equipment and pharmaceuticalsmust register with a new department in the Health Ministry created forthis purpose.Equipment without the proper registration and documentation areprohibited from being imported to the country.  The licensing system ispart of the country's healthcare reform which started at the beginningof this year.  Turkmenistan also introduced medical insurance inJanuary.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996SECTOR TO SEE "MODEST GROWTH"SYDNEY - The Medical Industry Association of Australia published itsindustry analysis for 1994 in its annual survey: "Industry SurveyNumber 4".The analysis of industry trends is based on data from 33 companies.Although the number of companies involved in the supply of medicaldevices and diagnostics in Australia is thought to exceed 600, MIAAsays the 33 companies constitute, in terms of sales, the "core"industry.Companies engaged in local manufacture have experienced sharplydifferent trading conditions over the period to those engaged solely inimporting.  "Importers have experienced continuous and substantialsales growth in both the domestic and re-export markets while localmanufacturers have faced little growth in domestic sales and widelyfluctuating export levels," reports MIAA.Reflecting these contrasting market conditions, manufacturing (andoverall) employment levels contracted sharply, despite modest growth innon-manufacturing staff numbers.Sharp differences across the various segments of the domestic marketwere seen in 1994, with growth rates in the private hospital sector faroutstripping those in the public hospital market.The diagnostics sector of the industry would have felt the impact ofthese market changes more severely than the devices sector, since thebulk of diagnostics sales are concentrated in the slower-growingsegments of the market.Because of the diversity of the results, MIAA says it is difficult topredict the outlook for future growth, but the group says at best, theoutlook is for modest growth.* Domestic sales to the public hospital sector remain the backbone ofthe industry's activities, accounting for 46 per cent of total sales in1994.* The government currently finances around 44 per cent of allexpenditure on public hospitals; total Commonwealth outlays on hospitalservices are projected to rise by only 12 per cent between 1994-95,A$5.3 billion ($3.9 billion), and 1998-99, A$5.9 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996AUSTRALIA HELPS CHINA ESTABLISH AUDIOLOGY TECHNOLOGY COURSESSYDNEY - Australia has agreed to help China establish audiologytraining schools in the major teaching hospitals in Beijing andShanghai.  Each school will have a centre with facilities for assessinghearing, fitting aids and making ear moulds.Last year, representatives from three bodies, Australian HearingServices, Cochlear Pty Ltd, Ascom Audiosys, and a group of Australianuniversities led by Macquarie University, met with Chinese officials toset up a new cadre of Chinese ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialists.These specialists will train fellow ENT specialists in audiology usingthe latest scientific devices and techniques.A spokesman for Macquarie University said Australia would advise onfacilities, equipment and local staff, and the Chinese government wouldpay for local costs.  Australia would also provide computer equipmentfor programmable hearing aids and associated software for Australian-made aids, he said.Professor Philip Newall of Macquarie University commented: "Audiologyhas developed rapidly with recent improvements in electronics, computerscience and technology.  It has become highly specialised in the Westwith new branches such as clinical, paediatric, industrial, educationaland hearing-aid audiology.  Hearing devices too are increasinglysophisticated.  As yet, there is no formal audiology school in China.ENT departments in hospitals and rehabilitation centres fit mainlychildren with hearing aids.  The rest of the population buys themthrough department stores without testing or fitting."Professor Newall is also closely associated with an increasingAustralian presence in audiology in Thailand.  "The Thai government isproviding hearing aids free of charge under a new law for thedisabled," he said.  "The initial contract is for 6,000 units, and itis hoped some will be made in Australia and fit to Australianspecifications."Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996INCONTROL TO START CLINICAL TRIALSBRUSSELS - InControl Inc (Europe operations, Belgium) has submitted itsapplication to European authorities to begin clinical implant trials ofthe Metrix atrial defibrillation system in up to 12 selected centres inEurope.  At the same time, the company has also submitted anapplication to the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requestingpermission to start US trials.Though implanted pacemakers have long been used to treat slow heartrhythms and implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) are used totreat ventricular fibrillation, the Metrix atrial defibrillator is oneof the first devices designed especially for patients with atrialfibrillation.Intended to be placed and programmed by physicians using techniquessimilar to those used for implanting pacemakers, the Metrix atrialdefibrillator is designed to detect the presence of atrial fibrillationand deliver a low-energy carefully-timed shock to convert the rhythm tonormal.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996PORTABLE DIALYSIS MACHINE PROVES "SMOOTHER & GENTLER"VANCOUVER - A nocturnal hemodialysis system has just completed twoyears of clinical testing at Toronto's Wellesley Hospital.  The teamdoing the test has recommended to the Ontario Health Ministry that thetreatment be made standard for patients requiring dialysis.The modified dialysis machine was designed by Dr Robert Udall ofToronto Western Hospital, with a grant from the Health Ministry.Compared to conventional dialysis, which is done two or three times aweek for three or four hours, under nursing supervision, the operationof the eight-hour-a-night dialyser is described as "smoother andgentler".The machine is linked by phone to a computerised monitoring station atthe hospital, and a technician calls the patient within two minutes ofany irregularity in its function.  In two years testing on sixpatients, no emergency home visits were required.  The design of themachine is presently being refined in order to make it more portable,so that a patient could travel with it in his luggage.Dr Andreas Pierratos, head of the Wellesley team, says that the newnocturnal dialysis system will cost only $25,000 a year per patient,half the annual cost of conventional dialysis.  With 9,000 patients inCanada requiring such treatment, the cost savings would beconsiderable.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996ST JUDE MEDICAL AND HEARTPORT TO TEST MITRAL VALVE REPAIR SYSTEMST PAUL, MN - St Jude Medical Inc and Heartport Inc (Redwood City,California) received US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval forits human clinical trials of its port-access mitral valve repair andreplacement system.The surgical system permits less invasive port-access heart valvesurgery to replace and repair diseased heart valves.  It has thepotential to reduce trauma, pain and debility that can result fromconventional open-chest surgery.  Additionally, side effects, recoverytime and hospital stays and costs are reduced.The port-access procedure allows surgery to be performed through smallincisions or "ports" between the ribs.  The system promises to replacethe traditional procedure for mitral valve surgery of opening the chestor "cracking" it by making a large incision, sawing the breastbone inhalf and forcibly spreading open the rib cage with a steel retractor.This conventional surgical procedure usually requires that patientsspend eight to 12 days in the hospital and an equal time for recoveryat home.Mechanical heart valve systemThe two companies have a worldwide agreement to develop products,supply components, as well as to patent, license and sell them.  StJude will sell a new, jointly developed product, the St Jude MedicalPort-Access Mechanical Heart Valve System that incorporates HeartportPort-Access Technology.St Jude Medical has an exclusive licensing agreement with ProfessorJacques Seguin of France for a unique, semi-rigid annuloplasty ring, aproduct used in the repair of diseased heart valves that is compatiblewith Heartport's Port-Access system.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996PERCLOSE TO START CLINICAL TRIALSMENLO PARK, CA - Perclose Inc has completed enrolling 500 randomlyselected patients for its Investigational Device Exemption trial forthe Prostar 9F and 11F Percutaneous Vascular Surgical systems.  Thecompany also announced that the initial human clinical testing of thesingle suture Techstar 7F system has been completed and has validatedthe device's safety and efficacy for human use.The Prostar 9F and 11F are minimally invasive surgical systems used toclose arterial access sites following therapeutic catherisationprocedures, such as angioplasty and stenting.Economic benefitsHank Plain, Perclose's president and chief executive officer, said: "Webelieve that the Prostar system provides patients with significantclinical and economic benefits, including more rapid achievement ofhemostasis, reduced time to ambulation and increased patient comfort."The Techstar 7F system was clinically tested and evaluated followingtherapeutic and diagnostic coronary procedures in Canada.  Plain notesthat the Techstar system is offered in 6F, 7F and 8F sizes providingphysicians with a complete line of arterial access site managementdevices that address the full range of clinical needs and physicians'size preferences.The company plans to begin marketing the system during the secondquarter 1996 in Europe, Japan and Canada.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996IDS TO CLINICALLY TEST CTLMSUNRISE, FL - Imaging Diagnostic System Inc has received approval fromthe US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to begin clinical testing ofits Computed Tomography Laser Mammography (CTLM).CTLM represents a painless and radiation free alternative totraditional mammography.  The machine uses a high-speed laser andsophisticated computer technology to produce ultra sharp three-dimensional, cross-sectional images of the breasts, without discomfortfrom breast compression.The clinical trials under the FDA's Investigational Device Exemptionapplication will begin at the Strax Breast Institute in FortLauderdale, Florida and will be expanded this year to screeningfacilities at cancer detection centres across the US.Dr Richard J Grable, chief executive officer and inventor of thetechnology, said: "When the FDA granted a prompt review of ourapplications, we were excited.  But now we're ecstatic it has resultedin the FDA's first acceptance of clinical trials using our medicaloptical imaging." The company projects more than $5 million in salesthis year in fulfilling orders from the Far East, Middle East andEurope.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996SLIGHT RISK FROM BREAST IMPLANTSCHICAGO, IL - The largest study to-date on the health risks associatedwith breast implants shows that women with implants are 24 per centmore likely to self-report connective-tissue diseases than women whohave never had breast implants, according to an article in the late-February issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association.The researchers noted: "The data from this large retrospective cohortstudy are compatible with previous recent reports from two other cohortstudies that provide reassuring evidence against a large hazard ofbreast implants on connective tissue diseases." However, they alsoindicate a small but significant increased risk of ...  any connectivetissue disease."The researchers found the small increased risk remained virtuallyconstant regardless of the woman's age or how long she had the implant.Connective tissue diseases are a group of disorders associated withabnormality of the immune system in which the body reacts against itsown cells, tissues and organs.  The researchers found the increasedrisk was of borderline statistical significance for rheumatoidarthritis, Sjogren's syndrome (a condition where the eyes and mouthbecome excessively dry), polymyositis or dermatomyositis (a rare,sometimes fatal disease in which the muscles and skin become inflamed,causing muscle weakness and a skin rash) and scleroderma (a rarecondition that can affect many organs and tissues of the body).Dr Charles Hennekens, Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women'sHospital in Massachusetts, and colleagues analysed questionnairescompleted by 395,543 female health professionals.  A total of 10,830women reported they had breast implants and 11,805 reported they hadone of more connective tissue diseases between 1962 and 1991.In 1992, the US Food and Drug Administration imposed a moratorium onthe use of silicone breast implants until their safety could be proved;however, they are still available under clinical trials and women canstill get saline implants.The results of the study are in line with FDA commissioner DavidKessler's testimony to Congress last year that the risk of getting aserious disease from the implants is minimal.The researchers noted: "Further research is necessary before firmconclusions can be drawn.The study was partially funded by former implant manufacturer DowCorning Corp.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996RECENTLY ISSUES MEDICAL DEVICE PATIENTSPatent No:                WO 96/02114Title:                    3D video endoscopeAssigned to or inventor:  Forschungszentrum, Karlsruhe GMBH,                          Karlsruhe, GermanyDate:                     25-01-96Classification:           Int: H04N 13/00                          G02B 23/24                          A61B 1/00Patent No:                WO 96/01585Title:                    Data input arrangement for stress                          managementAssigned to or inventor:  Polar Electro OY, Kempele, FinlandDate:                     25-01-96Classification:           Int: A61B 5/00                          G06F 19/00                          159/000Patent No:                WO 96/0l586Title:                    Impedance cardiograph apparatusAssigned to or inventor:  Reining International Ltd, Wisconsin, USADate:                     25-01-96Classification:           Int: A61B 5/05, 5/029Patent No:                WO 96/01588Title:                    Apparatus for resectioning knee condyles                          enabling a prosthesis to be fittedAssigned to or inventor:  Biomicron, Caen, FranceDate:                     25-01-96Classification:           Int: A61B 17/14Patent No:                WO 96/01590Title:                    Guide wire passage creation device for use                          in revascularisationAssigned to or inventor:  Rizik, DG, Arizona, USADate:                     25-01-96Classification:           Int:A61B 17/22Patent No:                WO 96/01591Title:                    Intravascular occlusion devicesAssigned to or inventor:  Microvna Corp, White Bear Lake, USADate:                     25-01-96Classification:           Int: A61B 17/22Patent No:                WO 96/01594Title:                    Surgical drapes having tape attachment                          stripsAssigned to or inventor:  Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Co.,                          Minnesota, USADate:                     25-01-96Classification:           Int: A61B 19/08Patent No:                WO 96/01600Title:                    Ligament prosthesisAssigned to or inventor:  Cuisset, Be Ville-d'Avray, FranceDate:                     25-01-96Classification:           Int: A61F 2/08Patent No:                WO 96/01603Title:                    Method to refrigerate a jacket for keeping                          a transplant coldAssigned to or inventor:  Electrolux, S A R L, Vianden, LuxembourgDate:                     25-01-96Classification:           Int: A61F 7/10, 7/00, A01N 1/02, F26C 1/16Patent No:                EP 0697197Title:                    Anvil pockets for surgical staplerAssigned to or inventor:  US Surgical Corp, Connecticut, USADate:                     21-02-96Classification:           Int: A61B 17/072Patent No:                EP 0697201Title:                    Disposable pneumatic thermal blanket with                          surgical accessAssigned to or inventor:  Progressive Dynamics Inc., Marshall, USADate:                     21-02-96Classification:           Int: A61F 7/00, A61B 19/08Patent No:                EP 0697221Title:                    Cardiopulmonary function assisting deviceAssigned to or inventor:  President of Hiroshima University,                          Hiroshima, JapanDate:                     21-02-96Classification:           Int: A61M 1/16, A61M 1/10Patent No:                EP 0697222Title:                    Pen needle dispenserAssigned to or inventor:  Becton Dickinson & Co, New Jersey, USADate:                     21-02-96Classification:           Int: A61M 5/32Patent No:                EP 0697223Title:                    Pocket-sized nebuliser for delivering                          drugs to the oral cavityAssigned to or inventor:  Plastiape S p A, Osnago, ItalyDate:                     21-02-96Classification:           Int: A61M 15/00Patent No:                EP 0697224Title:                    Anesthesia systemAssigned to or inventor:  Siemens Elema AB, Solna 1, SwedenDate:                     21-02-96Classification:           Int: A61M 16/01Patent No:                US 5,483,968Title:                    Method and apparatus for analysing the                          electrical activity of the heartAssigned to or inventor:  Technion R&D Foundation Ltd.                          Technion City, IsraelDate:                     16-01-96Classification:           Int: A61B 5/0432                          US: 128/696Patent No:                GB 2290971Title:                    Implantable device for removing                          particulate debris from prosthetic jointsAssigned to or inventor:  Montgomery, R J, County Durham, UKDate:                     17-01-96Classification:           Int: A61F 2/30Patent No:                GB 2290970Title:                    Male incontinence sheath and applicatorAssigned to or inventor:  E R Squibb & Sons Inc, Delaware, USADate:                     17-01-96Classification:           Int: A61F 5/453Patent No:                GB 2291191Title:                    Hand held Doppler probe to investigate                          blood flowAssigned to or inventor:  Whiteley, M S, Bath, UKDate:                     17-01-96Classification:           Int: G01F 1/66, A61B 8/06Patent No:                GB 2290968Title:                    Laminates with cyanoacrylates particularly                          for ostomy bagsAssigned to or inventor:  Welland Medical Limited, Crawley, UK                          17-01-96                          Int: A61F 5/44, A61L 25/00                          B32B 7/12 27/08Patent No:                GB 2291211Title:                    Eye testing apparatusAssigned to or inventor:  Richard Dewhirst, London, UKDate:                     17-01-96Classification:           Int: A61B 3/02Patent No:                GB 2290706Title:                    Inflatable pillow or mattress for relief                          of back painAssigned to or inventor:  Gardner A M N, Newton Abbott, UKDate:                     10-01-96Classification:           Int: A47G 9/00/A47C 27/08, A61F 5/32 5/34Patent No:                GB 2290473Title:                    Fixator for use in bone surgeryAssigned to or inventor:  Baker A S, Bromham, UKDate:                     03-01-96Classification:           Int: A61B 17/58, F16B 17/00 43/00Patent No:                US 5,484,396Title:                    Method and device for treatmentAssigned to or inventor:  S S Naficy, Houston, Texas, USADate:                     16-01-96Classification:           Int: A61M 1/00                          US: 604/4Patent No:                US 5,484,397Title:                    Artificial kidney for frequent (daily)                          hemodialysisAssigned to or inventor:  Z J Twardowski, Missouri, USADate:                     16-01-96Classification:           Int: A61M 5/00                          US: 604/5Patent No:                US 5,484,400Title:                    Dual channel RF delivery systemAssigned to or inventor:  Vidamed, Inc. California, USADate:                     16-01-96Classification:           Int: A61B 17/39                          US: 604/22Patent No:                US 5,484,412Title:                    Angioplasty method and means for                          performing angioplastyAssigned to or inventor:  Be E Pierpont, Florida, USADate:                     16-01-96Classification:           Int: A61M 29/00                          US: 604/101Patent No:                US 5,488,950Title:                    Stabiliser for MRI systemAssigned to or inventor:  G J Ehnholm, Helsinki, FinlandDate:                     06-02-96Classification:           Int: A61B 5/055                          US: 128/653.1Patent No:                US 5,489,301Title:                    Cornea ProsthesisAssigned to or inventor:  J C Barber, Pennsylvania, USADate:                     06-02-96Classification:           Int: A61F 2/14                          US: 623/5Patent No:                US 5,489,311Title:                    Prosthesis with orientable bearing surfaceAssigned to or inventor:  Joint Medical Products Corp, Connecticut,                          USADate:                     06-02-96Classification:           Int: A61F 2/38                          US: 623/20Patent No:                US 5,490,836Title:                    Endoscopic surgical instrumentAssigned to or inventor:  A H Desai, California, USADate:                     13-02-96Classification:           Int: A61N 1/30                          US: 604/21Patent No:                US 5,490,837Title:                    Single operator exchange catheter having                          a distal catheter shaft sectionAssigned to or inventor:  SCIMED Life Systems Inc, Minnesota, USADate:                     13-02-96Classification:           Int: A61M 29/00                          US: 604/96Patent No:                US 5,490,859Title:                    Expandable intravascular occlusione                          material removal devices and methods of usAssigned to or inventor:  SCIMED Life Systems Inc. Minnesota, USADate:                     13-02-96Classification:           Int: A61B 17/22                          US: 606/159Patent No:                US 5,492,529Title:                    Tissue necrosing apparatus and method for                          using same including treatment of benign                          prostrate hypertrophyAssigned to or inventor:  GYNELAB Products, North Carolina, USADate:                     20-02-96Classification:           Int: A61M 31/00                          US: 604/49Patent No:                US 5,492,530Title:                    Method for accessing the coronary arteries                          from the radial or brachial artery in the                          armAssigned to or inventor:  CATHCO, Inc, Maryland, USADate:                     20-02-96Classification:           Int: A61M 31/00                          US: 604/49Patent No:                US 5,492,531Title:                    Infuser apparatus for the gastric cavityAssigned to or inventor:  ETHOX Corp. New York, USADate:                     20-02-96Classification:           Int: A61M 37/00                          US: 604/82Patent No:                US 5,492,536Title:                    Safely disposable syringeAssigned to or inventor:  M F Mascia, Maryland, USADate:                     20-02-96Classification:           Int: A61M 5/32                          US: 604/197Patent No:tion is from the large number of British, European, World,Title: Patent Office documents published recently on this subjectand was prepared by the Search and Advisory Service of the UK PatentOffice.  Any questions, or requests for further information onpatents please contact: Michael Blackman, UK Patent Office,Tel: 44 (0) 1633 811010 or Fax: 44 (0) 1633 811020.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996IT TO CAPITALISE ON EXPERTISE IN POLYMER-BASED PRODUCTSCHESHIRE UK - The implantable and extracorporeal devices sector providesa $12 billion opportunity for sales of biomaterials, an area that has aworldwide growth potential estimated at 7-12 per cent per annum.  Thismarket provides the Innovative Technologies (IT) Group with a hugepotential for capitalising on its research and development expertise inalginate and polymer-based woundcare and medical products.IT is aiming to establish itself as a"one-stop shop" for advancedwoundcare products and other medical devices based on its polymertechnology and to continue to gain market share as a supplier ofmaterials and manufacturing process technology.  Though IT's salesfocus at present is on alginate and polymer film-based woundcareproducts, the company envisages a future in fields as far reaching asself-lubricating hip joints, heart-assist devices, catheters, medicaland clean room gloves, condoms, and drug delivery.  In a number ofthese areas IT is already involved in research with industry partnersincluding PharmaPlast AS (Norway), Nycomed AS (Norway) and Portex Ltd(UK).  It is also carrying out research through the UK Department ofTrade and Industry LINK-funded programmes.IT's core expertise in alginate and polymer woundcare products hasresulted in the development of tailor-made products for all categoriesof wounds at various stages of healing.  The company quotes figureswhich estimate the worldwide woundcare market to be some $9 billion,with a hi-tech segment approaching $2 billion and growing at over 20per cent annually.Managing costs of healthcareManaging the costs of healthcare is an increasing priority in anynumber of medical fields, and to this end IT believes it can make"unusually cost-effective" alginate and film dressings.  This is partlypossible through the ability of "intelligent film" to manage woundfluid, resulting in a dressing which needs changing less frequently,saving nursing time and therefore money.  Results so far suggest thatthese dressings can be left in place for up to seven days.  To-date,the design and development of a wide range of woundcare products hasbeen completed, including film, alginate, hydrocolloid, hydrogel andspecial gauze dressings.  The company does not sell under its own labelbut designs, develops, produces and manufactures for major companieswith "significant sales teams".Focused research has been one of the keys to IT's success, financialdirector David Chellingsworth maintains.  But there is also "a lotbubbling beneath the surface".  Although the bottom line is to generaterevenues and profits for shareholders (the company was listed on theUSM in 1994, and now - as of a couple of weeks ago - on the LondonStock Exchange) it is important "not to lose track of the fact that youmust not stifle the creativity that lies beneath the surface".  (Infact, IT's polymer technology does not stop at medical products, andits offshoot textiles group is forming alliances with the aim todevelop waterproof, breathable textiles through the use of itssuperurethane films as fabric coatings).Unique positionIT also believes it has the potential to become one of the lowest-costproducers of finished woundcare products, especially as alginate andpolysaccharide wound dressing manufacture has been integrated in house. The company sees itself "in a unique position" within the industry,with fully integrated manufacturing capabilities for films, frompolymer design to finished products, including the facility to convertand package many woundcare products, such as hydrocolloids andhydrogels.With major sales being generated by its line of "basic" alginatedressings, the company has major clients in Europe and North America.New products are planned for launch in the first half of 1996.  Thewoundcare market is still open to innovation and new ideas, DavidChellingsworth suggests, with many more niches to explore.  IT has thefacilities and expertise to further develop any viable ideas brought tothe company from third parties.  The company recently invested in itsown leading edge conversion capability with laminating and packagingfacilities.  (The US market for custom conversion of non-woundcaremedical devices, excluding drug delivery patches, is $50 million, ITclaims).The order books are filling steadily, David Chellingsworth says.According to IT's chairman in his interim report at the end of lastyear, the aim is to achieve annual sales in the order of #10 million($15.9 million) within two years.  Though IT is quite a small company(of some 80 individuals in total), it is targeting a fairly largemarket with "top of the range" products.  Even a year or so ago therewas little to show in terms of sales, and no major contracts had beensigned.  Things have progressed a long way since then.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICE BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetMarch 1, 1996DEVICES SECTOR SETS SIGHTS ON MARKET AND INDICATION EXPANSIONLONDON - LocalMed, a California-based private medical devices company,recently completed a $16 million private placement of preferred stock.As lead investor, International Biotechnology Trust invested $3million.  Hambrecht & Quist and Johnson & Johnson Development Capitalalso participated in the preferred stock offering.LocalMed markets devices which are used, in conjunction with ballooncatheters, to deliver drugs locally during angioplasty.  ItsInfusaSleeve system received FDA 510(k) approval in late-1994 and ismarketed by a direct sales force in the US and by distributors in therest of the world.  The local drug delivery catheter is used inconjunction with a standard PTCA balloon catheter to deliver drugs tothe coronary arteries during angioplasty, effectively converting thePTCA catheter into the drug delivery device.  LocalMed, founded in1993, is developing other devices which will be used during cardiacsurgery.Medtronic announced late-February that its Hemopump Cardiac AssistSystem is being released to the cardiac surgery market in Germany andon a limited basis to customers in other parts of Europe.  The Hemopumpis a catheter-mounted left ventricular assist system designed toaugment cardiac output.  The company is progressing toward USregulatory approval to resume a modified clinical trial focusing on theHemopump's effectiveness during coronary bypass procedures.  Trials areexpected to take place during the 1997 fiscal year.Keen support from city analystsUK-based Cortecs, a biopharmaceutical company keenly supported byseveral city analysts, hopes to launch before the end of the year asimple rapid testing kit for osteoporosis.Analysts estimate thepotential size of the worldwide market for a diagnostic kit forosteoporosis at up to $1 billion, three times bigger than that for anyother diagnostic product currently being sold.  A working prototype hasbeen established in collaboration with Danish company OsteometerBiotech AS, and trials are expected to commence over the next threemonths.  Cortecs took just eight months from the date of signing thedeal to create a working prototype.Osteometer originated the bone breakdown technology, which Cortecssecured access to last year through an exclusive licensing agreement.The product has in recent studies been shown to be the only bone markerwhich is predictive of hip fractures.Combining diagnostics with therapeutics in a single disease areaprovides enormous leverage when it comes to negotiating futuredistribution and detail sales force arrangements.  Jonathan Pockson,finance director of Cortecs, told MDBN: "If we can have a diagnostickit for osteoporosis, plus an oral version of calcitonin to handle thedisease, then effectively Cortecs will have a very strong control ofthe disease state in a massive field.  It represents a significantopportunity for the company and represents a follow on product from ourenabling technology.  "Helisal, the company's recently-launched H.pylori diagnostic, isproceeding as the company forecast.  Approval from the FDA is believedto be imminent.  It is gradually building momentum in Europe as part ofH.pylori eradication therapy; H.pylori is a bacteria linked to stomachulcers, cancer and heart disease.  The results from the Phase IIstudies of oral calcitonin are expected soon.  Cortecs posted "solidall around progress" in its interim financial reports posted on 11March, said the company.  It hopes to post profits in 1997.International demand to grow quicklyCalifornia-based Microbics Corp, which develops and markets biosensor-based systems for monitoring toxicity in environmental and processcontrol markets, is looking to raise about $20 million to fund theexpansion of sales and marketing and to support new systemsdevelopment.  International demand for toxicity testing is expected togrow quickly over the next five years.The anticipated pre-money valuation of $40 million offers considerableupside for a company with forecast net earnings in excess of $20million in 2001.  The company plans to move its headquarters to the UK,with a full flotation on the London stock market in early 1998.Shield Diagnostics expects within the next month to announcepreliminary data from the current Houston-based trials on its lab-basedtest (AFT), for activated factor 12 a diagnostic test to predictsusceptibility to coronary heart disease.  Market estimates put themarket for such a test at between #50 and #100 million.  Furtherproduct enhancements are likely, perhaps with a rapid assay test forpoint-of-care use.Back to Headline List WT03-B09-4IA087-000629-B020-119http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/me21.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035153 text/html 36321HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:49:59 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:52 GMTContent-length: 36134Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/me21.html Sample Issue Copyright MEDICAL DEVICES LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNet January 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES IL JUDGE DISMISSES PEDICLE SCREW CASE AS IMPERMISSIBLE (399 words) PLAINTIFFS ASK PA JUDGE TO DENY DISMISSAL OF CLAIMS (237 words) DEFENSE LIAISON COUNSEL SUBMITS SIXTH DEPOSITION SCHEDULE REPORT (196 words) COURT STAYS NOTICE PENDING MOTION TO RECONSIDER CERTIFICATION (326 words) TELECTRONICS SAYS NAMES OF CLASS MEMBERS SHOULD BE KEPT PRIVATE (234 words) NORPLANT PLAINTIFFS, DEFENDANTS ARGUE ON MEDICAL MONITORING (873 words) TRANSFER OF NONDEBTOR CASES OPPOSED BY TX PLAINTIFFS, MS DOCTORS (937 words) LAWYER NOT REQUIRED TO ANSWER SETTLEMENT QUESTIONS, COURT RULES (249 words) CIBA IMPROPERLY LABELED CONTACT LENS SOLUTION, APPELLANT ARGUES (505 words) SUIT ALLEGING MALFUNCTIONING PENILE IMPLANT IS SETTLED (304 words) 9TH CIRCUIT UPHOLDS INJUNCTION ON MANUFACTURER OF DEFIBRILLATORS (644 words) CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICES LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996IL JUDGE DISMISSES PEDICLE SCREW CASE AS IMPERMISSIBLE         In dismissing a complaint filed on behalf of 11 plaintiffswho alleged injuries from implanted spine plate pedicle screws, afederal judge in Chicago called the suit "an impermissiblelumping together of plaintiffs and defendants" and said theclaims must be filed separately.  Jarmasek et al. v. AcroMedCorp. et al., No. 95-C-7095 (ND IL, Eastern Div.).         "It simply will not do for counsel to put together this typeof hodgepodge in anticipation that it may be worked intorespectable size and shape through the efforts of the court oropposing counsel or both," said Senior U.S. District Judge MiltonI. Shadur of the Northern District of Illinois.         In his Dec. 6 order, Judge Shadur dismissed the suit withleave for the plaintiffs to refile an amended complaint byDec. 19.  According to court records, an amended and restatedcomplaint was filed by the plaintiffs on Dec. 14.         Joseph J. Jarmasek and 10 other plaintiffs filed a complainton Dec. 5, alleging that AcroMed Corp. and 99 other defendantswere responsible for injuries allegedly sustained from implantedpedicle screws.         "All 11 plaintiffs have a common grievance: the implantingof a spine plate pedicle screw," Judge Shadur said.  "But ofcourse the several implant operations were performed at differenttimes and almost without exception at different hospitals."         The judge criticized several problems in the complaint,including the plaintiffs' engagement "in a type of boilerplaterote repetition of allegations about defendants' purportedcontacts with this district that seems very likely to bedemonstratably false."  The ability to obtain personaljurisdiction over many of the defendants is extremely doubtful,Judge Shadur said.         "In addition, the inclusion in this action of some of thecategories of joined defendants (particularly, though notexclusively, the individual defendants) would seem highlyproblematic as they relate to any of the plaintiffs (and perhapsas to all of them)," the judge said.                   He said the litigation must be reduced to manageableproportions in compliance with the rules of the court, and mustbe supported by allegations that will be able to pass theobjective good faith standard of Rule 11.         Representing the plaintiffs were Mark E. Stone of Kurasch &Stone in Chicago; John J. Cummings III of Cummings, Cummings &Dudenhefer in New Orleans, LA; and Cary Michael Saperstein of theLaw Office of Michael D. Mannis in Chicago.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICES LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PLAINTIFFS ASK PA JUDGE TO DENY DISMISSAL OF CLAIMS         Nine plaintiffs in the orthopedic bone screw multidistrictlitigation in Philadelphia asked Senior U.S. District Judge LouisC. Bechtle on Dec. 5 to deny a motion by defendant AcroMed Corp.to dismiss their claims based on alleged noncompliance withPretrial Order No. 6.  In re Orthopedic Bone Screw ProductsLiability Litigation, No. 1014 (J.P.M.L.).         On Nov. 22, AcroMed moved the court to dismiss the claims ofnearly 600 plaintiffs, including William E. Biddle Jr., CynthiaL. Glenn, Mattie Tripp Johnson, Maureen Leckie, Ann F. Little,Bradley J. Little, Patricia Harper Whitley, Dan K. Whitley andJohnny W. Taylor.         In its motion, the company asserted that the plaintiffs werecompelled by Pretrial Order No. 6 to submit completedquestionnaires providing basic background and authorization toenable defendants to obtain medical records within 60 days ofreceiving the order.         The plaintiffs argued in their response that each plaintiffcomplied, in good faith, with the requirements of Pretrial OrderNo. 6.         "AcroMed believes that its interests in this litigation arebest served by seeking the wholesale dismissal of plaintiffs'claims based upon any possible deficiency that AcroMed can pointto with respect to Plaintiffs' compliance with Pretrial OrderNo. 6," the response stated.         The plaintiffs are represented by John P. Kopesky ofSheller, Ludwig & Badey in Philadelphia.  AcroMed is representedby Richard I. Werder Jr. of Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue inCleveland.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICES LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996DEFENSE LIAISON COUNSEL SUBMITS SIXTH DEPOSITION SCHEDULE REPORT         A total of 679 depositions have been taken and 127 dismissedor canceled since Sept. 15, 1995, in the orthopedic bone screwmultidistrict litigation in Philadelphia, according to the sixthbi-weekly report filed Dec. 11 by the defense liaison counsel.In re Orthopedic Bone Screw Products Liability Litigation,No. 1014 (J.P.M.L.).         The report, filed pursuant to Pretrial Order No. 68, detailseach of the 10 defendant manufacturers in the multidistrictlitigation and the number of depositions taken, rescheduled ordismissed/canceled.         According to the two-page report, the depositions were takenfrom 424 plaintiffs, 141 plaintiffs' spouses, 69 physicians ortherapists, 31 damage witnesses, 13 realtives/friends and oneplaintiff employer.         AcroMed Corp. has taken 121 depositions, dismissed orcancelled 22 depositions and rescheduled 15 depositions, thereport indicated.  Sofamor Danek Group, Inc. has taken 251depositions, dismissed or cancelled 25 depositions andrescheduled 118 depositions.         Other listed manufacturers were:  Advanced Spine FixationSystems, Inc., Artifex, Cross Medical Products, Inc., Smith &Nephew Richards, Inc., St. Luke's Baptist Hospital, Synthes(U.S.A.), Thomas Jefferson University Hospital and Zimmer, Inc.         The report was filed by Philip H. Lebowitz of Pepper,Hamilton & Scheetz in Philadelphia.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICES LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996COURT STAYS NOTICE PENDING MOTION TO RECONSIDER CERTIFICATION         Senior U.S. District Judge S. Arthur Spiegel on Dec. 15ordered that the notice to class participants in the TelectronicsPacing Systems, Inc. litigation in Ohio be stayed pending theresolution of the defendant's motion to reconsider the court'sorder certifying the class.  In re Telectronics Pacing Systems,Inc. Accufix Atrial "J" Leads Products Liability Litigation,No. 1057 (J.P.M.L.), No. CV95-87 (SD OH).         Judge Spiegel on Nov. 17 granted a motion to certify a classof plaintiffs who claimed they were injured as a result ofallegedly defective pacemaker "J" lead wires.  In his order, thejudge granted certification on four of the plaintiffs' 11 causesof action that stem from allegedly defective Telectronics PacingSystems Inc. Accufix Atrial "J" pacemaker leads that wereimplanted into the plaintiffs.         The plaintiffs assert that about 15% of the company'spacemaker leads are J-shaped in design.  Telectronics had usedthe J-shaped lead since December 1987 for pacemakers that arespecifically designed to stimulate muscle in the atrium of theheart.         The plaintiffs alleged that from December 1987 to October1994, Telectronics manufactured and sold its pacemakers, asignificant portion of which contained defective leads, on acontinuous basis.  According to the plaintiffs, about 40,500 ofthe company's J-leads were implanted into patients worldwide.         Judge Spiegel ordered the plaintiffs to file their responseto Telectronics' motion by Jan. 2, and Telectronics to replybefore Jan. 9.  A hearing regarding the motion to reconsiderclass certification has been scheduled for Jan. 26.         The plaintiffs are represented by Louis Gilligan of Keating,Muething & Klekamp in Cincinnati; and by Stanley M. Chesley andTerrence L. Goodman of Waite, Schneider, Bayless & Chesley Co.,L.P.A., also in Cincinnati.         Telectronics is represented by Frank C. Woodside III andJames A. Comodeca of Dinsmore & Shohl in Cincinnati; and byCharles P. Goodell Jr., Richard M. Barnes and Ian Gallagher ofGoodell, DeVries, Leech & Gray in Baltimore.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICES LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996TELECTRONICS SAYS NAMES OF CLASS MEMBERS SHOULD BE KEPT PRIVATE         In a Dec. 4 plan for notice of the pendency of the classaction, defendant Telectronics Pacing Systems, Inc. objected tothe plaintiffs' provision to provide the Plaintiffs' SteeringCommittee with computer disks and labels identifying the namesand addresses of all class members in its possession.  In reTelectronics Pacing Systems, Inc. Accufix Atrial "J" LeadsProducts Liability Litigation, No. 1057 (J.P.M.L.), No. CV95-87(SD OH).         In its plan for notice of the pendency of the class action,Telectronics said it must operate under the regulatoryrequirements of the Food and Drug Administration, which requiresthat patient names and addresses be kept confidential and beprotected from public disclosure.         As an alternative to the plaintiffs' proposal, Telectronicsproposed that it produce a list identifying all patient names andaddresses under seal to the court, which would prepare thenotification for mailing to the class members.         "In this manner, the confidentiality of the patient recordscan be preserved, while at the same time notifying members of theclass of the pendency of this class action," Telectronics said.         Translations of the class notice and press releases shouldbe made " at the plaintiffs' expense " in order to adequatelyinform members of this world-wide class who live in predominatelynon-English speaking countries, Telectronics said.  Thosecountries include Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Hong Kong, Japan, Italy,Belgium, Jordan, Iran, Iraq and Mexico.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICES LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996NORPLANT PLAINTIFFS, DEFENDANTS ARGUE ON MEDICAL MONITORING         In response to U.S. District Judge Richard A. Schell's orderregarding medical monitoring, plaintiffs and defendants in theNorplant multidistrict litigation argued on the issue of medicalmonitoring as a viable cause of action.  In re NorplantContraceptive Products Liability Litigation, No. 1038 (J.P.M.L.).         Judge Schell on Sept. 25 ordered the parties involved in theNorplant litigation to brief whether each state would recognize aclaim for medical monitoring and what physical injury informationwould be required in order to bring such a claim.         In a Nov. 30 brief, the plaintiffs argued that medicalmonitoring is a viable cause of action and that everyjurisdiction would recognize medical monitoring as a recoverableelement of damages.         "Although some jurisdictions require an existing physicalinjury to warrant medical monitoring, that factor is present inevery plaintiff by virtue of the fact that mere use of Norplantrequires invasive surgical procedures to both insert and removethe product," the plaintiffs said.         The plaintiffs urged the court to follow In re Paoli R.R.Yard PCB Litigation, 916 F.2d 829 (3rd Cir. 1990), cert. denied,499 U.S. 961 (1991), and In re Paoli R.R. Yard PCB Litigation, 35F.3d 829 (3rd Cir. 1994), cert. denied, 115 S.Ct. 1253 (1995).In those cases, the plaintiffs said, the courts held that medicalmonitoring is a viable cause of action.         Another case cited by the plaintiffs is In re TelectronicsPacing Systems, Inc. Accufix Atrial "J" Leads Products LiabilityLitigation, No. 1057 (J.P.M.L.).  In Telectronics, the plaintiffscontended in a footnote to their brief, the judge certifiedmedical monitoring as a separate class without making anydistinction between the laws of the various jurisdictions.         The plaintiffs maintained that the court must analyze eachlegal issue individually to determine which state has the "mostsignificant relationship" to each claim.  The places where theindividual plaintiffs were injured do not play a major role, theplaintiffs said, because where the plaintiffs were injured isunrelated to the defendant's conduct, which occurred inPennsylvania.         Defendant Wyeth Laboratories developed, tested, marketed andplaced the Norplant contraceptive into the stream of commerce inPennsylvania, the plaintiffs said.  Accordingly, the plaintiffssaid, Pennsylvania has the greatest number of relevant contactswith the litigation.         "In this case, virtually every act conducted by Wyeth whichrenders it legally liable for the claims brought by theplaintiffs occurred in Pennsylvania," the brief stated.  "Thus,in accord with the choice of law in this jurisdiction, the Courtshould select the law of Pennsylvania to uniformly governplaintiffs' medical monitoring claims."         In support of medical monitoring relief, the plaintiffs saidthey are suffering from physical symptoms such as excessivemenstrual bleeding, recurrent headaches, weight gain, hair loss,depression and mood swings.  The plaintiffs said they areconcerned about other long-term medical problems that they may beexperiencing that cannot be detected without medical monitoring.         "The acceptance of medical monitoring as a separate claimfor relief is the trend in the law and is clearly the law inPennsylvania, the principal place of business of WyethLaboratories and the state which has the most significantcontacts with this litigation," the plaintiffs said.         On the other hand, the defendants argued in their brief thatno law exists in the majority of the jurisdictions of theplaintiffs in the Norplant multidistrict litigation that touchesupon the issue of medical monitoring.  The defendants argued thatthe court must answer no for those class members fromjurisdictions that have not recognized medical monitoring as anindependent tort.         After the Third Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals' decisionrecognizing a cause of action for medical monitoring in Paoli,the defendants argued, another Pennsylvania court rejected theThird Circuit's ruling.  In Addams v. Westinghouse ElectricCorp., No. 1340 C.D. 1988, slip op. at 16 (PA C.P. Ct., MercerCty., July 30, 1993), the court held that "an action for medicalmonitoring is inappropriate."         "For this Court in this case to recognize a cause of actionfor medical monitoring in 31 jurisdictions would be to replicatethese other courts' errors in a far grander scale," thedefendants maintained.         The defendants argued that a nationwide Norplant classaction predicated upon state law claims such as medicalmonitoring would be unmanageable and "would constitute anunwarranted intrusion by a federal court into areas best left tolocal courts resolving individual actions."         "This problem " how to intuit and then apply the law of 64jurisdictions " demonstrates that there is somethingfundamentally wrong with the course plaintiffs would have thisCourt chart," the defendants said.         The court should deny the plaintiffs' request for classcertification prior to ruling on the defendants' motion todismiss, thereby eliminating the need to create the law for the31 jurisdictions that never have addressed the issue of medicalmonitoring, the defendants concluded.         The plaintiffs' brief was submitted by Christopher M. Parksof Parker, Parks & Rosenthal, L.L.P. in Port Arthur, TX.  Thedefendants' brief was submitted by Lawrence Germer and Paul Gertzof Germer & Gertz in Beaumont, TX; and by John W. Vardaman, F.Lane Heard III and Steven M. Farina of Williams & Connolly inWashington, DC.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICES LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996TRANSFER OF NONDEBTOR CASES OPPOSED BY TX PLAINTIFFS, MS DOCTORS         Breast implant plaintiffs from Johnson County, TX, and aconsortium of physicians from Mississippi late last month filedwith the Sixth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals their briefsopposing the challenge of the nondebtor defendant-appellants of adistrict court finding that breast implant claims against thenondebtors are not related to the Dow Corning Corp. Chapter 11case.  In re Dow Corning Corp.; Lindsey v. O'Brien, Tanski,Tanser and Young et al., Nos. 95-2034, 95-2106, 95-2082, 95-2084,and 95-2107 (6th Cir.).         The appellees contend that U.S. District Judge Denise PageHood did not err in ruling that the jurisdiction of her court islimited to only those cases that are related to the corebankruptcy proceeding.  The district court properly held thatbecause the appellees' state law claims against the nondebtorswould not affect the administration of the bankruptcy estate, itdid not have jurisdiction to hear those actions under 28 U.S.C.Section 1334(b), the appellees said.         At issue is Judge Hood's Sept. 12 memorandum opinion andorder in which she held that her court does not have jurisdictionover breast implant claims against nondebtor defendants.  Claimsagainst nondebtor defendants are not "related to" the Dow Corningbankruptcy, the judge said, citing to Pacor, Inc. v. Higgins, 743F.2d 984, 994 (3rd Cir. 1984).         Citing again to Pacor, Judge Hood noted the similarity ofthe cases and held that "there will be no contingent claim by theShareholders against the debtor for indemnification until suchtime as a judgment is rendered and, then, the non-debtors wouldstill have to proceed with an entirely separate proceeding inorder to obtain indemnification from the Debtor under 11 U.S.C.Section 502.  Joint tortfeasors are not indispensable parties inthe federal forum.  The Bankruptcy forum provides for a mechanismto resolve the debtor's liability for indemnification should ajudgment be rendered against the Shareholders."         The appellants contend that the judge's holding that shelacks jurisdiction over breast implant claims against theshareholders under 28 U.S.C. Section 1334(b) is "clearly wrong."The Sixth Circuit has often found that "related to" jurisdictionunder Section 1334(b) is fairly broad and that jurisdictionexists if the claims at issue may "conceivably" affect thebankruptcy estate, the appellants said.Mississippi Physicians         The Mississippi Physicians argued that the appellants havefailed to show that judicial economy would be served by thedistrict court's retaining jurisdiction over the cases at issue.Judge Hood properly decided that the district court need onlyconcern itself with the cases that are central to theadministration of the Dow Corning bankruptcy estate, theappellees said.         "The claims by the Plaintiffs against the Non-DebtorDefendants for indemnification and/or for joint and severedliability with Dow Corning are contingent," the appellees said."It is unnecessary to join all tortfeasors in one action.  Thereis no evidence of the impact the state court litigation will haveon Dow Corning's bankruptcy estate.  Accordingly, this Court hasno interest in the state court litigation in which any proceedingagainst Dow Corning is stayed by virtue of 11 U.S.C. Section362."         Further, the Mississippi Physicians said, "[s]ince the opt-out cases are stayed as against Dow Corning, the bankruptcyestate will not incur litigation costs, nor should any judgmentin favor of Plaintiffs against the Non-Debtor manufacturerDefendants be binding on the Debtor or incur a cost to theestate.  These cases are unrelated to the bankruptcy case, andnot subject to removal pursuant to 28 U.S.C. Section 1452.  Thus,this Court should affirm the District Court's ruling that it hadno jurisdiction over the Non-Debtor's claims."Johnson County Plaintiffs         "The arguments of the Third Party Nondebtors that the claimsagainst them are 'related to' Dow Corning's bankruptcy are simplydisingenuous," the Johnson County plaintiffs argued.  "First, theThird Party Nondebtors argue that the claims against them, ifallowed to proceed, will undermine Dow Corning's bankruptcy case.However, the arguments offered in support of this allegation,namely, their common law right of contribution from Dow Corning,are without merit.  Indeed, the Third Party Nondebtors failed topresent any evidence to the District Court of even one singlecase in any forum anywhere in the United States in which any ofthe Nondebtors have filed a cross-claim against Dow Corning forcontribution, even though thousands of cases have been pendingagainst those same Third Party Nondebtors for almost four years!"         The plaintiffs went on to argue that "[a]lthough there mayexist shared facts in cases against Dow Corning and thoseasserted against the Third Party Nondebtors..., the plaintiffs inthe underlying state court proceedings have alleged that theliability is joint and several, thus providing an independentbasis of liability as to the Third Party Nondebtors....  The onlypossible effect the estate may sustain in the present proceedingis the speculative diminution of potential estate assets byvirtue of the utilization of insurance defense proceeds."         The Mississippi Physicians are represented by Chris J.Walker, Delia Y. Robinson and J. Hale Freeland of Markow, Walker,Reeves & Anderson, P.A. in Jackson, MS.         The Johnson County plaintiffs are represented by Daniel W.McDonald of McDonald, Clay & Crow, L.L.P. in Fort Worth; J. MarkHowell and J. Kevin Clark of Clark & Howell in Fort Worth; FrankCain of Bowers & Cain in Fort Worth; Michael P. McGartland ofChappell & McGartland, L.L.P. in Fort Worth; Ben C. Martin of theLaw Offices of Ben C. Martin in Dallas; and Russell L. Munsch andStephen C. Stapleton of Munsch Hardt Kopf Harr & Dinan, P.C. inDallas.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICES LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996LAWYER NOT REQUIRED TO ANSWER SETTLEMENT QUESTIONS, COURT RULES         A lawyer for Dow Corning Corp. is not required to answer theTort Claimants Committee's questions about whether the debtorbelieves the amounts of settlements with breast implantplaintiffs are reasonable, U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Arthur J.Spector ruled Dec. 1.  In re Dow Corning Corp., No. 95-20512(ED MI Bankr.).         The Tort Claimants Committee is conducting a Rule 2004examination of debtor Dow Corning Corp. (DCC).  The committeeasked DCC's managing trial counsel, Douglas Schoettinger, whetherhe had any reason to believe that the amounts for which DCCsettled some 200 breast implant claims were not reasonable.Schoettinger said yes, but then refused to provide furtherinformation, invoking the work product privilege and attorney-client privilege.  The committee sought to compel him to providefurther information, but Judge Spector denied the request.         He said the committee failed to show that it could notobtain the information from other sources.  Judge Spector alsofound that DCC had not waived the privilege merely by saying ithad reason to believe the settlement amounts were unreasonable.         "The Debtor has given no clear indication, nor do I see anyreason to assume, that it will be using privileged information inan attempt to prove that the agreements are unreasonable," hesaid.  "Thus there is no justification for making a finding ofwaiver based on the 'truth-garbling' rationale.  One could positnumerous ways in which the reasonableness of the settlementscould be determined through the use of objective, non-privilegedinformation."Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICES LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996CIBA IMPROPERLY LABELED CONTACT LENS SOLUTION, APPELLANT ARGUES         Ciba Vision Corp., knowing that its AOSEPT contact lenssolution had been injuring hundreds of consumers, failed tocomply with Food and Drug Administration regulations thatrequired "common sense" in deciding to strengthen its productwarnings/labels, appellant Leslie Scott contended in reply toCiba's answer to her petition for review by the CaliforniaSupreme Court.  Scott v. Ciba Vision Corp., No. S049608 (CA Sup.Ct.).         Scott argued that she received no advance warning through aconsent form of the danger of misidentification of the productcontainers of Ciba's AOSEPT solution, which contains hydrogenperoxide, and saline solution.         Scott brought suit against Ciba, alleging claims of strictliability, negligence, failure to provide adequate warnings andbreach of implied warranty.  She claimed she had difficulty indistinguishing Ciba's AOSEPT solution from its saline solution.As a result of the indistinguishable bottles, Scott said shesuffered chemical burns to her eyes when she rinsed her contactsin the AOSEPT solution.         Around the time of her injury, Scott said, Ciba began tomarket its AOSEPT solution with a red cap, but also continued tomarket it in the old bottle, knowing that persons not wearingtheir contact lenses would have trouble in distinguishing the twobottles.         The Santa Clara County Superior Court granted Ciba's motionfor summary judgment, finding that Scott's claims were preemptedby the Medical Devices Amendments (MDA) to the Food, Drug andCosmetic Act.  On appeal, the California Court of Appeal, SixthDistrict, affirmed the trial court.         Scott petitioned the state Supreme Court for review, arguingthat the only other state Supreme Court that has addressed theissue of federal preemption of Class III devices concluded thatthe plaintiff's claims were not preempted (Larsen v. PacesetterSystems, Inc. [Hawaii 1992], 837 P.2d 1273, 1281).         In response, Ciba argued that approved labels and warningson medical devices are "specific requirements" of federal lawthat preempt causes of action brought under state law.  Thecompany maintained that the appellate court's ruling was alignedwith a majority of jurisdictions that have held that federal lawpreempts causes of action brought under state law.         In her Nov. 27 reply, Scott said the Court of Appeals citedtwo cases in its decision that are not relevant to this case.  InEvraets v. Intermedics Intraocular, Inc. (1994) 29 Cal.App.4th779, and Powers v. Optical Radiation Corp. (1995) 37 Cal.App.4th1444, the cases involved experimental products for which adequatewarnings were not yet known, Scott said.                   Ciba's statements that this case is a "pure label andwarning case" and that Scott "makes no claim for any defect inthe design" are disingenuous and completely inaccurate, Scottargued.         "Respondent is well aware that Leslie Scott claims that thedesign of the two virtually indistinguishable white productcontainers containing harmful and harmless ingredientsrespectively are defective under both negligence and strictliability theories," she stated.         The reply was submitted by Jonathan D. Gordon of the LawOffices of Jonathan D. Gordon in Pleasant Hill, CA.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICES LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SUIT ALLEGING MALFUNCTIONING PENILE IMPLANT IS SETTLED         Noting that the case has been settled, U.S. District JudgeJan E. DuBois of the Eastern District of Pennsylvania last monthdismissed as moot motions for and against summary judgment in apersonal injury action brought by an Arizona resident forinjuries allegedly sustained after surgical implantation of aninflatable penile prosthesis (IPP).  Werner v. American MedicalSystems Inc. et al., No. 95-1856 (ED PA).         Plaintiff James Werner received the implant on March 5,1992, in an operation at a hospital in Harrisburg, PA.  Followingthe surgery, Werner allegedly experienced side effects.  OnMarch 25, 1993, an attempt to remove an infected prosthesis wasunsuccessful.  Subsequently, a diagnosis of an infectedprosthesis was made, and another operation was performed toremove it.  After the operation, the plaintiff was told he couldnot receive an implant of a properly functioning prosthesis,rendering him permanently impotent.         In their motion for summary judgment, defendants AmericanMedical Systems Inc. and Pfizer Inc. argued that Werner knew ofhis injury and its cause more than two years before he initiatedhis suit.  Werner, on the other hand, argued that the statute oflimitations had been tolled by certification of a class actionsuit in the Southern District of Ohio against American MedicalSystems and Pfizer Inc. concerning similar allegations involvingtheir IPP, and that claims of negligent design and strictliability could proceed in any event because neither the MedicalDevices Amendments nor the Food and Drug Administration hadimposed specific design requirements on the device.         Werner was represented by John P. Kopesky of Sheller, Ludwig& Badey in Philadelphia.  The defendants were represented by JohnW. Frazier, Richard G. Placey and Sally Ackerman King ofMontgomery, McCracken, Walker & Rhoads in Philadelphia, and byDaniel J. Johnson, legal counsel to American Medical Systems Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL DEVICES LITIGATION REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 8, 19969TH CIRCUIT UPHOLDS INJUNCTION ON MANUFACTURER OF DEFIBRILLATORS         A Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals panel on Dec. 28affirmed a district court's issuance of an injunction against amanufacturer of automated external defibrillators (AEDs) foralleged violations of the Medical Device Recording (MDR)regulations.  United States v. Laerdal Manufacturing Corp. etal., No. 94-35780 (9th Cir.).         The panel upheld the district court's findings thatdefendant Laerdal Manufacturing Corp. failed to timely file areport with the Food and Drug Administration after one of itsAEDs allegedly failed.         The litigation involves a Laerdal AED that was applied inJune 1993 to a man in cardiac arrest in Grand Rapids, MI.  Thedevice allegedly did not apply any shock to the man's heart, andthe man died after the AED was disconnected and an ambulance crewapplied its own defibrillator.  Laerdal did eventually file areport on the incident, but argued that the circumstances of theincident did not make filing a report necessary.         After the U.S. government filed suit against Laerdal, theU.S. District Court for the District of Oregon determined thatthe company had violated 21 C.F.R. Section 803(a)(1)(i), whichrequires a manufacturer to file a report with the FDA wheneverinformation is received that suggests that a patient care devicemay have caused or contributed to a death or serious injury.         Laerdal argued that the district court improperly imposedthe injunction because there was no cognizable danger that thecompany would violate the MDR regulation in the future.  Laerdalasserted that the Grand Rapids incident was an isolated incidentand that the company has taken the necessary steps to preventfuture violations.         The Ninth Circuit rejected Laerdal's contention of theisolation of the Grand Rapids incident.         "The [district] court developed at length the factssurrounding the incident in Grand Rapids that first broughtLaerdal's reporting practices to the FDA's attention, but thecourt also found testimony in the record that Laerdal hadreceived complaints of other instances in which a Laerdal AEDfailed to work properly," the panel said.         The district court also found that Laerdal had an ongoinghistory of not implementing proper FDA reporting procedures, thepanel said.         "Even if the district court had found evidence of only oneviolation, Laerdal is in error in asserting that one violationprovides insufficient grounds for granting an injunction," thepanel concluded.                   The panel cited its decision in Burlington Northern RailroadCo. v. Department of Revenue of the State of Washington, 934 F.2d1064, 1074-5 (9th Cir. 1991).  In Burlington, the courtdetermined that a statutory injunction may be imposed when aviolation of a statute has been or is about to be committed.         "Laerdal's repeated self-justification is sufficient to showa likelihood of future violation," the panel stated.  "Even ifLaerdal had not intended to violate the regulation, its continuedinsistence on justifying its actions in committing the violation'is an important factor in deciding whether future violations aresufficiently likely to warrant an injunction.'"         The panel also rejected Laerdal's argument that the publicinterest was not harmed because the FDA allegedly suffers from abacklog in filing its reports and the Grand Rapids report wouldhave languished for several months before being filed.         "The public interest addressed by the MDR regulationscenters not on the efficiency of the FDA, but on the attentionmanufacturers pay to evidence that their products could becausing or contributing to needless deaths," the panel stated.         Representing the plaintiff was Craig J. Casey, AssistantU.S. Attorney in Portland, OR, and Elizabeth Stein of the U.S.Department of Justice in Washington, DC.  Counsel for Laerdal wasJames F. Dulcich, Jeffrey D. Austin and James N. Westwood ofMiller, Nash, Wiener, Hager & Carlsen in Portland, OR; and byDaniel G. Jarcho and Daniel E. Johnson of McKenna, Conner & Cuneoin Washington, DC.Back to Headline List WT03-B09-5IA087-000629-B020-154http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/me09.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035220 text/html 40568HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:50:16 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:53 GMTContent-length: 40381Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/me09.html Sample Issue Copyright MEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNet February 25, 1993 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES AHCPR Releases Cataract Guidelines (223 words) Carotid Endarterectomy Still Questionable (189 words) Outcomes Leader Is Key Clinton Adviser (319 words) Medicare Quality Studies Shouldn't Get Too Elaborate -- HCFA (235 words) Lee To Head Public Health Service (212 words) MN Blues Form Managed Care Network For Elective Cardiac Procedures (288 words) AHCPR Insures Guideline Developers, Offers Legal Guidance to Panels (254 words) Maine Liability Project May Include More Specialties (364 words) CA Firms Start High-Tech Angioplasty Tests (300 words) Specialty Society Ready To Release Parkinson's Disease Guidelines (184 words) MN Managed Care Firm Tests Substance Abuse Outcomes Measures (344 words) Vasectomy May Increase Risk of Prostate Cancer (625 words) AHCPR ROUNDUP (115 words) MEETINGS & DEVELOPMENTS (320 words) Clarification: The American Society of Hospital Pharmacists (ASHP) study (32 words) Correction: A Feb. 11 article on the agreement resolving a dispute between (39 words) SPECIAL REPORT Guidelines in the Courtroom: Great Expectations (790 words) Three States Join Maine With Malpractice Defense Laws (286 words) CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993AHCPR ReleasesCataract GuidelinesAlthough it stops short of charging surgical overuse, a federally sponsoredclinical guideline for cataract management urges the use of glasses andother visual aids before rushing a patient into surgery. In 1991, 1.35million procedures were performed.The presence of a cataract, a naturally occurring cloudiness of the eye,"never solely justifies" surgery, says Dennis O'Day, MD, chairman of the18-member panel commissioned by the Agency for Health Care Policy &Research (AHCPR) to develop the guidelines. In most cases, surgery shouldbe performed only if patients feel their lifestyle is compromised or ifvisual impairment isn't corrected by glasses or other interventions, saysthe guideline. Claiming that tests currently used by ophthalmologists togauge if surgery is necessary don't work, O'Day argues, "ultimately, thedecision is made by the patient."Ophthalmologists who perform cataract surgeries have an "ethicalobligation" to provide postoperative care, says the guideline. Althoughsome postop care can be delegated to other professionals, including nursesand optometrists, the guideline recommends that the primary responsibilityfor postop rehabilitation fall to the primary ophthalmologist.The guideline enjoys wide support from ophthalmology groups, but theAmerican Optometric Assn. charges the document "largely ignores theextensive and legitimate role of optometrists." AOA disputes thatophthalmologists should be the only provider of postoperative care forpatients who have "clearly recovered" from surgery.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993Carotid Endarterectomy Still QuestionableThe latest study on surgery to prevent stroke deaths does little to clearup controversy over the treatment. Whether carotid endarterectomy reducesmortality remains uncertain despite the procedure's widespread use, sayresearchers, blaming sample size for their lack of conclusions.The prospective Veterans' Affairs study, reported in the Jan. 28 NewEngland Journal of Medicine, followed 444 men with asymptomatic carotidstenosis at 11 VA medical centers nationwide between 1983 and 1991.Carotid stenosis is a hardening of one of the two main arteries in theneck. Endarterectomy is the surgical removal of atherosclerotic plaque fromthe artery. In 1990, 68,000 endarterectomies were performed in the U.S.,down from a peak of 107,000 in 1985.The researchers set out to find endarterectomy's effect on stroke and ontransient monocular blindness and transient ischemic attacks, both warningsymptoms of carotid stenosis. The patients were randomly assigned to groupstreated either surgically or medically. Both groups were treated withaspirin. In the surgical group, 4.7 percent suffered strokes, compared with9.4 percent in the medical group, but the combined incidence of stroke anddeath "showed no benefit from operative intervention."Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993Outcomes LeaderIs Key Clinton AdviserThomas Pyle, acting chairman of the new Health Outcomes Institute, has akey role advising the Clinton Administration on health care systeminfrastructure and support, including quality assurance.Formerly CEO of the Harvard Community Health Plan, Pyle is listed as chairof a White House working group on health reform in an undated internaldocument obtained last week by F&G's Automated Medical Payments News.According to the memo, the working group addressing "New SystemInfrastructure and Support" is divided into two subgroups: one addressingQuality Assurance and the other, Administration, Reimbursement andInformation Systems. Pyle is listed as chairing both.Meanwhile, the formal announcement that Pyle is acting chair of the HealthOutcomes Institute -- the successor to InterStudy -- was made Feb. 8. TheInstitute's board includes Pyle, William Goss of General Electric, KermitKnudsen, MD, of Scott & White Clinic, and Donald Steinwachs of JohnsHopkins University (MOGA 1/11/93).The Minnesota-based Institute promotes the "Outcomes Management System"(OMS), originally developed under the leadership of Paul Ellwood, MD, whenhe was at InterStudy. OMS relies on the generic SF-36 patient quality-of-life instrument and condition-specific TyPE questionnaires, filled out bytreating physicians. Information is gathered before, during, and afterclinical interventions and surgeries. Proponents want this approachincorporated into the "managed competition" reform proposal now beingdeveloped by the Clinton Administration. They propose that the Institutebecome the central repository for OMS information and disseminate it topayers and consumers, as a quality check on large health plan providers(MOGA 1/28, 2/11).Other names included in the memo as members of a Quality Assurance sub-group include former HCFA researcher Henry Krakauer, MD, HCFA HealthStandards & Quality Bureau Director Barbara Gagel, Institute of Medicineresearcher Kathleen Lohr, and AHCPR senior staffer Linda Demlo. One insidersaid the group hasn't yet grappled with specific approaches like OMS. Atpress time, Pyle was unavailable for comment.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993Medicare Quality StudiesShouldn't Get Too Elaborate -- HCFAThe Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) is telling Medicare PROsnot to get carried away with elaborate and costly quality-of-care studies.That's the message of a Feb. 3 draft memo to PROs from HCFA SeniorPhysician Adviser Stephen Jencks, M D, regarding implementation of HCFA's"Health Care Quality Improvement Initiative," which is to be phased in toPRO workplans beginning Apr. 1.In collaborating on practice pattern analysis with local physicians andhospitals, PROs should "avoid research and writing guidelines," saysJencks. He calls that the responsibility of AHCPR, arguing that PROs shouldchoose manageable, time-limited projects that emphasize "direct humancontact" between PROs and local providers.Jencks recommends that PROs look at, among other things, differentialdiagnosis in stroke, underuse of breast and cervical cancer screening, andDRG coding errors. PROs should focus on areas showing "substantialvariation" between local practice and existing guidelines promulgated bymedical specialty societies, says the memo.Jencks' recommendation that PROs use existing specialty society guidelinesto study variation is likely to raise eyebrows in the research community.Duke University Professor David Eddy, MD, RAND researcher Robert Brook, MD,the U.S. General Accounting Office, and others all argue that theseguidelines often haven't been validated by outcomes research and varysubstantially in terms of the rigor with which they're developed. Brook hasbeen especially critical of guidelines developed in the absence ofsubstantial literature reviews.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993Lee To Head Public Health ServiceHHS Secretary Donna Shalala has selected Philip Lee, MD, as Asst. Secretaryfor Health. The job involves managing the $21 billion Public HealthService, which oversees the Agency for Health Care Policy & Research(AHCPR).Lee, director of the Institute for Health Policy Studies at the Universityof California at San Francisco, currently heads the Physician PaymentReview Commission. The PPRC's 1992 Annual Report to Congress included asection critical of AHCPR. The re port accused the agency of failing todevelop guidelines addressing the most costly and overused treatments andprocedures."The efforts of guideline developers are not guided by a consistent set ofpriorities," said PPRC. The report called for closer scrutiny of how panelsdeliberate, more disclosure of the underpinnings of panel findings, moreefficient literature searches, and attention to questionable procedureslike chest x-rays, colonoscopy, and appendectomy.AHCPR Administrator J. Jarrett Clinton, MD, tells MOGA that despite budgetconstraints, AHCPR is reordering its priorities to focus more on costissues than it did initially. He cites guidelines now in process addressingsmoking cessation and mammography. Clinton says he has made no secret ofhis wish to stay in his current position, that he has heard nothing fromthe new Administration, and that his relations with Lee are "excellent."Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993MN Blues Form Managed Care NetworkFor Elective Cardiac ProceduresBlue Cross and Blue Shield of Minnesota (BCBSM) and its Blue Plus HMO haveformed a network of what they consider the state's 10 best cardiac careproviders in an effort to manage elective cardiac care procedures. TheMinnesota Blues say of their Project Health Vision Cardiac Network that for"the first time in Minnesota, patient outcomes and other quality of caremeasures have been used to select providers."BCBSM used the MedisGroups data analysis and severity indexing system tocompare complication and mortality rates for a variety of cardiacprocedures among hospitals throughout the state. The providers chosen bythe combination insurer/HMO-style provider for its network average 15deaths per 1,000 for cardiac procedures, compared with a statewide averageof 35 deaths per 1,000. BCBSM formed the network to provide cardiaccatheterization, electrophysiologic diagnostics, angioplasty, coronaryartery bypass grafts (CABG), and valve surgery -- all on an elective,nonemergency basis."Our research showed wide variation in patient outcomes among cardiac careproviders" in the state, says Mark Banks, MD, senior VP of BCBSM and COO ofBlue Plus. In addition to the MedisGroups data, BCBSM chose the providersaccording to their experience with the procedures and their "potential toparticipate in a long term relationship with Blue Plus."Blue Plus and BCBSM plan to use similar selection techniques over the nextfew years to create networks for oncology, orthopedics, high-riskmaternity, neurology, and physical therapy.All three of Minneapolis-St.Paul's major hospital systems are included inthe network, says Vic Ellison, VP of the Metropolitan Healthcare Council,the Twin Cities' hospital association. A spokeperson from the statewideMinnesota Hospital Assn. said "all of the major players" in the state areinvolved in the network.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993AHCPR Insures Guideline Developers,Offers Legal Guidance to PanelsThe Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (AHCPR) has purchasedliability insurance to protect members of agency-sponsored guidelinespanels, should the guidelines they produce not hold up in court. To date,AHCPR has spent approximately $150,000 for a policy that would coverindividuals or entire teams, including consultants, for up to $5 million,says an agency spokesperson.An AHCPR report on "The Use of Language in Clinical Practice Guidelines" isexpected to be released to the public in the next few months. A draft hasalready been distributed to the federal guidelines panels and is nowwinding its way through an elaborate clearance and revision process.The report, like the four guideline sets the agency has released so far,will include a "quick reference guide" and a longer monograph. These offer"guidelines on developing guidelines" for teams concerned with the "legalimplications" of the language they are using. Written by George WashingtonUniversity's Center for Health Policy Research, it has sections devoted tothe legal significance of words, hazards inherent to guidelines drafting,the importance of documenting all decisions that led to finalizingguidelines, and actual legal cases that examined practice guidelines. Thereport should become available "no later than June," says KathleenHastings, director of the agency's Legal Medicine Program.The Agency commissioned the report to calm fears expressed by AHCPR's ownguidelines panels, but the report should be useful for specialty societiesand others developing practice guidelines, says Hastings.For more on legal issues in guideline development, see p. 7.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993Maine Liability ProjectMay Include More SpecialtiesIf legislation proposed in Maine late last month is signed into law, itwill expand the state's ground-breaking Medical Liability DemonstrationProject to allow inclusion of all medical specialties. Only four arecurrently participating: anesthesiology, emergency medicine,obstetrics/gynecology, and radiology.At press time, the proposal was being reviewed by the state's banking andinsurance committee and awaiting a public hearing.Under the current law, the first of its type in the country, physicians mayuse proof of adherence to state panel-produced practice guidelines as an"affirmative defense" in malpractice cases. The 1990 law called for a five-year demonstration period beginning in January 1992, during whichdefendants who signed on as participants can introduce evidence that theyfollowed one or more of the 20 protocols for the four specialties. The lawstipulated that the project would not begin unless more than half of thestate's practitioners in each of those specialties agreed to participate.Among the specialties, enlistment has ranged "from 58 percent to almost 90percent in ob/gyn," says Gordon Smith, counsel for the Maine Medical Assn.Under the new proposal, any additional specialties that wished toparticipate would also have to sign up over half of their members.The law intends to lower medical costs in the state by stemming the tide ofdefensive medicine. Similar laws have since been enacted in Minnesota,Vermont, and Florida (see box on p. 8).There have been no test cases so far under the five-year project, and thelikelihood that any will come soon is slim, says Smith. "These 20 protocolsdeal with a very small portion of the medicine practiced in a small stateby a small number of physicians. We're glad to see (the other three states)joining in because it's going to take a lot more data than we have toexamine the liability issue."While liability seems to be the main focus of the Maine project, it'simportant not to lose sight of the program's effect on patients, saysRobert Keller, MD, executive director of the Maine Medical AssessmentFoundation. He calls for a study documenting changes in patient outcomesresulting from practitioners following the parameters.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993CA Firms Start High-Tech Angioplasty TestsTwo California medical device manufacturers are launching separate clinicaltrials focusing on percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA)outcomes. One study is designed to determine if patients with lesionsdetermined "significant" by angiography might benefit from drug therapyover PTCA. The other study is designed to evaluate PTCA success when theinvasive nonsurgical procedure is performed by a combinationultrasound/angioplasty device.Mountain View-based Cardiometrics will test its ultrasound catheter, calledFloWire, in 14 hospitals across the country "to conclude that patientswhose coronary lesions don't impair blood flow are appropriately excludedfrom angioplasty."The prospective, controlled trial will randomize 425 patients with"angiographically significant" lesions that do not impair blood flow togroups receiving either angioplasty or drug therapy. "Our belief is thatangioplasty done on lesions that don't impair blood flow will not lead togreater angina relief than medical therapy alone," says Nat Bowditch,Cardiometrics marketing manager. The two groups will be assessed at 30days, six months, and one year to determine whether symptoms are relievedand patients' ability to perform a standardized exercise stress test.Adverse event rates including coronary artery bypass grafts (CABG),myocardial infarctions, and mortality will be compared. It is estimatedthat 375,000 PTCAs were performed in the U.S last year at a cost of about$10,000-$15,000 each.Pleasanton-based EndoSonics is starting a randomized, multicenter clinicaltrial of a projected 500 patients to test its combination ultrasoundcatheter and balloon angioplasty device, called Oracle-Micro. EndoSonicswill test the effectiveness of PTCAs performed with the Oracle-Microagainst those performed with traditional PTCA devices, which do not offersimultaneous ultrasound imaging. A six-month follow-up will comparecomplication rates for the two groups. Complications from PTCA includethrombosis, artery dissection, and acute reclosure, says EndoSonicsPresident Mike Henson.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993Specialty Society Ready To ReleaseParkinson's Disease GuidelinesThe American Academy of Neurology (AAN) is set to release its guidelinesfor initial treatment of Parkinson's disease. A draft of the guidelines,which were approved by the AAN's executive board this week, calls for usinglevodopa as a front-line therapy because it is "usually the most effective"of all the drugs indicated for alleviating symptoms. The draft lists theadvantages and drawbacks of the other drugs in relation to levodopa.The AAN says it developed the guidelines because of current variations andcontroversy surrounding initial treatment. The group describes initialtherapy as the first two years of treatment following diagnosis. Therecommendations are based on a literature search of 818 articles andtextbooks and were approved by consensus of AAN experts.The guidelines caution that treatment must be tailored to each patient andthat prolonged follow-up is necessary to recognize and adjust formedication side effects. Doctors are told to encourage physical activityand watch for signs of depression. In addition to treatmentrecommendations, the guidelines contain recommendations for futureresearch, including outcomes studies to assess the benefits of physicaltherapy.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993MN Managed Care Firm TestsSubstance Abuse Outcomes MeasuresA managed mental health care firm is launching a nationwide pilot study totest a system for measuring substance abuse treatment outcomes. Ultimatelythe system will be used to create what developers call "empirically basedstandards of care" for providers.Minneapolis-based MCC Behavioral Care, a subsidiary of Cigna, commissioneda team of researchers at the University of Minnesota to construct adatabase for ongoing analysis of care and its effects on patient recovery,cravings, and relapses. MCC will use the database to measure clinical,medical, behavioral, emotional, and economic outcomes. Factors measuredinclude abuse levels, quality of life, social functioning, employmentstatus, medical status, and duration of abstinence.The project aims to separate the effects of treatment from other influenceson outcomes, gauge success rates for various treatment approaches, examinevariations among therapists, and determine cost-effectiveness of treatment.Patients' pretreatment baseline data will be compared with posttreatmentdata.The firm also plans to use the data to tell employers if they are spendingenough, or too much, on substance abuse treatment. The Institute for aDrug-Free Workplace estimates U.S. employers lose $60 billion a yearthrough drug abuse-related accidents, medical claims, absenteeism, theft,and lost productivity.MCC plans to analyze the pilot data in October, when it will begin toexpand the program to all its sites. The MCC network includes 1,500inpatient and outpatient facilities. MCC covers 5 million individuals. Itestimates 150,000 to 250,000 of those individuals will have substance abuseproblems each year.The project aims to set scientific standards in an area of caretraditionally viewed as rife with ambiguity. "Until now care has been basedon clinical judgment. In the '90s, we are finally beginning to practiceempirical health care," says Robert Kane, MD, head of the research team atthe University of Minnesota's Center for Health Services Research andPolicy. Once the pilot study for the substance abuse system is over and theprogram is in place throughout the network, MCC says it will begin work onsimilar systems for depression and anxiety.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993Vasectomy May IncreaseRisk of Prostate CancerTwo studies of a total of 73,000 men point to a link between vasectomy andan elevated risk of developing prostate cancer. Researchers say the cancerrisk increases over time following the procedure, but they are unable topinpoint the correlation's cause. In light of the studies' findings, theAmerican Urological Assn. (AUA) is recommending that younger vasectomizedmen follow guidelines established by the AUA and the American CancerSociety for early detection of prostate cancer in men ages 50 -70.The NIH-sponsored studies, one prospective and one retrospective, foundthat men who had a vasectomy more than 20 years ago have up to an 89percent "elevated risk" of developing prostate cancer. Both studies,conducted by Edward Giovannucci, MD, of Harvard University and Brigham andWomen's Hospital, and colleagues appeared in the Feb. 17 Journal of theAmerican Medical Association.The prospective study began in 1986 and compared 10,055 40- to 75-year-oldhealth professionals who had had a vasectomy with 37,800 similar men whohad not. Three hundred cases of prostate cancer appeared in thevasectomized group between 1986 and 19 90. This group had no previouscancer history. Baseline data were taken at the study's outset, and follow-up questionnaires were collected in 1988 and 1990. The overall increasedrisk of prostate cancer in the vasectomy group is 66 percent -- a figurethat rises to 85 percent 22 years post-vasectomy.The retrospective study used a questionnaire that had been administered in1976. Researchers followed up in 1989 with reports on 13,034 men withvasectomies and 12,306 without. The researchers found an overall 56 percentincrease in prostate cancer for the vasectomy group. It was in this groupthat the risk rose to 89 percent 20 years post-vasectomy."The mechanisms that might link vasectomy and risk of prostate cancerremain undefined," the researchers say. The studies were designed to ruleout "detection bias" and causal effects from smoking, alcohol consumption,level of physical activity, diet, educational level, body mass index, andgeographical area of residence. Because the risk factors for prostatecancer remain unknown, the researchers say it is "impossible" to "ensurethat the true risk factors" were equally distributed among the cohorts.While the researchers argue that the increased risk over time rules outbetter detection in vasectomized men, "bias was not properly addressed,"says Marc Goldstein, MD, director of male reproduction and microsurgery atthe New York Hospital/Cornell University's department of urology. Goldsteinsays that because all the vasectomized men had seen a urologist pre- andpost-surgery, "Diagnosis of prostate cancer goes up. This clearly explainsthe difference."The AUA immediately released an official statement upon the studies'publication that warns the suggested relationship "does not mean that menwho have had a vasectomy should seek a reversal of the procedure" because"the data are far too preliminary ." Four previous studies found a linkbetween vasectomy and prostate cancer, while three others did not.The AUA does caution, however, "If vasectomy is a risk factor for prostatecancer, people need to know and informed choices need to be made." Prostatecancer is now the second leading cause of cancer deaths in American men.One in 11 men in the United States will develop prostate cancer, themajority of whom will not have had a vasectomy. More than 15 percent ofAmerican men over 40 have had a vasectomy.The AUA/ACS guidelines for men between the ages of 50 and 70 advise annualrectal examinations and testing for serum prostatic antigen levels. The AUAis now saying that men who had a vasectomy more than 20 years ago, or whenthey were over 40 years old, should get exams and tests regardless of theirage.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993AHCPR ROUNDUPThe agency has announced three public meetings at which individuals andorganizations may address practice guideline panel members:o Screening for Alzheimer's disease and other related dementias -- Apr. 12,  Hyatt Regency Washington, Washington DC. For information: Demie Lyons,  617/290-0090o Diagnosis and treatment of chest pain due to unstable angina, Apr. 8,  American College of Cardiology, Heart House, Bethesda MD. For  information: Nancy Archibald, 919/684-6077o Quality determinants of mammography, Mar. 8, Bethesda Marriott, Bethesda  MD. For information: Mary Madison, 617/290-0090.o The Agency announced a request for proposals for health care financing  and cost research in the Jan. 29 NIH Guide. For information: Michael  Hagen, 301/227-8354.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993MEETINGS & DEVELOPMENTSo Duke University Professor David Eddy, MD, Joint Commission PresidentDennis O'Leary, MD, and Clinton Administration adviser Thomas Pyle  areamong the speakers at a major conference May 13-14, in Washington DC.Titled From Promises to Practice: The Marketplace Response, the two-daysession will explore federal practice guidelines, state-sponsoredinitiatives, the outcomes research agenda, and impact on providers.Sponsored by Faulkner & Gray's Healthcare Information Center, theconference will be held at the Sheraton Washington Hotel. Other leadingspeakers include Johns Hopkins University Professor Earl Steinberg, MD, NewYork State Health Commissioner Mark Chassin, MD, Centers for DiseaseControl Director William Roper, MD, and Health Research Group DirectorSidney Wolfe, MD. To register by phone, call 1-800-848-1153. (in DC, 202-828-4150).o Infoline is sponsoring a conference on managed behavioral health careoutcomes Apr. 26-28 at Le Meridien in New Orleans LA. Topics includemethodologies, strategies, and real-world applications. For information:508/481-6400.o The American Hospital Assn. is sponsoring a teleconference Mar. 18, onimplementing clinical practice guidelines in hospitals. The teleconferencewill include case studies from the Henry Ford Medical Group, Mt. SinaiHospital, and Dartmouth Medical School. Participants include the AMA's JohnKelly, MD, and Dartmouth's John Wennberg, MD. Call 800/999-4AHA to eitherhook up your hospital to the conference or to find out the location of ahospital near you receiving the broadcast.o Corporate CEO Survey -- In a recent survey of commercial insurers andBlue Cross and Blue Shield plans, nearly 40 percent of CEOs said they planto develop outcomes management programs in the next five years. Twentypercent say they have such a pro gram in place already. The survey wasconducted by management consulting firm Towers Perrin. Donald Santoski,principal at Towers Perrin, is predicting that eventually "outside ratingservices" will be offering consumers comparative performance data onhospitals and clinics.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993Clarification: The American Society of Hospital Pharmacists (ASHP) studyClarification: The American Society of Hospital Pharmacists (ASHP) studyreported in the 2/11/93 MOGA was sponsored by the ASHP's Research andEducation Foundation with funds contributed from nine differentpharmaceutical manufacturers.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993Correction: A Feb. 11 article on the agreement resolving a dispute betweenCorrection: A Feb. 11 article on the agreement resolving a dispute betweenthe MOS Trust and the Health Outcomes Institute should have stated that thelatter has agreed to rename a depression measurement survey previouslydistributed as "SF-36D."Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993Guidelines in the Courtroom:Great ExpectationsI think you have to help doctors stop practicing defensive medicine. I'verecommended that our doctors be given a set of national practice guidelinesand if they follow these guidelines, it raises the presumption that theydidn't do anything wrong. -- Bill Clinton, presidential debate, Oct. 15,1992.As policymakers prepare to attack health care costs with various proposals,many are lining up malpractice spending in their sights. The weapon most ofthem are aiming: practice guidelines.Recent estimates place potential savings from malpractice reform at aprojected $36 billion over the next five years. It is still unclear,however, whether better guidelines would indeed lower the cash awards andnumber of malpractice cases through fostering better care, or whether theywould serve to increase malpractice awards and cases by giving plaintiffs'attorneys more ammunition in court."I am currently working on an Administration task force looking atmalpractice reform, and we are definitely examining practice guidelines asalternatives," Kathleen Hastings, director of the Agency for Health CarePolicy & Research's (AHCPR) Legal Medicine Program, told a gathering ofpolicymakers and analysts earlier this month in Washington DC.The group, convened by the Assn. of Academic Health Centers (AHC) toinvestigate the rapidly growing bond between guidelines and the law,explored topics including whether federally produced guidelines would soontake legal precedence over those produced by states and privateorganizations. The AHC is a not-for-profit health care educationorganization with over 100 institutional members in the United States andCanada.Maine is the first state to battle malpractice costs with a legal defensefor physicians who follow state-sponsored guidelines. The federalgovernment taking that same route "is possible but not likely," says GordonSmith, legal counsel to the Maine Medical Assn. and chief expert on theMaine law, pointing to the U.S.' tradition of handling tort laws on astate-by-state basis.The move in most states' courtrooms, however, has been toward acceptance ofstandards produced on a national level, whether by government agency orspecialty society, says Troyen Brennan, MD. A national approach mustaccount for regional differences in standards of care, such as those inrural areas versus inner cities; conflicting standards, such asdisagreements over mammography screening; and uneven resource distribution,cautions Brennan, associate professor of medicine at Harvard MedicalSchool and Brigham and Women's Hospital. AHCPR's Hastings counters thatnationally produced guidelines "can be tailored to a local level later."The American Medical Assn. wants to see guidelines legislation formalpractice defense remain at the state level, at least for now. Thescience of guidelines creation is "still in its infancy, not reliableenough to mandate nationally," says Ed Hirshfeld, the AMA's associategeneral counsel for health law.Hirshfeld told the group that the AMA's policy asserts that guidelines,which it calls parameters, should retain their current status alongsidepeer-reviewed studies and expert witnesses as "simply one source ofevidence" among many that judges and juries should consider in malpracticecases. The AMA is concerned that mandating practice patterns nationwidemight stifle creativity in clinical research, technology, and drugdevelopment, and other "experimentation in the margins," creating achilling effect. Mandating standards of care on a national level would alsodamage efforts to fine-tune those standards, Hirshfeld says.One advantage of the Maine law, which has yet to be tested in court, isthat it will stop "the battle of the experts" on the witness stand, saysSmith. Maine's "affirmative defense" stands in contrast to PresidentClinton's recommendation of raising "presumption" against physicianwrongdoing, because presumption will leave the defense wide open forrebuttal from plaintiff's attorneys and their hired guns, Smith predicts.Conflicting testimony on scientific evidence that points in severaldirections already has courts in a quandary, says Franklin Zweig, seniorstaff scientist at George Washington University's Center for Health PolicyResearch. Merely blocking attempts to weave guidelines into federal law"won't stop the issue from being litigated in courts," warns Zweig, whorecommends health care professionals take advantage of this early stage inguidelines litigation by moving forward to educate trial judges so theycan recognize valid, scientifically sound practices.Judges are ripe for educational efforts, says Zweig. In a recent random-sample survey conducted by his Center, trial judges rated medical practiceguidelines as third among topics for which they want more information.Alcoholism science and genetic-based criminal evidence came in first andsecond. Zweig attributes this desire to know more to the growing number andcomplexity of health-related cases currently winding their way through thecourts. Many of those cases will soon have practice guidelines as theirmain core of evidence, regardless of who created them or whether they aremandated. -- D.S.Back to Headline List CopyrightMEDICAL OUTCOMES & GUIDELINES ALERT via NewsNetFebruary 25, 1993Three States Join MaineWith Malpractice Defense LawsMaine was the first state to pass legislation tying practice guidelines tomalpractice defense. To date, three other states have approached the'guidelines as defense' arena as part of state health care reformlegislation:Vermont's Universal Access statute, passed in 1992 and awaiting adoption inJan. 1994, will allow practice guidelines "recognized by state law" asadmissible evidence in cases judging whether a provider "met or failed tomeet the applicable standard of care." The state calls upon providerorganizations, hospitals, and quality assurance programs to draft the stateguidelines. The statute also establishes a nonbinding arbitration systemfor all medical liability claims.Under its Health Care Reform Act of 1992, Florida mandates the "adoptionand implementation" of "scientifically sound medical practice parameters"to eliminate "unwarranted" variations in health care delivery. Physiciansparticipating in a demonstration project between June of this year and Oct.1, 1998, will be able to use compliance with the parameters as an"affirmative defense" similar to the one established in Maine. The statutealso calls for periodic reviews and revisions of the parameters to ensurethey are based on the latest scientific findings. The state plans toaddress overall tort reform in upcoming legislative sessions.As part of its reform legislation, Minnesota's 1992 HealthRight Actestablished a program to develop, adopt, revise, and disseminate practiceparameters, drawing from those developed within the state and those createdby AHCPR and national specialty societies. Under the Act, adherence to thestate-sanctioned guidelines is an "absolute defense" giving the defendantan automatic win -- a sharp contrast to Maine's "affirmative defense." Theabsolute defense is suspended in cases involving delay in diagnosis,misdiagnosis, inappropriate application of the parameter, or failure toobtain informed consent.Back to Headline List WT03-B09-6IA087-000629-B020-195http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/me20.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035248 text/html 74011HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:50:41 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:51 GMTContent-length: 73824Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/me20.html Sample Issue Copyright OTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet January 10, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES HEAT ON US ANALGESICS AS BAYER LAUNCHES ACTRON (918 words) SB BUYS INTO GERMAN MASS MARKET (579 words) FEMSTAT SECOND SWITCH FOR PROCTER-SYNTEX (706 words) ASTRA WEIGHS UP BUDESONIDE OPTIONS (142 words) NEW DRUGSTORES FORMAT PAYING OFF AT LLOYDS? (247 words) BELGIAN INDUSTRY FEARS BLOCK ON ADVERTS (333 words) IBUPROFEN AND CLOTRIMAZOLE NOW OFFICIALLY GSL (927 words) WHICH? SLAMS PHARMACISTS AGAIN (2066 words) GERMAN PHARMACY SALES UP 3.7 PER CENT (319 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW GROWTH SLOWING IN UK MEDICATED SKINCARE? (592 words) FDA APPROVAL FOR ZANTAC SWITCH (596 words) FDA FINAL MONOGRAPH UPDATE (84 words) SIX US SWITCHES IN 1995 (288 words) FDA SITS OUT GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN (245 words) CONFERENCE REPORT WHOSE STANDARDS? ADVERTISING IN SOUTH EAST ASIA (2978 words) CopyrightOTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996HEAT ON US ANALGESICS AS BAYER LAUNCHES ACTRONBayer has launched Actron, its OTC version of the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory, ketoprofen, onto an already crowded US market forheadache.Actron is entering the non-prescription market two months afterWhitehall-Robins' rival ketoprofen brand, Orudis KT, and 18 monthsafter Procter-Syntex' NSAI switch, Aleve (naproxen sodium), shook upthe intensely competitive analgesic segment.So far the principle that being first to market is crucial to the long-term success of switches appears to be confirmed by Johnson &Johnson/Merck's H2-antagonist, Pepcid AC (famotidine) - a product thatwas something of an also-ran in prescription drug terms.Pepcid has managed to maintain around a seven per cent market sharedifferential over SmithKline Beecham's Tagamet HB (cimetidine) byarriving first, Merck & Co senior vice-president Judy Lewent toldsecurities analysts in mid-December."Thanks to Merck research, Pepcid was first on the market because,quite frankly, Tagamet had better name recognition. If Pepcid had comein second, that would have been a challenge", she said.Small but powerfulBayer announced on 8 January that Actron was available in drug, foodand mass merchandise retail outlets throughout the US. Both versions ofketoprofen were approved for OTC switching by the Food and DrugAdministration on 6 October 1995 (OTC Business News Vol 2, Issue 32,page 3).Actron is being promoted in full-page newspaper advertisements in top20 markets and USA Today, as well as in television adverts featuringthe theme, "Actron. It's so small because it's so powerful."Bayer sees size as a key selling point - Actron is 7ml in diameter, atleast one-third smaller than (Whitehall's) Advil, (Johnson & Johnson's)Extra Strength Tylenol and Orudis KT tablets.The company is supplying a full array of promotional materials,including "Try Me Free" displays in many retail outlets. This willenable consumers to purchase one 24-tablet bottle with full-pricerebate during the introductory period.Gary Balkema, president of Bayer Consumer Care in the US, said thelaunch was the single biggest in the division's history."We're excited to be launching Actron because it represents ameaningful new choice in OTC pain relief", he commented. "Actron'spowerful medicine offers effectiveness against many types of pain. Andits unique size gives a new, tangible benefit for consumers: it's easyto swallow."Bayer appears to be counting on its Aspirin legacy to give the newbrand vital leverage in the analgesics market."With Bayer Aspirin, this company brought the first branded analgesicto the consumer marketplace almost 100 years ago. Now with Actron,we're poised to significantly impact the analgesics category again aswe approach the 21st century", Mr Balkema said.A recent survey conducted by Bayer found there was "more than enoughroom in the very competitive OTC analgesics market for a differentiatednew entry like Actron", he added.Unmet needThis study confirmed that 89 per cent of American adults suffer fromaches and pains each year but more than a third of these do not atpresent take medication to help relieve the pain. The average adultspends one of every five days - or a total of more than two months eachyear - in pain, the survey found."Because analgesics can work differently in many individuals, we thinkoffering Actron as a new choice with ketoprofen in a unique new sizewill go a long way towards serving unmet consumer need", Mr Balkemaasserted.Merck & Co's comments on Pepcid AC were made to securities analysts on12 December 1995. Ms Lewent said the brand was the leading US acidrelief product with a market share of 22 per cent at the end ofNovember, successfully thwarting the challenge from Tagamet HB.SmithKline Beecham maintains, however, that its product is performingextremely well in the US market. Analysts' estimates put Tagamet HBsales at around $3 million per week, only slightly behind Pepcid AC.Ms Lewent presented Nielsen data indicating that Pepcid AC climbed tothe number one spot in the $1 billion antacid market within one monthof its OTC launch in June 1994. When Tagamet HB was subsequentlyintroduced in mid-August, it leapt to number one, the Nielsen datashowed.Pepcid AC regained the lead in late September and was holding onto itas of 25 November, the Merck official said.According to the Nielsen data, Tagamet HB then dipped to third place -just behind SB's older antacid, Tums - with about a 13 per cent marketshare. J&J/Merck's Mylanta held just over 10 per cent of the segment.Most successful OTC?Ms Lewent described Pepcid AC as "the most successful launch in US OTChistory. The big initial push ... for Tagamet HB was the direct resultof very heavy couponing", she noted."The significant market expansion that we are seeing validates thetheory that bringing an established prescription product with asignificant franchise into the OTC market can transform the marketplaceand revitalise growth", the Merck official told analysts.Pepcid slightly widened its lead in the week ended 2 December 1995,according to the company's figures. The brand's most recently quotedmarket share was 24 per cent compared with 12 per cent for Tagamet HB.Despite the strong initial sales, Merck & Co does not expect to seesubstantial profits from Pepcid AC until the end of the decade becauseof heavy promotional spending, Ms Lewent said.Back to Headline List CopyrightOTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SB BUYS INTO GERMAN MASS MARKETSmithKline Beecham prepared for Christmas by fattening up its GermanOTC business with a DM203 million ($142 million) agreement to purchaseAbtei Pharma-Vertriebs GmbH, a distributor of vitamin and mineralsupplements (VMS) and natural remedies.The acquisition sees SB widen its consumer healthcare interests inGermany - previously centred on oral care and the pharmacy sector - totake in grocery outlets, where Abtei is the leading OTC presence,SmithKline says.Assuming approval by the Federal Cartel Office, the transaction willalso make SB the leading consumer healthcare company in Germany, itadds.Based in Bielefeld, Westphalia, Abtei is a family-owned concern foundedin 1972 (although the Abtei brand dates back to the last century). Ithas a workforce of 125. Last year Abtei registered sales of DM130million compared with DM110 million in 1994.The company's product range includes vitamin and mineral supplements,natural medicines, dietary products and skincare. Around half of itsportfolio is licensed medicines and the rest food and vitaminsupplements.Abtei holds a 20 per cent share of a German OTC grocery market valuedat DM550 million (manufacturers' selling prices).Oral care profileTo date, SmithKline has been associated mainly with oral care inGermany, and it is the market leader in this category, the companynoted. Its existing German subsidiaries are Lingner & Fischer, whichsells oral hygiene products, and Fink, ranked sixth in the pharmacy OTCmarket.This latest acquisition will boost SB's share of the German healthcaremarket by 25 per cent.Abtei will both complement and consolidate SmithKline's pharmacy VMSbusiness, which includes leading brands such as Eunova multivitamins,Cetebe (vitamin C) and Granufink for urological indications, offeringpotential to divert SB pharmacy brands through Abtei's grocery channelsand visa versa.The move into the mass market does not signal a particular Europeanstrategy but is rather country-specific, and reflects Germany'spropensity for preventative healthcare, SB told OTC Business News.However, Peter Jensen, chairman of SmithKline Beecham ConsumerHealthcare Europe, said the OTC division would undertake "a fullanalysis of the market opportunity for the (Abtei) products acrossEurope and elsewhere"."With the increasing consumer awareness of positive "well-being"healthcare and with ageing populations in the developed world, weconsider that natural medicines and health supplements have tremendouspotential for expansion, and our track record has demonstrated SB'sability to reach the target consumers', he commented.SB estimates the European OTC grocery market at #1.5 billion "andgrowing".No short-term changesSmithKline will retain the Abtei brand and says it does not plan anyshort-term changes in the German company's operations. It has givenundertakings to consult Abtei's management on any future restructuring.Manufacturing for Abtei is contracted out, and these arrangements willremain in place after the acquisition.The German company had been looking for a partner to help it expandfurther on the domestic and international health shop and pharmacymarkets, said managing director Andreas Sarhage.SB had the resources to support Abtei on the medical and scientificfront, and to bolster its international product development, he added.The deal suggests that relatively modest, targeted acquisitions are theway into the German OTC market, which is regarded as somewhatimpenetrable.Boots Healthcare International has made no secret of its ambition tobuy up a German OTC presence but to date has cited price levels as apersistent deterrent.Back to Headline List CopyrightOTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996FEMSTAT SECOND SWITCH FOR PROCTER-SYNTEXProcter-Syntex is preparing a spring launch for its second prescription-to-OTC switch, Femstat 3 vaginal cream (butoconazole nitrate 2 percent).Cleared for OTC use by the Food and Drug Administration on 27 December1995, Femstat will be the first and only three-day treatment forvaginal yeast infections available without a prescription in the US,said Procter & Gamble, which will market the product to physicians andother health professionals as well as direct to consumers.All of the current OTC options for vaginal yeast infection requireseven days of treatment, P&G noted, adding that clinical trials hadshown Femstat 3 to be as safe and effective as Johnson & Johnson'sMonistat 7, the leading brand in an estimated $250 million US marketfor OTC vaginal antifungals (IIR retail figures, November 1995).Butoconazole nitrate was first launched on prescription in 1986 and hasbeen marketed as a three-day regimen by Syntex (now part of Roche) asFemstat and Femstat Prefill. The US patent on butoconazole for fungalinfections expires in March 1997; Procter-Syntex will now gain threeyears of marketing exclusivity for Femstat 3.Prescription Femstat will be withdrawn from the US market once its OTCderivative is launched, P&G said.The non-prescription version was developed by The Procter-Syntex HealthProducts Company, the US joint venture that brought its first switch,Aleve (naproxen sodium), to market in June 1994. Femstat will bemanufactured for OTC sale by Roche.An NDA for the prescription-to-OTC switch was filed with the FDA on 20December 1993. Because the safety and efficacy data were comparablewith seven-day OTC yeast treatments, Femstat 3 did not have to undergoadvisory committee review, P&G told OTC Business News.Creams preferredFemstat 3 will be available in US pharmacies, drugstores, supermarketsand mass merchandise outlets in a 5g prefilled disposable applicator,with three applicators packaged together as a per-day treatmentregimen. The cream will also be sold in a 20g tube packaged with threedisposable cardboard applicators.According to P&G, its research indicates that more than 50 per cent ofwomen would rather buy vaginal creams than suppositories. "This playsout in the marketplace, where nearly 70 per cent of OTC vaginal yeastinfection products sold are in the form of creams", the companycommented.It stressed that Femstat 3 is for treating the recurrent symptoms ofpreviously diagnosed vaginal yeast infection: first-time sufferersshould consult a doctor.A physician should also be contacted if there is abdominal pain, feveror a foul-smelling discharge; if the infection does not clear up inthree days or symptoms return within two months; or if the suffererthinks she has been exposed to the HIV virus.Women who are (or believe they may be) pregnant should not use Femstat3, the labelling points out. The product is also contraindicated inwomen who are HIV-positive, diabetics and girls under 12 years old.Clinical evidenceMore than 13 million women worldwide have been treated withbutoconazole nitrate for vaginal yeast infections. In 45 clinicalstudies involving a total of 5,289 patients, the drug-related incidenceof local adverse reactions (eg, burning and itching) with butoconazolewas equivalent to that of Monistat 7, P&G said.Two controlled clinical trials conducted in support of the switchapplication showed that a three-day regimen of butoconazole nitrate 2per cent (more than 300 patients were evaluated) was as safe andeffective as seven days of miconazole nitrate 2 per cent cream(Monistat 7, also tested on more than 300 patients) in combatingvulvovaginal candidiasis when assessed at eight and 30 days post-treatment, the company added.According to P&G, the incidence of vulvovaginal candidiasis in the USnearly doubled between 1980 and 1990, to 13 million cases per year.Handsome payoffVaginal antifungal switches have paid off handsomely in the US. Thefirst such product to reach the market, Schering-Plough's Gyne-Lotrimin, grew from a $27 million brand prescription to generate $115million in OTC sales.However, Gyme-lotrimin is now relegated firmly to second place in theOTC vaginal antifungal segment, with a market share of 15.7 per centcompared with Monistat's 49.9 per cent.Back to Headline List CopyrightOTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ASTRA WEIGHS UP BUDESONIDE OPTIONSAstra Pharmaceuticals has yet to decide on an OTC marketing strategyfor budesonide, the corticosteroid that was cleared for UK sale as apharmacy-only medicine for hayfever by the Medicines Control Agency atthe end of last year.Astra confirmed that a budesonide licence had been issued but would sayno more as yet about how it might proceed with a P version. The companydoes not have an OTC division.The approved indication is for the prevention and treatment of seasonalallergic rhinitis in adults and children aged over 12 years (OTCBusiness News Vol 2, Issue 29, page 7).Astra sells budesonide on prescription in the UK for the treatment ofperennial, allergic and vasomotor rhinitis in nasal aerosol and nasalspray formulations (as Rhinocort and Rhinocort Aqua respectively). TheUK P licence is for non-aerosol administration.Back to Headline List CopyrightOTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NEW DRUGSTORES FORMAT PAYING OFF AT LLOYDS?Despite a 3.5 per cent decline in like-for-like sales by its troubleddrugstores division in the second quarter, those stores alreadyoperating under the new health and beauty format "registered highernumbers of customers and increased sales" against the same quarter of1994, said Lloyds Chemists.The UK company took a #13.4 million provision last year to reorganiseits Supersave chain, which recorded a #3.7 million loss before tax inthe year to June 1995 compared with a #1.2 million profit in 1993/94(OTC Business News Vol 2, Issue 33, page 8).The re-think involved closing more than one third of the Supersaveoutlets, converting some of them into the more fruitful Holland &Barrett format (like-for-like sales up 10.3 per cent in the secondquarter), and incorporating some 175 stores into the chemists divisionwith a health and beauty profile.Without adjustment for closures, drugstore sales were down by 29.1 percent in the first and 45.9 per cent in the second quarter of 1995/96.In the half year to December, sales through the drugstores fell by 37.9per cent to #29.6 million (the like-for-like decline was 6 per cent).The overall picture was happier for Lloyds: total sales rose by 2.4 percent and 2.1 per cent in the quarter and half year respectively. Like-for-like sales in the chemists division were 5.9 per cent ahead (+0.9per cent in the first quarter), with growth in both prescription andcash sales.Back to Headline List CopyrightOTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BELGIAN INDUSTRY FEARS BLOCK ON ADVERTSOTC companies in Belgium fear the new system of approval for televisionand radio advertisements may be so restrictive that many adverts willnever reach the screen.The system, introduced last year to bring Belgium into line with theEuropean Union's advertising Directive (92/28/EEC), means OTCmanufacturers can now legally advertise their products nationwide,formalising what had already been common practice at regional level.But advertisements must be approved before they can be broadcast. A newbody, the Commission de Controle de la publicite des medicaments(commission for the control of medicines advertising), is charged withvetting adverts and then making recommendations to the Minister ofPublic Health on whether they may be screened (OTC Business News Vol 1,Issue 23, page 1).During its first two months of operation, the commission is believed tohave given positive recommendations on several advertisements. However,the Minister may still disregard the commission's advice and refuse togrant screening authorisations.Ministerial oppositionFears that this might happen have been given credence by recentministerial statements voicing opposition to any advertising of OTCproducts on television. One industry source commented that thegovernment may do everything in its power to make advertising asdifficult as possible.But with the first advertising 'visas' likely to be granted within thenext few weeks, the Belgian pharmaceutical industry association, AGIM,is adopting a "wait and see" approach.The new procedures are likely to continue coming under attack from OTCcompanies, which object in principle to the prior approval requirementfor advertisements.And, as a Belgian source noted, the system is a headache for companiesthat want to run pan-European advertising campaigns.The costs of the vetting procedure, which are met by prospectiveadvertisers, have also come under fire - particularly the charge ofBFr25,000 ($846) for the renewal of a two-year advertising licence.As the source commented: "It's just a question of putting the rightstamp on the right papers."Back to Headline List CopyrightOTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996IBUPROFEN AND CLOTRIMAZOLE NOW OFFICIALLY GSLIbuprofen and topical clotrimazole are now formally cleared for generalover-the-counter sale in the UK.Amendments to the General Sale Order releasing the ingredients frompharmacy-only (P) control in specified strengths and quantities wentthrough on 29 December 1995, taking effect from 1 January 1996.This was despite strong reservations voiced by UK pharmacists and theirrepresentatives, who have raised concerns about unsupervised use ofibuprofen and clotrimazole leading to drug interactions or serious side-effects in special cases such as asthmatics.The amendments were put out for consultation last summer afterpharmacists' hackles were raised by a temporary GSL approvalunexpectedly granted to Galpharm's 200mg ibuprofen tablets (OTCBusiness News Vol 2, Issue 26, page 1).Pharmacist resentment has already prompted two companies to backtrackon plans to launch GSL versions of ibuprofen, although CrookesHealthcare (Boots), the UK brand leader with Nurofen, has held firm toits intention of entering the grocery market.In September Zyma Healthcare (Ciba), which had already secured atemporary exemption from pharmacy-only status, decided to restrict itsibuprofen brand, Proflex, to pharmacy distribution. SubsequentlyDendron announced that it would maintain its topical ibuprofen,Ibuleve, as a pharmacy-only product.The UK Medicines Control Agency (MCA) recently held out an olive branchto pharmacists by proposing to establish a standardised P-to-GSLprocedure, similar to that already operating for POM-to-P switches -although this concept is opposed by the OTC industry on confidentialitygrounds (OTC Business News Vol 2, Issue 33, page 10).GSL specificationsThe GSL amendments specify that ibuprofen for oral administration mustbe limited to adults and children aged over 12 years, and that: theindications are for rheumatic and muscular pain, backache, neuralgia,migraine, headache, dental pain, dysmenorrhea, feverishness andsymptoms of cold and influenza; the maximum dose is 400mg; and themaximum daily dose is 1200mg.The 12 years and over stipulation also applies to topical ibuprofenwhen on general sale. Additional restrictions are that the indicationsare for relief of rheumatic pain and muscular aches, and of pains andswellings such as strains, sprains and sports injuries; the maximumstrength is 5 per cent; the maximum dose is 125mg; and the maximumdaily dose is 500mg.GSL clotrimazole is limited to external use. The indication must be forathlete's foot and the maximum strength 1 per cent.The MCA has also specified maximum pack or container sizes for the newGSL medicines: 12 X 200mg units for oral ibuprofen; not more than 2.5mgper pack for topical ibuprofen; and not more than 500mg per pack fortopical clotrimazole.Questioned wisdomJohn Ferguson, secretary and registrar of the Royal PharmaceuticalSociety of Great Britain, questioned the wisdom of adding furthermedicines to the General Sale List.UK law recognised that the public should have ready access to informedadvice when considering whether to use a non-prescription drug, hesaid, adding that this was particularly important for people sufferingfrom certain medical conditions and for pregnant women.Citing concerns about ibuprofen's potential to provoke asthma attackseven at low doses, he asked who would offer advice on side-effects ordrug interactions "at the supermarket checkout or garage forecourt".Moreover, Mr Ferguson said, he could not see the justification forwider availability of clotrimazole, as athlete's foot was unlikely torequire urgent attention. There was also a risk of people buying GSLclotrimazole products to treat other fungal infections, "for which, inlaw, they would still need to be obtained from a pharmacy so thatprofessional advice would be available"."This is a serious issue with implications for the management andenforcement of the licensing of medicines in this country. The Societyis looking for clarification on how the government intends to ensurethat conditions attached to the licences for these products areenforced", Mr Ferguson stated.The MCA insisted, however, that the patient information leaflets (PILs)now mandatory with new or amended medicines licences would provide abuffer against misuse. Licensed GSL medicines are obliged to carrysafety information either on packaging or a PIL.The licensing authority has also cleared for general sale a higher doseof folic acid (500mcg as opposed to the current ceiling of 400mcg); andvarious minor ingredients such as benzoin tincture compound in pastilleform, equisetum, magnesium alginate, choline bitartrate, capsicumoleoresin and capsicum (water soluble).Nurofen imminentThe MCA has seen a growing number of applications for GSL ibuprofen.Crookes Healthcare told OTC Business News that it obtained a temporaryapproval for Nurofen (ie, by the same route as Galpharm) in the week of12 December 1995.GSL Nurofen will be on the shelves soon, the company said. The patientleaflet will include full information on side-effects andcontra indications, in line with the provision for P Nurofen, it added.Branded versions of 1 per cent clotrimazole on the UK OTC market areBayer Consumer Care's Canesten Cream and Crookes Healthcare's morerecent line extension, Mycil Gold Clotrimazole.Both companies, however, said they had no current plans to move theirproducts into the GSL sector.An application to market GSL clotrimazole was made by Scholl ConsumerProducts, which already sells a range of treatments for athlete's footin the UK containing 1 per cent tolnaftate.The company confirmed to OTC Business News that it had secured approvalfor GSL clotrimazole, and said it was reviewing whether to take thelicence further. A decision is expected shortly.Back to Headline List CopyrightOTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996WHICH? SLAMS PHARMACISTS AGAINWhich? magazine has once again taken UK pharmacists to task over theirsupervision of pharmacy (P) medicine sales.In their latest snap survey, the Consumers Association (CA) researchersfound that nearly half the pharmacy staff approached "sold the wrongdrugs or failed to give the right advice", Which? said.The CA has decided to oppose any further prescription-to-OTC switchesuntil it is confident that its concerns about P medicine supervisionhave been fully addressed.Although the issue has been bubbling under since Which? ran its lastcritical report in June 1994 (OTC Business News Vol 1, Issue 1, page14), this was the second time in less than a month that consumerresearch had cast doubt on the protocols for P medicine salesintroduced at the beginning of 1995.Shortly before Christmas, a radio broadcast by the BBC consumerprogramme, You and Yours, drew similarly damning conclusions aboutprotocol adherence after running tests at 40 pharmacies around the UK.But pharmacy representatives, while admitting that some of the findingsare cause for concern,have attacked the surveys as failing to graspthe realities of the pharmacist/consumer relationship.Nurofen testFive (anonymous) Which? researchers were sent to 10 pharmacies aroundthe UK with specific brand or treatment requests as well as a preparedhistory of symptoms and concomitant drug use.With Crookes Healthcare's Nurofen, the test was predicated on thepotential of ibuprofen to interact with methotraxate, a prescriptiondrug for psoriasis, or to aggravate the symptoms of asthma.The researcher was told to say, if asked, that she did not suffer fromasthma but was taking other medication. If further questioned, she wasinstructed to say she was on methotraxate.Seven out of 10 pharmacies wrongly sold the researcher Nurofen, Which?reported. In two of these no questions were asked, while in one a salesassistant enquired whether the customer was on medication but did notask what it was, and subsequently sold her Nurofen.In three of the outlets the pharmacist was involved in the interactionand was aware that the researcher was taking methotraxate, but stillsold her Nurofen. The researcher was asked if she suffered from asthmain six of the pharmacies.The pharmacist was alerted to the request for a P medicine in only fiveof the eight cases where the researcher was served by a salesassistant, Which? added.These findings are particularly worrying in view of the decision toallow ibuprofen to go on general sale, the magazine commented (seeseparate story on page 6).It agrees with the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain(RPSGB) that ibuprofen should remain subject to pharmacist supervision."However, our research shows that, even in pharmacies, it's often beingsold without these safety checks", Which? said.Crookes Healthcare, noted that the failings highlighted by Which?largely concerned pharmacy assistants. The issue of P medicinesupervision was being looked at constantly, and the company would workto ensure both that assistants understood their role and that this rolewas made easy for them, it said.Canesten let-downThree versions of Bayer's Canesten are available across the pharmacycounter in the UK: a 500mg clotrimazole pessary and a 10 per centcream, both for the treatment of vaginal candidiasis (thrush); and a 1per cent cream, for the external treatment of fungal and candidal skininfections.Bayer recently supplemented these with the Canesten Combi pack (onepessary plus a tube of 1 per cent cream) for treating both the causeand symptoms of thrush.First-time sufferers should be referred to a GP before being soldCanesten or other OTC products for thrush. "If there are other symptomsthat are not the normal symptoms of thrush, like pain in the lowerabdomen, there could be a more serious problem, such as pelvicinflammatory disease, which would need treatment by a GP", Which?noted.The magazine's researcher asked for Canesten by name but did notspecify which version she wanted or what it was for. She was detailedto say, if asked, that she had not used Canesten before, nor hadexperienced these symptoms previously. If referred to the pharmacist,the researcher was to say (again, if asked) that she had not consultedher GP and that the symptoms included lower stomach pain.In only one out of 10 cases was the researcher referred to her GP -after the sales assistant serving her had consulted the pharmacist. Inthe one instance where she was served by the pharmacist, the researcherwas asked about her symptoms and described lower stomach pain, but wasnot referred to a doctor.In nine out of 10 cases the researcher was not asked whether she hadused Canesten before. Two of the pharmacy assistants asked no questionsat all before selling the product, Which? found.In five cases the only question asked by the sales assistant waswhether the customer wanted Canesten cream or pessary. In six cases theresearcher was sold the Canesten 1 per cent cream, "which is the leasteffective preparation for treating thrush", the magazine said.Which? described its findings as "deplorable", commenting that "staffin all but one of these pharmacies let their customers down badly".Bayer Consumer Care said it had recognised ever since the original OTCCanesten was launched that the product required proper consultation.The company had invested a "huge amount of time and money" in trainingcourses and distance learning packs for pharmacy staff.Bayer ran its own anonymous survey at around the same time as the firstWhich? report and discovered some confusion in pharmacies about whichversion of Canesten to sell. The company had stepped up its training atthat point and would be doing "more of the same", it told OTC BusinessNews.It noted that the new Canesten Combi pack, which it says is the mostappropriate format for treating thrush, is performing very well andappears to be clarifying the issue of product choice for pharmacists.Tagamet betterTagamet 100 fared somewhat better, although there was "still plenty ofroom for improvement", Which? cautioned.The exercise was again premised on the potential for drug interactions- in this case with the anti-asthmatic, phyllocontin. It also picked upon fears that indigestion in the middle-aged and elderly may be apointer to gastric cancer.The researcher, a middle-aged man, was detailed to tell the pharmacistor sales assistant that he had not taken Tagamet before nor hadpreviously suffered from indigestion. This was his first attack and ithad been coming and going for a week.If asked about other medication, the researcher was to mentionphyllocontin. "The pharmacist should have told him to go and see hisGP. In the meantime, he should not have been sold Tagamet - if any drugwas suggested, it should have been an alternative", Which? said.In the event, only two out of 10 pharmacists sold the researcherTagamet 100 - one without asking any questions and the other despitebeing told that the customer was on phyllocontin. Seven pharmacistsoffered an alternative to the brand and one refused to sell any drug,telling the researcher to see his doctor immediately.Five of the pharmacists instructed the researcher to see a doctor ifhis symptoms persisted. But in four cases the pharmacist failed to askwhether the customer had suffered indigestion before and did not referhim to a GP.Diarrhoea/hayfeverAnother Which? researcher asked for advice on how to treat diarrhoea.If questioned, he described symptoms that had persisted for a few weeksand told pharmacy staff he had recently visited South East Asia - atwhich point, Which? said, "he should have been sent to a doctorimmediately. Oral rehydration salts might have helped but anti-diarrhoeal drugs would not have been much use."The researcher was "asked all the relevant questions" and told to see aGP in seven out of 10 cases. In one other instance he was told to visithis doctor if the symptoms did not abate.In two of these eight cases the pharmacist or sales assistant refusedto sell the Which? researcher any medicine. In four cases he was soldoral rehydration salts, in one Imodium (a prescription-to-OTC switch ofloperamide), and in another both Arret (also loperamide) and oralrehydration salts.In two cases the customer was not referred to a GP and was simply soldImodium.A hayfever enquiry was designed to test whether someone taking theantidepressant, amitriptyline, would be steered away from Triludan(terfenadine), since the two drugs in combination can aggravate heartproblems.The researcher sought a recommendation for hayfever and in five out of10 cases, the sales assistant failed to establish that another drug wasbeing used.Triludan was sold in five cases, in two of these despite the pharmacistknowing that the customer was taking amitriptyline. The sales assistantdiscussed the request with a pharmacist in six cases.Pharmacists in crisis?Under the headline "Pharmacists in crisis", Which? commented: "We havecriticised pharmacists in the past for failing to protect consumersfrom the dangers of non-prescription drugs. Unfortunately the serviceis still not measuring up ... and now it matters more than ever.""More and more drugs are coming off prescription and being heavilypromoted by the drug industry", Which? said. "At the same time, over-secretive licensing laws do not allow the public to know whether suchmoves are safe for consumers."Which? encouraged consumers, in the absence of intervention, todescribe their symptoms to pharmacists as well as any action taken andwhether they were already on medication or had a pre-existing medicalcondition.This advice was welcomed by the RPSGB, which in a statement noted thatpharmacists trying to implement the new protocols "meet with resistanceand in some cases even hostility from some customers who do not wish todiscuss their symptoms".The pharmacists' body did not agree, however, with all the conclusionsof the Which? report, saying: "In some cases the report had beencritical of the level and content of advice given and of the provisionof products that it would have been perfectly proper for the pharmacistto supply in all circumstances."In fact, the survey showed that "the public could have confidence inthe service provided by pharmacists, who in order to help them providethe best service were now clearly asking for more information frompeople requesting a medicine by name", the Society maintained.It was concerned, however, by the cases where pharmacists appeared tobe asking no questions at all.Professional judgmentRoger Odd, head of the RPSGB's practice division, said pharmacists hadto make their own assessment of specific cases, in the same way asdoctors. The P medicine protocols were there to provide guidance only.Nonetheless, the Society is reviewing the protocol situation to makesure pharmacy staff are aware which questions they should or should notbe asking, Mr Odd told OTC Business News. But the RPSGB does notanticipate amending the guidelines in the light of the Which? report.The Society's position was supported by Boots The Chemists (BTC), thelargest pharmacy chain in the UK - although it noted that no Bootsoutlets were mentioned in the Which? report."The introduction of new protocols in all Boots pharmacies, backed upby intensive training of all our pharmacy and healthcare staff, is amajor priority for us and we invest in excess of #4 million per year onHealthcare training", BTC stated.It also stressed that pharmacists had to use their professionaljudgment rather than automatically running through a list of questions.Customers give out "visual signals" in their interaction with counterstaff, and quite often these will be at least observed by a pharmacist,commented public relations manager Sharon Buckle. Moreover, ifconsumers asked for a specific product, they need not necessarily bequizzed on whether they had taken it before.The feedback from BTC's own stores and customers was that thepharmacist's role was highly valued, Ms Buckle told OTC Business News.Back to Headline List CopyrightOTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996GERMAN PHARMACY SALES UP 3.7 PER CENTThe German market for OTC medicines sold via pharmacies grew by 3.7 percent to DM7 billion ($4.9 billion) between September 1994 and August1995.Direct supply by manufacturers bypassing wholesalers accounted for 14.9per cent of the sales by value and 22.5 per cent by volume, accordingto data given in the annual report of Anzag.In its pharmacy business the German wholesaler focuses particularly onthe OTC sector and is hence facing competition from manufacturers thatopt for direct delivery of non-prescription drugs.However, direct OTC business in Germany declined by 1.4 per cent to DM1billion at manufacturers' prices last year, Anzag said.Overall, the pharmaceutical wholesale market expanded by 7.2 per centto DM27.3 billion (excluding value added tax) in the year to August1995, according to Anzag's figures. Growth was more pronounced ineastern Germany (up 8.2 per cent to DM5.1 billion) than in the westernpart of the country (DM22.2 billion, +6.9 per cent).Anzag's shareAnzag's share of the total wholesale market stands at 16.1 per cent. Itexpects to see its turnover lift by 3-4 per cent in the currentfinancial year, as the German market recovers from the negative impactof the healthcare reform legislation introduced in 1993.The company recorded profit after tax of DM32.3 million in 1994/95 -slightly down on the DM33 million achieved in the previous year - onturnover of DM4.06 billion.Peter Haac, chairman of the Anzag board, said the company would furtherdevelop the marketing services it offers to pharmacists.Of the 8,000 pharmacies supplied by Anzag, 2,000 make use of thecompany's marketing package, which combines the delivery of selectedOTC medicines, display materials and customer leaflets with Anzag'sadvertising campaigns.Anzag has been beefing up its OTC advertising strategies since 1994,mostly through pharmacy displays but also in the print media.Back to Headline List CopyrightOTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996GROWTH SLOWING IN UK MEDICATED SKINCARE?The UK market for medicated skincare products is maturing, and growthis expected to slow from an impressive 39.2 per cent in 1990-1994 tofive per cent in the years to the end of the decade.UK sales reached #89 million in 1994 and should climb to #95 million bythe year 2000, according to a new report by MarketLine, GlobalMedicated Skincare.The surge in value during 1990-94 was largely driven by acne remediesand therapeutic moisturisers, respectively the largest (37.6 per centof total sales) and second-largest (30.5 per cent) segments of themedicated skincare market, MarketLine says.Therapeutic moisturisers have been particularly dynamic, growing by acumulative 81.3 per cent over the five-year period, but both categorieshave been gaining market share at the expense of antifungals, anti-itching products and haemorrhoid treatments.MarketLine gives the following estimates for sales and growth bycategory in 1990-94:UK Medicated Skincare Market by Sector1990-1994 Value vs Growth              Sales (# million)             % compoundCategory      1990  1991  1992  1993  1994  annual growthAcne remedies 23.4  25.0  26.3  31.8  33.5        9.4Antifungals    7.5   8.2   8.3   8.2   8.3        2.6Anti-itching   7.0   8.2   8.4   8.5   8.6        5.3Therapeutic   15.0  18.9  22.9  25.4  27.2       16.0moisturisersHaemorrhoid   11.1  11.3  11.4  11.4  11.5        0.9preparationsTotal         64.0  71.6  77.3  85.3  89.1        7.4In the acne remedies segment, Clearasil is the brand leader in aconcentrated market where the top three manufacturers account for morethan 90 per cent of sales."Smaller brands are suffering as a result of strong brand recognitionof the major acne remedies and the heavy advertising used to supportsuch products", MarketLine comments.It adds that market concentration and the brand loyalties built upamong teenagers generally make for rather static brand shares.Share of UK Acne Remedies Sector byCompany and Brand 1994Brand               Company               % market shareClearasil           Procter and Gamble       32Ultra               Procter and Gamble       28Biactol             Procter and Gamble       16Oxy                 SmithKline Beecham       17Tri Ac              Elida Gibbs               2Phivohex            Sterling (now SB)         1Wimpharm            Sterling (now SB)         1DDD                 Dendron                   1Others                  -                     2Clearasil, Biactol and Oxy are all advertising heavily to build marketshare, the researchers note. They give the following data onadvertising expenditure in the UK medicated skincare market during 1993-94:Advertising spend (#'000)Brand                  1993    1994   1994 share (%)Biactol Facewash      1,646   2,229            31.7Clearasil               901   1,602            22.8 Cleansing LotionClearasil Cream         707    N/A              N/AClearasil Ultrasound    247    N/A              N/A CreamDettol Liquid           556   1,191             16.9Oxy 10 Cream          1,304     770             10.9Preparation 10          334     516              7.3 OintmentSavlon Range            647     726             10.3Total                 6,072   7,034             100Source: Register-MEAL, MarketLineMarketLine believes therapeutic moisturisers will remain the mostenergetic segment of the UK market over the next five years."Growth in this sector will be due mainly to a move towards premiumproducts", the researchers predict.Sluggish performersThe most sluggish performers will be acne remedies, because of a lackof new products in this area, they say.Forecast Value of Medicated Skincare Market 1995-2000                Sales (# million)  % annual growthCategory        1995      2000        1995-2000Acne remedies   33.5      34.4            0.5Antifungals      8.3       8.6            0.7Anti-itching     8.7       9.0            0.7Therapeutic     28.4      31.0            l.8 moisturisersHaemorrhoid     11.6      12.0            0.7 preparationsTotal           90.5      95.0            1.0For more information on Global Medicated Skincare, contact RichardJames at MarketLine, 16 Connaught Street, London W2 2AF, UK. Tel: 0171794 2770.Back to Headline List CopyrightOTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996FDA APPROVAL FOR ZANTAC SWITCHGlaxo Wellcome's Zantac is poised to become the third H2-antagonistoption for US consumers in the OTC market for heartburn.The Food and Drug Administration approved OTC Zantac late last year andthe product will be launched sometime during the first quarter of 1996.It will be marketed as Zantac 75 (ranitidine hydrochloride 75mg) byWarner Wellcome Consumer Healthcare in packs of four, 10, and 20tablets.Zantac was the third H2-antagonist to be approved for OTC use by theFDA during 1995: Johnson & Johnson/Merck's Pepcid AC (famotidine) wascleared on 28 April and SmithKline Beecham's Tagamet HB (cimetidine) on19 June.Warner Wellcome is confident, however, that a late start will not deterit from becoming the market leader."The world's leading prescription H2-antagonist over the last fiveyears is now poised to take its rightful place in the over-the-counterheartburn market", said Robert Casale, vice president, gastrointestinalmarketing.$250 million potentialZantac has generated 200 million prescriptions in the US since 1983 andWarner Wellcome expects the OTC version to be among those drugs mostfrequently recommended by pharmacists.The product could bring in sales of around $250 million by the end ofthe decade, according to UK analysts Paul Krikler and Mark Tracey ofGoldman Sachs International.They believe Tagamet HB sales in the US are running at "a spectacularrate of $3 million per week", slightly behind Pepcid AC."Broadly speaking, these products have expanded the roughly $1 billionUS market for OTC acid-disease remedies by around 40 per cent to 50 percent since their launch earlier this year. We expect further sharegains for these newer products, although this may increasingly come atthe expense of the non-H2-antagonist therapies", the analysts comment.The Zantac 75 launch will be propelled by the biggest marketingcampaign in Warner Wellcome's history. US advertising is being handledby J Walter Thompson.The OTC joint venture expects to repeat its success with Zantac 75 inthe UK market, where sales have overtaken both Pepcid AC and Tagamet100 despite Zantac being introduced almost a year later than itscompetitors.By its fifth month on the UK market, Zantac had captured a 50 per centshare of the OTC H2-antagonist segment.Consumer expectationMr Casale noted that US sales of OTC stomach remedies over a 22-weekperiod rose by 27 per cent after the H2s became available withoutprescription. "We expect that growth will continue with theintroduction of Zantac 75", he said."Our research has shown that heartburn sufferers are looking forward tobuying a product with the characteristics of Zantac 75: wideacceptance, prescription heritage and familiarity. We expect that highconsumer expectation will translate into even higher retailerexcitement", Mr Casale commented.The recommended dose for adults and children aged 12 years and over isone 75mg tablet, not to exceed two tablets in 24 hours. Zantac 75 willhave no interaction warnings (unlike Tagamet HB) and, when used asdirected, can be taken at the maximum dose daily for up to two weeks.The Zantac 75 approval came just as Warner-Lambert signed a letter ofintent to purchase Glaxo Wellcome's interest in the Warner Wellcomejoint venture for $1.05 billion (OTC Business News Vol 2, Issue 36,page 1).The companies are also restructuring their marketing alliance for GlaxoWellcome's prescription-to-OTC switches, including Zantac. Profits andmarketing costs will continue to be split 50:50, with Glaxo Wellcomereceiving a royalty on sales.Back to Headline List CopyrightOTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996FDA FINAL MONOGRAPH UPDATEThree final OTC drug monographs were published by the US Food and DrugAdministration during l995.These were for the categories of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency(adopted 24 April); cough/cold combinations (27 July); and otic -swimmer's ear (16 August).Several monographs are expected to come up by spring of this year.These include documents on antidiarrhoeals, laxatives, anticaries,antiflatulents and poison treatments.Monographs on skin protectants, weight control products and internalanalgesics are also expected to be finalised sometime in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightOTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996SIX US SWITCHES IN 1995The US Food and Drug Administration was remarkably active in approvingprescription-to-OTC switches during l995.Six prescription drugs, the largest number in over a decade, weregranted approval to switch to OTC status. 1996 also looks promising, asfour drugs have been recommended for OTC switching by FDA advisorycommittees.Stomach remedies led the switch list in 1995, with three winningapproval, followed by two internal analgesics and one treatment forvaginal yeast infection.Drug/       Brand         Company           Advisory     FDAdose        name                            Approval     approvalStomachremediesFamotidine  Pepcid AC     J&J/Merck         29/7/94      28/4/95-10 mg upto 20 mg/dayCimetidine  Tagamet       SmithKline        27/3/95      19/6/95-200mg up   HB            Beechamto twicea dayRantidine - Zantac 75     Warner            13/7/95      19/12/9575 mg up to               Wellcometwice a dayInternalanalgesicsIbuprofen    Children's   McNeil            28/3/95      16/6/95suspension   Motrin       Consumer-7.5 mg/kg                Productsup to twicea dayKetroprofen  Orudis       Whitehall         14/7/95      16/10/95-12.5 mg     KT           Robinsevery 4-6hours        Actron       BayerAnticandidaButoconazole Femstat 3    Procter &          N/A         26/12/95nitrate - 2%              Gamblecream andapplicators(3 days)Four drugs have been recommended for approval and are awaiting FDAaction. These are:* Axid, Eli Lilly's H2-antagonist for heartburn (nizatidine 75mg,licensed for OTC sale to Whitehall Robins), recommended for approval on28 September 1995.* Nicorette, SmithKline Beecham's nicotine gum (2mg and 4mg, licensedfrom Pharmacia & Upjohn), recommended on 28 September 1995.* Pharmacia & Upjohn's hair regrowth treatment, Rogaine (minoxidil 2per cent), recommended for approval on 17 November 1995.The dandruff shampoo, ketoconazole, is also awaiting FDA approval. Itwas cleared for switching by the agency's advisors on 16 February 1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightOTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996FDA SITS OUT GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWNThe US Food and Drug Administration's OTC drug office had a remarkablyquiet Christmas holiday season. No announcements were made, no meetingsscheduled, no rules promulgated and no enforcement actions reported.But the inactivity was not, as many thought, a symptom of the historicUS government shutdown, which affected the Department of Health andHuman Services.History the reason"History is the reason", explained Don McLearn, FDA deputy associatecommissioner  for public affairs.The agency's budget falls under the Department of Agriculture, one ofthe few departments to receive an appropriation, and the FDA has hencebeen fully operational.While the agency's positioning within the executive branch has beenaltered to the relevant departments of health (Health, Education andWelfare - now the Department of Health and Human Services), its budgethas stayed under agriculture.The powerful chairs of the Congressional agricultural appropriationscommittees have fought successfully over the years to retainjurisdiction over the FDA budget - primarily to ensure that the agencywould remain concerned with food adulteration and insecticides.Essential employeesMr McLearn seemed pleased to explain the FDA's budgetary history ratherthan answer the many enquiries he has received about the "essentialnature" of its employees.The government shutdown required essential workers to report to theiragencies while others were furloughed.The FDA's critics apparently thought the budget standoff gave them achance to learn how many of the agency's employees were 'inessential'.Back to Headline List CopyrightOTC BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996WHOSE STANDARDS? ADVERTISING IN SOUTH EAST ASIAIf the growth surge in South East Asia has created a ready market forpremium-priced western OTC brands, reaching the consumers with newmoney in their pockets can be an uphill struggle.It is not just a question of geography and the unevenness ofdistribution routes across the region. Multinationals complain thattheir competitive edge in what consultant Nicholas Hall calls the"world's fastest growing OTC market" is blunted by cumbersome,unpredictable and paternalistic controls on advertising.In common with other regions where a western-style OTC sector is onlyjust beginning to coalesce, and 'self-prescription' is rife, there arewide divergences in both the range of products that can be advertisedto the public and the claims that can be made on them.But one consistent feature of the South East Asian markets is apreference for pre-vetting of OTC adverts.Marketers of international brands claim these systems are non-transparent (and, by implication, protectionist), bureaucratic andcorrupt, with some adverts taking anything from two to eight months togain clearance: a potentially disastrous scenario when it comes toscheduling product launches.It was hardly surprising, then, to see so much energy spent at theWFPMM's 2nd Asia Pacific Regional Meeting in Bangkok on promoting thekind of self-regulatory and message-led framework now installed in themajority of western markets.Different priorities?It could be argued that the health authorities in Thailand and otherSouth East Asian countries have different priorities from theircounterparts in the more developed OTC markets - that what appearspaternalistic in Western eyes is inextricable from issues of education,awareness, wealth distribution and regulatory enforcement.As Margaretha Helling-Borda, director of the World HealthOrganisation's (WHO) Action Programme on Essential Drugs, said inBangkok, self-medication is about a "whole matrix" of socio-economicand health factors affecting purchase.Some, however, view the advertising restrictions in South East Asia asbureaucracy pure and simple.One country manager commented to OTC Business News: "In my opinionexternal factors such as literacy are not a barrier to a more liberaladvertising environment. Instead, the bureaucracy ... is locked inregulations which relate to historical accident more than any realisticassessment of the level of development of consumers."Moreover, there is a fear that governments in South East Asia mayoffset encouragement of self-medication with demands for comprehensiveadvertising information on ingredients, usage, side-effects, etc, underthe influence of the WHO's ethical criteria for drug promotion - takingthe opposite path from European countries that have moved to eliminatefull disclosure requirements.The international industry says the WHO guidelines were formulated bydoctors and largely for doctor, not consumer, promotion. And theprevalence of doctor dispensing in South East Asia means the professionhas a direct financial stake in resisting any swing to self-medication.Against disclosureThe arguments against full disclosure were marshalled in Bangkok byPeter Glynn-Jones, chairman of the WFPMM and managing director,strategic development for SmithKline Beecham Consumer Healthcare.OTC advertising can at best convey one or two messages such as the nameand function of the product, he said. Research proves that it is "justnot possible" to inform consumers about contra indications or side-effects through adverts, Mr Glynn-Jones maintained.Last August the Pharmaceutical Producers Association of Thailand (PPA)sponsored an advertisising research project at the ChulalongkornUniversity Faculty of Communication Arts. This found that Thaiconsumers responded favourably to an "always read the label" directionon adverts for SmithKline Beecham's cold remedy, Contac 400.Two other versions of the ad carried either no written instruction orthe full text of labelling for Contac 400 (which is a prescription-onlymedicine in Thailand).On a mean scale, the "read the label" version drew the most positivereaction in the poll, in which each advert was viewed by 200 out of atotal 600 selected Bangkok residents of mixed age, income, education,etc.Nonetheless, 83 per cent of all the respondents saw advantages inhaving written texts in OTC adverts (52 per cent of these because they"provide the right way to take a medicine"), while 72 per centidentified disadvantages (39 per cent of them because of "too muchinformation").This suggests avenues for further research on exactly how muchinformation is desirable in advertising. At the same time, theresearchers found that 97 per cent of the Bangkok poll obtained medicalinformation through reading product labelling.Carte blancheAt present Thailand has no full disclosure requirement for OTCadvertisements. But the broad regulatory authority invested in the ThaiFood and Drug Administration is seen as giving the agency carte blancheto clamp down on the expressive devices - music, testimonials, 'before'and 'after' images, depictions of discomfort - conventionally employedby OTC advertisers in the west.Exacerbating these restrictions, local sources say, is a refusal toconsider precedents when reviewing advertising applications. Moreover,any problems that emerge must be cleared up before the FDA will proceedwith the review, adding months to the approval timetable.At the same time, OTC Business News was told, some companies sidestepthe controls by advertising live on radio in rural areas. "Theinternational companies feel bound to obey the regulations but thelocal companies are more entrepreneurial", one executive commented.From a multinational perspective, the Philippines offers the mostpalatable system. Again there is pre-control but it is administered bya review board that includes representatives of advertisers as well asconsumer groups, and works with predetermined criteria (eg, are theclaims technically supportable, in good taste, non-disparaging).The board meets several nights a week and reviews are generallycompleted in a single session. An appeals procedure is available ifobjections arise once the advertisement has gone public.Otherwise experience is mixed. Singapore and Malaysia are regarded asrelatively unproblematic, with similar committee systems to thePhilippines if a slightly less brisk turnover of applications. Vietnamdoes not regulate veracity or accuracy of advertising content butapplies 'political' censorship.The divergence of allowable claims or images - for example, an advertfor a stomach remedy may conclude with a smiling customer in onecountry and impassively in another if 'relief' cannot be shown -inevitably adds to the cost of reworking material from market tomarket.Longer-term dividendsFor those manufacturers that can build brand loyalty in South EastAsia, the longer-term dividends could be substantial.Addressing a meeting last summer of the Proprietary MedicinesAssociation of Australia in Canberra, Mr Hall, chairman and chiefexecutive officer of Nicholas Hall and Company, predicted that thetotal OTC market in South East Asia would double to around $6 billionby 2004, with growth (from a relatively small base) of 305 per cent inChina and 211 per cent in Indonesia.A recent report by Euromonitor estimates that the market has expandedby 46 per cent since 1990, with the Philippines showing the fastestrate of growth (132.3 per cent) followed by Thailand (110.7 per cent)and Indonesia (80.9 per cent).But it would take a hardened optimist to expect any rapid shift towardsa harmonised environment for OTC advertisers in South East Asia. As yetthere is little indication of any regional pattern in drug regulatorytrends.For example, Singapore's move to switch some 80 medicines fromprescription- to pharmacy-only status, and to make an even larger groupavailable for general sale, appears an isolated case. In other SouthEast Asian markets the tendency is still to restrict fairly routine OTCingredients to prescription-only use.One problem, local observers say, is the insularity of drug regulatorsin the region. And since the OTC market is as often as not something ofan undefined quantity, there is little incentive to look at how itoperates in other countries.Moreover, the kind of state-funded healthcare systems that are nowweighing heavily on government finances in Europe have not been thenorm in South East Asia, so there has not been the same economicrationale for stimulating self-care.A standardised split into prescription and non-prescription drugcategories might clear some space to define new rules for advertisingOTCs. But the adoption of anything approaching European-styleclassification could be years away.The Thai regulators, for their part, show little sign of modifying thecountry's two-stream system of 'dangerous' and 'non-dangerous' drugs.Non-dangerous products are effectively OTC in Thailand, since they canbe advertised to the general public. But the PPA would rather see aseparate category for self-medication, with formalised procedures foradvertising, labelling, packaging and patient information.Industry observers say the 'dangerous' classification is a misnomer aslong as products such as oral contraceptives and psychotropics arefreely available in Thai pharmacies.Global harmonisation?Even in the European Union, where the advertising Directive (92/28/EEC)adopted in 1992 has generally liberalised the conditions for OTCmarketers, some member states such as Belgium have clung onto their pre-control authority in regulating adverts for OTC medicines (this was oneelement that the Directive left to national discretion).Summing up the European regulatory achievements in Bangkok and notingtheir considerable impact on legislative reform in Central and EasternEurope, Dr Hubertus Cranz, director of the European OTC association,AESGP, asked if these experiences might not be applied on a globalscale.In the past, harmonisation in the self-medication market has beencomplicated by the strong influence of traditional medicines, Dr Cranzcommented. However, over the last decade the balance has tipped towardsmore 'international' OTCs, particularly in the light of consolidationwithin the industry and the large market shares captured byprescription-to-OTC switches.Dr Cranz suggested that a viable route to worldwide harmonisation mightbe standard-setting through guidelines that could be used as the basisfor national procedures. The WFPMM had long since embarked on thisprocess, through its Guidelines on Drug Promotion.But it was particularly important that the political climate was rightfor broadening the context of harmonisation, he added. "Therefore it issignificant that the WHO recently reinforced its position on theimportance of responsible self-medication and enlarged its statementson the appropriate use of non-prescription medicines", Dr Cranz said(see OTC Business News Vol 2, Issue 29, page 15).Nonetheless, he was cautious about the prospects for harmonisation ofadvertising regulations.A great deal of research has been conducted on "reasonable" rules foradvertising OTC products and in particular on the information that canbe conveyed through adverts, he noted."Again, in the sense of standard-setting, it might be worth takingsuch rules as a basis for considerations in countries which have often,due to their tradition, been more restrictive", Dr Cranz proposed.But, he went on to state, there are "certainly many areas in theregulatory environment of non-prescription medicines which are notsuitable for harmonisation; particularly evident are the areas ofdistribution of OTC medicines ... or the systems controlling public OTCadvertising."A similarly pragmatic line was taken in a panel discussion by Dr JeromeReinstein, director general of the WFPMM, who advised againstdeveloping countries moving immediately to a self-regulatory system ofadvertising control.This required the agreement of trade association members to a set ofstandards and codes, and some industry associations were not yet strongor unified enough to achieve this, he commented.(So far Australia and New Zealand are the only countries in the AsiaPacific region that have a discrete OTC industry association - Ed).Moreover, governments in emerging OTC markets must feel that "industryhas earned the right to self-regulation", Dr Reinstein said.Gulf in interestsThe issue is further muddied by the gulf between local andmultinational interests in `developing' markets.One illustration is the adoption of a self-regulatory Code of MarketingPractices by the Thai PPA in August 1994 (OTC Business News Vol 1,Issue 5, page 14).While the Code is undoubtedly closer to international practice (it is arequirement of WFPMM membership that member associations have their owneffective advertising code), its real impact is questionable. Not onlyare the guidelines more lenient than the government regulations inforce but around 80 per cent of the Thai OTC market is controlled bynon-PPA members.Many of these are local generic players that, over the years, arelikely to have found ways of working with the pre-control system. Themultinational industry is now focusing on issues of product quality andinformation provision in a bid to assert the superiority of its brandsover generic competitors.A similar national/multinational split is seen in the Philippines,where one local company holds around 25 per cent of the OTC market.However, in Indonesia the local industry association has agreed tocollaborate with international companies - a far cry from a few yearsback when the multinationals were not even allowed to attend localassociation meetings.The Thai PPA also reports some positive signals from the Bangkokmeeting, with Food and Drug Administration officials requesting copiesof presentations and talking about the need to look at OTC developmentsin other markets. A new, younger head of the FDA appointed last October(Prof Dr Pakdee Pothisiri) is seen as another harbinger of a moreinternational mindset.Education or persuasion?The drive towards regulatory harmonisation in Europe was largely amatter of market access - the free movement of goods as laid down bythe Treaty of Rome. How much, and indeed whether, consumers benefitfrom a broader range of OTC products depends on assumptions about theirability to make informed choices, with appropriate steerage frompharmacists or, in some cases, doctors.These issues are more sharply defined in South East Asia, particularlyas in Indonesia, for example, pharmacies are relatively thin on theground and an estimated 35-40 per cent of OTC sales go through non-drugoutlets (see OTC Business News Vol 2, Issue 35, page 19).Mary Murray, who has worked on national drug policies in Australia andother Asia Pacific markets, warned at the WFPMM meeting that manyconsumers in developing countries do not recognise symptoms and rely onthe family unit for guidance. Moreover, both literacy and healthknowledge decline in line with economic status.And Janne Graham, former chairwoman of the Consumers' Health Forum ofAustralia, said recent research in her home country revealed thatpeople living just above the poverty line had to make "real choicesbetween medicines and food on a daily basis".On the contrary, Steven Grossman, senior vice-president and director ofhealth policy at US advertisers Hill & Knowlton, saw health awarenessbenefiting from a more liberal advertising climate."I believe that the sophistication of American consumers about healthmatters is a result of advertising, not, as some would have it, aprecondition of allowing advertising to occur", he told the meeting.Mr Grossman went on to argue that wide availability coupled with broadpublic knowledge of OTC medicines was likely to check inappropriateusage - and keep prices down."Even when a primary goal of an advertisement is the creation ofimmediate product demand, it is usually consistent with public healthgoals because the advertising directs the consumer to a product thatresolves their health concern in a safe and effective manner", he said.Mr Grossman cited a 1992 survey by the Heller Research Group for the USNon prescription Drug Manufacturers Association, which found that nearlyseven out of 10 respondents preferred, if at all possible, to combatsymptoms without recourse to medication; and that close to nine in 10US consumers knew medicines should only be taken when absolutelynecessary.Co-regulation?But a more co-operative approach to squaring corporate and consumerinterests in OTC advertising was suggested by the Australian system ofpre-clearance.The committee that assesses compliance with the Proprietary MedicinesAssociation of Australia's (self-regulatory) Code of Conduct is chairedby an independent lawyer, with consumer and pharmacy representativessitting alongside delegates from the Therapeutic Goods Administrationand the drug industry - not "a committee of our mates", commented PMAApresident David Stephens.Health consumer groups in Australia had been "naturally suspicious"about pharmaceutical industry associations monitoring their ownmembers' compliance with advertising requirements, Ms Graham noted.Moreover, "there is a real risk from the consumer view that memberswill simply resign to avoid sanctions under the code and that outlieror 'rogue' companies simply will not join", she said.Two factors, however, had raised confidence in the Australian system,Ms Graham told the meeting: scrutiny of the PMAA Code of Conduct by theTrade Practices Commission, which resulted in "the widening ofinterests but, most particularly, those of the consumer" on thecompliance committee; and the annual public reporting of complaints andoutcomes.The co-regulatory spirit manifested in this system and bodies such asAustralian Pharmaceutical Advisory Council (APAC) was borne out inrecent discussions over indirect advertising of non-sedatingantihistamines.In this case, both industry and consumer groups saw the value of'generic' public advertising - with an "ask your chemist" message - toraise awareness of a more advanced treatment option, Ms Grahamexplained. (The products' Schedule 3 (pharmacy-only) status did notpermit advertising to the general population.)It was agreed that a set of guidelines on indirect adverts should beincorporated into the PMAA Code of Conduct and, to provide regulatoryballast, eventually be taken up by the Therapeutic Goods Act.Here, then, was an instance of industry and consumers moving in tandemto secure mutual benefit from OTC advertising - and pre-empting theAustralian licensing authority, which has yet to respond.Back to Headline List WT03-B09-7IA087-000629-B020-253http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/me18.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035320 text/html 117180HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:51:12 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:52 GMTContent-length: 116992Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/me18.html Sample Issue Copyright PHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet January 17, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES EC FINES BAYER OVER ADALAT PARALLEL IMPORT BAN (879 words) HOECHST AND RPR FORM CENTEON (294 words) HOECHST RESTRUCTURING TAKES EFFECT (279 words) ALKERMES TO ACQUIRE MEDISORB (128 words) AMGEN AND SUGEN CONCLUDE RESEARCH COLLABORATION (139 words) BRACCO TO EXPAND EASTWARDS (93 words) RHONE-POULENC ISSUES PROFITS WARNING (333 words) SB INTEGRATES HEALTHCARE SERVICES (134 words) NEWS CHRIS EVANS SETS UP CEREBRUS (43 words) GLAXO WELLCOME ANNOUNCES LAUNCH OF BOND (72 words) BIOCOMPATIBLES TO ACQUIRE ATLANTIS CATHETER (26 words) IMMUNE RESPONSE TO MERGE WITH OCUREST (47 words) VERTEX EARNS $5 MILLION IN MILESTONE FEES (82 words) LEGALITY OF CSM'S ADVICE OVER PILL CHALLENGED (412 words) GERMAN WHOLESALERS EXPAND BUSINESS (372 words) GERMAN PHARMA GROWTH LAGS IN 1995 (391 words) FRENCH PHARMA INDUSTRY IS RESIGNED TO PARALLEL IMPORT THREAT (322 words) INSTITUT PASTEUR FIGHTS AGAINST BANKRUPTCY (293 words) FRENCH COMPANIES AWAIT PAYMENT FORMULA FOR LEVY (460 words) ITALIAN PHARMA INDUSTRY COMES UNDER RENEWED PRESSURE (601 words) EC MAY DROP ANTIBIOTIC CONTROLS (260 words) EU HELPS FIGHT DIPHTHERIA (232 words) PATENT EXTENSIONS OF DRUGS FOR PERIOD IN REGULATORY REVIEW (105 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW FDA ISSUES GUIDELINE ON NEW DRUG SUBSTANCE IMPURITIES (193 words) GLAXO WELLCOME TO BUILD NEW PLANT IN RIO DE JANEIRO (100 words) BRAZILIAN DRUG SALES UP28 PER CENT (171 words) ELI LILLY INVESTS $20 MILLION IN BRAZIL (175 words) BRAZILIAN MEDICINE PRICES INCREASE (164 words) SANOFI GAINS US RIGHTS TO PHOTOFRIN (254 words) JAPANESE FIRMS' INTERIM RESULTS (422 words) INDIA FINALISES DRUG PRICING BODY (137 words) NEWS PIRAMAL GROUP ACQUIRES SUMITRA (42 words) SPIC TO EXPAND ANTIBIOTIC PRODUCTION (140 words) LUPIN DEVELOPS OWN HIV TESTS (99 words) PHARMAC REVIEWS MEDICINES SUBSIDY POLICY (386 words) PROCEPT FORMS VACTEX TO DEVELOP TB VACCINE (301 words) ALLIANCE AND HMR COLLABORATE ON LIQUIVENT (194 words) AGOURON TO START NEW ANTICANCER DRUG TRIALS (229 words) BIOCRYST STARTS PHASE II TRIAL FOR T-CELL CANCER AGENT (270 words) THERATECHNOLOGIES' LEUKAEMIA RESEARCH GRANT (116 words) GENELABS DRUG STUDY (103 words) ERGOSET TRIALS (58 words) NPS DEVELOPING CALCIUM RECEPTOR TECHNOLOGY (121 words) SEPRACOR TRIALS ON ASTHMA DRUG (100 words) TRIAL OF TREATMENT FOR AIDS-RELATED KAPOSI (21 words) LAUNCH OF CARDIA SALT ALTERNATIVE (60 words) TRIAL OF VACCINE FOR PROSTATE CANCER (58 words) STUDY OF EXTERNAL GUIDE SEQUENCE (EGS) DRUGS (78 words) MORE HEART PROBLEMS FOR IMIGRAN (297 words) RANITIDINE FOR PSORIASIS (246 words) BIOADHESIVE TABLET FOR VAGINOSIS (101 words) MEDICINES MONITORING UNIT TO EXPAND POST MARKETING WORK (123 words) INFLUENZA VACCINE BENEFIT FOR ELDERLY CONFIRMED (85 words) CORTICOSTEROID CONTROVERSY HIGHLIGHTS BONE LOSS (161 words) BENEFIT IN GRAFT-VERSUS-HOST DISEASE (80 words) OFLOXACIN SEIZURE RISK WARNING (101 words) TAXOL INHIBITS BONE RESORPTION (90 words) BROMOCRIPTINE FAILS IN APHASIA (96 words) KW-4679 IN ALLERGIC RHINITIS (86 words) GAVISCON SCORES OVER ALGITEC (195 words) CI-988 IN ANXIETY - DISAPPOINTING RESULTS (92 words) ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE WARNING (153 words) CYTOKINES AS VACCINE ADJUVANTS (103 words) NEW FRAXIPARINE IN STROKE STUDY (715 words) ZENECA TO LAUNCH NISOLDIPINE IN US (347 words) LEUKOTRIENE ANTAGONISTS TIPPED AS ASTHMA MARKET LEADERS (174 words) P&U GETS FDA CLEARANCE TO MARKET NEW ANTIARRHYTHMIC (205 words) FDA APPROVES ORTHO'S RENOVA (461 words) SCHWARZ PHARMA LAUNCHES ONCE DAILY ACE INHIBITOR (72 words) MARKETING APPROVAL FOR ANTI-HIV DRUG ZERIT (66 words) NDA FOR ANTI-PARKINSON'S DRUG (95 words) UK LAUNCH OF FEMOSTON (59 words) CITY TALK (765 words) CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996EC FINES BAYER OVER ADALAT PARALLEL IMPORT BANBayer has fallen foul of EU competition rules for trying to impedeparallel imports into the UK of its big-selling antihypertensive Adalat(nifedipine). The European Commission imposed a fine of ECU3 million($3.5 million) on 10 January, after deciding that the Germanpharmaceuticals producer had infringed the EC Treaty.The Commission has been investigating trading practices among severalof the group's subsidiaries for some months now, and says that Bayerhas committed a serious infringement of Community law, going back tothe end of the 1980s. Bayer immediately said it would appeal.This was a classic example of a blatant attempt to limit parallelimports, explained the Commission as it announced the fine in Brussels.The prices for Adalat vary widely in the various Member States in whichit is marketed, but Adalat's largest market shares are in the UK, whereits price is considerably higher than in other Member States, notablyFrance and Spain, it said.Before 1989 in Spain and 1991 in France, the main customers of theFrench and Spanish subsidiaries of Bayer, ie the pharmaceuticalwholesalers in those Member States, used to order larger quantities ofAdalat than they required for supplying the domestic market, and theythen exported the surplus to other Member States, including the UK. Butas from early 1989, Bayer Spain set up a computerised system foridentifying exporting wholesalers, and was refusing to supply them withall of the quantities of Adalat which they ordered. In September 1991,French wholesalers also found that Bayer France was no longer preparedto supply them with their full orders. In the autumn of 1991, a BayerSpain executive visited the management of Bayer France, to explain howthis system worked (although in the event, the system set up by BayerFrance for identifying exporting wholesalers remained less elaborate:handwritten lists were drawn up specifying "do not supply" or "blocked"for certain orders) .Wholesalers in France and Spain continued to try to obtain supplies ofAdalat from Bayer over and above their domestic requirements, andreacted to the manufacturer's blacklisting by using various means tocamouflage their requests so they could continue exporting to the UK.In particular, wholesalers used a system of spreading orders intendedfor export between their various agencies. They also placed ordersthrough other, small wholesalers not subject to monitoring. The aim wasto appear to comply with Bayer's requirement that the product shouldnot be exported - but the subterfuges broke down on occasions, and whenone of the wholesalers was found to be exporting, Bayer France andBayer Spain imposed their own penalties, making successive reductionsin the volumes supplied."All these practices engaged in by Bayer France and Bayer Spain showthat they subjected their wholesalers to a permanent threat of areduction in the quantities supplied, a threat which was repeatedly putinto effect if the wholesalers did not comply with the export ban",says the Commission.It goes on to point out that the export ban was not just a one-offexercise, but formed part of the continuous commercial relationsbetween Bayer France and Bayer Spain and their respective wholesalers -relations that the wholesalers, both in France and in Spain, clearlyunderstood, as their conduct shows, says the Commission. This provesthat the company was operating an agreement in breach of Article 85(1)of the Treaty (which forbids such agreements flatly as being anti-competitive).However, the Commission has not imposed the maximum possible fine. EUrules allow it to fine offenders as much as 10 per cent of theirturnover of the product involved - which ECU3 million certainly is not.In an interesting aside, the Commission has acknowledged that indetermining the amount of the fine, it has taken account of the factthat pharmaceutical product prices are not set autonomously bycompanies, but are governed by the various relevant national rules andregulations. This is an unusual Commission admission of the fact thatcompanies do not necessarily have a level playing field.Bayer said within hours of the fine being announced that it would takelegal action in the European Court of Justice against the Commissiondecision. Bayer "has not categorically violated the legal provisions ofthe Treaties of Rome", it says, and "protests at the Commission'sunconventional legal stance in interpreting the anti-trust rules",which it brands "incomprehensible"."The Commission's aim is evidently to restrict Bayer's freedom todecide what quantities of products to sell to which businesses",complains Bayer, pointing out that compliance with the Commission'sdemands for full supply of all wholesalers' requests wouldautomatically mean parallel importers benefiting.At the same time as it rejects the Commission's interpretation of EUrules, Bayer also claims it has in any case not deliberately penalisedwholesalers, while acknowledging that some orders have not been filled."As far as capacities allow, Bayer supplies subsidiaries outsideGermany with Adalat or its active ingredient, nifedipine. Supplies aregenerally governed by the requirements determined and forecasted by thesubsidiaries for their local markets on the basis of past experience.In isolated cases, therefore, wholesalers who obviously order more thanthey require for the local market may receive lower quantities thanthey have ordered".Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996HOECHST AND RPR FORM CENTEONThe US dominant Rhone-Poulenc Rorer subsidiary Armour Pharmaceutical Coand the leading European Hoechst subsidiary Behringwerke AG have joinedforces in a 50/50 venture to form Centeon, a $1.2 billion new plasmaprotein therapies company employing 4,500 people worldwide to beheadquartered in King of Prussia, Pennsylvania.Centeon, headed by former Armour president John Sedor as CEO andHoechst managing board member Karl Seifert as chairman, is to becomethe largest single supplier of plasma derived products worldwide,supplying plasma proteins used in coagulation disorders, immunedeficiencies, wound healing, trauma and neurologic disorders. Centeonshould hold a 24 per cent share of the $5 billion plasma productsmarket, ahead of Baxter, Bayer, Green Cross-Alpha, Immuno and severalsmaller players, according to Mr Sedor.The collaboration has involved Hoechst and RPR contributing all theplasma protein assets of both Armour and Behringwerke's plasma proteindivision. Behringwerke will retain separate diagnostic and vaccinedivisions.Pooled research budgets of the current companies are to be doubled to$60 million enabling Centeon to increase investment in R&D andaccelerate the pace of new plasma-derived product development. Its sizealso means it can be the global leader in supplying the world's needsfor plasma products.Both companies are active in Aids research; new research areas thatCenteon will focus on include blood components, rDNA technology andgene therapy. Emphasis is to be on innovative therapeutics. The companysays it will provide viral safety by combining the largest and mostsophisticated commercial plasma collection and tracking operation inthe world with advanced technology for viral inactivation andpurification of products.Mr Sedor is predicting average annual sales growth for the company of 7-10 per cent, double the market's current 3-5 per cent growth rate.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996HOECHST RESTRUCTURING TAKES EFFECTThe global restructuring plans announced by Hoechst last December havenow been put into effect commencing 1 January. The plans include areorganisation of research activity, establishment of a drugdevelopment centre, a reduction in ingredient production, the sheddingof 8,000 jobs including 1,400 in Germany, and the adoption of amulticultural marketing approach. Integration between 1995 and 1998will cost an estimated $800 million but cost savings of $800million/year will be achieved by 1997 says the company with marketingand administration efficiencies saving $350 million, R&D $230 millionand manufacturing $20 million. A return on sales of 20 per cent isforecast for 1997/8 compared with 12 per cent in 1994 and Hoechst'spharmaceutical business in total is expected to contribute 27 per centof the company's DM15 billion sales.Research activity is to be based at four locations: Frankfurt,Romainville, France, Somerville, US and Kawagoe, Japan. Research willfocus on eight therapeutic areas; cardiovascular, metabolic disordersand rheumatology, infectious diseases, bone diseases, CNS, oncology andrespiratory disorders. Research centres at Cincinnati, US, Gerenzano,Italy, Strasbourg, France and Swindon, UK are to be closed and activitytransferred to the other sites. The natural product screening facilityin India is under review but a decision has been taken to continueresearch at HMR's combinatorial chemistry affiliate Selectide inTucson, US.Hoechst's stated aims are to cut costs and launch innovative productsrapidly, using novel marketing methods. Integration of Roussel Uclaf(56 per cent Hoechst-owned) should be complete by end 1996 and theexpected synergies, cost savings, higher sales and growth potentialfrom the acquisition of Marion Merrell Dow are expected to startbecoming apparent this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996ALKERMES TO ACQUIRE MEDISORBCambridge, Massachusetts-based company Alkermes Inc has announced itwill acquire the technology and assets of the controlled release drugdelivery leader Medisorb Technologies International of Wilmington,Ohio.In doing so, it will provide Alkermes with the wherewithal tomanufacture injectable sustained release formulations of traditionalsmall molecule pharmaceuticals, complementing Alkermes ProLease drugdelivery system for larger, complex biotechnology compounds.Alkermes aims to be the leader in injectable sustained drug delivery,said CEO Richard Pops last week, and the Medisorb acquisition will opennew large markets.The acquisition is to be financed by a combination of cash and futurepayments based on the successful commercial launch of productsincorporating Medisorb's technology, said a company statement. NoAlkermes stock is to be issued to finance the deal.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996AMGEN AND SUGEN CONCLUDE RESEARCH COLLABORATIONSugen Inc and Amgen have agreed to end a four-year researchcollaboration into neurobiology and haematopoiesis one year earlierthan planned.A change of research priorities for both parties have led to theamicable winding up of the project which was to have identified novelsignal transduction targets for certain neurological and haematopoieticdisorders, say the companies.Amgen will pay Sugen $2.5 million and grant back to Sugen exclusiveworldwide rights to 22 proprietary signal transduction targetsdiscovered during the collaboration, subject to royalty payments onfuture sales.Sugen is buying back from Amgen 235,000 shares at $11.48 per share. Thecompany develops small molecule drugs which interact with key signaltransduction molecules known as tyrosine kinases and phosphatases.Signalling pathways for the molecules are involved in a number of humandiseases including cancer and diabetes.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996BRACCO TO EXPAND EASTWARDSBracco, the Italian pharmaceutical company has announced it intends toexpand its Chinese and Russian interests this year. The company hasrecently been concentrating on penetrating the US market.Bracco, which last year purchased Squibb Diagnostics recently bought 15per cent of the shares of Esaote, a partly US-owned Italianpharmaceutical company, for #18 billion. Its 1995 sales should reachL1,600 billion, up from L1,142 billion the year before. Net profits for1995 are anticipated to be 40 per cent of sales of which 71 per centare derived from overseas business.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996RHONE-POULENC ISSUES PROFITS WARNINGHit by a number of negative factors, Rhone-Poulenc SA last week warnedof lower 1995 profits than forecast earlier. In 1994 the group reporteda net attributable profit of FFr1.915 billion and had hoped to post adouble-digit growth in 1995.Investment sentiment among sector analysts appears neutral to mildlypositive: some analysts expect a flat to negative outturn, others ahealthy increase. Analysts expect the company to report net profit for1995 of between FFr2 billion to FFr2.3 billion."The implication of RP's warning is that it made little or no profit inthe fourth quarter," commented one bearish analyst. Negative factorsare thought to have wiped out some FFr600 million of potential profitsin the fourth quarter - these included the slowdown in the Frencheconomy, the transport strike and provisions for the integration andrestructuring of Fisons, expected to exceed FFr100 million.Rhone-Poulenc Rorer separately announced that its 1995 results, due tobe released on 29 January, would be in line with the consensus ofanalysts' expectations, despite a one-off tax charge of around $20-25million. One analyst said he expected earnings per share of around$3.25, up almost 30 per cent on 1994's $2.50 per share." We are holdersof most French drug company stocks until we see what the impact is ofthe negotiations with the French government over a FFr2.5 billioncontribution sought from the industry to help cut the social securitydeficit."Still, French pharmaceutical companies will be cushioned to a greaterextent than foreign companies because of their higher domestic researchexpenditure. Although French drug companies account for a quarter ofthe total French pharmaceutical market, they are liable to just 15 percent of the total potential tax burden.A spokesman for RPR told PBN "we are confident that the businessoverall is going forward well." Details will shortly be unveiled on theintegration charge for Fisons and the structure and shape of its newly-enlarged asthma management business.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996SB INTEGRATES HEALTHCARE SERVICESSmithKline Beecham last week announced what it termed a majorinitiative to implement an integrated healthcare strategy, creating anew unit combining the company's varied healthcare services into asingle division called Healthcare Services.The new director Dr Tadataka Yamada, brings together the clinicallaboratories division, Diversified Pharmaceutical Services -thepharmaceutical benefit management company acquired last year for $2.3billion - Diversified Prescription Delivery, a mail order business, andthe recently formed Disease Management group.Said Jan Leschly, chief executive of SB: "Alternative solutions, thatcan deliver healthcare at lower costs without reducing quality, arebeing aggressively pursued on a global basis. By bringing togetherthese groups we can better meet our current customer requirements andat the same time build a stronger foundation for our expanding globalefforts in these areas."Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996CHRIS EVANS SETS UP CEREBRUSDr Chris Evans, the Welsh scientist/ entrepreneur who foundedChiroscience and Celsis in the UK, has now set up Cerebrus, aneuroscience research company. The company will develop its own drugdiscoveries but also intends to seek contract research work from othercompanies.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996GLAXO WELLCOME ANNOUNCES LAUNCH OF BONDGlaxo Wellcome has announced the launch of a $500 million fixed ratebond due 25 January 2006. The issue is priced at a spread of 48 basispoints over the yield on the 5.875 per cent US Treasury Bond dueNovember 2005. Proceeds are to be used to repay debts and for generalcorporate purposes, says the company. Lehman Bros and JP MorganSecurities Ltd are joint lead managers for the issue.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996BIOCOMPATIBLES TO ACQUIRE ATLANTIS CATHETERBiocompatibles International plc has announced it is to acquire theAtlantis Catheter Co of Sunnyvale, California and Galway, Eire forapproximately $17.5 million in Biocompatibles shares.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996IMMUNE RESPONSE TO MERGE WITH OCURESTImmune Response Inc has announced an agreement to merge with OcurestLaboratories Inc of Palm Beach Gardens, Florida. The combined companyexpects the transaction to be completed during the first quarter of1996 subject to shareholder and board approval mid-February, and willbe known as Ocurest Laboratories.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996VERTEX EARNS $5 MILLION IN MILESTONE FEESVertex Pharmaceuticals Inc says it earned $5 million in milestone andoption fees from Glaxo Wellcome and Kissei Pharmaceutical Co, Japan inQ4 of 1995 for its HIV protease inhibitor VX-478 currently in PhaseI/II studies at eight US and European Centres.Kissei has exercised its option to commercialise VX-478 in 15 Asianterritories in addition to China and Japan, including Hong Kong, thePhilippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam. Glaxo Wellcomeholds the rights for the rest of the world.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996LEGALITY OF CSM'S ADVICE OVER PILL CHALLENGEDThe Director of the University of Aberdeen's Medicines AssessmentResearch Unit is continuing to highlight the possibility that the UKCommittee on Safety of Medicines acted unlawfully in issuing advice todoctors concerning third generation oral contraceptive Pills and therisk of thromboembolism.Dr Andrew Watt has written to the chief executive of the MedicinesControl Agency (MCA), Dr Keith Jones, after failing to receive aresponse from the licensing authority to a letter he published in theBritish Medical Journal on 16 December. The BMJ letter pointed out thatthe committee had based its recommendation on hastily considered andincomplete data. It further suggested the CSM had exceeded itsauthority in advising prescribers because its remit is solely to advisethe MCA which as licensing authority should then take appropriateaction in revoking or amending product licences as seen fit. No suchaction was taken so, according to Dr Watt, the MCA must be assumed tohave considered the third generation Pill to be safe and the CSM couldarguably be said to be acting unlawfully in overriding the Agency'sjudgment by going direct to prescribers with advice.In his letter to Dr Jones, Dr Watt accuses the Licensing Authority andthe Committee on Safety of Medicines of unnecessarily disrupting thelives of one and a half million women and of actions "which do notappear fully to have met the highest standards of behaviour either inrespect of law or science".A statement issued to the press last weekend calls on the MCA todemonstrate its confidence in the CSM by taking appropriate licensingaction or by stating publicly its lack of confidence in the advice.Dr Watt whose University is conducting research work on unconnectedproduct areas for Wyeth ( manufacturers of the gestodene-containingoral contraceptives Minulet and Triminulet) says his interest in theissue stems from a previous position studying the role of the CSM. Hehas however disclosed that he has worked briefly as a consultant forone of the Pill manufacturers concerned.If Watt's point is shown to carry weight it could conceivably benefitoral contraceptive manufacturers if they were to take legal actionagainst the UK Regulator. The three month time limit for seeking ajudicial review however runs out on 18 January. As PBN went to press,none of the three companies Schering, Wyeth and Organon had taken afinal decision on whether or not to seek a review.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996GERMAN WHOLESALERS EXPAND BUSINESSGerman pharmaceuticals wholesaler Anzag expects business to improveconsiderably in 1996 and results to be as good as those achieved beforethe introduction of the healthcare system's reform in 1993. "Weenvisage between 3 per cent and 4 per cent growth in turnover," said MrPeter Haac, chairman of the Anzag board.In the business year 1994/1995 (September to August), the companyrecorded turnover of DM4.06 billion. From January to August 1994, whenAnzag changed its report period, it had achieved turnover of DM2.5billion. After-tax profits were DM32.3 million, while in the firsteight months of 1994, they totalled DM22.2 million. The companybenefited considerably from the unexpected upswing in the Germanpharmaceuticals wholesale market. Between September 1994 and August1995, the combined market volume of all pharmaceuticals wholesalersrose 7.2 per cent to DM27.3 billion. In western Germany, the increasewas 6.9 per cent totalling DM22.2 billion, and thus less pronouncedthan in eastern Germany, where 8.2 per cent growth to DM5.1 billion wasrecorded. Anzag maintained its market share of 16.1 per cent.Mr Haac said the company will continue to develop its marketingservices to pharmacies, mainly in the self-medication sector. Anzagplans to expand into new markets, particularly in eastern Europe.Anzag's competitor Phoenix has taken another step to strengthen itsposition within Europe. The company signed a letter of intent toacquire a 52 per cent stake in Italian Comifar. The Mailand-basedwholesaler achieved turnover of around DM500 million in 1995 and holdsa market share of 20 per cent. According to Phoenix, Comifar is one ofthe major pharmaceuticals wholesalers in northern Italy.Phoenix is already present in Italy through stakes it holds inCommercio Ingrosso Medicinali (CIM). Perugia, Societa AdriaticaMedicinali (SAM) in Paese and P Felletti Spadazzi, Padua. IncludingComifar, the Italian companies of the Phoenix group would achieve acombined annual turnover of DM1 billion. Phoenix is also active inFrance, Poland, the Netherlands, Austria, Hungary and the CzechRepublic and, again with Comifar, forecast a combined foreign turnoverof DM4 billion for 1996.The group holds a 30 per cent share of the German pharmaceuticalswholesale market and achieved domestic turnover of DM7 billion in 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996GERMAN PHARMA GROWTH LAGS IN 1995Following a strong first half of the year, growth in the Germanpharmaceuticals market slipped "perceptibly" in the second half of1995, according to the industry association Bundesverband derpharmazeutischen Industrie (BPI).Against the background for statistical aberrations due to the Germangovernment's switch to EU-compatible reporting methods, BPI said itexpects full-year figures to show production up 4 per cent and sales topharmacies up by just over 6 per cent. This would bring results backinto line with 1992 and 1994. The improvement is attributed in majorpart to higher growth rates in eastern Germany and steady demand fromabroad in the first half year. Business in western Germany continued todecline throughout 1995, resulting in negative production growth forthe full year.Along with restrictions on prescribing mandated by the German healthministry, the strength of the Deutschemark also affected adversely theperformance of German pharmaceutical producers in 1995, said BPI.Led by anti-infectives (up 15.5 per cent) in the wake of an influenzaspell and the launch of new products in the first year, sales ofpharmaceuticals to German chemist shops rose by nearly 7 per cent fromJanuary to November to reach a value of DM21.6 billion. Blood productssaw growth of 13 per cent, urogenital and CNS preparations 8.5 per centand 8.6 per cent respectively, respiratory drugs 8.1 per centcardiovascular medications 3.3 per cent, digestion aids 4 per cent andmuscular-skeletal drugs 2.1 per cent.After increasing 8 per cent in 1993 and 12.6 per cent in 1994, exportsales rose by only 6 per cent in the first eight months of 1995, thelast period for which the organisation has figures. However, importsgrowth also slackened to 9 per cent in the January-August time frame,after expanding by one third in 1994. BPI estimates that producerselling prices eased forward 0.2 per cent in 1995 following the end ofthe price freeze agreed with the health ministry. In 1993, pricesdeclined 3.6 per cent and in 1994 by 1.2 per cent.According to the federal office of statistics, employment in the Germanpharmaceutical industry fell by 1,600 in the first nine months of 1995.However, BPI believes the decline for the full year could be greater,due to ongoing restructurisation procedures at drug producers since1993.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996FRENCH PHARMA INDUSTRY IS RESIGNED TO PARALLEL IMPORT THREATThe European Commission's decision to go ahead allowing wholesalerswithin the union to import pharmaceuticals from Spain and Portugal hasraised some fears of the French industry being undercut. Last autumn,the Paris authorities sought to extend the period of protection foranother two years, but failed. There is a chance that France, and theother nine countries opposed to this particular liberalisation will goto the European Court of Justice. But a senior French official pouredcold water on this idea, saying that the decision was more a politicalthan legal matter.The ban on Spanish and Portuguese drugs went back 10 years, to the timewhen these countries joined the European Economic Community (as it wasin 1985) but did not have proper patent legislation, allowing localpharmaceutical manufacturers to copy molecules without havingcontributed to the research costs. They became subject to legislationin 1992, and the commission set a three-year transition period, whichexpired on 31 December 1995.The French industry sought to console itself with the thought that mostIberian production was now licensed, and that in general it was onlyabout 15 per cent cheaper than French production, which did notnormally justify the trouble of importing. Only a few specific drugs,which were significantly cheaper than 15 per cent, were likely to beaffected, indicated one specialist. The impact of the change was likelyto be much greater in other countries such as Germany or Holland - thelatter having pharmaceutical prices on average some 75 per cent higherthan Spain.Another expert noted that pharmaceuticals were relatively cheap inFrance, compared with other European countries, and that France tendedto export them towards its northern neighbours. But the new rules couldundermine these sales.The European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industry Associations hasestimated that opening the Spanish border could cost its members some$2 billion a year in lost turnover.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996INSTITUT PASTEUR FIGHTS AGAINST BANKRUPTCYThe Institut Pasteur de Lyon has succeeded in raising FFr10 million($2.02 million) additional finance to keep going - a matter of daysbefore it was due to go into formal liquidation. Of the additionalmoney, FFr8 million ($1.62 million) will come from the state, whileFFr2 million ($404,000) will come from the national research institutesCNRS (Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique) and INSERM(Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale).But the money is not quite the end of the Institut Pasteur'sdifficulties. It still needs a further FFr4 million to keep its 107-strong research team running for a full year - long enough to put itsrescue plans into action. Pasteur Lyon's president, Christian Dutreuil,was confident the money could be found "from a few additional sources".The rescue plan involves transferring the 140-strong hospital biologysection to Hospices Civils de Lyon. The 125-strong commercial section,which carries out analyses, is going into partnership with FoundationMerieux. And to raise the funds to pay for some 82 redundancies, aswell as paying off an accumulated debt of FFr20 million ($4.04million), the institute has arranged a property deal with the regionalblood transfusion centre, which would buy part or all of Pasteur Lyon'sbuilding in the centre of the city, and rent it to the institute.Institut Pasteur has lost its lawsuit alleging three patentinfringements by Cambridge Biotech concerning Cambridge's HIV-1 westernblot confirmation test.The US bankruptcy court for Massachusetts has declared a non-exclusivepatent license to be in effect between the two companies as of 1January covering the HIV-1 test. In September the court ruled Cambridgehas a valid licence under two of the Pasteur patents covering HIV-2.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996FRENCH COMPANIES AWAIT PAYMENT FORMULA FOR LEVYThe formula for paying the special contribution of FFr2.5 billion thatthe French pharmaceutical industry is having to make this year towardsreducing the national health insurance deficit will be officiallyannounced by the government on 17 January, when a Cabinet meeting isdue to approve the final text of the executive order. The formula isbeing negotiated between the Syndicat National de l'IndustriePharmaceutique (SNIP), the industry federation, and Health Ministryofficials; neither side is prepared to make any official comment aboutthe content of their discussions at present.However, some pointers to the way each company's contribution will becalculated have leaked out and given rise to what SNIP calls "pressspeculation". The talks appear to be moving towards the adoption of aformula composed of three components. Almost half the surcharge, FFr1.2billion, would be raised through a tax on any increase in companiesrevenues in 1995. However, those companies whose revenues rose by lessthan 3 per cent (or less than 4.5 per cent in the case of those thathave signed conventions with the government on the limitation of theirdrug sales) would be exempt. Others would be liable to pay theequivalent of 25-30 per cent of the growth in turnover between 3-6 percent and 50-60 per cent on any increase over 6 per cent.In addition, there could be an exceptional increase in the special taxon pharmaceutical companies' advertising and marketing outlays from 9per cent to 14 per cent this year, which would generate an additionalFFr500 million.Finally, some FFr700-800 million would be raised through a 1.5 per centsurtax on companies' total revenues, less R&D outlays.Whatever the amounts due by companies under these different headings,no company will have to pay in total more than the equivalent of 6.5per cent of its 1995 turnover. The government order is expected torequire all companies to file an assessment of what they owe by 1April, with payment to be made by 31 August.The government is introducing all its planned social security reformsby means of executive orders, which circumvent normal legislativeprocedures. Five are to be promulgated over the next few months andmust be ratified en bloc by parliament by 31 May at the latest. Theywill provide successively for: the introduction of a new contributionto pay off the accumulated debts of the social security system over themedium to long term; the implementation of short-term measures forbringing social security income and expenditure into balance in 1996-97(which includes the pharmaceutical industry's contribution); reform ofthe health insurance system and its administration; hospital reform;and new measures for controlling healthcare costs by establishingguidelines for good medical practice.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996ITALIAN PHARMA INDUSTRY COMES UNDER RENEWED PRESSUREA further drastic reduction in state reimbursement for medicines thisyear has been approved in a government Finance Bill amendment by theItalian parliament. The sudden and surprising move, hotly contested bythe pharmaceutical industry, is likely to force major changes in theclassification of reimbursable medicines and, according to theindustry, will accelerate its decline.The legislative action follows a government decree to write off costoverruns in government reimbursement for medicines for 1995. The L9,000billion ceiling forecast for 1995 was exceeded by L700 billion.Parliament has called for a similar spending cap during the government1996 Finance Bill debate and to ensure a chance of succeeding hasattached an amendment stating that reimbursements will be based, as ofApril, on the cost of the cheapest medicines in the same classadministered by the same route. Until now, reimbursements were allowedregardless of cost.The legislative move has created confusion, if not panic, within theindustry because, in effect, it means medicines costing more than thecheapest ones in their class may no longer be marketable.In addition, the amendment also calls for physicians to inform patientsprescribed a more expensive alternative that government will reimburseonly the cost of the cheapest drug of its type available for theirmedical condition. In effect it would mean that most prescriptions willbe for the cheapest medicines since it seems unlikely patients wouldwant to pay the difference for medicines considered of equal efficacy.Most will opt to change brands.Italy's pharmaceutical industry association, Farmindustria hasresponded with a sharp, so far futile, protest, threatening to withdrawaltogether from the National Health service and the reimbursementscheme.Farmindustria has claimed that medicine prices in Italy, are now 31 percent below that of the European Union average, with prices forced todrop by 20 per cent in the past four years despite 18 per centinflation in the same period. In addition, according to Farmindustria,in the past 12 months medicine prices dropped by 7 per cent, whileinflation remained at 6 per cent and production costs soared (25 percent for glass, 39 per cent for packaging, 6.5 per cent for rubber and4.7 per cent for labour)."Under these conditions, "Farmindustria declared, "companies can nolonger guarantee necessary standards, and many are being forced to haltinvestment in Italy."Although 1995 figures are not yet available, Italy's pharmaceuticalindustry stood alone among all industrialised nations in showing adecline in both production and revenues during 1994. Much of this isattributed to diminishing government subsidies, which declined from apeak of L14,000 billion four years ago to the ceiling of L9,000 billionin 1995. The ceiling is expected to remain the same in 1996.At the same time, Parliament is also calling for the possibleintroduction of generic medicines in an attempt to further reducegovernment spending on medicines and for a 50 per cent discount oncertain drugs for specific diseases.As supposed compensation for reduced government spending on medicines,the prices of some Class A and Class B medicines are to increasebetween 2.5 per cent and 5 per cent in 1996. But Farmindustria saidthere would be no real increase since prices would merely return totheir 1994 levels.Industry sources are consoling themselves with the hope that theparliamentary amendment may be subject to further debate in a futureparliament. The life of this legislature, although elected less thantwo years ago, is on a tight-rope and early elections are likelysometime in 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996EC MAY DROP ANTIBIOTIC CONTROLSThe European commission is considering easing import controls on thefirst generation antibiotic, dihydrostreptomycin, from China. Under a1991 Council Regulation, imports are currently subject to a strict anti-dumping duty to protect European industry. But a review of thislimitation has been requested by Dutch importer, Tocelo Chemicals,acting on its own behalf and also for Long March Pharmaceutical Plant,a Chinese exporter. They claim the duty is no longer necessary tooffset dumping, because there is no Community industry that would beinjured by such imports. The original - and sole - EU complainant inthe proceedings that led to duty being imposed was Rhone PoulencBiochimie, which, says Tocelo, has now ceased production. It also saysthe other EU manufacturer, Norbrook Laboratories Ltd produces adifferent type of dihydro-streptomycin, for internal consumption only.The Commission has therefore opened an investigation, and will seekinformation via questionnaire from Rhone Poulenc, Norbrook, andimporters known to be concerned. At the same time, a copy of thequestionnaires will be sent to representative associations ofimporters. The Commission is inviting any other parties interested inco-operating in the investigation to make contact with it directly, andto submit views by mid-February. But it stresses that any informationsubmitted under this article will only be taken into account ifsupported by factual evidence at the time of submission. Details from:Commission of the European Communities, Directorate-General forExternal Economic Relations, Attn Mr H Neumann, Cort 100-6 134, Rue dela Ici/Wetstraat 200, B-1049 Brussels; Fax: (32 2) 295 65 05.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996EU HELPS FIGHT DIPHTHERIAThe European Commission has granted nearly ECU2 million ($2.4 million)to combat diphtheria in the new independent states of the former SovietUnion. The grant will be channelled via the European CommunityHumanitarian Office and will enable the United Nations Children's Fund(UNICEF) and the International Federation of the Red Cross (IFRC) tocontinue work on a co-ordinated vaccination campaign.UNICEF will get a grant of ECU1 million, to cover Tadjikistan, thecountry with the highest level of fatal cases (ECU630,000 ), and thethree southern Caucasus states, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia(ECU370,000). IFRC will get a grant of ECU980,000, for work in Belarus(ECU730,000), and the Russian Federation (ECU250,000).Diphtheria, which had been virtually eradicated in Western Europe, madea comeback in the former Soviet Union as social structures broke down.In 1994, there were about 50,000 cases, eight out of 10 of them in theRussian Federation. Isolated cases have also been reported in theEuropean Union in individuals who had travelled east.These new grants provide continuing support for the anti-diphtheriacampaign the World Health Organisation launched in late 1994 withUNICEF and IFRC. ECHO's contribution prior to this fresh fundingamounts to 3.6 MECU. Thanks to the campaign, the number of casesreported in the Russian Federation has been declining since July, butelsewhere both the number of cases and death rates are still climbing.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996PATENT EXTENSIONS OF DRUGS FOR PERIOD IN REGULATORY REVIEWThe US Food and Drug Administration has reviewed the following drugs todetermine the number of days that each was in regulatory review beforemarketing. These days form the basis for patent extension.Drug/date     Drug            Company         Number     Date forof approval   action                          of days    comments/docket no.                                   extensionPrevacid      Healing/symptom Hiroshi         1,706      1/7/96(lansoprazole relief of       Akimoto10 May 1995   active duodenal95E-0301      ulcerZinecard      Reducing        British         1,825      5/2/96(dexrazoxane) incidence of    Technology26 May 1995   cardio-         Group Ltd95E-0299      myopathyCellcept      Prophylaxis of  Syntex Inc        824      5/2/96(Mycopheno    organ rejectionlate mofetil) in allogeneic3 May 1995    renal transplants95E-0300Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996FDA ISSUES GUIDELINE ON NEW DRUG SUBSTANCE IMPURITIESThe US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) published, 4 January, aguideline entitled Impurities in New Drug Substances following theInternational Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements forRegistration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH), in the EU, Japanand the US. The final draft was approved at the ICH meeting in Marchl995.The guideline assists drug marketing registration by detailing thecontent and qualifications of impurities in new drug substancesproduced by chemical syntheses and not previously registered in aregion or member state. It is not intended to apply to new drugsubstances used during the clinical research stage of development orclinical trials. Not covered are: biological/biotechnological, peptide,oligonucleotide, radiopharmaceutical, fermentation and semisyntheticproducts, herbal and crude products of animal origin. The guidanceaddresses impurities in new drug substances from two perspectives;chemistry and safety aspects, and offers descriptions of andsuggestions about analytic methods. The new l996 guideline representFDA's current thinking. The publication is expected to be periodicallyreviewed.Copies of the guideline are available from the Consumer Affairs Branch(HFD-210, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, FDA, 7500 StandishPl., Rockville, D 20855, USA.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996GLAXO WELLCOME TO BUILD NEW PLANT IN RIO DE JANEIROGlaxo Wellcome has announced it will build a new $111.3 million plantin the state of Rio de Janeiro. It will be Glaxo Wellcome's second inBrazil and represents a stepping stone towards GW doubling its marketshare from 2 per cent to 4 per cent in the year 2000, said JorgeRaimundo Filho, president of GW's Brazilian operations.GW Brazil had a turnover of around $100 million in 1995 and expectsthis to grow to $300 million in the year 2000.Bristol Myers Squibb currently leads pharmaceuticals sales in Brazilwith a 6 per cent market share.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996BRAZILIAN DRUG SALES UP28 PER CENTFigures released in December by Brazil's association of pharmaceuticalsmanufacturers (Abifarma - Associacao Brasileira da IndustriaFarmaceutica), show 1995 sales rose 28.2 per cent to R$8.23 billionBrazilian Reals (c US$8.35 billion). Brazil is the world's fourthlargest pharmaceuticals market after the US, France and Italy.Only 50 per cent of Brazil's medicines production was exported in 1995but Abifarma plans to raise this amount to between 10 per cent and 15per cent with target markets being the South American Common Market(Marcosur) and other Latin American countries.During the year 1.77 billion units were sold, 16.4 per cent more thanin 1994. Abifarma's president Sr Jose Eduardo Bandeira de Mello said atleast five pharmaceutical companies were closing their plants in othercountries and planning to move their operations to Brazil.In 1995, he said, laboratories invested $250 million in Brazil, up 25per cent on the previous year. In 1996 he expected these investments toincrease substantially seeing Glaxo Wellcome alone was investing $111million.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996ELI LILLY INVESTS $20 MILLION IN BRAZILAt the end of December Eli Lilly & Co announced $20 million investmentsin its Brazilian subsidiary. The funding will be used to build a newproduction unit alongside its existing installations in Cosmopolis, SaoPaulo. The new plant will produce principally antibiotics.Eli Lilly plans to double its exports from Brazil to $30 million in thenext three years. Its export markets are Mercosur (the South Americancommon market consisting of Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay),Asia and the US.This is the largest investment made by the company in Brazil where ithas been established for 51 years. Most of the $20 million will be usedto buy high technology equipment in order to bring productiontechniques into line with FDA requirements.The Brazilian subsidiary of Eli Lilly had a turnover of approximately$180 million in 1995.Investments reported to be planned by other companies include KnollBasf ($37 million); Sanofi Winthrop ($7.3 million); Fundacao Ataulfo dePaiva ($5 million); Laboratorio Darrow ($3 million ) and Bravet ($2million).Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996BRAZILIAN MEDICINE PRICES INCREASEBrazilian medicine prices were allowed to rise in December by anaverage of 8 per cent. The industry had been demanding 14 per cent.Medicine prices should not be adjusted again until June 1996.The 8 per cent limit was calculated by Brazil's prices secretary to bethe industry's loss through inflation. Since Brazil's successful anti-inflation plan was introduced in July 1994 medicine prices have risen21.34 per cent. The plan has cut inflation from 50 per cent a month toless than 2 per cent.In order to co-operate with the government's anti-inflation plan,laboratories have agreed to place 100 to 150 generic medicines on themarket and to cut prices to the less well-off through public hospitalsand health scheme discounts.The industry has also backed OTC sales in supermarkets in order toreduce prices. Brazil's pharmacies operate with a profit margin of 42.5per cent and it is hoped to cut this to around 30 per cent.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996SANOFI GAINS US RIGHTS TO PHOTOFRINSanofi Winthrop Inc, the US subsidiary of Sanofi, itself part of theElf Aquitaine group, has signed an agreement with Canadian company QLTPhotoTherapeutics Inc giving Sanofi Winthrop exclusive US marketingrights to Photofrin (porfimer sodium) and future photodynamic therapyproducts developed by QLT (originally known as Quadra LogicTechnologies). Photofrin, used to treat advanced oesophageal cancer isthe first light-activated drug for use in photodynamic therapy to beapproved by the US Food and Drug Administration.The agreement provides for Sanofi to pay an access fee, partly in cashand partly through the purchase of QLT stock, as well as to makemilestone payments for the development of new photodynamic therapyproducts (although no timetable has been set).Photodynamic therapy is an emerging medical technology utilising drugsactivated by light, for the treatment of various cancers, as well asuse in ophthalmology and other diseases.Photofrin is administered intravenously and accumulates in tumours; itis then activated by non-thermal light emitted by a medical laser,producing an active form of oxygen that helps destroy cancer cells.Sanofi describes the deal as a logical step in its developing oncologyprogramme. It has a number of anti-cancer compounds undergoing clinicaldevelopment, which include:* tirapazamine, for the treatment of solid tumours, currently in PhaseIII clinical trials in the US;* mitoguazone, for Aids-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma;* oxaliplatin, for colorectal and ovarian cancers, which is beingtested in Europe; and* urate oxidase, for hyperuricaemia-associated cancer treatment.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996JAPANESE FIRMS' INTERIM RESULTSInterim earnings of Japan's top drug makers fell in line withexpectations, with few surprises overall.More importantly, year to March forecasts - the focus of most attention- were subdued, as the companies seek to avoid closer scrutiny from theMinistry of Health and Welfare (MHW) which will implement a new roundof ethical drug price cuts from 1 April.Industry leader Takeda, recorded a doubling of revenues of its leadproduct Lupron, to Y10.5 billion in the half year, and is forecastingrevenues in the full year here of Y21.5 billion (US215 million).For Sankyo, revenues of its cholesterol agent, Mervalotin, rose 5-8 percent to Y67.4 billion, and are forecast to reach Y131.4 billion ($1.31billion) in the year to March. Continued growth in revenues leaves theproduct exposed to further price cuts from the MHW which takes especialinterest in drugs generating revenues of over Y100 billion as beingover-priced.In the same drug category, Merck associate Banyu Pharmaceutical sawrevenues of its cholesterol agent Lipovase rise 24 per cent in theSeptember half, reaching Y16 billion ($160 million), and set to totalY31.5 billion in the year to March.It also saw buoyant growth from its EPO, ESPO, with revenues rising by7.1 per cent to Y15.1 billion in the years first half, which isforecast at Y30.2 billion for the full term.Ono Pharmaceutical's September half year spending on R&D rose to Y7.83billion, up from Y7.12 billion in the same term last year. Year toMarch outlays are budgeted at Y12.47 billion. Similarly, Dai NipponPharmaceutical, is forecasting year to March R&D outlays of Y13billion.Industry leader Takeda's R&D spending is to rise to Y61 billion in thefull year, following a rise in September half earnings to Y30.4billion.Sankyo continues to top the list in terms of R&D outlays, with year toMarch spending budgeted at Y45.1 billion, well ahead of Takeda's andpitched at over 10 per cent of forecast full year revenues of Y405billionJapan's year to March 1995, drug sector revenues were basically flat,rising 1 per cent year on year to Y5.75 billion, on a drug productionbasis.Revenues in most key categories showed modest rises, with the biggestdeclines in areas such as antibiotics, down 12.9 per cent andtraditional Chinese medicines, down 14.3 per cent.Both of these areas have been recent targets of the MWH for cuts,following sizeable rises in recent years.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996INDIA FINALISES DRUG PRICING BODYA National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority is on schedule to be up andrunning in India for the new financial year beginning 1 April 1996.Posts of chairman and secretary and the NPPA's remit have now beensanctioned by the union cabinet following year long talks with theministries of chemicals, industry and finance.The NPPA will be an independent body with more flexibility in drugpricing than the Bureau of Costs and Prices was allowed. Besides fixingdrug prices, the authority will update the list of drugs subject toprice control each year, monitor prices of other drugs, and willoversee the implementation of the Drug Price Control Order. Time limitsfor deciding on price approvals will be set by the NPPA. Initiallythese will be two months for formulations and four months for bulkdrugs.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996PIRAMAL GROUP ACQUIRES SUMITRAThe Ajay Piramal Group has joined the top 10 pharmaceuticalmanufacturers league with the acquisition of Andhra Pradesh-basedSumitra Pharmaceuticals.Nicholas Piramal, India has taken over management of the Rs660 millionSumitra Pharma on a 5 for 100 share swap scheme.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996SPIC TO EXPAND ANTIBIOTIC PRODUCTIONSPIC Pharma the pharmaceutical division of Madras-based SouthernPetrochemicals Industries Corp Ltd (SPIC), plans to invest Rs3,000million in its core areas of fermentation products, synthetic drugs andherbal products over the next two to three years, says pharmaceuticalsvice-president Dr MD Nair. Cephalosporins will be the nextantibacterials to be manufactured.SPIC, which commissioned an international-sized plant for Penicillin Gin June last year at Cuddalore with an initial investment of Rs1,800million and bought in overseas technology, is also experimenting withother antibacterials. The company is planning to manufacture Penicillinbased products such as ampicillin and amoxycillin and is seekingmarketing partners globally and on the domestic front for these, saidDr Nair. The company is already working with a number of Germanpharmaceutical companies and with companies in the Indo-China region,eg, in Vietnam and Cambodia.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996LUPIN DEVELOPS OWN HIV TESTSBombay company Lupin Laboratories has announced it is developingdiagnostic kits for HIV I and II that are specific to particularantigens predominant in Aids patients in India.The company is investing 6.4 per cent of its Rs4450 million turnover onR&D compared with an average of 1.5 to 2 per cent for most Indianpharmaceutical companies.Lupin, which already manufactures five cephalosporins, is also settingup facilities at Mandideep, near Bhopal to produce ceftazidime. Thecompany launched cefachlor, ceftriaxone and cefotaxime last year andexpects a sales potential of Rs2000 million annually from itscephalosporin range.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996PHARMAC REVIEWS MEDICINES SUBSIDY POLICYNew Zealand pharmaceutical funding agency, Pharmac, is looking atredirecting resources into more cost-effective treatments such as theAZT/DDI or AZT/DDC Aids cocktails and away from treatments "which itsubsidises for purely historical reasons and which probably no longerwarrant being given out free." Pharmac is spending NZ$2.3 million(US$1.5 million) subsidising cold sore creams "and at the same time,"David Moore, Pharmac general manager says, "we don't have the halfmillion necessary to extend the lives of Aids victims."Mr Moore is at odds with the New Zealand Medical Association over astatement that doctors have been prescribing medicines like a "lollyscramble". But Mr Moore says "whether Dr Dennis Pezaro," president ofthe New Zealand Medical Association, "wants to acknowledge it or  not,there is considerable wastage in some parts of the medicines budget."Mr Moore says the extent to which medicines are wasted is demonstratedby a recent campaign to collect unused drugs which touched only fourper cent of Auckland homes, but collected unused drugs worth $730,000including Roaccutane for acne, bronchodilators, treatments forrheumatic disease and gout, and antibacterials.Pezaro told PBN  "it's a ridiculous storm in a teacup." The NZMA has noproblem with controlling wastage. "The question is how we go aboutstrategies to contain it and Mr Moore appears to have a problemrecognising who are his helpers." Pezaro says the NZMA and Pharmacshould be "sitting down and talking things through" but Pharmac "is notin a consultative mode." Pharmac is a joint venture of New Zealand'sfour regional health authorities.In Pezaro's view some wastage is "truly inevitable". In the end, it is"patient choice" whether they finish a course of medicines or not."Where it is very much controllable," in his view, however, "is whereprolonged quantities are dispensed in order to cut the co-paymentimplications for the patient."Three-month prescribing was very low before the New Zealand governmentintroduced part-charges, Pezaro says. "Part of the wastage is a directresponsibility of government policy." Pezaro is not necessarilysuggesting part-charges should be abolished, but that they should bestructured so that they do not introduce incentives to over-prescribing. There is currently no difference in the co-payment amountper item whether the prescription is for a short or long treatment.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996PROCEPT FORMS VACTEX TO DEVELOP TB VACCINEProcept, the Cambridge, Massachusetts-based company, has joined withtop researchers at the Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women'sHospital, and a group of investors to form the VacTex Corp. The latterhas raised $1 million to fund new vaccine developments which exploitthe discoveries of researchers Dr Michael Brenner and Dr StevenPorcelli regarding hitherto unknown aspects of immunology concerningthe CD-1 system of lipid antigen presentation.Vaccines based on lipid antigens may succeed where other approachesusing MHC molecules have failed, according to a company statement.Infectious agents which may be addressed by novel vaccines includetuberculosis, malaria and salmonella, said VacTex chairman and CEO DrRobert Carpenter. Initial efforts will focus on producing a vaccine forTB which affects 1.8 billion people worldwide and is the leading causeof death from a single infectious agent. Procept has an option topurchase VacTex under certain unspecified terms and conditions.Procept has also announced it is to start a new Phase I/II trial of itsanti-HIV drug PR 2000 in Belgium under the direction of Dr NathanClumeck at the Saint Pierre University Hospital, Brussels. A Phase Isafety trial using single bolus injections was successfully completedin the UK last May but continuous iv infusion has been associated withreversible liver enzyme and platelet changes in some patients.  The newtrial will therefore stick to single daily bolus injections.PR 2000 blocks the binding of a surface glycoprotein gp 120 found onthe HIV-I virus to the CD4 protein on immune cells. The rationale forits use is therefore to act as a molecular barrier to block HIV frominfecting critical immune system cells including T-cells andmacrophages. By targeting the CD4 protein rather than the HIV virusitself, Procept believes drug resistance is less likely.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996ALLIANCE AND HMR COLLABORATE ON LIQUIVENTThe San Diego based Alliance Pharmaceutical Corp and Hoechst MarionRoussel have announced an agreement in principle for a worldwidelicence to develop and market LiquiVent (perflubron) for treatment ofacute respiratory failure. A final agreement, conditional on regulatoryapprovals, is expected to be negotiated within the next two months.Alliance has recently started a paediatric Phase II/III trial ofLiquiVent for acute respiratory failure in addition to continuingtrials with adults and premature babies. Early trials in adults,children and premature babies showed the treatment improves respiratorygas exchange and lung mechanics.HMR wants LiquiVent in order to build up its respiratory drug portfoliowhich includes the anti-allergic drug Seldane, Rifampicin for TB,several development compounds for asthma, allergies and acuterespiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) as well as antibiotics used totreat lower respiratory tract infections.Hoechst says the licence agreement is expected to include the purchaseof a minority equity interest in Alliance and a licence fee payment forAlliance contingent on milestone developments. HMR will fund productdevelopment and pay Alliance royalties on sales. In return HMR willhave exclusive manufacturing and worldwide marketing rights to theproduct.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996AGOURON TO START NEW ANTICANCER DRUG TRIALSClinical testing of Agouron Pharmaceuticals' two new anticancer drugswill start this year, company president and CEO Peter Johnson hasannounced.Speaking at the Hambrecht & Quist Annual Life Science Conference in SanFrancisco, he said one agent, AG2034, has demonstrated potent anti-tumour activity in preclinical animal models. The drug inhibits anenzyme required for the synthesis of purine nucleotides essential forsustained proliferation of cancer cells.Another agent, AG3340, has shown significant anti-metastatic and anti-tumour activity in animal models. The drug, which is orallybioavailable and has a favourable pharmacokinetic profile, was designedas a potential selective inhibitor of matrix metalloprotease enzymesinvolved in cancer and arthritis.The company already has the anti-cancer agent Thymitaq (AG 337) inclinical development. To date 120 patients have been enrolled in sixPhase II studies (PBN 258 1995, Vol II, Page 19).Viracept (nelfinavir mesylate), the company's anti HIV drug beingdeveloped in conjunction with the pharmaceutical division of JapanTobacco, is also in Phase II trials. In the trial programme, evaluatingeight different dose levels, it has shown potent activity in acute HIVinfection, said Mr Johnson. In the most recent studies, doses of 750mgand 1000mg tds produced significantly greater reductions of HIV thanlower doses tested previously. Large scale pivotal trials using thehigher doses are now scheduled to begin next month.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996BIOCRYST STARTS PHASE II TRIAL FOR T-CELL CANCER AGENTBioCryst Pharmaceuticals' oral formulation of its lead drug BCX-34, asmall molecule inhibitor of purine nucleoside phosphorylase - theenzyme active in T-cell proliferation, is now in a Phase I/II doseescalation trial. The trial follows an open label Phase I trial whichshowed it is well tolerated in doses of 36-42mg iv followed by the samedose orally a week later and has high bioavailability (>76 per cent).The new trial will target BCX-34 against T-cell cancers for whichcurrently there are no satisfactory effective treatments, saidpresident and CEO Dr Charles Bugg. But the drug is also to be testedfor other clinical conditions including rheumatoid arthritis, multiplesclerosis and transplant rejection. BCX-34 was granted orphan status in1993 and qualifies for accelerated review as a new drug to treatserious and life-threatening illness.In the Phase I/II trial, to be conducted at University of Alabama,Birmingham, a dose range of 20mg up to 350mg twice daily for 28 dayswill be tested.More than 20,000 patients in the US are thought to suffer from T-cellcancers - either cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, T-cell leukaemia or other Tcell cancers. Approximately, 1,000 new cases of CTCL, more than 400 newcases of T-CLL and approximately 8,000 new cases of other T-cellcancers are diagnosed each year in the US.A topical formulation of BCX-34 tested in a Phase I open-label trialshowed evidence of efficacy in CTCL and as a result a multicentre PhaseIII trial of topical treatment in CTCL is now in progress. A Phase IItrial is examining topical therapy in psoriasis.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996THERATECHNOLOGIES' LEUKAEMIA RESEARCH GRANTThe National Research Council of Canada has awarded Theratechnologies a$350,000 grant to continue its research into the photodynamic treatmentof leukaemia. The money will enable the research to progress to Phase Itrials.Preliminary research over the past four years suggestsTheratechnologies has produced a molecule that will benefit patientswith chronic myeloid leukaemia. The molecule may also be of benefit inother types of leukaemia and some metastic cancers, says the company.Theratech researchers have also developed a new activating lightsource.The new technique permits autologous bone marrow grafting; previouslyonly a quarter of chronic myeloid leukaemia patients receive a bonemarrow graft depending on the compatibility of available donor marrow.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996GENELABS DRUG STUDYGenelabs Technologies DHEA drug GL701 benefits women with systemiclupus erythematosus according to results of a study conducted atStanford University, California and published in Arthritis andRheumatism. Researchers said 28 women with mild to moderate SLE treatedfor three months with DHEA or placebo improved as assessed by an indexof disease activity, self-assessment, physician assessment andreduction in steroid dosage. Principal investigator Dr James McGuiresaid SLE patients had not had a new drug for their disease approved inover 20 years. DHEA is safe and steroid-sparing and patients feelbetter on it, he commented. The treatment can cause acne, however.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996ERGOSET TRIALSErgo Science Corp has found an explanation for why its lead compoundErgoset (specially formulated bromcriptine) currently in Phase IIItrials, works in Type II diabetes. Animal studies show it overcomesinsulin resistance because it significantly reduces nocturnal lipolysisand hepatic glucose production resulting in a 75 per cent decrease incirculating insulin with improved daytime glucose tolerance.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996NPS DEVELOPING CALCIUM RECEPTOR TECHNOLOGYNPS Pharmaceuticals has reported reaching a milestone in developing itscalcium receptor technology worth $3 million in a deal with SmithKlineBeecham. The technology which has anti-resorptive and bone-growthstimulating implications has applications in osteoporosis. Thecondition affects more than 200 million people worldwide but numbersare expected to escalate with the growth of the ageing population overthe next 25 to 35 years. The company also reports satisfactory outcomesto Phase I/II clinical trials of NPS R-568 Norcalcin itshyperparathyroidism treatment. The drug, licensed to Kirin Brewery Cofor Asia and to Amgen for the rest of the world, mimics the action ofcalcium in activating the calcium receptor, reducing secretion ofparathyroid hormone and lowering levels of serum calcium.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996SEPRACOR TRIALS ON ASTHMA DRUGSepracor has begun Phase III trials on its R-albuterol asthma druginvolving more than 300 patients in 20 centres led by global opinionleaders. It expects to file an NDA early in 1997.The product, which uses a dose equivalent to half or a quarter of theracemic albuterol dose, purports to be safer than racemic versions ofthe bronchodilator, and to avoid side effects of hyper-reactivity. APhase II trial completed last year demonstrated that the S-isomer ofracemic albuterol, previously considered inert, induces bronchialhyper reactivity. Racemic albuterol products currently generate revenuesworth around $2.5 billion worldwide.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996TRIAL OF TREATMENT FOR AIDS-RELATED KAPOSIAllergan Ligand Retinoid Therapeutics is to begin a Phase III trial ofALRT 1057 its topical treatment for Aids-related Kaposi's sarcoma.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996LAUNCH OF CARDIA SALT ALTERNATIVEApplied Microbiology Inc is expected to launch its Cardia SaltAlternative in March this year after results of Japanese clinicaltrials show it reduces blood pressure by 7.4mm Hg (systolic) and 3.4mmHg (diastolic). These and preliminary results of a new 100 patientmulticentre US trial will be presented at the American College ofCardiology meeting, Orlando on 23 March.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996TRIAL OF VACCINE FOR PROSTATE CANCERSomatix Therapy Corp has started a Phase I trial of its GVAX vaccinefor prostate cancer at John Hopkins University, Maryland. A phase IItrial is scheduled to start mid-year along with a 350 patient/50 sitePhase III trial for the vaccine in melanoma. The company is looking forcorporate partners to help finance its gene therapy programme.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996STUDY OF EXTERNAL GUIDE SEQUENCE (EGS) DRUGSInnovir Laboratories Inc has reported positive preclinical studyresults for several of its oligonucleotide-based External GuideSequence (EGS) drugs against the hepatitis B virus. A number of thecompounds appeared comparable or nearly comparable in efficacy to thenucleoside analogue 3 TC, according to company CEO Dr Allan Goldberg.Speaking at the Strategic Research Institute's San Francisco meeting,he said Innovir's scientists have also developed a novel technology tofacilitate drug delivery of EGS drugs to the liver.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996MORE HEART PROBLEMS FOR IMIGRANAnother sumatriptan - associated myocardial infarction is reported inthe current issue of Neurology (45: 2274-6). The patient, a 43-year oldCanadian man, suffered a transmural MI within one hour of ingestingsumatriptan 100mg.Dr P O'Connor of St Michael's Hospital, Toronto, said that the caseunderscores the need to avoid using sumatriptan in patients with ahistory of symptomatic coronary artery disease, or ill-defined chestpain. He further suggests caution in using sumatriptan in any patientwith significant vascular risk factors, including smoking.The occurrence of serious cardiac complications after sumatriptaninjection resulted in Glaxo Wellcome issuing a warning in October 1994that "Serious coronary events, including some that have been fatal,following Imitrex (Imigran) injection have occurred but are extremelyrare."Dr O'Connor highlights a previous report of a 47 year old woman whodeveloped symptoms of severe substernal chest pain radiating to theleft shoulder 15 minutes after 6mg subcutaneous injection. In June1995, Neurology also reported another cardiac arrest suffered by a 35-year-old woman within minutes of receiving a first time dose ofsubcutaneous sumatriptan.Glaxo Wellcome's spokeswoman Corrine Gordon said "Imigran iscontraindicated in patients with ischaemic heart disease or previous MI- but use in patients with risk factors for heart disease is a matterof clinical judgement. We normally advise that patients in whomrecognised cardiac disease is likely should be evaluated for underlyingcardiovascular disease - examples of these sorts of patients would bepost menopausal women, males over 40 and patients with risk factors forcoronary artery disease. Its basically a matter of clinical judgementwhat these risk factors are".In the UK Glaxo Wellcome issued a "Dear Doctor" letter strengtheningexisting warnings and precautions about use of Imigran in December1994.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996RANITIDINE FOR PSORIASISBetter news for Glaxo Wellcome comes with the publication of a studyshowing that ranitidine (Zantac) has a substantial clinical effect inthe treatment of psoriasis.Previous studies of H2 receptor antagonists in psoriasis, have proveddisappointing; an almost immediate deterioration in some patientsleading to discontinuation of treatment.The key to success, according to a team of Danish dermatologists andimmunologists, is persistence. They found that oral ranitidine 300mgtwice daily for six months reduced the mean PASI score (Psoriasis Areaand Severity Index) from 15.7 to 5.7 in 18 patients with moderate tosevere plaque-type psoriasis.Fifteen patients did experience a mild to moderate worsening of theirpsoriasis in the first month of treatment. However, this resolved withcontinuing therapy. "We emphasise that initial worsening duringranitidine therapy is not a reason for discontinuation of treatment asclinical benefit was observed in the long term. Ranitidine appears tobe a safe and effective long-term treatment for psoriasis," reported DrH Nielsen of the National University Hospital, Denmark. (BritishJournal of Dermatology 133:  905-908).The accumulating evidence of benefit for ranitidine in this indicationsuggests that histamine is involved in the pathogenesis of psoriasis.Ranitidine is thought to act by blocking H2-receptors presented by CD8+T lymphocytes, counteracting a possible dysregulation of CD8+ cytotoxiclymphocyte-CD8+ suppressor lymphocyte axis. This may return suppressoractivity to normal and down-regulate synthesis and presentation ofmajor histocompatibility class II antigen and release ofauto antibodies.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996BIOADHESIVE TABLET FOR VAGINOSISA bioadhesive vaginal tablet containing 100mg metronidazole and appliedto the cervix shows promise for the treatment of bacterial vaginosis,according to preliminary studies by Dr J Remon, of the Laboratory ofPharmaceutical Technology, University of Gent, Belgium.In tests, the bioadhesive tablet achieved similar cure rates toconventional oral metronidazole, but using only one-seventieth of theoral dose (Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology  47:  970-971).Dr Remon concludes that further tests of the bioadhesive matrix(consisting of a modified starch/polyacrylic mixture) are required. Theformula has already been used successfully as a buccal bioadhesivetablet to treat candidiasis.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996MEDICINES MONITORING UNIT TO EXPAND POST MARKETING WORKFollowing six years of successful development, The Medicines MonitoringUnit (MEMO) based at Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, UK is to expand itswork, according to a report published in the current issue of thejournal Pharmaceutical Medicine (9:  177-184). The unit, which issupported by the UK Medicines Control Agency, has developed anautomated database on record-linkage techniques to conduct post-marketing drug safety studies, and currently has access to data for400,000 residents of Tayside Scotland. In future, record linkagestudies will be conducted on the entire population of Scotland (5.5million) giving the unit enhanced capacity to study newly-marketeddrugs. Other planned developments include linkage with GP-basedcomputer systems, and ISDN links to pharmacies (enabling the provisionof accurate drug utilisation data).Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996INFLUENZA VACCINE BENEFIT FOR ELDERLY CONFIRMEDDoubts about the efficacy of influenza vaccination of older individualswill be dispelled by a study published in the current InternationalJournal of Epidemiology (24, 6, 1240-1247).Dr Suzanne Ohmit, of the School of Public Health, University ofMichigan, found that vaccination reduced the likelihood of 65+ yearolds being admitted to hospital with influenza by 32 per cent duringboth influenza type A and type B epidemics. Her community basedinfluenza surveillance programme covered seven counties in Michigan,over a two year period.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996CORTICOSTEROID CONTROVERSY HIGHLIGHTS BONE LOSSWhile the controversy over the safety of inhaled corticosteroids inyoung asthmatics continues, a new twist has been added to the story byCalifornian researchers. Doctors from the Department of Family andPreventive Medicine, University of California, say that older adultsmay risk loss of bone mineral density following prolonged use of oraland inhaled corticosteroids (beclomethasone, triamcinolone,flunisolide).Their study, published in the American Journal of Public Health (85, 12pages 1693-95) suggests that women may be more at risk. The decrease inbone mineral densities for oral corticosteroid users (compared with non-users) was 7.2 per cent  at the midshaft radius, 9.4 per cent at thehip and 8 per cent at the spine. "The most striking difference was atthe hip, suggesting that this site may be particularly vulnerable tocorticosteroids," reported Dr Elizabeth Barrett-Connor. She suggeststhat further studies of bone mineral density loss and corticosteroiduse (particularly inhaled use) in older adults are still needed.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996BENEFIT IN GRAFT-VERSUS-HOST DISEASEOral beclomethasone dipropionate appears safe and effective in thetreatment of acute graft-versus-host disease, a complication ofallogenic bone marrow transplantation, according to a study byUniversity of Washington oncologists and gastroenterologists.Forty-two patients were given 8mg BDP daily for up to 28 days. Symptomssuch as nausea and diarrhoea improved, as did appetite. An overallbeneficial response was observed in 72 per cent of the group andfurther studies are warranted, concluded the report (Transplantation,60, 11, 1231-38).Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996OFLOXACIN SEIZURE RISK WARNINGClinicians have been reminded to comply strictly with manufacturersguidelines for renally impaired patients, when using the antibioticofloxacin (Tarivid, Hoechst). A report in Clinical Infectious Diseases(21: 1504-6) describes four patients who had seizures while receivingofloxacin. All were older patients receiving high doses. Renalinsufficiency was thought to play a role in three cases. The authors,from Akron City Hospital, Ohio, US, say that neurotoxicity and seizuresassociated with ofloxacin have previously been described. Dosagereductions may be warranted in elderly, severely ill patients becauseaccumulation may occur in some severely ill patients in spite of normalrenal function.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996TAXOL INHIBITS BONE RESORPTIONThe anti-tumour compound taxol has been found to inhibit osteoclasticbone resorption, suggesting benefit in the inhibition of hypercalcaemiaand bone metastases, according to research published by Dr Tony Hall,of Ciba-Geigy, Basle, Switzerland.The report, which appears as a rapid communication in the current issueof Calcified Tissue International, (57: 463-465) shows that Taxol dose-dependently inhibited bone resorption in a bone-slice assay. Thisinhibition was only partly accounted for by a decrease in osteoclastspreading, suggesting that Taxol inhibits osteoclastic bone resorptionby more than one mechanism.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996BROMOCRIPTINE FAILS IN APHASIAThe postsynaptic dopaminergic agonist bromocriptine has failed to showany benefit in the first randomised, double-blind and placebocontrolled study of aphasia.The study, by neurologist Dr Sergio Strakstein, of the Department ofBehavioural Neurology, Raul Carrea Institute of Neurological Research,Buenos Aires, followed earlier reports that bromocriptine may improvelanguage deficit in people suffering nonfluent aphasia.However, the study, which used doses escalating from 3.75 mg/day to60mg day over a six week period , failed to show any differencesbetween active and placebo treatment when speech was rated by a speechpathologist.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996KW-4679 IN ALLERGIC RHINITISKW-4679 a new compound thought to have both antihistaminic and anti-allergic properties may be useful for the treatment of allergicrhinitis, according to pharmacologists from Kyowa Hakko Kogyo Co, theJapanese company responsible for synthesising the compound.Animal work, published in this month's Japanese Journal of Pharmacologyshows that the compound reduced nasal blockage. The mechanism of actionis thought to be via the inhibition of release of histamine, peptideleukotrienes , the production of PAF and leukotriene B4, and therelease of neuropeptides.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996GAVISCON SCORES OVER ALGITECLiquid Gaviscon (Reckitt and Colman) is superior to Algitec Suspension(SmithKline Beecham) in the prevention of reflux when given as a singledose, according to a study by Dr N Washington, of the Department ofSurgery, Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham, UK.The study assessed the ability of both compounds to suppress food andacid reflux into the oesophagus after a test meal in 12 healthyvolunteers. Liquid Gaviscon significantly reduced both food and acidreflux, but Algitec did not (Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology  47:879-882).The raft strength of Algitec was approximately half that of LiquidGaviscon, a factor which may explain the poor results for the former,said Dr Washington. Algitec is a combination of sodium alginate withcimetidine. According to the report, the H2 -receptor antagonist andthe alginate may interact in a complex manner with the latterinfluencing the delivery or bioavailability of the cimetidine. Althougha longer dosing schedule may improve the benefit from Algitec, mostpatients want immediate symptomatic relief on an as-needed basis and"the formation of a physical barrier on the gastric contents by thealginate (in Gaviscon) allows an immediate action," concludes thereport.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996CI-988 IN ANXIETY - DISAPPOINTING RESULTSThe novel CCK-B antagonist CI-988 could not be distinguished fromplacebo in the treatment of generalised anxiety disorder, when given ata dose of 300mg/day thrice daily, according to research published byParke-Davis (Michigan) researchers. In the current Journal of ClinicalPsychopharmacology (15: 6,428-433) they report that " there were notrends in this study strong enough to warrant repeating a study usingCI-988 at the 300mg/day dose." However, evaluations of higher doseswill be performed to discover whether CCK-B antagonists play a role inthe modulation of anxiety, concluded their report.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE WARNINGTwo reports published this month highlight the growing problem ofantibiotic resistance. Finnish researchers call for more prudent use ofantibiotics in outpatients following the finding of a statisticallysignificant association between local erythromycin use and erythromycinresistance in group A streptococci in Finland. "Restrictions oftreatment are essential to the continued efficacy of antibioticscurrently available," states their report (Clinical Infectious Diseases21: 1378-85).A second study, by German researchers, tracked national antimicrobialresistance patterns over two years for Streptococcus pneumoniaeisolates causing systemic infections (Clinical Infectious Diseases 21:1398-401). The prospective study involved 40 laboratories ranged acrossGermany. The results showed that penicillin remained the antibiotic ofchoice for pneumococcal infections (despite 1.8 per cent of isolatesshowing reduced susceptibility. Rates of resistance to clindamycin,erythromycin, tetracycline, and chloramphenicol were 1.4 per cent, 3.2per cent, 11 per cent, and 1.9 per cent respectively. Resistance tocefotaxime was not observed.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996CYTOKINES AS VACCINE ADJUVANTSIn the light of limited clinical data and the controversial resultsobtained, much more work has to be done before cytokines can beaccepted as adjuvants for use in human vaccines, according to a reviewarticle by Sandoz researchers, published in this month's ClinicalInfectious Diseases (21: 1439-49)."Two critical issues must be addressed by clinical trials of vaccineswith cytokine adjuvants.  The first is the balance between safety andadjuvanticity...the second is how best to combine vaccines andadjuvants," concludes the review - however despite these reservations,it says that cytokines are likely to play an important role as futureadjuvants.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996NEW FRAXIPARINE IN STROKE STUDYA new trial to find out if low molecular weight heparin can be used totreat stroke victims begins this week in Europe, North America, HongKong, and Australia.A product licence for the use of low molecular weight heparin in thetreatment of stroke moved a step closer last December, with thepublication in the New England Journal of Medicine, of a study showingthat nadroparin calcium (Fraxiparine - Sanofi) improved outcome whengiven within 48 hours of a stroke.Sanofi, clearly delighted at the results, this week hosted aninternational press conference to publicise the study - and to announcethe new trial.The NEJM "Fraxiparine in Stroke Study (FISS)" involved 306 strokepatients at four Hong Kong hospitals. Patients received high dosenadroparin (4100 anti-factor Xa IU twice daily), low-dose nadroparin(4100IU once daily) or placebo subcutaneously for 10 days.Three and six months after treatment there were no significantdifferences in the primary endpoints of death or dependency (defined asthe need for help with everyday activities). However, there was asignificant improvement in the combined endpoint of death or dependency(p=0.12 at three months and 0.005 at six months). By the end of sixmonths, 45 per cent of patients on high dose Fraxiparine, 52 per centof patients on low dose Fraxiparine, and 65 per cent of patients in thecontrol group had poor outcomes (ie had died or become dependent onothers for daily living)."Our data suggest that for every five patients treated, one death orcase of dependency may be avoided," reported Dr Richard Kay, AssociateProfessor of Medicine, Chinese University of Hong Kong.However, at this week's meeting, he said the results - althoughpromising - did not warrant routine use of Fraxiparine in all strokepatients. In order to get the 312 patients randomised, 2,750 strokepatients were screened.The major exclusion criteria were the wrong type of stroke(haemorrhagic rather than ischaemic); age (>80); or arriving too latefor treatment (later than 48 hours post-stroke).In the US, heparins are widely used in the treatment of stroke despitea lack of evidence that they work, said Dr Kay. He estimates that some30-50 per cent of US patients receive predominately older standardheparins.New low molecular weight heparins, such as Fraxiparine, have severaladvantages over these older products. They can be administeredsubcutaneously making home treatment feasible, they are bettertolerated, and the results of treatment are more predictable.With Fraxiparine antithrombotic activity is guaranteed for at least 24hours without the need for laboratory monitoring. Patients treated withstandard heparin need daily blood tests to monitor anticoagulantactivity. With these advantages, and a positive result from a secondconfirmatory study, the market for low molecular weight heparins couldexpand substantially.Heparins are currently used for the treatment of deep vein thrombosis,and peri- or post-operative surgical thromboprophylaxis. World wide,some 200 million units of heparins are sold annually.Since their introduction in the mid 1980's, low molecular weightheparins have gradually been taking a larger slice of this total -amounting to about half of the units sold in 1995. Of the low molecularweight heparins, three companies account for the lion's share of sales;Sanofi with Fraxiparine (32 per cent of all units sold); Rhone-PoulencRorer with enoxaparin (28 per cent) and Kabi Pharmacia/Upjohn withFragmin (20 per cent).Fraxiparine was worth $650 million in 1995. Company analysts areconfident of a massive boost in sales, if the new study confirms theFISS results. World wide, some 1.5 million people suffer a stroke eachyear. "We hope to capture at least 30 per cent of this market. WithFraxiparine selling at $5 to $10 for a days treatment, this amounts toa considerable turnover," said Francine Jacob, Strategic Marketing,Sanofi."This growth will really depend on the outcome of the new study. Theresults will be available in 1997 and should lead to registration andformal approval for this indication. We would anticipate the firstapproval in Europe, followed by Asia and North America," she said.The new study will duplicate FISS, but with more subjects (800 strokepatients) drawn from a wider range of countries.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996ZENECA TO LAUNCH NISOLDIPINE IN USZeneca has acquired the US rights and full marketing control for a newcalcium channel blocker, nisoldipine (Sular), recently approved by theFDA. The company which will launch the product this month is stillnegotiating marketing rights for other countries.Sular is in a controlled release formulation to allow once daily dosingand will be marketed for hypertension as Sular Extended Releasetablets, says Zeneca.The product has been acquired to boost Zeneca's cardiovascularportfolio which includes the world's No 3 ACE inhibitor Zestril, thelargest selling beta-blocker Tenormin and Sorbitrate, the nitrate.Despite the recent controversy over calcium channel blockers, themarket has been growing and has a current estimated value of #4.4billion worldwide and #2.2 billion in the US.Arimidex, Zeneca's aromatase inhibitor, has been cleared for treatmentof advanced breast cancer in the US. The drug was approved for use inthe UK last Autumn and has been submitted to all major markets outsideJapan.In the US 18,000 women have advanced breast cancer and the expectednumber of new cases diagnosed each year is 184,300. The US market forhormonal breast cancer therapies is valued at $300 million.The approval follows FDA clearance for Zeneca's other new treatment foradvanced breast cancer Zoladex, announced mid December. Zoladex,injected once monthly, is indicated for premenopausal andperimenopausal women and avoids the need for oophorectomy. One third ofnew cases of breast cancer are in the pre and perimenopausal age groupsand 6 per cent of new cases have advanced disease.Zoladex, which won a Queen's award for technology five years ago, wasapproved in the US in 1989 for advanced prostate cancer and in 1993 forendometriosis. It is already earning in excess of $60 million in theUS. Zeneca announced FDA approval of the drug in its three month depotformulation (Zoladex LA) for prostate cancer on 12 January. Treatmentreduces testosterone to castration levels and avoids the need fororchidectomy. The drug is already approved for pre and peri-menopausalbreast cancer in 72 countries.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996LEUKOTRIENE ANTAGONISTS TIPPED AS ASTHMA MARKET LEADERSLeukotriene receptor antagonists are tipped to become the leadingproduct group in the respiratory drug market of the early years of the21st century with 20 per cent of asthma sales and 14 per cent of thetotal respiratory market. Merck, Zeneca, Abbott and SmithKline Beechamare companies new to the respiratory market which will profit from thenew drug class.The projection comes in a new report from the Pharma Strategy Group ofIMS based on an analysis of IMS data and interviews with 80 opinionleaders, which sees total drug sales for respiratory disorders growingby 47 per cent in six major markets - Germany, France, UK, Italy, Japanand the US. Total sales are projected at $14.1 billion by the year 2005against the current $9.5 billion.Phosphodiesterase inhibitors which have both bronchodilatory and anti-inflammatory effects in asthma, as well as possible applications inrhinitis and dermatitis, are predicted to reach the marketplace by theyear 200? and to hold 7 per cent of asthma sales by 2005.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996P&U GETS FDA CLEARANCE TO MARKET NEW ANTIARRHYTHMICPharmacia &Upjohn, Inc announced US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)approval to market Corvert Injection (ibutilide fumarate injection),used to treat the common arrhythmias of atrial fibrillation and atrialflutter. Corvert is used to achieve rapid conversion of atrialfibrillation or atrial flutter to normal sinus rhythm.The frequency of arrhythmias increases with age. Atrial fibrillationaffects .4 per cent of Americans under the age of 60 and 2 to 4 percent of those over 60. The primary treatment option for patientsneeding rapid conversion of atrial fibril action and flutter iselectrical cardioversion. Drugs are not rapidly effective and usuallyrequire one to three days of hospitalisation, dose titration andobservation. Two large, placebo-controlled, double-blind, andrandomised clinical trials demonstrated that, compared to placebo,Corvert Injection successfully and rapidly converted atrialfibrillation and flutter to normal rhythm. In a third study in Europe,Corvert compared quite well with another intravenous antiarrhythmicagent.Joann L Data, corporate vice-president for world-wide pharmaceuticalregulatory affairs and project management, said "Corvert is a novelagent, that provides a pharmacological alternative for a difficultmanagement problem. Currently, no medicines are approved to providerapid pharmacological conversion of atrial fibrillation and atrialflutter to normal sinus rhythm".Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996FDA APPROVES ORTHO'S RENOVAThe US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved for marketing, 2January, Renova, 0.05 per cent tretinoin emollient cream.) as atreatment for reducing certain kinds of skin damage, such as finewrinkles, spotty discoloration and rough skin. Renova was developed bythe Dermatological Division of Ortho Pharmaceutical Corporation(Raritan, NJ), a subsidiary of Johnson and Johnson. It is an offshootof the company's acne product, Retin-A. Renova is formulated as anemollient cream, which differentiates it from Retin-A. Renova wasapproved for damaged skin, in conjunction with a co prehensive skincare and sun avoidance programme. Its effectiveness is dependent onother good skin care practices including avoiding direct sunlight,applying sunscreens, wearing protective clothing and using moisturisinglotions. FDA notes that many people can enhance skin appearance andprotect skin from damage by adopting regular use of these practices andnot using Renova.It does not eliminate wrinkles, repair sun damaged skin, reverse theageing process or photo ageing or repair factors leading to skin cancer.Nor is there evidence that Renova treats deep wrinkles, coarse skin,skin yellowing or other skin problems. Studies have shown that after 24weeks, approximately 30 per cent of users had moderate improvement oftheir fine wrinkles or spotty discoloration, 34 per cent had minimalimprovement and 35 per cent had no improvement. Furthermore, about 16per cent of users had moderate improvement in skin roughness, 35 percent saw minimal improvement and 49 per cent had no improvement.Patients using Renova noticed some improvement between three to sixmonths. Improvements gradually diminished when treatment stopped. Thesafety of daily use for more than 48 weeks has not been established.Renova has not been studied in people age 50 or older, or in peoplewith moderately or darkly pigmented skin. Safe use in children has notbeen shown and pregnant patients are warned not to use this cream.Ortho Pharmaceutical Corp will begin marketing Renova in February l996.The company estimates costs for the patient of $10-$15 per month. Theaverage retail price for the 40 gram tube that usually lasts four tosix months is $60. It will be available, also, in tubes containing 60grams. The company, that markets in more than 100 countries and employsapproximately 2,000 workers, sells Renova in Ireland and the UK, havingreceived approval for the drug in those countries in 1993 and 1995respectively. In 1995, Renova was also approved in Canada. Ortho'sspokesperson told PBN that Renova has been filed in Mexico, France,Portugal, Spain, Australia, New Zealand and Thailand. The discoverythat Retin-A reduces wrinkles and photoageing was made by Dr AlbertKligman of Pennsylvania University. The university and its agentCompetitive Technologies will receive royalties on US and foreignsales.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996SCHWARZ PHARMA LAUNCHES ONCE DAILY ACE INHIBITORSchwarz Pharma has launched its once daily ACE inhibitor Perdix(moexipril hydrochloride) in the UK for the treatment of hypertensionas monotherapy or as a second line add on therapy to diuretics orcalcium antagonists.Schwarz is positioning Perdix as a treatment of choice forpostmenopausal hypertensive women. The company conducted a prelaunchclinical trial programme specifically in this patient group, assessingthe drug's effects on bone metabolism and breast cancer.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996MARKETING APPROVAL FOR ANTI-HIV DRUG ZERITBristol-Myers Squibb has received full marketing approval for its anti-HIV drug Zerit to be used in patients who have undergone prolonged AZTtherapy. The product was initially cleared for marketing on the basisof an interim analysis of early data under the FDA's fast trackprogramme where drugs for life-threatening conditions and relativeunmet clinical need are afforded priority in a less stringent reviewingprocess.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996NDA FOR ANTI-PARKINSON'S DRUGPharmacia & Upjohn says it has submitted a NDA for the anti-Parkinson'sdrug pramipexole following the conclusion of three large scale PhaseIII trials. The dopamine agonist, discovered by Boehringer Ingelheimand co-developed with Pharmacia & Upjohn, is indicated for both theearly and late stages of disease. Early use of pramipexole is expectedto delay the onset of complications seen in late stage disease afterearly use of levodopa therapy. Preclinical studies have shown the drughas advantages over levodopa in binding preferentially to the D3receptor and acting as a full dopamine agonist.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996UK LAUNCH OF FEMOSTONSolvay Healthcare has announced the UK launch of Femoston, a sequentialHRT available as a single tablet combining 17 beta oestradiol with theprogestogen dydrogesterone (Duphaston). Dydrogesterone is claimed to bethe closest available synthetic progestogen to natural progesterone andto avoid weight gain. According to studies it causes no androgeniceffects, few PMS-like symptoms and is lipid neutral.Back to Headline List CopyrightPHARMACEUTICAL BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996CITY TALKSector analysts increasingly are recommending an overweight position inthe US pharmaceuticals sector, with faster approvals from the FDA in1995 said to have helped bolster new product prospects. Proposals forFDA reform should ensure a continuing improvement in the rate ofapprovals by the agency and a lowering of the review time required.Despite a weaker Dow Jones Industrial Average, Merck gained $1-1/2 on15 January. In late December Merck outlined its growth strategy in apresentation to analysts, saying it would grow sales with effectivepromotion of existing products, by providing value to managed carecustomers with Medco and through R&D support to ensure future newproduct flows. It was disclosed that Merck's products account for 13per cent of Medco's sales, the highest of any drug company and up from11.5 per cent a year ago. One analyst, maintaining a holdrecommendation on the shares, highlighted the huge margins generatedfrom the Astra Merck joint venture, estimated at around 50 per cent.Merck's vaccine business, including joint ventures, has salesapproaching $1 billion a year. Johnson & Johnson, up $1-1/8 to $84-7/8in morning trade on 12 January, was upgraded to near-term buy by oneWall Street analyst. Industry consolidation looks set to continuethrough much of 1996. Hygenics Pharmaceuticals, a US company thatdevelops premium generic drugs, announced it was in preliminary talksto merge with an unidentified pharmaceutical manufacturing company.In the UK, the majority of analysts have turned neutral after thesector's stunning performance in 1995 - the pharmaceutical sectoroutperformed the All-Share index by about 35 per cent last year - andrecommend profit-taking ahead of the anticipated economic recovery."More people are looking to take profits rather than to build upweightings," said one analyst. That said, Glaxo Wellcome, Medeva andSmithKline Beecham are tipped to perform well this year, with someanalysts continuing to recommend an overweight investment stance.Shares in SmithKline Beecham, at 719p on 5 January, have risen stronglyover the past 12 months, up more than 50 per cent, and boosted recentlyby keen interest from US investors. Better-than-average earnings growthover the next two years should bolster the stock's investor appeal.Analysts estimate full-year underlying pre-tax profits of around #1.35billion and reported pharmaceutical sales growth in excess of 12 percent when 1995 results are announced on 20 February. Margins at DPShowever are considered weaker than first thought at the time of theacquisition. Strong deal-making efforts are likely to see Medevaoutperform, with the shares considered cheap at current levels.Although the shares have risen more than 40 per cent relative to themarket over the past 12 months, further headway is likely as thecompany demonstrates the potential of its restored growth and soundunderlying strategy. Analysts highlight the growth potential from ageneric version of Glaxo Wellcome's Ventolin and anaesthetic gases fromInhalon. In December the US FDA approved the first generic inhaledasthma drug, Ivax's aerosol formulation of salbutamol. Full-yearresults for the year to end December will be announced in lateFebruary. Analysts are forecasting pre-tax profits of around #77million, an increase of over 20 per cent on 1994. The results alsoinclude a #1.5 million charge in relation to settlement of ashareholder suit tied to the company's share price fall in 1993. Lastweek Glaxo Wellcome issued a $500 million 10-year Eurobond, completingits debt restructuring programme following the #9.5 billion acquisitionof Wellcome. On 15 January, rating agency Standard & Poor's affirmedits AA minus long-term and A1 plus short-term ratings of Glaxo Wellcomeand revised its outlook to stable from negative. The positive re-ratingacknowledges the strength of Glaxo Wellcome's research pipeline and itsstrong cash-generating ability. Risks remain however, includinguncertainties over the group's ability to generate the anticipated costsavings and the threat of a higher-than-anticipated decline in sales ofZantac. "Glaxo Wellcome is at a discount to the sector because ofuncertainty over Zovirax, Zantac and the rationalisation benefits.Zeneca, which last week received FDA approval for its Zoladex prostatecancer treatment, drifted lower, closing the week off 2.8 per cent at1230p. Takeover speculation apart, the shares are described asovervalued.European drug stocks, strengthened by firmer product and marketstrategies, face a bright year ahead. Hafslund Nycomed, Synthelabo andSandoz are expected to perform in line or ahead of their respectivemarkets over the next six months. Shares in the latter surged more than60 per cent in absolute terms in the past year but are now likely toconsolidate around current levels.Back to Headline List WT03-B09-8IA087-000629-B020-296http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/me05.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035409 text/html 113787HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:51:41 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:55 GMTContent-length: 113599Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/me05.html Sample Issue Copyright THE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNet January 1996 Vol. 24, No. 1 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SPORTS AND EXERCISE DURING ACUTE ILLNESS Recommending the Right Course for Patients (2809 words) DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF EXERCISE-INDUCED ASTHMA (4897 words) EMERGENCIES NECK INJURIES Urgent Decisions and Actions (2285 words) PATIENT ADVISER EXERCISING--OR NOT--WHEN YOU ARE SICK (714 words) ECG QUIZ AN IRREGULAR PULSE IN A SKYDIVER (679 words) CASE REPORT NONTRAUMATIC HIP PAIN IN ACTIVE CHILDREN A Critical Differential (2633 words) NEWS BRIEFS GOING ONLINE: SPORTS MEDICINE AND MORE (706 words) RELIEF FOR EXERCISE INCONTINENCE (640 words) PEARLS EXPEDITE ANKLE EVALUATION (61 words) IMPROVE YOUR GOLF GRIP (156 words) EARLY ASTHMA DETECTION (58 words) ESTABLISHING TEAM CONFIDENCES (105 words) WOUND CARE FOR AQUATIC ACTIVITIES (110 words) EXERCISE ADVISER STRENGTHENING THE HIP ABDUCTORS (536 words) CopyrightTHE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1SPORTS AND EXERCISE DURING ACUTE ILLNESSRecommending the Right Course for PatientsBy:William A. Primos, Jr, MDIn brief: Active people who suffer acute infectious illness may havequestions concerning participation in exercise or sports during theirillness. Many patients are reluctant to ``get behind'' on their training or``let down the team.'' Physical activity, however, may worsen thecondition, result in impaired performance, or infect others. On the otherhand, some contagious diseases are relatively benign, and some activitiesdon't affect others. Therefore, clinicians need to understand both thesport and the illness to know what level of activity to recommend. Forexample, solo exercise at a reduced intensity is generally safe forpatients whose symptoms are above the neck.   Although regular exercise can help improve health, even well-trainedathletes develop acute infectious diseases. Most physicians advise patientsto rest during an acute illness. However, highly motivated athletes andexercisers often have a variety of reasons to continue athletic activitiesduring an illness:   -- Marcia is a 30-year-old runner training for a marathon. She developsinfectious gastroenteritis. She does not want to miss a day of running andfall behind in her training schedule. Despite several episodes of diarrheathe night before, she decides to accompany her friends on their usualSaturday morning 20-mile run. The weather that day is unusually warm andhumid. During the run she collapses and suffers heatstroke.   -- Mark, a 16-year-old wrestler, has influenza. Tomorrow the conferencetournament will be held, which he must win to qualify for the statechampionships. His symptoms include headaches, chills, and myalgia. Histemperature is 103 degrees F (39.4 degrees C). Mark decides to enter thetournament. In his first-round match he loses to an opponent he had easilydefeated 2 weeks before. Mark's team receives no points in his weight classand is narrowly defeated for the team championship.   -- Michelle is a 32-year-old aerobics instructor who has anupper-respiratory tract infection with rhinorrhea and a sore throat. She isscheduled to teach two classes tonight and one tomorrow morning and cannotfind a substitute instructor. She slightly alters the routine for herclasses, decreasing the number of high-intensity steps and increasing thetime spent stretching. She is able to complete her classes, has noworsening of symptoms, and is asymptomatic 2 days later.   Patients with acute infectious diseases often have questions aboutparticipation in athletic activities. What effect does exercise have on aninfection? Can physical exertion worsen the problem?   Physicians should be able to determine what level of activity is safefor their patients with infectious diseases and to explain to the patientswho need restrictions why they should avoid sports. An understanding ofathletes' susceptibility to infection, effects of illness on physicalperformance, risks of exercising during an illness, and general guidelinesabout determining playability will guide the physician's recommendations.How Susceptible to Infection?   Does regular exercise and physical conditioning affect susceptibility toinfection? Do athletes have altered immunity? A number of factors canaffect a physically active person's risk of acquiring an infection.   Active people may be placed at increased risk of contracting infectiousdiseases because of increased exposure. Athletes are often in close contactwith other participants who may carry pathogens. Transmission may occurthrough a number of different mechanisms. Training and competition ofteninvolve heavy respiration, coughing, and spitting. These acts may transmitnasopharyngeal secretions containing infectious organisms. Directtransmission may occur by bodies touching in some contact sports. Infectionmay also be transmitted by contact with contaminated objects such as mats,towels, and water bottles.   Some studies1,2 (Reference) have shown that intense physical trainingmay lead to a suppressed immune system and an increased susceptibility toinfection. A recent study3 showed that natural killer cell activityincreased immediately after high-intensity exercise, but decreased 1 hourand 2 hours after both moderate- and high-intensity exercise. These changesmay have been due to a shift of the natural killer cells from the blood toperipheral tissues.   Eichner4 (Reference) reviewed several studies dealing with exercise andthe immune system. Some showed alterations in the immune system byexercise. Most of the data, however, were inconclusive about whether thechanges that occurred in the immune system were clinically important. Also,some changes in immunity in athletes may be attributable to emotionalstress.   Even if exercise does not increase susceptibility to illness, physicalactivity may make people more sensitive to symptoms. Minor symptoms such asnasal congestion or a cough are likely to be noticed by a runner during atrain- ing session but may be overlooked by a sedentary person.Harmful Effects   In making a decision about whether an individual should participate inathletics, a number of different factors should be considered. The primaryarea of concern is how exercise would affect the health of the patient.Could exercise worsen symptoms, cause complications, or delay recovery?   Strenuous exercise may result in more severe symptoms. Studies haveshown that intense exercise during the incubation phase of an infection canincrease the severity of the illness.1 (Reference) This may be related tosuppression of the immune system during exercise.   Exercising with an infection also carries some disease-specific healthrisks. Symptoms of a respiratory tract infection, for example, may worsenwith exercise. These infections are often associated with inflammation ofthe airways and increased bronchial secretions. In individuals with asthmaor reactive airways caused by a respiratory tract infection, strenuousexercise may cause bronchospasm, with increased cough, wheezing, anddyspnea.   Splenic rupture is a potentially fatal complication of infectiousmononucleosis. Physicians restrict patients who have infectiousmononucleosis from strenuous athletic activities for extended periodsbecause of the perceived risk of splenic rupture from direct trauma orexertion.5 (Reference) The decision on the proper time for resumingathletic activity is controversial, ranging from 1 to 6 months after theonset of the illness.5-8 (Reference) Since only enlarged spleens rupture,and because almost all splenic ruptures occur in the first 3 weeks ofillness,6 (Reference) the following criteria may be used for determiningthe proper time for return to athletic activity, assuming the patient isalso asymptomatic:   -- For light, nonstrenuous exercise, patients can resume activity 3weeks after the onset of the illness as long as the spleen is not markedlyenlarged on physical examination.   -- For strenuous and contact sports, patients can resume activityapproximately 1 month after the onset of the illness if the spleen is notenlarged on palpation. (Physical examination may not be reliable fordetermining spleen size. Therefore, ultrasonography should be consideredfor assessing spleen size in a patient who wishes to return to strenuous orcontact sports before 1 month.)   Another group of diseases that might be worsened or complicated byexercise is infection with enteroviruses such as coxsackieviruses.Enteroviruses usually cause respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms, butthey may also cause myocarditis.9 (Reference) (See ``Viral Myocarditis:Detection and Management, July 1995, page 63.) Studies on viral myocarditisin mice found that strenuous exercise can result in myocardial necrosis andcardiac dilation, which often led to death from pulmonary edema.10(Reference) Myocarditis has also been implicated as a cause of sudden deathduring exercise in humans11 (Reference) and has been reported as the mostfrequent cause of sudden death in military recruits.12 (Reference) Becauseof the potential for myocarditis, it has been recommended that people whohave systemic symptoms such as fever and myalgia avoid strenuousexercise.11 (Reference)Impaired Performance   A different factor to consider in determining playability is impairedperformance. Acute illness can hinder athletic performance by influencingseveral different body systems.   Cardiac function may be altered during acute infections, especiallythose accompanied by fever. Cardiac output and cardiac stroke volume maydecrease during systemic febrile viral infections. These effects were foundin subjects who were inoculated with sandfly fever virus.13 (Reference) Inanother study,14 (Reference) individuals with febrile illness showed higheroxygen uptake and higher maximal heart rate during exercise. Still anotherstudy15 found acute disturbance of myocardial electrical and mechanicalfunction in subjects who had viral infections.   Acute viral respiratory tract infections can affect pulmonary function.For example, research studies have shown respiratory infections to impairpulmonary gas exchange, though the impairment is not serious. A possibleexplanation for this effect could be mild bronchiolitis that results inmild ventilation-perfusion abnormalities.16 (Reference) Additionally,rhinovirus infection may produce transient peripheral airway abnormalities,which are detected by measuring the dynamic compliance of the lungs andalso are not serious. In a study by Blair et al,17 (Reference) five ofeight individuals with rhinovirus infection developed increased lungcompliance with higher respiration rates. These changes were transient,usually resolving in 2 weeks.   Viral infections can also affect the muscular system. Studies9,13,18(Reference) have shown impaired skeletal muscle performance and strengthduring acute viral infections. One study13 found that all subjects haddecreased muscle strength and function, and another18 (Reference) showedthat 9 of 10 subjects had statistically significant loss of isometric anddynamic strength and muscle endurance.   Some infectious diseases may alter an active person's fluid status.Acute infectious diseases, especially those with gastroenteritis and fever,often result in reduced fluid intake and increased fluid losses. A fluiddeficit of as little as 2% to 3% of body weight stresses the circulatorysystem and can impair endurance.19,20 (Reference)   Low levels of body fluid could also affect temperature regulation sinceless perspiration results in dissipation of less body heat. Although bodytemperature normally rises during exercise, exercisers who have a feverexperience an even greater rise.21 (Reference) Impaired fluid status andthermoregulation caused by febrile illness could put an active person indanger of developing heat exhaustion, heatstroke, and circulatorycollapse.   Because of these effects on the various body systems, acute infectiousillness may result in decreased endurance, strength, speed, concentration,or any combination of these factors. If an athlete is unable to performadequately, the goals of the team would probably be better served by usinganother team member who is able to perform at a higher level.   Because of the previously discussed physiologic effects of acute febrileviral infections, it is logical to assume that working out during a viralillness would impart fewer fitness gains than would working out whilehealthy. Patients who are concerned about losing training time can bereminded of this supposition.Risk of Infecting Others   Playability decisions are also affected by whether other people would beput at risk by the infected person's participation. To determine the riskof transmission, one must consider the period of contagiousness, the modeof transmission, and the type of contact. If the illness is potentiallysevere and is in the contagious period--and the type of contact would putothers at risk of infection--participation should be avoided. Athletesshould be encouraged to consider the health and welfare of others moreimportant than their participation in sports.   Measles is an infection that can be transmitted to others through sportsparticipation. Measles is a highly contagious illness for those who are notimmune and is transmitted person to person via aerosol droplets. Measlestransmission during athletic events such as the 1991 International SpecialOlympics and the Maryland high school state wrestling tournament has beendocumented.22 (Reference) The period of contagiousness for measles lastsuntil 4 days after the appearance of the rash; people with measles shouldbe disqualified from sports participation during this period.   Epidemic pleurodynia, or epidemic myalgia, is characterized by abruptonset of chest or abdominal pain and fever. The usual pathogen iscoxsackievirus B. Outbreaks of this disease have been reported on footballand soccer teams. In an outbreak on a New York high school football team, apossible mode of transmission was shared water containers.23 (Reference)   In a recent review of infectious diseases in sports in the UnitedStates, the most common disease spread by person-to-person contact washerpes simplex,24 (Reference) with 12 documented reports among wrestlersand rugby players. Close contact is required for transmission. The diseasecan be spread either via body fluids or by direct contact of the lesionswith uninfected skin or mucous membranes. The risk of transmission isincreased if the uninfected skin is abraded or otherwise damaged. Toprevent spread of herpes simplex, infected athletes should be disqualifiedfrom contact sports until all lesions are crusted over or healed.Practical Advice   Physicians need to educate patients about exercising during an acuteillness, limiting spread of the disease, and preventing infection in thefirst place (see the patient handout ``Exercising--or Not--When You AreSick'' on page 55). As pointed out by Goodman et al,24 (Reference) athletesshould be reminded that by their participation in sports, others may be putat risk of acquiring infection. If infection could be transmitted duringthe sport, participation should be avoided.   In addition, athletes should be immunized against preventable diseasessuch as measles, mumps, tetanus, rubella, and, possibly, hepatitis B.Diseases such as enteroviral infections can be prevented by avoiding sharedwater bottles and towels. Also, healthcare providers need to reportoutbreaks of infectious diseases to public health officials to allowcontrol measures.   Active people who do develop acute infectious illnesses should beadvised that the benefits of exercise are decreased during illness and thatthey might as well wait until they have recovered. Patients should also beinformed that participation in strenuous exercise may be dangerous to theirhealth.   To help prevent serious complications such as myocarditis, patients canuse a ``neck check'' of symptoms.4 (Reference) If the person has only``above the neck'' symptoms, such as nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, and sorethroat, then he or she can probably safely try participation. However, ifthe patient has ``below the neck'' symptoms, such as myalgia, hackingcough, fever, or chills, it would be wise to refrain from intense physicalactivity. By following these recommendations, patients who have acuteillnesses may avoid complications and make a safe return to full activity.   Address correspondence to William A. Primos, Jr, MD, SportsMedicineCharlotte/Metrolina Orthopaedic, Sports Science Centre, 335 Billingsley Rd,Charlotte, NC 28211.About the Author(s):Dr Primos practices primary care sports medicine in Charlotte, NorthCarolina, and is a charter member of the American Medical Society forSports Medicine.Reference(s):1. Fitzgerald L: Overtraining increases the susceptibility to infection.Int J Sports Med 1991;12(suppl 1):S5-S82. Heath GW, Ford ES, Craven TE, et al: Exercise and the incidence of upperrespiratory tract infections. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1991;23(2):152-1573. Nieman DC, Miller AR, Henson DA, et al: Effects of high- vsmoderate-intensity exercise on natural killer cell activity. Med Sci SportsExerc 1993;25(10): 1126-11344. Eichner ER: Infection, immunity, and exercise. Phys Sportsmed1993;21(1):125-1355. Haines JD Jr: When to resume sports after infectious mononucleosis: howsoon is safe? Postgrad Med 1987;81(1):331-3336. Maki DG, Reich RM: Infectious mononucleosis in the athlete: diagnosis,complications, and management. Am J Sports Med 1982;10(3):162-1737. Eichner ER: Infectious mononucleosis: recognition and management inathletes. Phys Sportsmed 1987; 15(12):61-728. Rutkow IM: Rupture of the spleen in infectious mononucleosis: a criticalreview. Arch Surg 1978;113 (6):718-7209. Roberts JA: Viral illnesses and sports performance. Sports Med1986;3(4):298-30310. Lerner AM: A new continuing fatigue syndrome following mild viralillness: a proscription to exercise, editorial. Chest 1988;94(5):901-90211. Johnson RJ: Sudden death during exercise: a cruel turn of events.Postgrad Med 1992;92(2):195-20612. Phillips M, Robinowitz M, Higgins JR, et al: Sudden cardiac death inAir Force recruits: a 20-year review. JAMA 1986;256(19):2696-269913. Friman G, Wright JE, Ilback NG, et al: Does fever or myalgia indicatereduced physical performance capacity in viral infections? Acta Med Scand1985;217 (4):353-36114. Grimby G: Exercise in man during pyrogen-induced fever. Scand J ClinLab Invest 1962;14(suppl 67):1-11215. Montague TJ, Marrie TJ, Bewick DJ, et al: Cardiac effects of commonviral illnesses. Chest 1988;94(5): 919-92516. Cate TR, Roberts JS, Russ MA, et al: Effects of common colds onpulmonary function. Am Rev Respir Dis 1973;108(4):858-86517. Blair HT, Greenberg SB, Stevens PM, et al: Effects of rhinovirusinfection of pulmonary function of healthy human volunteers. Am Rev RespirDis 1976;114(1):95-10218. Daniels WL, Vogel JA, Sharp DS, et al: Effects of virus infection onphysical performance in man. Mil Med 1985;150(1):8-1419. McArdle WD, Katch FI, Katch VL: Exercise Physiology: Energy, Nutrition,and Human Performance, ed 2. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 198620. Guyton AC: Textbook of Medical Physiology, ed 7. Philadelphia, WBSaunders Co, 198621. Hanson PG: Illness among athletes: an overview, in Strauss RH (ed):Sports Medicine. Philadelphia, WB Saunders Co, 198422. White J: Measles: a hazard of indoor sports. Phys Sportsmed1991;19(11):2123. Ikeda RM, Kondracki SF, Drabkin PD, et al: Pleurodynia among footballplayers at a high school: an outbreak associated with coxsackievirus B1.JAMA 1993;270(18):2205-220624. Goodman RA, Thacker SB, Solomon SL, et al: Infectious diseases incompetitive sports. JAMA 1994; 271(11):862-867Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF EXERCISE-INDUCED ASTHMABy:Ned T. Rupp, MEd, MD   In brief: Exercise-induced asthma (EIA) affects 12% to 15% of thegeneral population. Its symptoms include chest tightness, shortness ofbreath, coughing, wheezing, fatigue, and prolonged recovery times afterexercise. Diagnosis depends on accurate history, physical examination, andlung function testing. Nonpharmacologic management includes modification ofboth activity and ambient conditions, along with rigorous patienteducation. Short-acting inhaled beta (subscript) 2 agonists are thepharmacologic treatment of choice for isolated and breakthrough EIA.Anti-inflammatory medications such as inhaled cromolyn sodium, nedocromilsodium, and corticosteroids are used to control underlying asthma as wellas EIA. Other agents such as oral theophylline or long-acting beta agonistsmay be important but their roles aren't clearly defined.   When undiagnosed, exercise-induced asthma (EIA), a common clinicalsyndrome characterized by a transient increase in airway resistancefollowing several minutes of exercise,1,2 (Reference) can be an obstacle toan active lifestyle. But when the disease is identified and well managed,the results can be remarkable for patients of all activity levels. Of the597 members of the 1984 United States Olympic Team, 67 (11.2%) experiencedEIA.3 (Reference) The athletes who had EIA won 41 medals during the games.Their superb achievements indicate the high level of performance thatpeople who have EIA can reach with appropriate therapy.How Common is EIA?   EIA affects a broad segment of the population. Up to 90% of people whohave asthma experience EIA during the course of their disease, and mostconsider exercise to be a major precipitant of their asthma.4-6 (Reference)In addition, 35% to 40% of patients who have allergic rhinitis experienceEIA precipitated by allergens, viruses, cold air, air pollutants, or acombination of these factors.2,4-7 (Reference) The general population whoare not diagnosed as asthmatic and do not have noted respiratory allergieshave a much lower EIA incidence of 3% to 10%. Combining these groups givesan overall EIA incidence of 12% to 15%.8 (Reference) The incidence issomewhat higher in children than in adults.8 (Reference)   Among active people, the incidence of EIA ranges from 3% to more than12%.3,6,9-11 (Reference) The presence of EIA in active people, however, maybe underreported, as many athletes may not be aware they have thecondition. The symptoms of EIA can often be perceived as part of theexperience of normal vigorous exercise.11 (Reference) In addition, denialof illness is common among young athletes.When Exercise Obstructs   Asthma is an obstructive disease of the airways characterized by airwayinflammation and hyperreactivity. Airflow obstruction is influenced bybronchial wall edema, mucus production, airway smooth muscle contraction,and hypertrophy. The obstruction may be initiated by inflammatory events inthe airways, particularly the release of inflammatory mediators from mastcells, macrophages, and epithelial cells. Airway hyperreactivity is anexaggerated bronchoconstriction response to various stimuli includingallergens, environmental irritants, viral respiratory infections, cold air,and exercise. Airway obstruction brought on by exercise is termed EIA.   The etiology of EIA is probably multifactorial. Though much has beendiscovered about EIA, complete understanding of the pathophysiology of thedisease has not yet been obtained. For example, the concept of airwayinflammation contributing to asthma is relatively new, and its impact onmanagement of the disease is still being determined.   There is a general consensus that the airway obstruction that developsin EIA is related to thermodynamic events within the airway duringhyperpnea. As a result of hyperventilation during and after exercise, theupper airway is unable to bring inspired air to body temperature and 100%humidity. Heat and water are drawn from the respiratory tissue in order towarm and humidify the inspired air, resulting in respiratory tissue waterloss and airway cooling.12-14 (Reference)   Typically, EIA begins with bronchodilation either during or immediatelyfollowing exercise. All people experience bronchodilation in response toexercise. Normally, widening of the glottis and bronchodilation meet theincreased oxygen requirements during exercise. In EIA, however, the glottiswidens but the lower airways constrict. Respiratory demand increases, andforced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV (subscript) 1) and peakexpiratory flow rate (PEFR) decrease significantly. Maximalbronchoconstriction generally occurs 3 to 15 minutes after exerciseceases.15 (Reference) Factors that can vary the usual bronchoconstrictiontiming include environmental conditions such as temperature, humidity, airquality, or pollens; the type, duration, or intensity of the exercise; thetime from a previous exercise session; and the degree of bronchialhyperreactivity.   With a second exercise challenge, less than half of the original degreeof obstruction will occur--this is defined as the refractory period.Approximately half of patients are refractory within 1 hour, but nearlyeveryone loses the effect after 2 to 3 hours. It is impossible to predictwhether a person will be refractory to EIA, and occurrence of a refractoryperiod may be intermittent in any patient. Original bronchospasm severityplays no role in a patient's refractory status, though certain factorsencourage the refractory period: a warm-up session before exercise;breathing or exercising in warm, humid air; and prolonged submaximalexercise.   Though most patients recover from EIA within 1 hour,2 (Reference) lateasthmatic responses that occur 3 to 9 hours after exercise have beenreported.16,17 (Reference) Patients at higher risk for late responsesappear to be children and those with severe early responses.2 (Reference)Some investigators have doubted the existence of this late response or itsclinical relevance19 (Reference) because bronchoconstriction during thelate response is usually much less severe.   In other words, repeated exercise challenge during the refractory periodmay still reduce FEV (subscript) 1 and PEFR, but less than half as much aswith the initial postchallenge reduction.18 (Reference)   The factors that influence the severity of EIA (table 1) are similar tothose that affect the refractory period and include the degree ofunderlying bronchial hyperreactivity; duration, type and intensity ofexercise; environmental conditions; exposure to allergens; respiratoryinfections; interval since the last episode of EIA (refractory period);16(Reference) and low fitness level. Environmental factors such as cold, dryair, airborne allergens such as pollens or house dust mites, and airpollutants can exacerbate EIA. In patients with EIA who are susceptible toallergens, antigen challenge during exercise has been found to double theintensity of EIA.20 (Reference) Therefore, designing an individualtreatment regimen requires consideration of seasonal and geographicfactors. Activities such as running and cycling that require high levels ofactivity at or near maximal levels of aerobic capacity are most likely tocause EIA. Generally, the more vigorous the exercise, the more rapid andsevere the bronchospasm.21 (Reference) The relationship of duration ofexercise to intensity of EIA is more complex. With a short period ofactivity, the severity of bronchospasm is related to exercise length;however, some patients find that if they continue to exercise aftersymptoms develop, they may be able to ``run through'' theirbronchospasm.2,8 (Reference) This effect may be related to the refractoryperiod.EIA Workup Strategies   In the workup of a patient who has suspected EIA, a thorough history isvital (table 2). The signs and symptoms of EIA are typically those ofclassic airway obstruction: dyspnea, cough, and chest tightness with orwithout wheezing, though some patients may also complain ofgastrointestinal discomfort. EIA may also present as chest pain in childrenand adolescents.22 (Reference) Without a careful history, possiblyaugmented by teammates, coaches, family, or friends, these signs andsymptoms may be easily misinterpreted as postexercise fatigue. Also, denialof symptoms is common, especially among student-athletes because of peerpressure, embarrassment, and fear of losing their place on the team.11(Reference)   A careful physical examination of the upper and lower respiratory tractsis important. However, because of the episodic nature of EIA, the physicalexam is often normal despite the presence of significant disease. Thepharynx should be examined for mucus indicating postnasal drainage.Examination of the nose may reveal erythema, congestion, and enlargedturbinates. Sinuses should be percussed to assess for tenderness.Examination of the lower respiratory tract should include auscultation ofthe lungs to determine the presence of a prolonged expiratory phase,wheezing, or coughing with inspiration.   Pulmonary function testing is an integral part of EIA diagnosis. InitialFEV (subscript) 1, forced vital capacity (FVC), FEV (subscript) 1/FVCratio, and PEFR values should be determined. FEV (subscript) 1 and FEV(subscript) 1/FVC values below 80% of predicted value indicate obstructiveairway disease. Caution should accompany a diagnosis based on PEFRmeasurements: Peak flow is highly effort dependent, and a low PEFR mayindicate either obstructive or restrictive respiratory disease. Once theEIA diagnosis has been made, PEFR measurements may be useful in followingthe course of the disease and response to treatment.   However, many patients have symptoms of EIA but a normal restingpulmonary function test. These patients may require inhalation challenge,exercise challenge, or a therapeutic trial to establish the diagnosis. (See``Exercise Challenge for Exercise-Induced Bronchospasm: ConfirmingPresence, Evaluating Control,'' August 1995, page 47.) Furthermore, activepatients often have lung function well above normal predicted values; forexample, a 30% drop in a patient with 150% of normal function may appearsatisfactory, but could represent a bronchospastic problem for thatindividual.   Bronchoprovocation testing is sensitive for diagnosing hyperreactiveairways.6 (Reference) Patients inhale gradually increasing concentrationsof a bronchoconstrictor, usually methacholine (though histamine may also beused), while spirometric changes in airflow are recorded. The degree ofairway hyperreactivity is related to the amount of bronchoconstrictorrequired to cause bronchospasm. Another laboratory test that has gainedpopularity is bronchoprovocation with cold air.   Exercise challenge testing involves determining baseline lung functionbefore exercise and measuring forced expiration at 5- to 10-minuteintervals following exercise for 15 to 30 minutes. Exercise challengeshould consist of 6 to 10 minutes of strenuous exercise at 85% to 90% ofthe predicted maximal heart rate. Postexercise decreases of 10% to 20% inFEV (subscript) 1 indicate mild EIA, 20% to 40% moderate, and more than 40%severe.23 (Reference) When the patient's history is compatible with EIA yetspirometry at 15 minutes is nondiagnostic, a prolonged postexerciseevaluation is necessary.15 (Reference)   Exercise challenge is less sensitive than methacholine challenge, sonegative results do not exclude the diagnosis of EIA; however, exercisetesting is highly specific for EIA, and positive results provide goodassurance of the presence of the disease. Results of provocation testingmay vary due to the influences of allergens, air pollution, temperature, orupper respiratory infections. These same factors can account for theseasonal occurrence of EIA in many people.   Because a patient who has EIA may have normal ``at rest'' pulmonaryfunction, a history consistent with EIA should prompt patient educationabout the condition and its treatment. A trial of a short-acting beta(subscript) 2 agonist prior to exercise, with symptom monitoring by thepatient, is often the next appropriate step. Follow-up exercise challengeis often unnecessary in cases of clear benefit, so this strategy can be avery cost-effective management approach.   Challenge testing is warranted when the patient history is unclear orwhen the patient's coach or parents have brought the symptoms to thephysician's attention. Testing can help avoid overuse or unnecessary use ofmedication when the patient's breathing problems are caused by anxiety,hyperventilation syndrome, poor conditioning, upper airway obstruction, orseasonal EIA. Finally, an exercise challenge can not only reproduce thesymptoms for the patient, but also encourage compliance by demonstratingthe effectiveness of therapy.Nonpharmacologic Interventions   The goal of EIA management is to allow patients to participate fully inathletic activities without difficulty. The ultimate success ofpharmacologic therapy will depend on the following nonpharmacologicstrategies: activity modification, improvement in ambient air conditions,and patient education.   Management should begin with efforts to increase physical conditioning,which can reduce the requirements for pharmacotherapy and decrease theincidence of asthma attacks.7,24 (Reference) Also, short bursts of activityhave been shown to decrease EIA.25 (Reference) By incorporating warm-upactivities into their exercise program, patients may be able to takeadvantage of the refractory period and decrease the frequency and severityof bronchospastic episodes.   Warm, humid environments or breathing in warm, humid air will ameliorateEIA and will improve the patient's chances of being refractory to repeatedexercise challenge over the next 1 to 3 hours. Wearing a face mask duringactivity warms and humidifies inspired air when outdoor conditions are coldand dry. Breathing through the nose rather than the mouth will filter,warm, and humidify inspired air.   Education can boost the effectiveness of other therapeuticinterventions. Patients must be aware of the conditions that exacerbatetheir disease and how to avoid them, early signs of an impending asthmaattack, and appropriate use of medications for prevention and flares.Pharmacologic Options   The pharmacologic goals of treating EIA are preventing the onset ofasthma episodes and treating breakthrough episodes that may occur followingexercise. Several classes of drugs with bronchodilating andanti-inflammatory effects are used to treat EIA, including beta agonists,cromolyn sodium, nedocromil sodium, and corticosteroids--all mostfrequently given by inhalation--and oral theophylline.   Beta agonists are the drugs of choice for preventing isolated EIA andfor on-demand treatment of exercise-induced acute asthmaexacerbations.2,6,7,15,24,26 (Reference) This group includes theestablished short-acting agents albuterol, bitolterol mesylate,metaproterenol sulfate, pirbuterol acetate, terbutaline sulfate, and thenewer, longer-acting salmeterol. Both short and long-acting beta agonistsare effective in nearly all patients who have asthma--those with chronicobstruction and those who have only exercise-related obstruction. However,short-acting beta agonists are the most effective agents for preventingEIA, and are effective in 80% to 95% of patients.27 (Reference) Theyreverse contraction of bronchial smooth muscle and are very effectivebronchodilators.28 (Reference) In the laboratory, beta agonists haveexhibited some anti-inflammatory activity through stabilization of mastcells and prevention of release of histamine and other inflammatorymediators; however, the clinical relevance of these effects is not yetknown.29 (Reference) Short-acting inhaled beta agonists have a rapid onsetof action, usually within 5 minutes, and maximal bronchodilation usuallyoccurs within 15 minutes.30 (Reference) Therefore, to achieve maximaleffect during intense exercise, short-acting beta agonists should beadministered 15 minutes before exercise. Duration of action varies, buteffectiveness against EIA generally lasts 3 to 6 hours.   Salmeterol, the long-acting beta agonist approved for use in patientsage 12 or older in the United States, has been shown to protect against EIAfor up to 12 hours in 55% of patients who have EIA and take no chronicasthma medications.31 (Reference) Because its onset of action is slowerthan that of the short-acting beta agonists, salmeterol is never to be usedas a rescue medication, and dosing is limited to 2 puffs every 12 hours.32(Reference) Patients who take salmeterol, therefore, must have ashort-acting beta agonist available to relieve sudden onset ofbronchospasm.33 (Reference) The effectiveness of short-acting beta agonistsfor rescue purposes may be blunted if salmeterol is being used.34(Reference)   In addition, tolerance to the effects of beta agonists is an area ofactive research. In general, tachyphylaxis appears to occur with regularuse of beta agonists.33,35,36 (Reference) With regard to EIA, a recentstudy37 reported that after 4 weeks of regular salmeterol administration,tachyphylaxis developed to the point that there was no significantdifference in effectiveness between the drug and placebo. The controversysurrounding the regular use of beta agonists has led to the currentconsensus recommendation of on-demand use.24,26,38,39 (Reference)   Current guidelines for the management of EIA begin with administrationof a short-acting inhaled beta agonist 15 minutes before exercise. Patientsshould then undertake a 15-minute warm-up period of stretching andlow-level exercise, followed by a 15-minute rest period before intenseexercise if possible. If asthma symptoms develop during exercise, on-demandtherapy with two puffs of short-acting beta agonist should be repeated.6(Reference)   Patients must be carefully educated about the proper use and roles ofshort- and long-acting beta agonists. If a patient's use of a short-actingbeta agonist increases, he or she should immediately contact the physician:Increased use may be a sign of worsening disease, and the patient may needfurther evaluation and anti-inflammatory therapy. Patients should alsoclearly understand that a long-acting beta agonist is not intended asrescue medication nor as a replacement for inhaled anti-inflammatorytherapy. Recent reports of deaths attributable to respiratory arrest inpatients using salmeterol40,41 (Reference) emphasize the importance ofpatient education and proper use of asthma medication.   Cromolyn sodium is another frequently used medication for the treatmentof EIA; its anti-inflammatory effects prevent EIA in 70% to 85% ofpatients, with a very low incidence of side effects.28 (Reference)Administered before exercise, it is most effective in patients who havenormal pulmonary function tests. Cromolyn combined with a beta agonist ishighly effective in patients who don't respond to single-medicationtherapy. Early- and late-phase asthmatic responses are inhibited bycromolyn sodium, though its exact mechanism of action in EIA is unknown.Theories include inhibition of mast cell mediator release and alteration ofcalcium influx. Because the duration of action and efficacy of cromolynsodium are less than those of the beta agonists, it is generally used as asecond-line agent.7 (Reference) The greatest inhibitory effect of cromolynsodium on EIA may occur at much higher doses than provided by two puffs ofthe metered dose inhaler.42 (Reference)   Cromolyn is most effective for EIA when given by inhaler 10 to 45minutes prior to exercise.43 (Reference) Cromolyn does not have anybronchodilating action, and if it fails to prevent bronchoconstriction, abeta agonist inhaler should be used for immediate relief.   Nedocromil sodium, an inhaled anti-inflammatory agent, has also beenfound to inhibit exercise-induced asthma,44,45 (Reference) showingeffectiveness equal to that of cromolyn sodium.46 (Reference) Likecromolyn, nedocromil is administered before exercise and is most effectivein patients who have normal pulmonary function tests. Nedocromil combinedwith a beta agonist is highly effective in patients who don't respond tosingle-medication therapy.   Corticosteroids administered through an inhaler improve asthma symptomsby reducing airway inflammation and bronchial hyperreactivity. They do nothave any immediate bronchodilator effect and are not effective if usedalone just prior to exercise. Corticosteroids should instead be used asmaintenance therapy to control asthma. Such use can improve theeffectiveness of pre-exercise beta agonists in preventing or decreasing theseverity of EIA.6,47 (Reference) Inhaled dosages of less than 400 g dailyhave a low incidence of side effects. When side effects occur, the mostcommon are oropharyngeal candidiasis and dysphonia; both can be avoided byusing a spacer.28 (Reference)   Oral theophylline has been widely used in the treatment of asthma fordecades. Its bronchodilating effects are directly related to plasmaconcentration, and theophylline may also have some anti-inflammatoryeffects.29 (Reference) Theophylline is not a first-line agent in theprevention and treatment of EIA--it is generally used for patients who donot respond well to inhaled beta agonists. Theophylline would be a thirdchoice behind beta agonists and cromolyn for patients under age 12, andwould rank behind beta agonists, cromolyn or nedocromil, and perhapsipratropium bromide in those over age 12. Theophylline may be given eitherin rapid-release form 1 to 2 hours before exercise or regularly in thesustained-release form for prophylaxis. Even in rapid-release form,theophylline's long onset of action (approximately 90 minutes) limits itsuse in an athletic setting.29 (Reference) Factors influencing serumconcentration and the possible effect on classroom concentration inchildren make theophylline less desirable than other options in mostpatients. As with cromolyn sodium, the combination of theophylline and abeta agonist may be additive in the prevention of EIA,29 (Reference) thoughconcerns have been raised regarding increased incidence of side effectswhen these two agents are used together.7 (Reference)   Ipratropium bromide is a derivative of atropine and has bronchodilatingeffects. The inhaled drug is used in some patients with EIA who are unableto tolerate or who do not respond well to beta agonists. It may also beused in combination with beta agonists or cromolyn sodium. If cromolyn ornedocromil combined with a beta agonist do not adequately controlbronchospasm, a trial of ipratropium bromide would be recommended. The drughas a slower onset of action than beta agonists, and its use in EIA islimited: When used alone, the drug is effective in only 30% to 40% ofpatients and requires nearly normal baseline pulmonary function to beeffective.7 (Reference) When combined with a beta agonist, ipratropiumbromide may be a helpful adjunct in adults who have moderate-to-severeasthma. Though some studies have reported effective prophylaxis of EIA withipratropium bromide, others have not found it to be effective.48(Reference)   Other agents that have been used in the treatment of EIA includeantihistamines and calcium channel blockers. Antihistamines decreasebronchospasm in some individuals but will not prevent EIA. However, theycan improve nasal function, allowing the patient to breathe better throughhis or her nose. The calcium channel blockers nifedipine and verapamilhydrochloride have been shown to inhibit mast cell mediator release andprevent symptoms of EIA in a select group of patients;49 (Reference)however, data are insufficient to recommend them for EIA control.   Recent studies50,51 report that leukotriene inhibitors and heparinrelieve EIA. The clinical effectiveness and use of these medicines willbecome more apparent after further trials.Removing Breathing Barriers   From allergies to air temperature, many factors can affect thebronchospastic response of EIA, and the physician must be aware of thenuances of each patient's response. Fortunately, there are manynonpharmacologic and pharmacologic options that can be combined to controlnearly any degree of EIA.   The efforts put into the diagnostic workup, follow-up, and patienteducation are rewarding because they enable patients to perform at or nearmaximal activity levels.   Address correspondence to Ned T. Rupp, MEd, MD, Medical College ofGeorgia, Section of Allergy and Immunology, Dept of Pediatrics andMedicine, BG-247, Augusta, GA 30912; e-mail to deptped.nrupp@ mail.mcg.eduTable 1. Factors Contributing to the Severity of Exercise-Induced Asthma   -- Ambient air conditions (cold air, low humidity, pollutants)   -- Duration, type, and intensity of exercise   -- Exposure to allergens in sensitized individuals   -- Overall control of asthma   -- Poor physical conditioning   -- Respiratory infections   -- Time since last episode of exercise-induced asthma   -- Underlying bronchial hyperreactivityTable 2. Factors in the Patient History That Suggest the Presence ofExercise-Induced Asthma   -- Coughing, wheezing, dyspnea, or chest discomfort with exercise   -- Symptoms that vary by season or outdoor temperature   -- Discontinued, decreased, or altered exercise regimen   -- Complaints of decreased or limited endurance   -- `Out of Shape' label used to describe a well-conditioned athlete   -- Minimal problems with swimming or in warm, humid environmentsAbout the Author(s):Dr Rupp is assistant professor of pediatrics and medicine at the MedicalCollege of Georgia in Augusta, Georgia. He is a fellow of the AmericanCollege of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology and the American Academy ofAllergy, Asthma, and Immunology; he is a member of the sports medicinesubcommittee for both organizations.Reference(s):1. Gelb AF, Tashkin DP, Epstein JD, et al: Exercise-induced bronchodilationin asthma. Chest 1985;87 (2):196-2012. Spector SL: Update on exercise-induced asthma. Ann Allergy1993;71(6):571-5773. Pierson WE, Voy RO: Exercise-induced bronchospasm in the XXIII summerOlympic games. N Engl Reg Allergy Proc 1988;9(3):209-2134. Anderson SD: Issues in exercise-induced asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol1985;76(6):763-7725. Anderson SD: Exercise-induced asthma: the state of the art. Chest1985;87(Suppl):191S-195S6. Mahler DA: Exercise-induced asthma. Med Sci Sports Exerc1993;25(5):554-5617. Kobayashi RH, Mellion MB: Exercise-induced asthma, anaphylaxis, andurticaria. Prim Care 1991;18 (4):809-8318. McCarthy P: Wheezing or breezing through exercise-induced asthma. PhysSportsmed 1989;17(7): 125-1309. Rice SG, Bierman CW, Shapiro GG, et al: Identification ofexercise-induced asthma among intercollegiate athletes. Ann Allergy1985;55(6):790-79310. Rupp NT, Guill MF, Brudno DS: Unrecognized exercise-inducedbronchospasm in adolescent athletes. Am J Dis Child 1992;146(8):941-94411. Rupp NT, Brudno DS, Guill MF: The value of screening for risk ofexercise-induced asthma in high school athletes. Ann Allergy1993;70(4):339-34212. Anderson SD, Schoeffel RE, Follet R, et al: Sensitivity to heat andwater loss at rest and during exercise in asthmatic patients. Eur J RespirDis 1982;63(5):459-47113. Anderson SD: Is there a unifying hypothesis for exercise-inducedasthma? J Allergy Clin Immunol 1984;73(5 pt 2):660-66514. McFadden ER Jr: Hypothesis: exercise-induced asthma as a vascularphenomenon. Lancet 1990;335 (8694):880-88315. Brudno DS, Wagner JM, Rupp NT: Length of postexercise assessment in thedetermination of exercise-induced bronchospasm. Ann Allergy 1994;73(3):227-23116. McFadden ER Jr: Exercise and asthma, editorial. N Engl J Med1987;317(8):502-50417. Dahl R, Molgaard Henriksen J: Development of late asthmatic reactionsafter allergen or exercise challenge tests. Eur J Respir Dis1980;61(6):320-32418. Belcher NG, O'Hickey S, Arm JP, et al: Pathogenetic mechanisms ofexercise-induced asthma and the refractory period. N Engl Reg Allergy Proc1988; 9(3):199-20119. Boner AL, Sette L, Piacentini G, et al: Exercise-induced biphasicresponses and methacholine reactivity in asthma. Ann Allergy1990;65(4):284-28620. Mussaffi H, Springer C, Godfrey S: Increased bronchial responsivenessto exercise and histamine after allergen challenge in children with asthma.J Allergy Clin Immunol 1986;77(1 pt 1):48-5221. Noviski N, Bar-Yishay E, Gur I, et al: Exercise intensity determinesand climatic conditions modify the severity of exercise-induced asthma. AmRev Respir Dis 1987;136(3):592-59422. Wiens L, Sabath R, Ewing L, et al: Chest pain in otherwise healthychildren and adolescents is frequently caused by exercise-induced asthma.Pediatrics 1992;90(3):350-35323. Eggleston PA: Methods of exercise challenge. J Allergy Clin Immunol1984;73(5 pt 2):666-66924. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: International ConsensusReport on Diagnosis and Management of Asthma. Bethesda, MD: NationalInstitutes of Health; 1992. NIH publication 92-309125. Reiff DB, Choudry NB, Pride NB, et al: The effect of prolongedsubmaximal warm-up exercise on exercise-induced asthma. Am Rev Respir Dis1989;139 (2):479-48426. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Asthma EducationProgram, Expert Panel on the Management of Asthma: Guidelines for theDiagnosis and Management of Asthma: Expert Panel Report. Bethesda, MD:National Asthma Education Program, Office of Prevention, Education, andControl, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes ofHealth, US Dept of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service; 1991.Publication 91-304227. AAP issues statement of exercise-induced asthma in children. Am FamPhysician 1989;40(4):314, 31628. Hendrickson CD, Lynch JM, Gleeson K: Exercise induced asthma: aclinical perspective. Lung 1994;172(1):1-1429. Morton AR, Fitch KD: Asthmatic drugs and competitive sport: an update.Sports Med 1992;14(4):228-24230. Morgan DJ: Clinical pharmacokinetics of beta-agonists. ClinPharmacokinet 1990;18(4):270-29431. Kemp JP, Dockhorn RJ, Busse WW, et al: Prolonged effect of inhaledsalmeterol against exercise-induced bronchospasm. Am J Respir Crit Care Med1994;150(6 pt 1):1612-161532. Serevent prescribing information. Allen & Hanburys, 199533. Boulet LP: Long- versus short-acting beta 2-agonists: implications fordrug therapy. Drugs 1994; 47(2):207-222 [published erratum in Drugs 1994;48(2):326]34. Grove A, Lipworth BJ: Bronchodilator subsensitivity to salbutamol aftertwice daily salmeterol in asthmatic patients. Lancet1995;346(8969):201-20635. Sears MR, Taylor DR, Print CG, et al: Regular inhaled beta-agonisttreatment in bronchial asthma. Lancet 1990;336(8728):1391-139636. Cheung D, Timmers MC, Zwinderman AH, et al: Long-term effects of along-acting beta 2-adrenoceptor agonist, salmeterol, on airwayhyperresponsiveness in patients with mild asthma. N Engl J Med1992;327(17):1198-120337. Ramage L, Lipworth BJ, Ingram CG, et al: Reduced protection againstexercise induced bronchoconstriction after chronic dosing with salmeterol.Respir Med 1994;88(5):363-36838. Guidelines for management of asthma in adults. I: Chronic persistentasthma. Statement by the British Thoracic Society, Research Unit of theRoyal College of Physicians of London, King's Fund Centre, National AsthmaCampaign. BMJ 1990;301(6753):651-653 [published erratum in BMJ1990;301(6757):924]39. Inhaled beta 2-adrenergic agonists in asthma. The Executive Committeeof the American Academy of Allergy and Immunology. J Allergy Clin Immunol1993;91(6):1234-123740. Finkelstein FN: Risks of salmeterol? letter. N Engl J Med1994;331(19):131441. Asthma deaths tied to error in use of drug. New York Times 1994;Nov8:B1142. Patel KR, Berkin KE, Kerr JW: Dose-response study of sodiumcromoglycate in exercise-induced asthma. Thorax 1982;37(9):663-66643. Kunig P: The use of cromolyn in the management of hyperreactive airwaysand exercise. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1984;73(5 pt 2):686-68944. Shaw RJ, Kay AB: Nedocromil, a mucosal and connective tissue mast cellstabilizer, inhibits exercise-induced asthma. Br J Dis Chest1985;79(4):385-38945. Novembre E, Frongia G, Lombardi E, et al: The preventive effect ofnedocromil or furosemide alone or in combination on exercise-induced asthmain children. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1994;94(2 pt 1):201-20646. de Benedictis FM, Tuteri G, Bertotto A, et al: Comparison of theprotective effects of cromolyn sodium and nedocromil sodium in thetreatment of exercise-induced asthma in children. J Allergy Clin Immunol1994;94(4):684-68847. Henriksen JM, Dahl R: Effects of inhaled budesonide alone and incombination with low-dose terbutaline in children with exercise-inducedasthma. Am Rev Respir Dis 1983;128(6):993-99748. Furukawa CT: Other pharmacologic agents that may affect bronchialhyperreactivity. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1984;73(5 pt 2):693-69849. McFadden ER Jr: Calcium-channel blocking agents and asthma, editorial.Ann Intern Med 1981;95(2): 232-23350. Makker HK, Lau LC, Thomson HW, et al: The protective effect of inhaledleukotriene D4 receptor antagonist ICI 204,219 against exercise-inducedasthma. Am Rev Respir Dis 1993;147(6 pt 1):1413-141851. Ahmed T, Garrigo J, Danta I: Preventing bronchoconstriction inexercise-related asthma with inhaled heparin. N Engl J Med1993;329(2):90-95Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1NECK INJURIESUrgent Decisions and ActionsBy:John Wiesenfarth, MD, MS; William Briner, Jr, MDEmergencies Series Editor: Warren B. Howe, MDIn brief: When a neck injury is suspected, the on-site physician must firstprovide basic trauma care, which includes establishing an airway asnecessary, assessing breathing, and checking circulation and neurologiccompromise. A few targeted questions during history taking and a directedphysical exam will help rule out serious cervical injuries, which areuncommon. More common are minor injuries, such as ``burners.'' Teamphysicians must also be well-versed in immobilizing and transporting thepatient, administering a thorough neurologic exam, and establishing whenthe athlete can return to competition.Of the 6,000 to 10,000 spinal cord injuries reported each year, motorvehicle accidents account for 35% to 45%, and falls for 25% to 30%.1(Reference) Most of the rest are related to sports, especially football,rugby, ice hockey, soccer, diving, gymnastics, and wrestling.2-4(Reference) Nevertheless, catastrophic neck injuries are infrequent insports, with a prevalence of less than 2/100,000 neck injuries.3(Reference) One sport has especially reduced the incidence: Fewer than 10football players each year have sustained permanent injury to the cervicalspinal cord since 1977.5 (Reference)   Less serious sports-related neck injuries, in contrast, are fairlycommon. Moreover, it is often difficult to differentiate a stable neckinjury from an unstable one, so physicians must be proficient in assessingand managing all neck injuries. Three priorities must be considered in theemergency medical management of a patient with a spinal cord injury: (1)ensure patient survival, (2) preserve spinal cord function, and (3) allowthe highest possible chance for an injured spinal cord to recover.On-Field Evaluation   First, do no harm! Do not move the patient except from immediate dangeror for basic trauma management. An estimated 50% of neurologic deficits arecreated after the initial traumatic insult.6,7 (Reference) Furthermore, itis difficult to determine immediately if a neck injury is stable orunstable.   If the athlete has fallen on the field, have him or her lie there untila brief initial evaluation is completed (figure 1). An unstable neck injurymust be assumed in the following instances: an unconscious athlete, anawake athlete who has numbness and paralysis, and a neurologically intactathlete who has neck pain or pain with neck movement.   When a neck injury is suspected, institute the ABCDEs of trauma care(airway, breathing, circulation and cervical spine, disability, andexposing an injury for evaluation). Here is a modified version that can beused for possible neck trauma.   Trauma care basics. Airway management is of primary importance. The jawthrust technique has been shown to be the safest method for opening theairway in patients with suspected neck injury.8 (Reference) In thistechnique, the caregiver places his or her fingers behind the angle of bothsides of the patient's jaw and lifts up, bringing the mandible forward. Ifthis technique is inadequate, the modified jaw thrust-head tilt, in whichthe jaw is pulled upward and the head tilted back as little as possible,can be used.   In a football player with a suspected neck injury, do not remove thehelmet initially because the jostling may cause severe neurologiccomplications if the patient has an unstable fracture. If an airway accessis necessary, the face mask may be cut using a sharp knife or a devicecalled a Trainer's Angel (Trainer's Angel, Riverside, California). Trainedpersonnel can remove a face mask in less than 30 seconds using a Trainer'sAngel.   Breathing problems in a patient with a neck injury may signal moresevere injury. For example, apnea may mean that the patient has sustaineddamage to the brain stem. Once the airway is secure, artificial respirationmay be necessary.   In assessing circulation, first check for a carotid pulse. If it isabsent, begin chest compressions in accordance with basic life supportguidelines. It is important to remember that spinal shock can causehypotension, paradoxical bradycardia, and warm, dry skin. However, considerall causes of shock in an athlete who might have multiple fractures. Atension pneumothorax, especially in tall, thin athletes, may also causehypotension with paradoxical bradycardia.   It is also important to gauge cervical tenderness by palpating thespinal processes for tenderness and the paraspinal musculature fortenderness and spasm.   To evaluate disabilities, it is important to perform a motor and sensoryassessment (table 1). This can also be done on the sideline. Clinically,there are two classes of spinal cord injury: complete and incomplete.Complete injury renders the patient without motor power or sensation belowthe level of injury. Incomplete injury leaves the patient with somepreserved motor or sensory function. Although rare, a complete injuryresults in a poor outcome in almost all cases. Spinal shock may appear tobe a complete lesion; however, it usually resolves within 24 hours.9(Reference)   Finally, if a serious injury is visually obscured, it may be necessaryto expose the area by removing clothing or equipment without moving thepatient.   History. If the patient is alert, the history is at least as importantas the physical exam. History taking can be included during initial traumamanagement or be done immediately afterward. How the athlete responds toquestions can help in further assessing the level of consciousness. If heor she can respond verbally without any problems, chances are the airway ispatent. Important questions to ask are:    -- How did the injury happen?    -- Are you having any weakness, numbness, or tingling?    -- Are you feeling any pain?    -- Does it hurt to move your neck?    -- Have you had a neck injury before?    -- Do you think you can go back into the game?   Most sources agree that severe neck injury is usually accompanied bypain and sometimes neurologic symptoms.10-13 (Reference) An athlete withoutpain and neurologic symptoms has a very low probability of having a severeneck injury and therefore can be helped off the field for furtherevaluation. A patient with neck pain should have his or her cervical spineimmobilized and be placed on a backboard for transport to the sideline enroute to an emergency facility.Transportation to the Sideline   It is essential that proper equipment be available for transporting thepatient from the field safely. If the clinical picture is unknown, it isbest to treat all neck injuries as unstable by immobilizing the neck. If acervical collar is available, apply it until a cervical-spine injury isruled out.14 (Reference) A backboard is necessary to prevent further injurywhile moving the athlete (figure 2). Once the athlete is on the backboard,immobilize his or her head and torso. Use sandbags or other padding tosandwich the head as it is taped to the backboard (figure 3). Ammonia orsmelling salts should be avoided in the dazed or unconscious athletebecause a reaction of jerking away from this stimulus may cause neurologiccompromise.Off-the-Field Management   Further assessment and initial treatment can be initiated once thepatient is on the sideline. If there is time, patients on backboards can beassessed while waiting for emergency transportation.   When an unstable injury is possible, it is important to determine thenature and severity of the injury and have the patient further evaluated atan appropriate medical facility. Stable cervical sprains and strains, incontrast, rarely require extensive treatment and generally resolve withoutincident. All possible neck injuries, however, require a thoroughneurologic examination off the field.   The sideline neurologic exam includes a quick assessment of motor,sensory, and reflex pathways. Have the patient move his or her fingers andtoes. Assess grip strength by having the athlete squeeze your fingers witheach hand simultaneously; be alert for asymmetry. Look for asymmetry whenthe athlete dorsiflexes and plantar flexes his or her feet. Check for grosssensation in the upper extremities by simultaneously touching similar partsof each arm. If the situation allows, check for reflexes and for asymmetryof reflexes.   Also, assess the cranial nerves. Nerves II through XII should be quicklyassessed in all patients who have acute neck injuries. This evaluates brainstem function. Finally, active range of motion (ROM) should be included sothat the patient can stop if the movement becomes painful. A patient who isasymptomatic and has full ROM can usually return to play.   The most common neurologic cervical injury is a unilateral neurapraxiaof the cervical nerve roots and brachial plexus, often called a ``burner.''Key historical features of this condition are quick recovery from theresulting paresthesia or weakness in the extremities, accompanied by fullROM without pain. Return to activity is permitted when the paresthesia hassubsided and full muscle strength and full, pain-free ROM havereturned.15,16 (Reference) Neurapraxias that are multiple or bilateral maywarrant further diagnostic workup. If this is an athlete's firstneurapraxia or if the condition involves the lower extremities, he or sheneeds a full workup and should not return to play.Be Prepared   The best way to handle cervical spine injuries is to be prepared forthem. It is important to have a game plan, with all equipment inspected andreadily accessible, and all personnel involved trained to use it.Communication among all members of the emergency medical team should beestablished before the competition. Transportation to an emergency medicalfacility should be immediately available as well. Proper preparation can goa long way in avoiding serious long-term sequelae.The authors thank Scott Raub, DO, for his assistance in preparing thismanuscript.   Address correspondence to John Wiesenfarth, MD, MS, Dept of EmergencyMedicine, William Beaumont Hospital, 3601 W 13 Mile Rd, Royal Oak, MI48073.Table 1. Motor and Sensory Innervation of the Cervical Spine Nerve RootsRoot Level  Muscles             Function Lost               Sensory LevelC-2         Anterior            Neck flexion and rotation   Occiput             vertebral neckC-3,C-4     Trapezius           Shoulder elevation          Base of neckC-4         Diaphragm           Respiration                 Shoulder topsC-5,C-6     Biceps              Forearm flexion             Thumb (C-6)C-7         Triceps             Forearm extension           Long fingerC-8         Flexor digitorum    Finger flexion              Little fingerIllustration(s):Figure: 1. An easy-to-remember algorithm can help physicians assess neckinjuries on the field.Figure: 2. To move an athlete to a backboard, a person should be assignedto the injured athlete's head to hold it in a neutral position (a). Threeother helpers--one each at the shoulders, hips, and legs--assist in rollingthe athlete onto his or her side (b) as the board is slid underneath theathlete by a fifth helper. The person assigned to the head should lead themaneuver.Figure: 3. When securing a patient's head onto a backboard, the idea is toimmobilize the neck in relation to the rest of the spine and not to fastenonly the neck to the backboard. Therefore, place a sandbag or rolled towelon either side of the head. Tape the head and sandbags to the backboardwith at least one piece of tape across the forehead and one piece acrossthe chin. Also, fasten down the trunk.About the Author(s):Dr Wiesenfarth is a resident in the Department of Emergency Medicine atWilliam Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak, Michigan. Dr Briner is the directorof the Primary Care Sports Medicine Fellowship at Lutheran General Hospitalin Park Ridge, Illinois. He is a fellow of the American College of SportsMedicine. Dr Howe is a team physician at Western Washington University inBellingham, Washington, and a member of the editorial board of THEPHYSICIAN AND SPORTSMEDICINE.Reference(s):1. Little NE: In case of a broken neck. Emerg Med 1989; 21(9):22-322. Anderson C: Neck injuries: backboard, bench, or return to play? PhysSportsmed 1993;21(8):23-343. Torg JS, Vegso JJ, O'Neill MJ, et al: The epidemiologic, pathologic,biomechanical, and cinematographic analysis of football-induced cervicalspine trauma. Am J Sports Med 1990;18(1):50-574. Tall RL, DeVault W: Spinal injury in sport: epidemiologicconsiderations. Clin Sports Med 1993;12(3): 441-4485. Bailes JE, Hadley MN, Quigley MR, et al: Management of athletic injuriesof the cervical spine and spinal cord. Neurosurgery 1991;29(4):491-4976. Torg JS, Wiesel S, Rothman R: Diagnosis and management of cervical spineinjuries, in Torg JS (ed): Athletic Injuries to the Head, Neck, and Face.Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1982, pp 181-2097. American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Sports Medicine and Fitness:Head and neck injuries, in Dyment PG (ed): Sports Medicine: Health Care forYoung Athletes, ed 2. Elk Grove Village, IL, American Academy ofPediatrics, 1991, pp 236-2498. Cummins RO (ed): Textbook of Advanced Cardiac Life Support. Dallas,American Heart Association, 19949. Hockberger R, Kirshenbaum K, Doris P: Spinal trauma, in Rosen P, BarkinRM, Braen CR, et al (eds): Emergency Medicine: Concepts and ClinicalPractice, ed 3. St Louis, CV Mosby Co, 199210. Vegso J, Torg JS: Field evaluation of cervical spine injuries, in TorgJS (ed): Athletic Injuries to the Head, Neck, and Face, ed 2. St Louis,Mosby Year Book, 199111. Fourre M: On-site management of cervical spine injuries. Phys Sportsmed1991;19(4):53-5612. Marks MR, Bell GR, Boumphrey FR: Cervical spine fractures in athletes.Clin Sports Med 1990;9(1):13-2913. Sweeney TA, Marx JA: Blunt neck injury. Emerg Med Clin North Am1993;11(1):71-7914. Mangiardi J, Moser F, Spitzer D, et al: Spinal injuries, in SchwartzGR, Cayten CG, Bircher NG, et al (eds): Principles and Practice ofEmergency Medicine, ed 3. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1992, pp 955-98515. Vereschagin K, Wiens JJ, Fanton GS: Burners: don't overlook orunderestimate them. Phys Sportsmed 1991;19(9):96-10616. Hopkins TJ, White AA III: Rehabilitation of athletes following spineinjury. Clin Sports Med 1993;12(3): 603-619Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1EXERCISING--OR NOT--WHEN YOU ARE SICKBy:William A. Primos, Jr, MD, with James R. Wappes   You're not feeling great. You have a sore throat, stuffy head, and runnynose. But you feel like you could maybe log a few road miles. Should you?   Whether you're a low-key exerciser or a competitive athlete, knowingwhen to work out if you don't feel well can be difficult. When you have aninfection such as a cold, ``stomach flu,'' or contagious skin condition,you (and, often, your doctor) need to decide how exercise might affect yourhealth, your performance, and the health of others. Of course, it's alsogood to avoid infection in the first place.Should You Play On?   The first question to ask your infected body is if you need to push it.When your body is fighting an infection, your performance and fitnessbenefits will likely be less than optimal, so why bother? Missing a fewdays of training is not the end of the world--and it may even be a betteroption. And if you're a competitive athlete, taking yourself out may be thebest thing for the team.   Sometimes, though, physical activity helps you feel better. For example,working out can sometimes temporarily clear a stuffed-up head when you havea cold.   So if you think exercise might help, or if you can't bear to miss aworkout, do a ``neck check'' of your symptoms.1 (Reference) If yoursymptoms are located ``above the neck''--a stuffy or runny nose, sneezing,or a sore throat, for example--then exercise is probably safe. But start athalf speed. If you feel better after 10 minutes, you can increase yourspeed and finish the workout or game. If you feel miserable, though, stop.   On the other hand, your ``neck check'' may reveal ``below-the-neck''symptoms. Avoid intense physical activity if you have any of thesesymptoms: muscle aches, hacking cough, fever of 100 degrees F or higher,chills, diarrhea, or vomiting. Exercising when you have below-the-necksymptoms may mean, at best, that you'll feel weak and dehydrated. Worse,you may risk such dangerous conditions as heatstroke (dangerously high bodytemperature) and heart failure.   You can resume exercising when ``below-the-neck'' symptoms subside.However, when recovering from an illness that prevented you from workingout, it's important to ease back into activity gradually. A good rule ofthumb is to exercise for 2 days at a lower-than-normal intensity for eachday you were sick.Stop the Spread   If you're on a team, an additional concern is whether you will infectothers. And if you're healthy, you may wonder about someone else infectingyou. For common illnesses like the cold, practice commonsense hygiene likewashing your hands frequently and directing coughs and sneezes away fromothers.   Some infections, though, are readily spread in sports and requireathletes to be sidelined while they are contagious. Two such conditions aremeasles and herpes simplex (a virus that often causes cold sores orblisters and is transmitted via skin-to-skin contact, as in wrestling). Ifyou may have such an infection, see a doctor for treatment and informationabout when to resume sports.   Other conditions can also spread readily. So in addition to regularhygiene, athletes need to refrain from sharing water bottles and towels.Infections have been known to pass to other athletes via both routes.   You should also be properly immunized against diseases such as measles,mumps, tetanus, and rubella. Also, some athletes may benefit from aninfluenza vaccine. Ask your doctor what immunizations you need.Common Cold, Common Sense   As is often true, deciding to exercise when you are sick largelyinvolves common sense. Taking precautions about spreading infection andlistening to your body can go a long way in getting you back into actionwithout serious problems.   Remember: This information is not intended as a substitute for medicaladvice. If you have concerns about your health, consult a physician.About the Author(s):Dr Primos practices primary care sports medicine in Charlotte, NorthCarolina, and is a charter member of the American Medical Society forSports Medicine. James R. Wappes is an associate editor of THE PHYSICIANAND SPORTSMEDICINE.Reference(s):1. Eichner ER: Infection, immunity, and exercise. Phys Sportsmed1993;21(1): 125-135Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1AN IRREGULAR PULSE IN A SKYDIVERBy:John D. Cantwell, MD   A 29-year-old man was referred to a cardiologist after an irregularheartbeat was found on a preemployment physical examination. He had nocardiac or pulmonary symptoms.   Past illness or surgery included only several operations for ocularstrabismus. He took no medications. His weekly alcohol intake included sixbeers, two shots of hard liquor, and six or seven glasses of wine. Heaveraged one-fourth pack of cigarettes per day over the past 9 months, buthad not smoked previously.   His exercise habits included skydiving (two to five jumps per weekend),running 6 miles three times per week, and lifting weights for 1 hour two tothree times per week. His father was hypertensive. There was no familyhistory of early coronary disease, arrhythmia, or sudden death. The systemsreview indicated a single syncopal episode 6 years earlier while liftingweights after having donated blood.   On physical examination the patient's blood pressure was 115/82 mm Hg,and his pulse was 54 per minute and irregular. Neck and chest evaluationswere normal. The heart was not enlarged. A grade 1/6 short systolicejection murmur was heard at the upper and midleft sternal border, anddiminished with Valsalva's maneuver and with standing. His first heartsound quieted progressively on an intermittent basis in cycles of three orfour. The complete blood count and biochemical profile were normal. Histotal cholesterol level was 135 mg/dL and his HDL was 45 mg/dL.   His resting electrocardiogram (ECG) is shown in figure 1. His Bruceprotocol treadmill test was normal; he had a duration of 16 minutes,stopping because of fatigue.   Why did his first heart sound soften progressively and cyclically? Basedon your interpretation and diagnosis, do you think he should be hired for ademanding job that involves a certain amount of emotional stress?Diagnosis   The resting ECG shows 5:4 Wenckebach second-degree atrioventricular (AV)block (figure 2). The loudness of the first heart sound is inverselyrelated to the length of the PR interval on the resting ECG. A longer PRinterval allows the AV valves more time to drift closer to the closedposition, resulting in a softer sound. The exercise ECG is normal (figure3); the PR intervals usually become regular as the athlete exercises.Discussion   In 1906, the noted Dutch physician Karel Frederik Wenckebach firstreported periodic prolongation of the PR interval with dropped ventricularbeats.1 (Reference) Wenckebach had previously discovered that extrasystoleswere seen in healthy individuals as well as in those with cardiac disease.   Wenckebach AV block (also referred to as Mobitz type I AV block) can benormal in a highly-trained athletic person such as this patient. It isprobably related to an increase in resting vagal tone and subsides duringthe stress of exercise when blood catecholamine levels rise.   We advised the company that the young man was healthy and recommendedthat he be hired. We added that his maximum oxygen uptake was 54.7mL/kg/min, placing him in the high fitness category for men his age.   Address correspondence to John D. Cantwell, MD, 340 Boulevard NE, Suite200, Box 413, Atlanta, GA 30312.Illustration(s):Figure: 1. A resting ECG from an athletic 27-year-old man undergoingevaluation for an irregular heartbeat.Figure: 2. The patient's resting ECG shows 5:4 Wenckebach second-degreeatrioventricular block; every fifth P wave is a dropped beat (arrow) (ie,not followed by a QRS complex). The loudness of the first heart sound isinversely related to the PR intervals.Figure: 3. The patient's exercise ECG shows a normal ST segment responseand regularization of the PR interval.About the Author(s):Dr Cantwell is director of preventive medicine and cardiac rehabilitationat Georgia Baptist Medical Center and clinical professor of medicine atMorehouse School of Medicine in Atlanta. He is a member of the editorialboard of THE PHYSICIAN AND SPORTSMEDICINE and chief medical officer of the1996 Olympic Games.Reference(s):1. Fye WB: Karel Frederik Wenckebach, 1864-1940. Clin Cardiol1990;13(2):146-148Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1NONTRAUMATIC HIP PAIN IN ACTIVE CHILDRENA Critical DifferentialBy:Lynda F. Gerberg, MD; Lyle J. Micheli, MDPediatrics Series Editors: Barry Goldberg, MD, and Elliott B. Hershman, MD   In brief: A case report of an 8-year-old baseball player who wasdiagnosed with Legg-Calve-Perthes (LCP) disease gives an opportunity toconsider the many nontraumatic causes of hip pain. Possibilities includeslipped capital femoral epiphysis, septic arthritis, transient synovitis,juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, and bone tumor. Radiographs and bone scansare used to document and stage LCP, and to evaluate the effectiveness oftreatment. Though the aggressiveness of treatment depends on the diseasestage, the treatment of choice is generally nonsurgical containment of thefemoral epiphysis with a cast or orthosis.   When an active young person presents with a limp and hip pain, an injuryshould of course be considered; however, it is also important to thinkabout the many nontraumatic entities with similar presentations.   Our case report of a patient who had Legg-Calve-Perthes (LCP) disease(avascular necrosis of the femoral head) demonstrates the importance of athorough exam and referral when necessary.Case Report   An 8-year-old Little League baseball player presented with a history ofintermittent pain in his left hip over the past 6 months. It had begungradually and was initially most noticeable during baseball practice.Crutches and activity restriction, prescribed after a recent exacerbation,had provided no relief, and he was referred to our orthopedic sportsmedicine clinic.   There was no history of acute trauma. He had been experiencing pain withall activities. He had no history of illness.   On physical exam, the patient walked with an antalgic limp. He otherwiseappeared to be in good health with appropriate height and weight for hisage. He was afebrile. There were no gross deformities in his legs or hipsand no differences in temperature or girth between the limbs. He had markeddiscomfort to palpation over the entire left hip region. Internal rotationand hip abduction caused significant pain. When compared with the oppositeside, decreases were noted in hip range of motion in abduction, internalrotation, and flexion.   A full laboratory work-up included complete blood count, erythrocytesedimentation rate, antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, and Lymetiter. There were no significant findings. Plain radiographs demonstrated a``moth-eaten'' radiolucency suggestive of osteopenia of the femoralepiphysis and neck (figure 1a). The femoral epiphysis was shortened. A bonescan (figure 1b) demonstrated evidence of avascularity of the left femoralepiphysis consistent with LCP disease.   The patient was placed in a Petrie spica cast with the hip in 30 degreeabduction and 30 degree internal rotation. A follow-up x-ray (figure 1c)demonstrated proper containment of the femoral epiphysis within theacetabulum.   The patient was pain free 2 weeks after cast application. After castremoval at 6 weeks, physical therapy was instituted to restore full rangeof motion and strength to the hip, and three-point partial weight bearingwas begun. Anteroposterior and frog lateral radiographs taken after 1 monthof physical therapy demonstrated continued containment and no fragmentationof the femoral epiphysis. The patient remained pain free, and hip range ofmotion improved. He was sent home on crutches for another 12 weeks afterwhich crutch use was tapered. Nine months after initial diagnosis he wastaken off crutches completely and was asymptomatic.   Anteroposterior and frog lateral x-rays taken 1 year after initialpresentation (figure 1d) demonstrated that the femoral epiphysis hadremodeled within the acetabulum with a good spherical shape. Mild scleroticchanges had not progressed and the joint space was preserved. The patientreturned to sports without difficulty.More on Legg-Calve-Perthes Disease   LCP disease may present between ages 2 and 12; the majority of casesoccur when patients are between 4 and 8 years old. In boys the incidence is1:750; in girls it is 1:3,700.1 (Reference)   Initially pain free, this condition often presents as a limp afteractivity. The limp usually worsens, and eventually the patient may complainof pain in the hip, groin, inner thigh, or occasionally the knee. Musclespasm and synovitis can limit motion, particularly abduction and internalrotation. Though various triggers of LCP disease have been hypothesized,including trauma, synovitis, and hypercoagulability, the pathogenesis thesehold in common is interrupted blood supply of the growing femoralepiphysis.2 (Reference)   The natural history of LCP disease occurs in the following stages:   (1) Edema develops at the synovial membrane and capsule over 1 to 6weeks.   (2) Necrosis of the femoral epiphysis occurs, and can last from severalmonths to 1 year.   (3) Regeneration/resorption lasts 1 to 3 years. Granulation tissueinvades the necrotic bone, leaving isolated areas of bone sequestered.1(Reference) Invasion by connective tissues leads to resorption andreplacement by new immature bone. This may result in weakening ofsubchondral support.   (4) Repair occurs when new, normal bone replaces dead bone. The outcomeis related to the percentage of epiphysis involved, the patient's age, andthe promptness of the diagnosis.3 (Reference)   Catterall3 (Reference) classified LCP disease into four stages based onradiographic findings of percentage of involvement of the epiphysis (figure2). Plain radiographs of our patient's hip showed changes that were clearlyconsistent with LCP disease (Catterall stage 2); however, further imagingis indicated if there is a strong suspicion of LCP disease despite normalplain films. We confirmed our diagnosis with a bone scan, which is highlyaccurate once symptoms have presented. New developments in nuclear medicinesuch as the pinhole camera and computerized axial techniques allow evenearlier diagnosis of ischemic necrosis.4 (Reference) Magnetic resonanceimaging (MRI) is extremely effective in detecting early and preclinical orasymptomatic avascular necrosis, and it localizes and identifies the extentof the ischemia. Because of cost, MRI should be reserved for earlyidentification when less expensive tests are negative or inconclusive.4(Reference)Other Nontraumatic Hip Disorders   The differential diagnosis in the work-up of a patient with apparent LCPdisease takes on added significance because one of thepossibilities--slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE)--is an orthopedicemergency and requires immediate referral. Several other hip disordersresemble LCP disease.   Slipped capital femoral epiphysis. SCFE is the most common nontraumatichip problem in adolescents, and its presentation is similar to that of LCPdisease. In SCFE, the epiphyseal plate weakens during rapid growth. Thestress of the patient's body weight disrupts the attachment of the femoralneck and the femoral epiphysis, with the femoral neck moving upward andforward on the femoral epiphysis.   Clinically, patients who have SFCE are either obese or tall and thin.The condition usually occurs in children who are slightly older (11 to 16years) than those who have LCP disease. The physical presentation issimilar, but the pain is usually worse. The patient is unable to touch theabdomen with the thigh because the hip externally rotates with flexion.Radiologic studies help differentiate SCFE from other hip disorders. Itmust be kept in mind that SCFE is an emergency, and requiresnon-weight-bearing treatment as soon as it is diagnosed.5 (Reference)   Septic arthritis. In our patient, septic arthritis was quickly ruledout. He appeared healthy, with no fever or other clinical or laboratorysigns of sepsis, and the physical exam of his hip did not correlate withthe picture of a septic joint.   Though septic arthritis is seen in all age groups, it is most common ininfants and children ages 1 to 2 years. Patients often have a history ofrecent injury or infection such as otitis media. The usually acute onset ofseptic arthritis is accompanied by fever, apprehension, and loss ofappetite. The joint is warm, swollen, and held in flexion. Active andpassive range of motion are limited by extreme pain. Physical andlaboratory signs of sepsis should prompt quick referral for immediateaspiration of the joint under appropriate conditions.   Transient synovitis. Transient synovitis can resemble LCP disease;however, the patient may have a history of a recent upper-respiratoryinfection and may have a slight fever, usually no higher than 100 degrees F(37.7 degrees C) to 101 degrees F (38.3 degrees C). Transient synovitis isthe most common cause of hip pain in children under age 10. Patientspresent with pain in the anteromedial aspect of the thigh and knee and walkwith a limp. Motion is limited, and a flexion contracture of the hip may bepresent. Hematologic tests are negative with no signs of sepsis. Onradiographs, capsular bulging is evident; no changes in bone are seen,which helps rule out avascular necrosis. Transient synovitis is aself-limited benign condition. Weight-bearing is limited, and radiographsare repeated in 2 to 3 months to rule out LCP disease, which may developafter an episode of transient synovitis.   Rheumatoid arthritis. The hip is the third most common joint to beinvolved in pauciarticular juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Children withpauciarticular juvenile rheumatoid arthritis do not present with systemicsystems. The insidious onset is accompanied by swelling, stiffness, andminimal pain on motion. Effusion is palpable, and soft-tissue and bonychanges are seen on radiographs.   Tumors. Tumors involving the hip joint must also be kept in mind. Thephysical exam and radiographic studies will help detect or rule out a bonetumor.Restoring Hip Function   LCP disease requires individualized treatment; factors include age atonset, change in range of motion, stage of the disease, and Catterallgroup. Age at onset is a significant prognostic factor--results aresignificantly better in younger children. Therefore, early diagnosis is themost important factor in preventing long-term complications. The maintreatment objectives are to relieve muscle spasm, regain range of motion,and contain the femoral epiphysis within the acetabulum to minimizedeformation of the femoral head.   Historically, there have been four methods of treatment:1 (Reference)observation, bed rest, nonsurgical containment with ambulation, andsurgical containment. Currently, observation is chosen only when thepatient has no decreased range of motion and meets Catterall's stage Icriteria. The child is allowed to continue with regular activities of dailyliving. Bed rest is rarely used today because it requires lengthyhospitalization.2 (Reference) However, bed rest with hip abduction hasshown satisfactory results in 70% to 80% of patients.1 (Reference)   If surgery is required, the goals are the same as for nonsurgicaltreatment: to regain adequate range of motion, minimize deformity, andrelieve muscle spasm.5 (Reference) The femoral head is repositioned viafemoral osteotomy or the acetabulum repositioned via pelvic innominateosteotomy. The goal is to place the femoral epiphysis deep within theacetabulum, therefore preventing or minimizing deformation. Surgery shouldbe reserved for patients who have or are progressing to femoral headdeformity, but who cannot or will not accept orthoses.   The current treatment of choice is ambulatory management withnonsurgical containment of the femoral epiphysis. This method has been usedwith extremely favorable results.6 (Reference) and allows the child tocontinue most activities of daily living. Good results have been observedin 60% to 70% of patients. Without containment, the femoral epiphysis maybecome deformed and extrude from the acetabulum during therevascularization stage of LCP disease, particularly if the hip is allowedto maintain adduction and external rotation. Placing the femoral epiphysiswithin the acetabulum and maintaining abduction and internal rotationreduces forces on the epiphysis, allowing it to remodel properly.   Methods of ambulatory containment include the Petrie spica cast andremovable devices such as the Newington A-frame orthosis, the Scottish Riteabduction orthosis,7 (Reference) and the Toronto brace. It has been ourexperience that ambulatory casting gives excellent results along with goodcompliance by the patients and their families.   Long-term prognosis. Long-term outcomes are good in the majority ofpatients.1,2,5 (Reference) Approximately 9.5%, however, developdeteriorating symptoms and degenerative arthritis in late adolescence andearly adulthood. The development of degenerative arthritis is not relatedto sports participation after initial treatment.5 (Reference) Thesepatients often require surgery before age 35. Studies5 (Reference) haveshown that the abduction extension osteotomy yields the best results,relieving pain, improving range of motion, and correcting any leg lengthdiscrepancies.A Full Return to Activity   Early recognition and intervention can help patients with LCP diseaseavoid deformity and disability that might otherwise lead to lifelongimpairment of activity. Indeed, the long-term prognosis for completerecovery and sports participation after treatment is excellent, and mostpatients can return to activity without restrictions.   Address correspondence to Lynda F. Gerberg, MD, Schneider Children'sHospital, Long Island Jewish Medical Center, Department of GeneralPediatrics, 269-01 76th Ave, New Hyde Park, New York, 11040; e-mail toP.Bals@Rational.comIllustration(s):Figure: 1. An anteroposterior radiograph (a) of the pelvis of an 8-year-oldboy who presented with left hip pain demonstrates shortening of the leftfemoral epiphysis (bracketed area) caused by trabecular fracture.Irregularity of the bony contours of the femoral epiphysis is also noted(arrow), along with fullness about the left hip suggestive of an effusion.``Moth-eaten'' radiolucencies (arrowheads) suggest osteopenia of thefemoral epiphysis and neck. On a bone scan of the patient's left femoralepiphysis (b), decreased uptake is consistent with the avascular necrosisof Legg-Calve-Perthes disease (arrow). Films taken shortly after Petriecasting (c) indicate proper containment of the femoral head within theacetabulum. The legs have been placed in 30 degrees of abduction and 30degrees of internal rotation bilaterally. Note the presence of mildflattening of the left femoral epiphysis (arrow). A follow-up frog lateralview (d) taken 1 year after treatment with a Petrie spica cast demonstratesproper joint space preservation. The left femoral epiphysis remains wellseated within the acetabulum. Mild flattening and sclerosis (arrows) showno further progression.Figure: 2. Catterall classified Legg-Calve-Perthes disease into fourstages. In stage 1, necrosis is present at the anterior aspect of thefemoral head as noted by the dotted areas. Lysis is present, but there isno bony sequestration. In stage 2, bony sequestration is present as notedby the central areas of radiopacity. A medial and lateral column of normalbone protects the central area from collapse. In stage 3, extensive bonysequestration diminishes support and increases the chance of residualdeformity. Metaphyseal cyst formation is noted by the line-slashed areas.In stage 4, total involvement produces significant residual deformity shownby the jagged areas that indicate sclerosis and decreased size of thefemoral head.About the Author(s):Dr Gerberg is director of sports medicine at Schneider Children's Hospitalin New Hyde Park, New York, and an assistant clinical professor ofpediatrics at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in Bronx, New York. DrMicheli is director in the Division of Sports Medicine at the Children'sHospital in Boston, an associate clinical professor of orthopedic surgeryat Harvard Medical School in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and a fellow of theAmerican College of Sports Medicine. Dr Goldberg is director of sportsmedicine at Yale University Health Services and a clinical professor ofpediatrics at Yale University School of Medicine in New Haven, Connecticut.Dr Hershman is assistant director of orthopedic surgery at Lenox HillHospital in New York City. Dr Micheli and Dr Goldberg are editorial boardmembers of THE PHYSICIAN AND SPORTSMEDICINE.Reference(s):1. Schoenecker PL: Legg-Calve-Perthes disease. Orthop Rev1986;15(9):561-5742. Herring JA: Legg-Calve-Perthes disease: a review of current knowledge.Instr Course Lect 1989;38:309-3153. Catterall A: The natural history of Perthes' disease. J Bone Joint Surg(Br) 1971;53(1):37-534. Bassett LW, Gold RH, Reicher M, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging in theearly diagnosis of ischemic necrosis of the femoral head: preliminaryresults. Clin Orthop 1987;Jan(214):237-2485. Catterall A: Adolescent hip pain after Perthes' disease. Clin Orthop1986;Aug(209):65-696. Fackler CD: Nonsurgical treatment of Legg-Calve-Perthes disease. InstrCourse Lect 1989;38:305-3087. Meehan PL, Angel D, Nelson JM: The Scottish Rite abduction orthosis forthe treatment of Legg-Perthes disease: a radiographic analysis. J BoneJoint Surg (Am) 1992;74(1):2-12Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1GOING ONLINE: SPORTS MEDICINE AND MOREBy:Ann Harste, Minneapolispsm@mill2.millcomm.com   You say you don't have time to search online for lively sports medicinedebate and helpful medical resources. But you have Internet access at theclinic or at home, and you find yourself craving some high-techprofessional connectedness. How you access the different areas of theInternet will depend on the type of connection you have, but once you'reon-line, here's a quick tour of the Net to get you started.   World Wide Web. A good starting point on the Web is Yahoo(http://www.yahoo.com), a hip and definitive directory of some of the bestsites indexed by subject. Yahoo offers hundreds of links under the healthcategory. Another site is the highly acclaimed Virtual Hospital(http://indy.radiology.uiowa.edu/), a digital health sciences libraryadministered by the University of Iowa. You'll find patient simulations,journals, clinical practice guidelines, multimedia textbooks, and teachingfiles.   To get a quick handle on the medical journals and newsletters availableonline, visit MedWeb: Electronic Newsletters and Journals(http://www.cc.emory.edu/WHSCL/medweb.ejs.html), a directory that providesmany direct links to journals' tables of contents and, in some cases,abstracts and full-text articles.   Medical Matrix: Guide to Internet Clinical Medicine Resources(http://www.kumc.edu:80/mmatrix/) is a project of the American MedicalInformatics Association's Internet Working Group. In addition to being richin links to other sites, Medical Matrix provides an overview of existingInternet medical resources and news on resources in development.   Finding epidemiologic information is a whole lot easier now that theCenters for Disease Control and Prevention has a Web site for the Morbidityand Mortality Weekly Report (http://www.cdc.gov/epo/mmwr/mmwr.html). Thesite features full-text retrieval, and users can search past issues bytopic--no more thumbing through that prolific stack of skinny reports. TheNational Library of Medicine's HyperDOC Home Page (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/)is the place to go for links to the institution's vast collection ofclinical resources.   A must-visit stop on your Web rounds is Dr Bil's Cool Medical Site ofthe Week (http://www.hooked.net/users/wcd/cmsotw.html). William C. Donlon,DDS, exhaustively searches the Web's medical sites and crowns his pick ofthe week. Visitors are also asked to submit their suggestions.   Gopher servers. Even though the Web is getting the lion's share of theattention these days, there are also many valuable resources on Gopherservers. The University of Southern California offers links tomedicine-related Gopher servers all over the world. Their Gopher address iscwis.usc.edu; once connected, select: Other Gophers and InformationResources/Gopher-Jewels/Health, Medical, and Disability/MedicalRelated/Medical Related (misc).   News groups. News groups are discussion groups devoted to specifictopics; they are similar to bulletin board systems found on commercialonline services or private dial-up services. There are hundreds of topicsto choose from. To get a thumbnail sketch of what other physicians aredoing with their technology tools, consider browsing throughsci.med.telemedicine. It's a convenient source of medical software reviews,an announcement board for other online medical resources, and a soundingboard for physicians' experiences with clinical information systems.   E-mail lists. Like news groups, electronic mailing lists provide anexchange of information among users interested in a particular topic.Subscribers receive the discussion directly to their e-mailbox throughe-mail postings from other members of the group. The American MedicalSociety for Sports Medicine's AMSSMNet is available to its members andother interested parties. To subscribe, AMSSM members can send an e-mailmessage to listserv@msu.edu. In the first line of the body of your messagetype: SUBSCRIBE AMSSMNet Your Name. Nonmembers can request e-mailinformation about joining AMSSMNet from Dave Jenkinson, DO, at13460DJ@msu.edu or Randy Pearson, MD, at 13460RP@msu.edu.   The ATHTRN-L e-mail list contains topics in sports medicine along withdiscussions on the roles and certification of athletic trainers. Tosubscribe, send an e-mail to listserv@iubvm.ucs.indiana.edu . In the firstline of the body of your message type: Subscribe ATHTRN-L Your Name.   A vital source for family medicine practitioners is Fam-Med, an e-maillist that focuses on use of computer and telecommunication technology inthe teaching and practice of family medicine. Fam-Med also offers aresource area that includes access to file archives, a Gopher server, and aWeb index. The resource area and instructions for subscribing to thediscussion group can be found on the Web at http://apollo.gac.edu/.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1RELIEF FOR EXERCISE INCONTINENCEBy:Carol Potera, Great Falls, Montana   Stress incontinence often puts a damper on a woman's resolve toexercise. Up to a third of women--even young, conditionedathletes--experience stress incontinence.1 (Reference) Treatment optionshave included tampons, pessaries, diaphragms, and, for severe cases,surgery. The bladder neck support prosthesis (BNSP) is a new option.   A study1 (Reference) on the effectiveness of two incontinenceoptions--tampons and pessaries--recently came out in favor of tampons. Theresearchers found that 8 of 14 women with mild incontinence (less than 15 gof urine loss) remained dry while wearing a tampon during aerobic exercise,while a standard pessary kept only 5 of 14 women dry. Urine loss wasmeasured by weighing an absorbent pad before and after exercise.   The tampon is worn during exercise or other activities that producestress incontinence, says Ingrid Nygaard, MD, the study's author andassistant professor in the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at theUniversity of Iowa College of Medicine in Iowa City. Tampons have no sideeffects when worn for less than a day, she says. Nygaard advises patientsto moisten the tip of the tampon with water beforehand to make insertionand removal more comfortable.   Most women, and even some gynecologists, have never heard of pessaries,Nygaard says. There are many types of pessaries: The ones specificallydesigned to treat stress incontinence resemble a diaphragm but have aprotrusion on the ring that helps elevate the urethra, thus blocking urineleakage. When worn only for short periods of time during activities thatproduce incontinence, pessaries produce no side effects and do notdecondition pelvic floor muscles, Nygaard says.   A new vaginal device designed especially for active women debuted inOctober. The flexible, ring-shaped BNSP has two blunt prongs on one endthat laterally support the urethra. The BNSP (Johnson and Johnson Medical,Inc, Arlington, Texas) rests on the pelvic floor muscles and reinforcestheir function during exercise. ``This is the same thing we accomplish withsurgery,'' says urogynecologist Willy Davila, MD, of the ColoradoGynecology and Continence Center in Denver. When tested on runners, hikers,and other active women, the BNSP kept 24 of 30 patients dry; 6 wereimproved but still had mild incontinence.2 (Reference) Benefits weregreatest in those who had severe incontinence. All participants rated thedevice satisfactory.   To provide a custom fit, BNSPs come in 25 sizes, varying in ring sizeand prong length. The BNSP appears to be relatively free of side effects,says Davila. One patient in the study developed a bladder infection;however, he says bladder infections are not unusual in patients who havestress incontinence. Pelvic floor muscle deconditioning is not an issue,Davila says. In fact, he says muscle function seems to improve: Pelvicfloor contractions during activity are partially responsible for thedevice's support function.   Physicians can routinely help women open up about their problems withincontinence by telling patients that many active women notice urineleakage while exercising, says Nygaard. Advising women about simple,nonsurgical treatments such as tampons, pessaries, and pelvic floorexercises can minimize incontinence and keep women exercising, she says.   A traditional pessary costs about $50, and the BNSP costs about $300,says Nygaard. Some active women report that the BNSP is more comfortablethan the traditional pessary, says Davila. ``The BNSP fits in loosely andis designed to be dynamic; it moves with the woman,'' he says. ``Atraditional pessary fits in tightly and supports prolapsed tissues.''However, Nygaard says many of her patients who are runners have beensatisfied with comfort of traditional pessaries.Reference(s):1. Nygaard I: Prevention of exercise incontinence with mechanical devices.J Reprod Med 1995;40(2):89-942. Davila GW, Ostermann KV: The bladder neck support prosthesis: anonsurgical approach to stress incontinence in adult women. Am J ObstetGynecol 1994;171(1):206-211Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1EXPEDITE ANKLE EVALUATIONBy:Aaron Rubin, MD, Fontana, California   When making return-to-play decisions for players who have just injuredtheir ankles, a good screening test if you're busy on the sidelines is toask them to squat. If they are unable to squat because of pain or havedifficulty rising, they are probably unable to resume play.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1IMPROVE YOUR GOLF GRIPBy:Ty Wadsworth, MD, St Louis   A new exercise to develop grip strength was developed by Dale Boggs, agolf professional who was recovering from an upper-extremity injury. Theexercise requires an old telephone book. To begin, open the phone book withthe binding facing away. The fingertips should be slightly moist. With onehand use pressure from the fingertips to rip, crumple, then discard thefirst page from the phone book. Repeat the exercise until fatigued,typically 15 to 30 pages for the dominant hand and 10 to 20 pages for thenondominant hand. The page numbers can be used to keep up with repetitions,which are increased over time.   This exercise is useful for increasing grip strength and endurance,wrist flexor strength, and fine motor control. It is useful for injuryrehabilitation and for performance enhancement because it promotes a firm,relaxed grip throughout the golf swing.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1EARLY ASTHMA DETECTIONBy:William W. Dexter, MD, Lebanon, New Hampshire   Exercise-induced asthma (EIA) presentation can be subtle, especially inchildren. Parental reports of a child lagging on the playground or seemingunduly fatigued after competition warrant further investigation: These canbe signs of EIA, even if the child is not coughing or wheezing.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1ESTABLISHING TEAM CONFIDENCESBy:David Garner, PhD, Bowling Green, Ohio   As a clinical psychologist in Toledo and an adjunct professor ofpsychology at Bowling Green State University, I've worked with teams thathave players with eating disorders. I've found that it's useful to build anindependent relationship with the team--one that is not connected to thecoach. This may enable team members to open up to you and be more honest.At the same time, I discourage enlisting the help of players to identifyeating disorders in teammates. This practice only serves to establish anatmosphere of paranoia on the team.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1WOUND CARE FOR AQUATIC ACTIVITIESBy:Stephen Fuzie, PT, ATC, Pittsburgh   In water sports such as water polo, there are times when an athleteneeds to wear a bandage to prevent bleeding or to cover stitches. Regularathletic tape loses adherence in the water and presents a target foropposing players. Covering a flesh-colored bandage with clear Tegadermtransparent dressing with label (3M Corp, St Paul) or a similar productwill keep the wound dry and prevent bleeding. The thinness of the materialminimizes the edge so that the bandage can't be easily removed by frictionor contact. This bandaging technique is also helpful when athletes sweatheavily.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE PHYSICIAN & SPORTSMEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 24, No. 1STRENGTHENING THE HIP ABDUCTORSBy:Michael Ross, MSEd, PT   Many common exercises, like partial squats, involve movement mainly tothe front and back. Such exercises are good conditioners for activitieslike bicycling and using stair machines and treadmills, which primarilyrequire back-and-forth motion. But most sports and many daily activitiesrequire side-to-side motion. To prepare your body for a variety ofstresses, you need to build strength for those motions, too.   The muscles most responsible for sideways leg motion are the hipabductors on the sides of your hips. These muscles help move your legs outand away from each other. They play a large role in steadying forwardmovements, not to mention their importance in sports like tennis and golfthat require a lot of side-to-side motion or stability. Includinghip-abductor strengthening in your exercise regimen will help with dailyactivities and sports and will lower your injury risk. These strengthenersare especially good for people who have had hip or low-back pain.   The exercises in figures 1 through 3 help strengthen your hip abductors.These exercises are simple and don't take much time, so you can easily fitthem into your training.   For each exercise, build up to three sets of 20 repetitions, 3 to 4 daysper week, if possible. Go slowly, and rest only long enough between sets tolet your muscles recover from the slight burning sensation they willexperience. As the exercises become easier over time, you can add ankleweights in 1- to 2-lb increments as long you have no pain.   Remember: This information is not intended as a substitute for medicaltreatment. Before starting an exercise program, consult a physician.   The opinions expressed herein are those of the author and do notnecessarily reflect the opinions of the US Department of Defense, the USAir Force, or other federal agencies.Illustration(s):Figure: 1. To do the sideways leg raise, lie on your side. Flex the muscleson the outside of your thigh and lift your leg 12 to 15 inches whilekeeping your back still. Hold for 3 to 5 seconds. Repeat with the otherleg.Figure: 2. For the hip hiker, stand with one foot on a stable 4- to 6-inchobject (a). Slowly raise yourself by straightening the upper knee and hip(b). Hold for 3 to 5 seconds, then slowly lower the foot back to the floor.If you find it hard to balance, stand in front of a sink or table and placeyour hands on it for support. Repeat on the other side.Figure: 3. Start the squat and slide by standing. Slightly bend one knee asyou slide the opposite foot to the side as far as is comfortable withoutbending that leg. Hold for 3 to 5 seconds, then return. Repeat with theother leg. For better balance, place your hands on a sink or table.About the Author(s):Mr Ross is the director of physical therapy services with the 39th MedicalGroup of the United States Air Force at Incirlik Air Base, Turkey. He is amember of the Orthopaedic and Sports sections of the American PhysicalTherapy Association.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B09-9IA087-000629-B020-395http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/me06.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035522 text/html 266687HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:52:30 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:54 GMTContent-length: 266499Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/me06.html Sample Issue Copyright POSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNet January 1996 Vol. 99, No. 1 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES HYPOTHERMIA ACCIDENTAL HYPOTHERMIA: WHEN THERMOREGULATION IS OVERWHELMED (3552 words) EDITORIAL THE COST OF CARING: WHO HEALS THE HEALER? (1625 words) PHYSICIAN-AT-LARGE TWO BY TWO (927 words) DIGITAL DOC YOUR `WINDOW' TO THE WORLD'S INFORMATION (1410 words) MEET JERRY POTTS (332 words) PARKINSON'S DISEASE MODERATE PARKINSON'S DISEASE: STRATEGIES FOR MAXIMIZING TREATMENT (3070 words) SYMPOSIUM PNEUMONIA, A FIVE ARTICLE SYMPOSIUM COMMUNITY-ACQUIRED PNEUMONIA: WHAT'S NEEDED FOR ACCURATE DIAGNOSIS (4042 words) PNEUMONIA, A FIVE-ARTICLE SYMPOSIUM: INTRODUCTION (616 words) ATYPICAL PNEUMONIA: EXTRAPULMONARY CLUES GUIDE THE WAY TO DIAGNOSIS (2998 words) COMMUNITY-ACQUIRED PNEUMONIA: COST-EFFECTIVE ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY (2650 words) DELAYED RESOLUTION OF PNEUMONIA: WHEN IS SLOW HEALING TOO SLOW? (2125 words) RADIOGRAPHIC MIMICS OF PNEUMONIA: PULMONARY DISORDERS TO CONSIDER IN DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS (2095 words) ANOREXIA AND BULIMIA ANOREXIA NERVOSA AND BULIMIA NERVOSA: WHEN THE PURSUIT OF BODILY `PERFECTION' BECOMES A KILLER (3485 words) TREATING PRURITUS TREATING PRURITUS: WHAT'S NEW IN SAFE RELIEF OF SYMPTOMS? (2702 words) THE MECHANISMS OF PRURITUS (378 words) PATIENT NOTES ACUTE BRONCHITIS (443 words) HYPERTENSIVE CRISES THE NEED FOR URGENT MANAGEMENT (3660 words) PEARLS FOUL-SMELLING TODDLERS (80 words) IS IT ULCERATIVE COLITIS? (66 words) APICAL EXAMINATION FOR LEFT VENTRICULAR ENLARGEMENT (152 words) BURNS FROM DEFIBRILLATION (57 words) CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1ACCIDENTAL HYPOTHERMIA: WHEN THERMOREGULATION IS OVERWHELMEDBy:Teofilo L. Lee-Chiong Jr, MDJohn T. Stitt, PhDPreview   The homeless, the elderly, infants, military personnel on duty, and evenpersons living in subtropical climes may fall prey to the effects ofhypothermia. Most cold-related injuries and fatalities are due toaccidental exposure, ingestion of alcohol and other intoxicants,hypoglycemia, trauma, or chronic debilitating illness. The authors explainthe effects of heat loss on body systems and discuss how to reverse theprocess and achieve rapid rewarming.   Like other homeothermic animals, humans are able to maintain their bodytemperature within narrow limits regardless of normal changes inenvironmental conditions. Nonetheless, hypothermia, which is defined asbody core temperature below 35 degrees C (95 degrees F), can developwhenever this remarkable thermoregulatory apparatus is overwhelmed byexcessive heat loss, inadequate heat production, or impairment offunction.Epidemiology   Over 9,300 deaths from hypothermia were reported in the United Statesbetween 1979 and 1990.1 (Reference) Most cases occur in urban areas, andthe elderly, the indigent, and the homeless are often affected. Forexample, one half of cold-related fatalities in the District of Columbiabetween 1972 and 1982 occurred in persons with inadequate housing.2(Reference) The highest number of deaths from hypothermia occurred not onlyin states with severe winters, such as Illinois, New York, andPennsylvania, but also in states with milder weather, such as North andSouth Carolina and Virginia.3 (Reference) The incidence of hypothermia isequally alarming in other countries. In a Danish hospital from 1975 to1989, hypothermia was documented in nearly 5% of patients admitted to theintensive care unit.4 (Reference)   Cold-related deaths and injuries are also often reported in combatantsduring military campaigns and in participants in outdoor winter sports.About 91,000 cases of cold injury were reported among US soldiers in Europeduring World War II.5 (Reference)   Hypothermia may develop in persons exposed to a modestly cool climatefor prolonged periods. The condition has even been reported in tropicalclimates where average daily temperatures do not fall below 16 degrees C(60.8 degrees F).6 (Reference) However, most cases of ``tropical''hypothermia have involved patients with severe undernutrition ormalnutrition.Predisposing factors   The principal predisposing factors in cases of hypothermia areaccidental cold exposure, immersion in water, extremes of age, trauma, drugingestion, poisoning, and chronic illness. Hypothermia due to accidentalcold exposure is encountered most commonly among neonates and the elderly,in those immobilized by trauma or exhaustion, and in intoxicated andunconscious persons.   Extremes of age--In neo-nates, large surface area relative to body mass,lack of subcutaneous fatty tissue, rudimentary adaptive behavior, andineffective shivering all contribute to inability to defend against extremeenvironmental conditions. In the elderly, altered thermal perception,deteriorating adaptive responses, low body-fat content, autonomicdysfunction, maintenance on medications, impaired vasoconstrictive ability,and low metabolic capacity are common factors that contribute tohypothermia.   Trauma--Exposure to cold at the scene of an accident, during lengthysurgery, or as a result of inadvertent transfusion of large amounts ofunwarmed crystalloid solutions and chilled blood components increases therisk for hypothermia in trauma patients. Furthermore, heat production fromshivering is inhibited by anesthetics and neuromuscular blocking agents.Abnormal peripheral vasodilatation and dermal damage produced by surfaceburns may produce large, unchecked heat losses from the body surface.   Drug ingestion and poisoning--The possibility of recreational andtherapeutic drug ingestion must be considered in any unexplained case ofhypothermia. Depending on the population surveyed, consumption of ethanolis associated with up to 80% of hypothermia cases.7 (Reference)Phenothiazines may produce hypothermia through a hypothalamic depressantaction and an inhibitory effect on shivering. Drug overdoses and poisoningscan disrupt normal heat production and conservation by impairing perceptionof changes in ambient temperature (which may result in inappropriate andoften paradoxical behavioral responses) and depressing the mental status.   Chronic illness--Antecedent chronic debilitating illnesses, such assevere hypothyroidism, hypothalamic tumors, overwhelming infections, severestrokes, and malnutrition, not only exacerbate hypothermic injuries butalso decrease the victim's capacity to counter hypothermia once it hasdeveloped.Manifestations   During early, mild hypothermia, the body attempts to compensate for itsfalling temperature by intensifying thermogenesis through shivering andhypermetabolism. A generalized increase in heat production by themusculature surrounding the torso is associated with shivering. In theextremities, shivering is less pronounced or absent. Accompanying theincrease in metabolism are (1) elevations in respiratory rate, minuteventilation, and oxygen consumption, (2) increases in heart rate, cardiacoutput, and mean arterial pressure, and (3) elevated levels of serumcortisol, lactate, glycerol, ketones, and glucose; all of these result inincreased heat production. Acrocyanosis and cool skin reflect the intenseperipheral vasoconstriction that helps sustain core temperature by shuntingblood away from the cold body surface.   Thermoregulatory failure--Thermoregulation eventually fails when peakheat production is unable to offset the rate of heat loss from the bodysurface; further reductions in core temperature occur, eventually leadingto progressive multiorgan dysfunction (table 1). Because of reductions incerebral blood flow, patients may become uncooperative and uncoordinatedand may even manifest irrational behavior, such as undressing. Confusionand stupor emerge at temperatures between 32 degrees C and 35 degrees C(89.6 degrees F and 95 degrees F). Most patients are comatose at 27 degreesC (80.6 degrees F).   Pulmonary and renal effects--Depression of the central respiratorycenter can cause both tidal volumes and respiratory rates to decline.Cold-induced vasoconstriction increases central blood volume; this increasepromotes withdrawal of antidiuretic hormone, which leads to the familiarcold-induced diuresis. Furthermore, in cases of hypothermia, cold-relatedimpairment of renal enzymatic activity can inhibit active tubularreabsorption, resulting in marked excretion of extremely dilute urine,which, in turn, may further compound preexisting hypovolemia andhemoconcentration. Renal failure secondary to depressed renal blood flowand defective tubular activity often develops in patients who haveprolonged and profound hypothermia.   Gastrointestinal effects--Diminished intestinal motility is commonlyobserved at core temperatures below 34 degrees C (93.2 degrees F), andileus is invariably present once body temperature falls below 30 degrees C(86 degrees F). In addition, acute punctate erosions of the stomach andduodenum, hepatic dysfunction, and pancreatitis may develop as a result ofhypoperfusion.   Cardiovascular effects--Cardiac output and mean arterial pressure fallas a result of bradycardia, hypovolemia, and decreased ejection fraction.Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias often develop as hypothermia progresses.Atrial fibrillation becomes common below 32 degrees C, and ventricularfibrillation and asystole may occur if core temperature falls below 28degrees C (82.4 degrees F) and 20 degrees C (68 degrees F), respectively.When body temperature drops below 31 degrees C (87.8 degrees F), acharacteristic electrocardiographic change called the Osborne wave (J wave)is seen; it manifests as a deflection at the QRS and ST junction and isbest visualized in leads II and V (subscript) 6.   Reduced metabolic demands--The widespread physiologic derangements ofhypothermia would be immediately fatal were it not for the concomitantreduction in metabolic demands caused by body cooling. Vasoconstriction andhemoconcentration ensure acceptable arterial pressures in spite of reducedcardiac indexes. As a result of reduced metabolic requirements, even theprogressively falling respiratory minute ventilation remains adequate tomeet the demands of oxygen delivery and carbon dioxide elimination. Oxygenconsumption falls by 25% at a core temperature of 31 degrees C and by 75%at a core temperature of 20 degrees C. Depression of cerebral metabolismenables the brain to tolerate most hypothermic insults, and completerecovery of neurologic functions has been reported despite prolongedcardiac arrest and resuscitation.8 (Reference)Treatment   One of the most difficult tasks confronting physicians who treatpatients with hypothermia is accurate determination of death. Rigor mortis,dependent lividity, and fixed, dilated pupils--all of which are commonlyassociated with death in normothermic individuals--become unreliableindicators in the presence of hypothermia. Therefore, resuscitativemeasures must be terminated only when cardiac arrest persists despiterewarming.   Preventing further heat loss--It is imperative that further heat loss behalted by moving patients to a warmer environment. They must be kept dryand insulated. Hot drinks and particularly alcohol are best avoided becausethey can magnify ongoing heat loss by promoting inappropriate peripheralvasodilatation.   Laboratory studies--Laboratory values obtained at presentation not onlyserve as a useful baseline for future determinations but also mayfacilitate early recognition of emerging complications. In addition toblood counts, serum chemistry values, and coagulation parameters, it isadvisable to obtain a thyroid panel, measurements of serum cortisol andcardiac isoenzymes, and surveillance cultures and chest radiographs. Bloodglucose levels are notoriously unpredictable and must be closely monitored,especially in cases of hypoglycemia, which may impede rewarming if leftuncorrected. Films of the cervical spine are essential whenever coexistinghead and neck trauma is a possibility. Repeated abdominal and pelvicradiographs and determinations of serum amylase and lipase levels may benecessary to monitor pancreatic and intestinal injuries.   While awaiting results of toxicologic studies, physicians may considerempirical administration of naloxone hydrochloride (Narcan) and thiaminehydrochloride (Biamine) in patients who are known to have a history ofillicit drug and alcohol abuse. Levothyroxine sodium is indicated only forhypothermic myxedema and methylprednisolone (A-Methapred, Solu-Medrol) onlyfor adrenocortical insufficiency.   Cardiac monitoring--This is essential for assessment of arrhythmias.Faint peripheral pulses can be extremely difficult to appreciate because ofbradycardia and intense vasoconstriction. Atrial arrhythmias and heartblocks are usually transient phenomena that convert spontaneously withrewarming. Bretylium tosylate (Bretylol) is the drug of choice forventricular fibrillation and appears to be more efficacious than lidocainehydrochloride (Xylocaine). Bradyarrhythmias may require temporary pacing.Aggressive rewarming is mandatory with arrest rhythms, becausepharmacologic and electrical cardioversions are invariably unsuccessfulwhen body temperature is below 30 degrees C. Cardiopulmonary resuscitationmust be continued until the victim's core temperature has reached 32degrees C to 35 degrees C.   Maintenance of intravascular volume--Adequate intravascular volume needsto be supported. Early initiation of intravenous access facilitatesparenteral administration of pharmacologic agents as well as infusion ofcrystalloid solutions and various blood components. In the presence offrostbitten extremities, central venous access may be preferable toperipheral catheters. Furthermore, central venous lines allow large-volumeinfusions, which may not be possible peripherally with cold-inducedvascular constriction; central lines also permit monitoring of centralvenous pressure during fluid replenishment.   Because the hypothermic myocardium is intensely irritable, the tip of acentral catheter must be located at a reasonable distance from the heart toprevent induction of arrhythmias. Invasive hemodynamic monitoring usingpulmonary catheters may precipitate fatal arrhythmias.   Preferably, 5% dextrose in normal saline solution should be heated to 40degrees C to 42 degrees C (104 degrees F to 107.6 degrees F) beforeadministration. Lactated Ringer's solution is best avoided because theliver's capacity to metabolize lactate to bicarbonate is often inhibited byhypothermia. Low doses of dopamine hydrochloride (Dopastat, Intropin) maybe required if hypotension persists despite seemingly adequate fluidrepletion. Because of their inherent arrhythmogenic capacity, levarterenol(Levophed), epinephrine, and isoproterenol hydrochloride (Isuprel) arerarely, if ever, indicated. Hourly urinary output should be monitored byusing indwelling bladder catheters.   Airway control--Satisfactory airway control must be guaranteed.Administration of warm, humidified oxygen by face mask suffices for mostcases of mild hypothermia. Endotracheal intubation is primarily indicatedduring respiratory arrest and whenever adequate protection of the airwaysis questionable. Control of secretions is particularly troublesome inpersons with moderate to severe hypothermia, because profuse bronchorrheaand ineffective mucociliary activity may contribute to airway obstruction.   Infection--This ever-present hazard requires diagnostic vigilance andvigorous therapy. Infection is easily missed because fever is often absentand laboratory findings are invariably nonspecific. At times, anunexplained fall in systemic vascular resistance is the sole clue toevolving sepsis. Use of prophylactic antibiotics is indicated in neonatesand infants and also in diabetic adults, in whom the prognosis with sepsisis particularly ominous.   Thromboembolism--Hypothermic patients may be prone to thromboembolismbecause of cold-related intravascular volume depletion and increased bloodviscosity. Unfortunately, traditional measures are often unsatisfactory inpreventing this complication. Cutaneous hypoperfusion renders theabsorption of subcutaneously administered heparin highly erratic.Application of pneumatic boots may further compromise frostbittenextremities.   Dermal injury--Dermal injury from frostbite typically affects theextremities, face, ears, penis, and scrotum. Initially gray and waxy, theinvolved areas usually become swollen and blistered and may turn red toblack with rewarming. Frostbitten dermis may be thawed by bathing in waterthat has been warmed to 38 degrees C to 40 degrees C (100.4 degrees F to104 degrees F). Parenteral heparin has been used to salvage injuredtissues. Surgical excision and amputation must be deferred until definitedemarcation of nonviable dermis becomes apparent during the second weekafter injury.Methods of rewarming   Rewarming should be achieved rapidly at the most hemodynamicallytolerable rate possible with use of the least invasive means (table 2). Aparticular rewarming method, whether passive or active, is selected afterthorough consideration of the patient's age and overall health, thepresence of any concurrent complications, the severity and duration of thehypothermic insult, and the effectiveness and degree of invasiveness ofavailable techniques.   Passive external rewarming--This is the least invasive method ofrewarming and is generally sufficient for patients with core temperaturesabove 33 degrees C (91.4 degrees F). Minimizing further heat dissipation byremoving the patient from the cold environment and providing shelter andinsulation is often all that is necessary for acute, mild hypothermia whenendogenous heat production through shivering restores body temperature toacceptable levels. With this method, temperature can increase by 0.4 degreeC to 2 degrees C (0.7 degree F to 3.6 degrees F) each hour. Peripheralvasoconstriction is maintained; this minimizes the risk of both hypotensionand temperature afterdrops, which often occur when cold peripheral blood isshunted to the core during vasodilatation.   Active rewarming--This method is indicated for patients with moderate tosevere hypothermia and core temperatures below 32 degrees C. It may also bepreferable in the elderly and in patients with hypoglycemia,hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency, hypopituitarism, or other disordersthat limit endogenous thermogenesis. Persons with diabetic ketoacidosis andcardiovascular instability may benefit from the rapid normalization of corebody temperature that is possible only with active rewarming. Finally,active rewarming must be considered in any patient, whatever the degree ofhypothermia, if initial passive rewarming methods fail to elevate bodytemperature.   Active external rewarming--This may be accomplished with hot waterbottles, heated blankets, external radiant sources, or warm bathimmersions.9-11 (Reference) These approaches are highly effective inelevating body temperature but do have several drawbacks. In addition todangerous surface burns, which may occur if the temperature of the thermalappliance is not closely monitored, afterdrops of core temperature maydevelop because these methods tend to induce early peripheralvasodilatation. Hemodynamic instability may ensue if the hypothermic heartis unable to respond adequately to the rising metabolic requirements of therewarmed exterior tissue shell. The risk of circulatory collapse isdetermined primarily by the patient's degree of cardiovascular tolerance,the extent of exposed body surface, and the intensity of rewarming.   Active core rewarming--This provides the most rapid return tonormothermia and is the method of choice in patients who have cardiacarrest or ventricular fibrillation. Airway rewarming is done with warmed,humidified gas, and rewarming rates between 1 degree C and 2.5 degrees C(1.8 degrees F and 4.5 degrees F) an hour can be achieved. This method hasthe added benefits of (1) preferential rewarming of central blood volumeand the heart and lungs and (2) stimulation of the airway mucociliaryapparatus. Inhaled gas temperatures should be maintained between 40 degreesC and 45 degrees C (104 degrees F and 113 degrees F) by using an in-linetemperature monitor to prevent tracheobronchial injuries and parenchymaledema, which may occur if gas temperatures exceed 46 degrees C (114.8degrees F).   Lavage of the gastrointestinal tract can be done with warmed solutions.However, the effectiveness of intragastric irrigation is limited by thesmall surface area of the stomach, and fluid and electrolyte shifts maycomplicate intracolonic irrigation. Lavage is contraindicated in personswith suspected intra-abdominal trauma and in those who have had recentgastrointestinal surgery.   Pleural irrigation is performed either through thoracostomy tubes orwith open thoracotomy. Circulating warm saline solution can also beintroduced into the mediastinum through chest tubes. Similarly, peritoneallavage with prewarmed dialysate can be accomplished by peritoneal dialysisor by direct irrigation of the open peritoneal cavity if hypothermiadevelops as a complication of abdominal surgery. Peritoneal dialysis iscontraindicated in patients with abdominal injuries and is preferablyavoided in those who have had previous operations, because they may be moreprone to intraperitoneal injury and infection from preexisting adhesions.Like intracolonic lavage, peritoneal dialysis may promote detoxification ofingested drugs and poisons by rewarming the liver and reactivating hepaticenzymes.   Extracorporeal rewarming of blood by cardiopulmonary bypass orhemodialysis should be considered for severely hypothermic patients withcore temperatures below 28 degrees C. Blood circulation can be preserved byusing cardiopulmonary bypass even in the absence of effective myocardialactivity. The rate of rewarming averages 9.5 degrees C (17.1 degrees F) anhour during cardiopulmonary bypass.12 (Reference)Prognosis   Survival is inversely related to the intensity and duration ofhypothermia. Outcome is better in cases resulting from simple exposure oringestion of ethanol. Significant antecedent illness, cardiac arrest beforehospitalization, hypotension, coma, respiratory failure, and intravascularthrombosis indicate a worse prognosis.Summary   The diagnosis of hypothermia must be entertained when patients presentwith unexplained mental status changes or arrhythmias. Prompt recognitionand aggressive treatment of complications should reduce cold-relatedfatalities. The choice of an appropriate rewarming method must beindividualized and depends on the severity of hypothermia and the patient'sdegree of hemodynamic tolerance.   The authors wish to thank Leslye Stein, Deborah Maroon, and GraceZamudio for their assistance in preparation of this manuscript.   Mailing address: John T. Stitt, PhD, Yale University School of Medicine,John B. Pierce Laboratory, 290 Congress Ave, New Haven, CT 06519.Table 1. Physiologic effects of hypothermiaGeneral (according to body temperature)At 32 degrees C to 37 degrees C (89.6 degrees F to 98.6 degrees F)  Shivering and nonshivering thermogenesisAt 30 degrees C to 33 degrees C (86 degrees F to 91.4 degrees F)  Declining metabolic rateAt 26 degrees C (78.8 degrees F)  Decrease in oxygen consumption to 50% of basal levelsPulmonaryEarly  Increased respiratory rateLate  Respiratory depression, increased dead space, decreased mucociliaryactivity, profuse bronchorrhea, airway and parenchymal edemaRenalCold-induced diuresis, inhibition of release of antidiuretic hormone,decreased renal tubular reabsorption, reduction in renal blood flowGastrointestinalDiminished intestinal motility, hepatic and pancreatic injury, intestinalerosions and ulcerationsCardiovascularEarly  Increase in heart rate, cardiac ouput, and mean arterial pressureLate  Bradycardia, reduced ventricular compliance, arrhythmiaNeurologicEarly  DisorientationLate  Disorganization of electroencephalographic activity, delayed latency ofvisual evoked potentials, reduction in conduction velocity of peripheralnerves, stupor, comaHematologicHemoconcentration, thrombocytopenia, decrease in white blood countEndocrineDepression of insulin release, increased peripheral resistance to insulinTable 2. Methods and rates of rewarming for persons with hypothermiaMethod              Rate of rewarming (per hour)Passive             0.4 degree C to 2 degrees C                    (0.7 degree F to 3.6 degrees F)Active              1 degree C to 9.5 degrees C                    (1.8 degrees F to 17.1 degrees F)External  Hot water bottles  Heated blankets  Thermal mattresses  Warmed sheets  Warm bath immersion  Radiant heatInternal  Airway rewarming  Pleural irrigation             1 degree C to 2.5 degrees C  Gastrointestinal irrigation    (1.8 degrees F to 4.5 degrees F)  Diathermy  Peritoneal dialysis            Up to 4 degrees C (7.2 degrees F)  Cardiopulmonary bypass  Hemodialysis                   Up to 9.5 degrees C (17.1 degrees F)About the Author(s):   Dr Lee-Chiong is medical director, intensive care unit andcardiopulmonary service, Androscoggin Valley Hospital, Berlin, NewHampshire.   Dr Stitt is professor of epidemiology and environmental health and ofcellular and molecular physiology, Yale University School of Medicine, NewHaven, Connecticut.Reference(s):1. Hypothermia-related deaths: Cook County, Illinois, November 1992-March1993. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1993;42(47):917-92. Exposure-related hypothermia deaths: District of Columbia, 1972-1982.MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1982;31(50):669-713. Hypothermia-related deaths: North Carolina, November 1993-March 1994.MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1994;43(46):849,855-64. Nielsen HK, Toft P, Koch J, et al. Hypothermic patients admitted to anintensive care unit: a fifteen year survey. Dan Med Bull 1992;39(2):190-35. Vaughn PB. Local cold injury--menace to military operations: a review.Mil Med 1980;145(5):305-116. Sadikali F, Owor R. Hypothermia in the tropics: a review of 24 cases.Trop Geogr Med 1974;26(3):265-707. Fitzgerald FT. Hypoglycemia and accidental hypothermia in an alcoholicpopulation. West J Med 1980;133(2):105-78. Jessen K, Hagelsten JO. Search and rescue service in Denmark withspecial reference to accidental hypothermia. Aerosp Med 1972;43(7):787-919. Romet TT, Hoskin RW. Temperature and metabolic responses to inhalationand bath rewarming protocols. Aviat Space Environ Med 1988;59(7):630-410. Gautam PC, Ghosh S, Mandal AR, et al. Hypothermia in the elderly:management in a purpose-built chamber. Gerontology 1988;34(3):145-5011. Miles JM, Thompson GR. Treatment of severe accidental hypothermia usingthe Clinitron bed. Anaesthesia 1987;42(4):415-812. Splittgerber FH, Talbert JG, Sweezer WP, et al. Partial cardiopulmonarybypass for core rewarming in profound accidental hypothermia. Am Surg1986;52(8):407-12Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1THE COST OF CARING: WHO HEALS THE HEALER?By:Peter A. Setness, MD   The cost of medicine. We hear about it constantly, usually in connectionwith terms such as ``skyrocketing,'' ``spiraling,'' and ``out of control.''But at a 25-year reunion of a family practice residency program I attendedrecently, the discussion centered on a different type of medical cost--thepersonal cost of being a primary care physician.   A large group of current faculty and residents, as well as returninggraduates, spent a Saturday morning listening to a panel discussion andthen, in smaller groups, sharing some of their own stories. Thesephysicians, from rural solo practices, urban multispecialty grouppractices, and everything in between, talked not only of their greatsatisfaction in sharing in the personal and family events in the lives oftheir patients, but also of the loneliness in dealing with medical crisesand other problems faced by patients they had come to know as friends. Mostof them spoke of a lack of emotional support from the community and,unfortunately, a lack of overt support from colleagues when they weredealing with a poor patient outcome, a malpractice suit, or personalproblems.Key rewards   I'd like to believe that physicians in primary care medicine have somepersonal values that enable us to reach out to patients and that these veryconnections, in turn, reward us. There is an important difference betweenbeing a doctor and being a personal doctor, one who is willing to make acommitment of person to the patients he or she serves. This commitment iswhat allows us to turn a case into a patient and a number into a name--of areal person in a real family in a real community. It gives our medicalencounters depth, but it also puts us at some emotional risk.   The relationships we develop with patients are the key rewards in ourpractice. They are what keeps us coming back for more. Often we have theprivilege of caring for a patient through many years or even through thepatient's life span. The flip side, though, is the emotional burden offoreseeing the medical problems that lie ahead for a patient. The joys ofthe doctor-patient relationship are tempered when a patient is dying orwhen we feel we or the medical community could have done something better.Punishing ourselves   When a patient's outcome is poor, we punish ourselves by second-guessingour decisions. But when a result is less than optimum, perhaps no one is toblame. As Rabbi H. Kushner says in his well-known book, bad things dohappen to good people. We may be at the wrong place at the wrong time.Despite our competence and conscientious surveillance, some patients mayexperience side effects of medications or procedures. As financialconsiderations become more important in medical care, managed careguidelines or policies may distort our particular style of medicalpractice. We may pay too much attention to cost containment, thusincreasing the potential for a poor outcome.   Instead of personalizing poor results and internalizing the discomfort,we need to remind ourselves that the situation may have been beyond ourcontrol. One long-time physician in my discussion group shared the pain ofnot diagnosing a carcinoma until it became metastatic in a patient who hadjust recently come in for an annual exam. The physician felt personallyresponsible for that patient's cancer and had grieved silently for years.Unfortunately, his family, his friends, and even his other patients alsosuffered because of his unresolved grief, damaged self-esteem, and milddepression.   Such self-doubts can get way out of hand: According to the NationalInstitute for Occupational Safety and Health, physicians are No. 3 out of230 occupations analyzed for risk of suicide, with an odds ratio of 2.88compared with the general public. Only psychologists and pharmacists rankhigher, and lawyers hold the fifth spot.   A poor outcome is not necessarily the same as a mistake. As Mark Twainis quoted as saying, ``Good judgment comes from experience, and experiencecomes from poor judgment.'' Reviewing events retrospectively, with all theadvantages of hindsight, can be healthy. But it is easy to focus on aparticular outcome and to forget about the confusion and complexities thatsurrounded the case in context. We are accountable for what we try to do,but not for everything that happens.Sharing our feelings   We also need to remember that we cannot protect ourselves or others fromthe personal pain of living. Sometimes all we can do is try to easesomeone's pain. But because we feel we need to be strong, we tend not toshow our feelings. And when bad things happen, we blame ourselves tooeasily. We might feel such guilt that we dread seeing a patient or won'teven call the patient's family. The point is, it's okay to say ``I'msorry.'' It's not an admission of guilt. And by sharing your feelings withyour patients and their families, you become a personal doctor.   Like everyone else, physicians have to deal with personalproblems--family illnesses and deaths, financial concerns, chemicaldependency, divorce, disabilities, and the whole range of human frailty.Physicians who are struggling with such problems need tremendous support.The stress of silence can be almost unbearable, and not talking about ourfeelings contributes to a sense of isolation and hopelessness. Doctors areusually better at analyzing and evaluating facts, function, and form thanat dealing with their own frustrations and feelings and their need toforgive and to be forgiven.A listening ear   The physicians at the reunion shared their difficulty in coping withtheir personal pain within their practice setting. In one case, the leastlikely colleague initiated a healing discussion, while a best-friendphysician would not or could not discuss the topic with the distressedphysician. It's almost as if some physicians cannot talk about painfulissues. Perhaps they think that the emotional feelings surrounding pooroutcomes, malpractice cases, and personal pain are contagious. But, atleast in the case of problems related to practice, support from colleagueswho not only can understand the confidential nature of a poor outcome orthe legal implications of a malpractice threat, but also can identify withour vulnerability, is invaluable. We need our colleagues, with commonexperience, to become trusted listeners.   Support can also come from other sources. One doctor in the discussiongroup said that a unique, long-time patient-friend turned out to be hisgreatest source of support time and again. The important thing is to find anonjudgmental listener who, by hearing and reflecting on our story, canhelp us understand our experience better. Sometimes all a patient needs isfor us to listen. At times, a good listener may be all that we need too.Reaching out for help   So who heals the healer? How do we talk, and how do we find trustedlisteners? How do we deal with our burdens?   Look to your colleagues and friends. And perhaps consider a group, butdon't call it a support group. Instead, call it a professional developmentgroup, or a case study seminar, or a journal club, and devote the last partof the discussion time to patient and personal issues. The group could be amodel of the now-classic Balint seminar, where one confronts oneself bydiscussing case-centered, patient-centered issues. What often happens insuch discussions is that the ``doctor'' in the doctor-patient relationshipemerges as you talk about a patient's problems, and soon you are talkingabout your own place in the relationship and your own needs as a doctor.   If discussion groups aren't your cup of tea or if you are in an isolatedrural solo practice, consider e-mail with other physicians. You might findthat the distance adds a measure of safety and comfort when sharingpersonal issues. But be careful of confidentiality issues when discussingcases on e-mail. The point is, reach out for help. If you don't know whereto turn, call a trusted faculty member at your local residency program orcontact a medical school or your state or county medical society. If youare in severe distress, consider professional therapy.   Finally, don't forget to celebrate the everyday joys and successes ofpracticing medicine. We have all helped patients through difficult times.Let's start reminding each other of the successes we have had. And let's bea constructive force in helping colleagues to cope during difficult times.The need for help is not a sign of weakness. Don't let the burdens ofcaring hide the rewards of practicing medicine.What is the Balint method of training?   Michael Balint was a psychiatrist who, with his wife Enid, conducted aseries of training seminars for general practitioners at the TavistockClinic in London during the late 1950s and 1960s. He published themonograph The Doctor, His Patient, and the Illness after several of hisgroups had been meeting for at least 3 years.   The design of the ``training cum research'' was extremely simple: Smallgroups of family physicians met weekly to discuss their interactions withpatients that were in any way puzzling, frustrating, or unsatisfying.Presentations were informal and spontaneous, and the groups dealt with thecases over time to understand more about the doctor-patient relationshipand how it affected the quality and outcome of care.   After Dr Balint taught in the United States in the late 1960s, histraining techniques were widely adopted, especially in family practicetraining programs around the country. Today, the International BalintFederation continues to adapt and use his methods. Information about theAmerican Balint Society can be obtained from Laurel Milberg, PhD, ForbesFamily Practice Residency, 2566 Haymaker Rd, Monroeville, PA 15146; fax:412-858-2765.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1TWO BY TWOBy:Eric G. Anderson, MD   I often see geriatric patients as Noah saw his passengers: two by two.Many of my older patients bring their spouses with them to the office.   Sometimes these couples make me laugh and brighten my day. I've learned,however, to bite my lip on occasion and not to laugh too soon, becausesometimes the humor is inadvertent.   This was the case with Mrs Angel,* who brought her husband in on a daywhen he was being particularly difficult.   ``Do you know why I married this man?'' she finally asked me.   I shook my head cautiously.   ``Because there were things about him that I knew would bother otherpeople that didn't bother me,'' she replied.   I sometimes learn more from the couple than I would seeing each personseparately. But just as often in my interactions with pairs, I blow it.   That's what happened with Mrs Teitelbaum,* a new patient whounexpectedly volunteered that she had divorced her first husband. Hercurrent husband shrank back uncomfortably into one of my office chairs.   ``Well, I'm sure Mr Teitelbaum is better looking,'' I saidencouragingly, smiling at the embarrassed man.   ``No,'' she said, brushing some lint off her skirt. ``My first husbandwas better looking.''I blundered on. ``Yes, but I bet your mother prefers Mr Teitelbaum.''   ``No. She prefers my second husband,'' she replied. ``He's my third.''   Silence really is golden.   Not so funny was my relationship with Mrs Freedman.* She insisted ongiving her husband's history, even though he was an intelligent retiredschoolteacher who was very much on the ball. She corrected any symptoms heoffered. It was hard, therefore, to get the patient's perspective--not anuncommon problem when one spouse is dominant, yet a situation experiencedphysicians learn to handle.   I must have forgotten my experience, because at one point in the officevisit I said, probably in exasperation, ``Mrs Freedman, please let yourhusband explain how he's feeling. Then we can see if you agree with whathe's said.''   I caught a strange look on her face, a look I saw again later when Imade my only appearance in court to defend myself against a charge ofmedical malpractice. The charge was preposterous and I won, but it took 3years of my life and a lot of the joy out of practicing medicine.   The malpractice charge surely sharpened my sensitivity to any patient'sspouse, but I still smile when I think about two situations in which I wasslow to tune in.   Mrs Schlott* brought in her oversedated husband, who sat drooling in thecorner while she told me what had happened: She'd taken him to our urgentcare department, and a doctor there had diagnosed depression and prescribedtrazodone. The doctor hadn't mentioned the drug's side effects, though. MrsSchlott wondered if her husband's headache, nausea, and palpitations couldbe related to the medication.   I wasn't surprised by her questions. The husband, a deaf, irascibleperson who never showed his wife affection, used various doctors forprimary care. She often asked me to sort out any confusion regarding histreatment.   I looked at the label and noted that a heavy loading dose had beenprescribed for a man his age. I thought I should warn him about the moreimportant side effects.   I leaned over and shouted in his ear, dropping my voice when I came topriapism, a complication I'd actually seen in a couple of patients. Ididn't want to embarrass his wife.   ``What exactly are you saying, Doctor?'' she asked.   ``The male might have an erection that could last for hours, MrsSchlott. It can be a problem if it doesn't go down,'' I said hesitatingly.   She led her husband out the door, saying, ``Well, I don't think we'llworry about a little bit of nausea and headache, will we, Fritz? Thismedicine is helping you.''   Mrs Firenze* had the opposite situation.   Her debonair Italian husband, aged 93, sported a silk cravat, pearltiepin, and a polyester leisure suit. He wanted his ``marital rights''twice daily.   His younger wife was exhausted.   At a number of visits, the old man asked, ``Don't you think my wifeshould consider her husband's physical needs?''She responded with frantic semaphore signals behind his back that showedshe didn't share his sexual appetite.   Mr Firenze had severe pulmonary and cardiovascular disease. I don't knowhow he had the energy to talk about sex, much less want it so often.   One day, he came in with arrhythmia. He was lethargic, confused,vomiting, and dehydrated; he'd had a strangulated inguinal hernia for 2days. I called for an ambulance, then went back to explain the poorprognosis to his wife.   She listened carefully until I felt obliged to say, ``He's a poor riskfor surgery. He might die on the operating table. I wish the hospital wascloser. Even the short ambulance ride could kill him.''   Bless her heart. She fought hard, trying to compose her face, but shefinally broke out into a lopsided grin.   ``When we take the ambulance,'' she asked, ``could we go the longway?''*Names have been changed.About the Author(s):Dr Anderson is a semiretired family physician in a multispecialty grouppractice in San Diego. He is a charter fellow of the American Academy ofFamily Physicians and a charter diplomate of the American Board of FamilyPractice. Mailing address: Eric G. Anderson, MD, 10205 Rue Touraine, SanDiego, CA 92131-2230. E-mail address: erit@aol.com.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1YOUR `WINDOW' TO THE WORLD'S INFORMATIONBy:Jerry F. Potts, MD   Consider the paramecium. The little one-celled creature we all rememberfrom basic biology can be compared to the computer sitting in many aphysician's office, or at least to the way it's used.   A one-celled organism is capable of simple functions (eg, it is motileand can feed itself). Similarly, a physician's computer often sits alone,unconnected to others, and completes simple tasks (eg, generates letters ortracks accounts) with use of a small-business application.   But when grouped, both organisms and computers become more complexentities, capable of functioning at new levels that are stunning in theirdiversity and exciting in their potential.What computers can do   Right now, the technology is available to bring radiographs directlyfrom the imaging equipment to the desktop screen and to allow theradiologist and the clinician at the screen to discuss the radiographs asthey view them simultaneously.   Right now, the technology is available to transfer the spoken worddirectly into text on a word processor. Yes, the ``talking typewriter'' ofscience fiction stories is now a science fact. And the ``picturetelephone'' is becoming common in the business world as computers andtelephone equipment merge.   Right now, the technology is available to check a drug dose as youprescribe it, to print out a personalized set of instructions for apatient, and to enter information on that patient into an electronicrecord.   To take advantage of the technology that is already available, not tomention what is coming up, physicians need to take a wider view of what acomputer can do. Rather than thinking of a computer as a tool with which toaccomplish a task, these days it may be more accurate to think of it as a``window.'' Through it, physicians can see and choose information that isavailable from nearly anywhere. As technology becomes simpler and morestandardized, fear of computers, which is already fading fast, will bereplaced with the confident attitude, ``I know it's there. How can I findit?'' The dominant role of physicians of the future may well be to find andinterpret the most current information, wherever it resides.What computer networks can do   One of the latest trends in the computer world is networking. Expertscall for the eventual connection of virtually all computers. Theramifications as this concept becomes reality are amazing to consider. Evensmall networks (eg, a few computers within one office or clinic that cancommunicate with each other) offer more information to physicians than whatis immediately available on a single computer.   The biggest network of all, known as the Internet, is the driving forcebehind a complete transformation of computers--from pieces of individualequipment to mechanical members of large-group cooperatives. By somecounts, as many as 20 million computers now are connected to this worldwidenetwork of information. Until quite recently, the Internet was theexclusive province of universities and military institutions. But astechnology advanced, more and more people started using the Internet to``talk'' to others all over the world. Soon commercial interests came toappreciate the ability to reach millions of computer-literate people atvirtually no cost.   The Internet continues to grow at a tremendous rate. The standard methodof communication among corporations, students and others members of theacademic community, and many professionals throughout the world iselectronic mail passed through the network. Today, an Internet address isalmost as common on a business card as a telephone number.What all this means to physicians   Among the abundance of material that is readily available on theInternet is medical information. Disease-prevention statistics,medical-image files, reference databases, and many other types of text andgraphics are available with a few keystrokes if you know where to look.Educational pieces for both physicians and patients are accessible anduseful. For minimal cost, you can view an encyclopedia (including audio andvideo clips), and if you really want to, you can even watch a frogdissection.   In the near future, computer networking is likely to directly affectphysicians by changing the reimbursement process. Electronic submission ofclaims is available and is already being used by the large healthcareinstitutions. Almost certainly, electronic filing will become arequirement, so significant changes will be needed in the business officesof even small practices.   Many people feel that they save personal time by using the Internet.Users can plan trips, purchase tickets and other products, and make bankingtransactions. They can also dial in to read the latest news or check up andcomment on legislation that is pending in Congress.   And there are just-plain-fun aspects of networks. Discussion groups havebeen formed around virtually every interest, from the arts to gardening totennis. Whatever your passion may be, you can chat about it with fellowenthusiasts across the globe.   My aim in coming columns is to look at a number of issues related tocomputers and the Internet. I'll tell you about ways I've incorporatedcomputers into my practice and about some of the things ``out there'' thatare on my agenda to try. What's on your computer agenda? I'll be interestedto hear your stories and opinions, and we may share some of them in futurecolumns (with your permission, of course).   It becomes more and more obvious the longer I work with computers andnetworks that there are no limits to their practical applications in dailylife, especially since they are becoming easier and easier to use. Already,daughter Elizabeth (aged 20 months) is displaying a tendency to monopolizethe home computer. Can her own e-mail address be far behind?   Your comments and discoveries about using computers in practice and forfun are welcome and may be published in Digital Doc. Contact Jerry F.Potts, MDBy mail: POSTGRADUATE MEDICINE, 4530 W 77th St, Minneapolis, MN 55435. Byfax: 612-835-3460. By e-mail: pgm@mill2.millcomm.comA tiny product sampleScriptLetter 1.3   This program records prescriptions in patients' records, prints out theprescription for the physician's signature, and prints a customized lettercontaining information about the drug and its side effects for the patient.A warning appears on screen if the patient is allergic to the drug. Drugselection is from a list supplied by the developer. Drugs and often-usedprescriptions can be added. An optional module allows faxing theprescription directly to the pharmacy.   For information: CompuScript, 300 S Eighth St, Suite 107E, Murray, KY42071; 502-753-9240.Travel Care 2.0   For the countries selected, this program provides summaries of the riskof disease (eg, yellow fever, malaria) and any needed immunizations andprecautions. Also available are travel advisories, general information forparticular regions, travel restrictions, and State Department advisories.Printouts are available in color and use boldface and underlining for easyreading. Updated monthly. Available for Macintosh computers.   For information: Care Ware, 9559 Poole St, La Jolla, CA 92037;619-455-1484.The Illustrated Merck Manual (CD-ROM version)   Choosing from a list of general topics takes the user to the appropriatearea of the Merck Manual index, which may then be searched by entering thedesired word and picking the desired title. Text may be searched bychoosing words or categories; online hints help define and limit searches.Users may attach reminders or additions to text, and these annotations aremarked by a ``paper clip'' icon. Graphic figures and tables may bedisplayed and printed by clicking on an icon. Photographs are notincluded.   For information: CMC Research, 322 NW Fifth Ave, Suite 201, Portland, OR97209; 503-242-2567; e-mail: cmcresrch@aol.com.Current Contents   Updated weekly, this research tool reproduces the table-of-contentspages from more than 1,300 journals in the life sciences. Fullbibliographic information is provided for each entry. Text may be searchedby author, title, key words, and more. Available in IBM and Apple Macintoshversions; on disk, on disk with abstracts, and in Windows.   For information: Institute for Scientific Information, 3501 Market St,Philadelphia, PA 19104-9981; 800-336-4474 and press 2; fax: 215-386-2911;e-mail: isiorder@isinet.com, department D-5Z20311.Continuing Medical Education Database & Guide   The thousands of medical meetings and conventions occurring around theglobe are listed on one CD-ROM, with annual updates and a floppy diskversion soon available. Queries may be formatted by date, venue, andspecialty.   For information: Professional Database Indexes, 344 Bloor St W, Suite508, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5S 3A7; 800-279-3011 or 416-960-5700; fax:416-960-5622.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1MEET JERRY POTTSBy:Peter A. Setness, MD, Editor-in-Chief   Computer poker! Teletype Star Trek! Thus began Jerry's noble andaltruistic interest in computers.   But that was only high school and college stuff. During his residencytraining in the early 1980s at Hayes Army Hospital, Fort Ord, California,he attended a patient-wellness fair where the big drawing card was a fairlynew idea at the time--a computer printout of each person's results. Withhundreds of people awaiting their printout, the Radio Shack TRS-80 computerlocked up. To the great relief of the organizers, Jerry was able to getthings going again. As is the Army's way, it rewarded Jerry the ArmyService Medal for his act of selfless heroism. He is probably one of only afew physicians to be decorated for computer work above and beyond the callof duty.   And once again he has fearlessly stepped forward, this time byvolunteering to write a column on computer use by busy practicingphysicians. Jerry is certainly one of those. He has been with the FamilyPractice Department at Hennepin County Medical Center in Minneapolis since1986 and is the department's assistant chief and a faculty member of theresidency training program. He is medical director of the Family MedicalCenter, sees patients nearly every day, and in his spare time is working ona prototype electronic medical record-keeping system for the clinic.   In the limited remainder of his time, he has agreed to give us hisperspective on becoming a ``digital doc.'' Although he has a Mac IIcx athome, a Pentium 90 at work, and an Apple IIe that he still uses regularlyfor word processing (plus a Tandy model 100 in the closet), he really is aphysician first. His interest in computers is self-generated, and he usesthis interest at work to explore ways to facilitate and improve patientcare. This column will be a travelogue of Jerry's explorations--what worksfor him and what doesn't.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1MODERATE PARKINSON'S DISEASE: STRATEGIES FOR MAXIMIZING TREATMENTBy:Paul M. Silverstein, MDPreview   Levodopa has long been the standard pharmacologic agent for treatment ofParkinson's disease, but after long-term use of the drug, motorfluctuations and dyskinesia occur in many patients. In this article, DrSilverstein discusses dosage adjustments, combination drug regimens, anddietary changes that help to optimize symptomatic therapy. He also exploresthe neuroprotective potential of selegiline in slowing progression ofParkinson's disease.   Parkinson's disease is a relentlessly progressive neurologic disorderthat affects primarily the elderly. Symptoms of the disease are sometimesinitially attributed to the aging process, but one or more of the cardinalsymptoms of parkinsonism--bradykinesia, a characteristic resting tremor,postural instability, impaired gait and mobility, and limb rigidity--areoften clinically apparent. A number of other symptoms are less common(table 1).   Symptoms and rate of disease progression vary greatly among patients.Once the diagnosis is established, the degree of functional impairmentdictates whether or not drug therapy is initiated. With the help of currenttherapies, some patients continue working or lead a relatively normal lifefor 10 years or more. But this was not always the case. According to astudy from 1967,1 (Reference) about two thirds of patients were severelydisabled 5 years after onset of the disease; more than 80% were severelydisabled or dead 10 years after onset. The rate of expected mortality hasdecreased markedly since 1967, when physicians began to use levodopa(Dopar, Larodopa)--the precursor to dopamine hydrochloride--for treatmentof Parkinson's disease.2 (Reference)   Today, there are many options for pharmacologic management ofParkinson's disease (table 2). This article summarizes a number of the mostcurrent strategies for treating patients with moderate disease andfunctional impairment.What causes Parkinson's disease?   The exact cause of Parkinson's disease is unknown, but theories abound.Although a link has not definitely been established, excessive free radicalformation and oxidative damage to the cells of the substantia nigraprobably play a role in development of the disease.3 (Reference)   The pathology of Parkinson's disease is well defined: Intracytoplasmicinclusions, progressive destruction of the dopaminergic nigrostriatalpathway, and consequent reduction of striatal concentration of dopamine arecharacteristic.4 (Reference) Postmortem studies have revealed an 80% lossof dopamine in the striatum at the time symptoms become clinicallyapparent.5 (Reference) A deficiency of dopamine, which functions as aneurotransmitter in the striatum and in other related brain centers,results in the vast array of physical changes, cognitive dysfunction, anddepressive symptoms that characterize Parkinson's disease.Slowing disease progression   Neuroprotective therapy to slow the progression of Parkinson's diseasehas become an important focus of treatment strategies recently. Themonoamine oxidase type B (MAO-B) inhibitor selegiline hydrochloride(Eldepryl) may moderate disease progression by reducing toxic free radicalformation, thereby sparing remaining neurons in the substantia nigra.   Studies involving newly diagnosed cases of Parkinson's disease show thatselegiline slowed the rate of symptom development and delayed the need forlevodopa therapy.6-8 (Reference) Whether this resulted from the drug'ssymptomatic effect or from its neuroprotective effect on the neurons of thesubstantia nigra remains controversial.9,10 (Reference) Selegiline has thepotential to exert a symptomatic effect because it increases intracellulardopamine through its inhibition of MAO-B, which blocks the breakdown ofdopamine. Consequently, many clinicians choose selegiline for initialtherapy because of its potential to provide both symptomatic andneuroprotective benefits.Symptomatic treatment   When a patient with Parkinson's disease becomes functionally disabled,symptomatic treatment is initiated. The choice of the appropriatepharmacologic intervention is determined by the patient's needs, extent ofdisability, symptoms, age, presence or absence of cognitive dysfunction,and response to initial drug therapy.   In 1994, a panel of neurologists outlined treatment guidelines forParkinson's disease and developed an algorithm that helps maximize responseto drug therapy (figure 1). The algorithm is designed to help physicianstailor treatment, especially in newly diagnosed cases.   Currently, drugs used to treat symptoms of Parkinson's disease includeanticholinergics, amantadine hydrochloride (Symadine, Symmetrel), dopamineagonists, and levodopa. Each of these agents relies on a differentmechanism of action in the brain and has a well-defined role in themanagement of Parkinson's disease.   Levodopa is currently the most effective treatment, but motorfluctuations and dyskinesia develop in most patients after long-termadministration of the drug. Current research suggests that this is becauseof gradual loss of dopamine terminals in the striatum and changes in theresponse of the striatal receptor cells to dopamine.11 (Reference)   In the normal brain, striatal receptor cells receive a continuous, tonicstimulation from dopamine via the intact striatonigral pathway. The gradualloss of dopaminergic terminals in the striatum diminishes the brain'sability to continuously produce, store, and release dopamine. InParkinson's disease, postsynaptic changes seem to result from theintermittent stimulation of striatal receptor cells that occurs whenstandard levodopa is administered periodically during the day. As thedisease progresses, daily fluctuations in motor capability--ranging from``wearing-off'' phenomena to sudden, unpredictable changes in mobility,known as ``on-off'' syndrome--produce increasing disability. Choreiform ordystonic dyskinesias also develop and are often disabling.   Other factors thought to influence wearing-off phenomena are thevariability of gastric emptying and factors that influence levodopatransport. Levodopa is absorbed into the duodenum and then must competewith large neutral amino acids in the diet for transport across the gutwall and into the bloodstream; similar competition occurs for transportacross the blood-brain barrier.12 (Reference) Gastric emptying into theduodenum is delayed by large meals and the use of anticholinergic anddopaminergic drugs and is a common consequence of advancing age.13(Reference)Motor fluctuations   Management of motor fluctuations is challenging and not alwayssuccessful, but a number of strategies are worth trying. Many of thesetreatment options share the principal goals of therapy: to sustaintherapeutic brain concentrations of levodopa and provide continuousstimulation of the striatal receptor cells. These strategies attempt tocontrol the delivery of levodopa to the brain, modify its breakdown withinthe brain, or bypass the presynaptic substantia nigra neuron that isdegenerating and directly stimulate the dopamine receptor.   Dosage adjustments--Lower and more frequent doses of immediate-releasecarbidopa/levodopa (Sinemet) throughout the day may help maintaintherapeutic levels in the blood. Providing a dose every 3 to 4 hours duringthe day is often beneficial. It is important to give a sufficient amount oflevodopa with each dose to produce an effect; insufficient doses can resultin multiple dose failures during the day.   Sustained-release preparation--Use of the sustained-release formulationof carbidopa/levodopa (Sinemet CR) prolongs the drug's benefit and helpsavoid wearing-off effects.14 (Reference) This strategy may help to preventfurther alteration in the striatal receptor response by providing a morephysiologic tonic stimulation. When patients change to thesustained-release preparation, however, the daily levodopa dose must beincreased by 20% to 30% because of differences in bioavailability betweenthe two preparations. Patients who switch to the sustained-releaseformulation often comment that they miss the initial ``kick'' they used toreceive from their first morning dose of regular carbidopa/levodopa. Insuch cases, a combination regimen of 1 tablet of the immediate-release formand 1 tablet of the sustained-release form may be taken as the initialmorning dose. This provides rapid onset of action and a prolonged effect.   Liquid preparation--For selected patients who are highly compliant andwilling to adhere to a demanding therapeutic schedule, a liquid preparationof carbidopa/levodopa can be mixed at home to counteract wearing-offperiods.15 (Reference) The standard formula calls for 10 tablets ofcarbidopa/levodopa in the 25/100-mg strength and 2 g of ascorbic acidcrystals dissolved in 1 L of tap water. The patient drinks 75 mL of thesolution first thing in the morning and then consumes 35 to 50 mL/hrthereafter. This preparation works well for many patients who have motorfluctuations, but a fair amount of fine-tuning is usually required toestablish the correct dose.   Dopamine agonists--Addition of a dopamine agonist to thecarbidopa/levodopa regimen often results in substantial improvement ofmotor fluctuations, because dopamine agonists directly stimulate dopaminereceptors16 (Reference) (figure 2). The two agonists that are currentlyavailable in the United States, bromocriptine mesylate (Parlodel) andpergolide mesylate (Permax), differ in the way they stimulate the striatalreceptors but have virtually the same effect. A patient who does notrespond to one of the agonists may benefit from the other.   Daily doses of 15 to 30 mg of bromocriptine generally suffice when theagonist is added to the carbidopa/levodopa regimen. Doses of 2 to 4 mg ofpergolide per day usually are required to avoid wearing-off effects. When adopamine agonist is added to this regimen, the carbidopa/levodopa scheduleis often modified so that smaller, more frequent doses are administered.For example, a patient taking the 25/250-mg strength of carbidopa/levodopathree times a day might be switched to the 25/100-mg strength six times perday. Supplemental dopamine agonist therapy helps smooth out fluctuations.   Mao-b inhibitors--Use of a selected MAO-B inhibitor, such as selegiline,may help manage motor fluctuations.17 (Reference) MAO-B inhibitors blockthe enzymatic breakdown of dopamine and extend the duration of levodopaeffect. The addition of 5 mg of selegiline twice a day generally requires a10% to 20% reduction in carbidopa/levodopa to avoid levodopa peak-dose sideeffects, such as increased dyskinesia.   Amantadine also may help some patients. The drug appears to enhance therelease of dopamine, thereby prolonging the amount of ``on'' time thatpatients experience.   Dietary modifications--Large neutral amino acids in the diet cansignificantly alter the effect of levodopa by competing with the drug fortransport, primarily across the blood-brain barrier.18 (Reference) Thus, ameal that is high in protein may diminish the effect of a recent dose ofcarbidopa/levodopa. Most patients can avoid this problem by taking theirmedication about 30 to 45 minutes before eating. For patients with moresevere fluctuations, a protein-redistribution diet, in which most proteinis consumed in the evening, may be indicated.19 (Reference) Another optionis to consume a balanced carbohydrate-protein diet, for which products areavailable commercially. Both of these dietary modifications enhance thetransport of levodopa across the blood-brain barrier and, consequently, atthe dopamine nerve terminals.   Enteral infusion--In rare cases in which pronounced, disablingfluctuations cannot be stabilized with other techniques, continuous enteralinfusion of levodopa through a percutaneous gastrojejunal tube may bewarranted.20 (Reference) The challenge is to convince patients of thebenefits of this invasive delivery method.Dyskinesia   After 3 years of treatment with levodopa, about half of patients havedyskinesia.11 (Reference) Muenter and associates21 (Reference) describeddyskinesia as occurring in two patterns: dystonia-improvement-dystonia andimprovement-dystonia-improvement. Treatment is often problematic, butseveral strategies may be helpful.   Peak-dose dyskinesia--The improvement-dystonia-improvement pattern, orpeak-dose dyskinesia, is relatively common. Choreic or dystonic movementsof the head, trunk, limbs and, occasionally, respiratory muscles arecharacteristic. Lowering each individual dose of carbidopa/levodopa by asmall amount may help. If motor response deteriorates, a dopamine agonist,such as bromocriptine or pergolide, may be added. The use ofsustained-release rather than standard carbidopa/levodopa may be beneficialfor this type of dyskinesia because lower peak-dose levodopa blood levelsare achieved. Finally, for patients taking selegiline, discontinuation ofthe drug may help reduce dopamine concentrations in the brain.   Diphasic dyskinesia--The dystonia-improvement-dystonia pattern, ordiphasic dyskinesia, develops with advanced Parkinson's disease and is moredifficult to correct. Abnormal movements are often coarser, associated withlimb pain, and observed when plasma levodopa levels are increasing ordecreasing. This pattern of dyskinesia may respond to more frequent dosingof carbidopa/levodopa, which helps to achieve a more steady ``on'' state.Increasing each dose may help, but this approach usually fails over time.Another strategy is to switch patients with diphasic dyskinesia to anagonist drug for primary therapy and then supplement the regimen withsmaller doses of carbidopa/levodopa. Use of sustained-releasecarbidopa/levodopa may aggravate this pattern of dyskinesia, most likelybecause a slower flux of levodopa levels in the blood may contribute todevelopment rather than treatment of dyskinesias.   Foot cramps--Patients with advanced Parkinson's disease may have painfulfoot cramps in the morning or occasionally late in the afternoon because ofdystonic posturing of the foot. During the cramps, blood levels of levodopaare critically low. Administration of baclofen (Lioresal),sustained-release carbidopa/levodopa, or dopamine agonist therapy providesrelief.Summary   Motor fluctuations and dyskinesia often develop in patients withParkinson's disease after 3 to 5 years of levodopa therapy. Dosageadjustments, addition of a second medication to the drug regimen, anddietary modifications may help maximize response to symptomatic therapy.Given the dramatic variability of symptoms and response to treatment, drugregimens must be individualized according to the patient's needs.   In newly diagnosed cases of Parkinson's disease, administration ofselegiline hydrochloride (Eldepryl) may slow symptom development and delaythe need for levodopa therapy. Many physicians prescribe selegilineinitially for its symptomatic and potential neuroprotective benefits.   Mailing address: Paul M. Silverstein, MD, Minneapolis Clinic ofNeurology, Ltd, W-414 Meadowbrook Medical Building, 6490 Excelsior Blvd, StLouis Park, MN 55426-4710. E-mail address: fjhf02a@prodigy.com.ReferencesTable 1. Symptoms of Parkinson's diseasePrimaryBradykinesia Progressively smaller handwriting Reduced semiautomatic gestures (eg, crossing legs or arms) Reduced spontaneous facial movements; masklike stare, infrequent blinking Slowed movements (eg, walking, sitting, dressing) Soft voice that trails offImpaired gait and mobility Change in stride Short, shuffling stepsPostural instability Difficulty with balance when walking or standing Injuries from frequent falls Stooping forward to maintain center of gravityResting tremor Involves mainly hands and feet; head, neck, face, lips, tongue, or jawalso may be affected Often the initial symptom; affects 50% to 75% of patients Regular and rhythmic (4 to 6 beats per second); occurs when limb issupported and at restRigidity Breathing, eating, swallowing, speech may be affected Common types include cogwheel rigidity (muscles move in series of shortjerks) or lead-pipe rigidity (muscles move smoothly but stiffly) Sustained muscle contraction (often mistaken for common stiffness orachiness) Walking with arms held stiffly at sidesSecondaryAkathisiaCognitive impairmentDepressionDysarthriaFatigueFreezing of movement (motor blocks)ImpotenceIncreased salivationOrthostatic hypotensionParoxysmal drenching sweatsSeborrheic dermatitisUrinary frequencyTable 2. Primary drugs used to treat Parkinson's diseaseDrug                            Mechanism of actionCarbidopa/levodopa (Sinemet)    Dopa decarboxylase inhibitor/dopamine                                precursor (replacement)Carbidopa/levodopa sustained-   Dopa decarboxylase inhibitor/dopaminerelease (Sinemet CR)            precursor (replacement)Levodopa (Dopar, Larodopa)      Dopamine precursor (replacement)Pergolide mesylate (Permax)     Dopamine agonistBromocriptine mesylate          Dopamine agonist(Parlodel)Selegiline HCl (Eldepryl)       Monoamine oxidase type B inhibitorAmantadine HCl (Symadine,       Release of dopamine, anticholinergicSymmetrel)Trihexyphenidyl HCl (Artane)    AnticholinergicBenztropine mesylate            Anticholinergic(Cogentin)Illustration(s):Illustration: Figure: Figure 1. Management algorithm for early Parkinson'sdisease. Patient's chronological and biological age should be consideredwhen drugs and dosages are chosen. Central nervous system phenomena, suchas confusion, hallucinations, and delusions, may occur as side effects ofanti-Parkinson's medications. Care should be taken when these drugs aregiven with other medications that have the potential to produce centralnervous system side effects. In particular, use of anticholinergics isgenerally not recommended for patients over age 60 because of the potentialfor significant side effects.   Adapted, with permission, from Pahwa R, Koller WC. A rationalpolypharmacy approach to Parkinson's. Intern Med 1994;15(7):52-64.Illustration: Figure: Figure 2. Release of dopamine at striatal receptorand bromocriptine mesylate stimulation of striatal receptor.   Adapted with permission of Sandoz Pharmaceuticals Corporation.Photograph(s):Photograph: Paul M. Silverstein, MDAbout the Author(s):Paul M. Silverstein, MD is medical director of the Struthers Parkinson'sCenter, Methodist Hospital, St Louis Park, Minnesota, and is in privatepractice of neurology in Minneapolis. He is also clinical professor,departments of neurology and family practice, University of MinnesotaMedical School--Minneapolis.Reference(s):1. Hoehn MM, Yahr MD. Parkinsonism: onset, progression, and mortality.Neurology 1967;17(5):427-422. Joseph C, Chassan JB, Koch ML. Levodopa in Parkinson disease: along-term appraisal of mortality. Ann Neurol 1978;3(2):116-83. McGeer PL, Itgaki S, Akinyama H, et al. Comparison of neuronal loss inParkinson's disease and aging. In: Calne DB, et al, eds. Parkinsonism andaging. New York: Raven Press, 1989:25-344. Gibb WR. Neuropathology of Parkinson's disease and related syndromes.In: Cedarbaum JM, Gancher ST, eds. Neurologic Clinics: Parkinson's Disease.Philadelphia: Saunders, 1992:361-765. Bernheimer H, Birkmayer W, Hornykiewicz O, et al. Brain dopamine and thesyndromes of Parkinson and Huntington. J Neurol Sci 1973;20(4):415-556. The Parkinson Study Group. Effect of deprenyl on the progression ofdisability in early Parkinson's disease. N Engl J Med 1989;321(20):1364-717. The Parkinson Study Group. Effects of tocopherol and deprenyl on theprogression of disability in early Parkinson's disease. N Engl J Med1993;328(3):176-838. Myllyla VV, Sotaniemi KA, Vuorinen JA, et al. Selegiline as initialtreatment in de novo parkinsonian patients. Neurology 1992;42(2):339-439. Olanow CW, Calne D. Does selegiline monotherapy in Parkinson's diseaseact by symptomatic or protective mechanisms? Neurology 1992;42(4 Suppl4):13-2610. Schulzer M, Mak E, Calne DB. The antiparkinson efficacy of deprenylderives from transient improvement that is likely to be symptomatic. AnnNeurol 1992;32(6):795-811. Bravi D, Mouradian MM, Roberts JW, et al. Wearing-off fluctuations inParkinson's disease: contribution of postsynaptic mechanisms. Ann Neurol1994;36(1):27-3112. Nutt JG, Fellman JH. Pharmacokinetics of levodopa. Clin Neuropharmacol1984;7(1):35-4913. Baruzzi A, Contin M, Riva R, et al. Influence of meal ingestion time onpharmacokinetics of orally administered levodopa in parkinsonian patients.Clin Neuropharmacol 1987;10(6):527-3714. Rodnitzky RL, Dickins QS, Dobson J. Long-term clinical efficacy ofSinemet CR in patients with Parkinson's disease. Neurology 1989;39(Suppl2):92-515. Kurth MC, Tetrud JW, Irwin I, et al. Oral levodopa/carbidopa solutionversus tablets in Parkinson's patients with severe fluctuations: a pilotstudy. Neurology 1993;43(5):1036-916. Calne DB. Treatment of Parkinson's disease. N Engl J Med1993;329(14):1021-717. Golbe LI, Lieberman AN, Muenter MD, et al. Deprenyl in the treatment ofsymptom fluctuations in advanced Parkinson's disease. Clin Neuropharmacol1988;11(1):45-5518. Juncos JL, Fabbrini G, Mouradian MM, et al. Dietary influences on theantiparkinsonian response to levodopa. Arch Neurol 1987;44(10):1003-519. Pincus JH, Barry K. Protein redistribution diet restores motor functionin patients with dopa-resistant ``off'' periods. Neurology1988;38(3):481-320. LeWitt PA. Treatment strategies for extension of levodopa effect. In:Cedarbaum JM, Gancher ST, eds. Neurologic Clinics: Parkinson's Disease.Philadelphia: Saunders, 1992:511-2621. Muenter MD, Sharpless NS, Tyce GM, et al. Patterns of dystonia (`I-D-I'and `D-I-D') in response to l-dopa therapy for Parkinson's disease. MayoClin Proc 1977;52(3):163-74Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1PNEUMONIA, A FIVE ARTICLE SYMPOSIUMCOMMUNITY-ACQUIRED PNEUMONIA: WHAT'S NEEDED FOR ACCURATE DIAGNOSISBy:Thomas M. File Jr, MDJames S. Tan, MDJoseph F. Plouffe, MDPreview   Community-acquired pneumonia remains a leading cause of morbidity anddeath, particularly in the elderly and in patients with underlying disease.Identification of a specific cause on clinical grounds often is notpossible, and even extensive studies may not reveal the responsiblepathogen. In this article, the authors concentrate on the factors thatcontribute to a reliable diagnosis.   Several important changes have made diagnosis and management ofcommunity-acquired pneumonia a greater challenge than ever. These includean expanding number of possible pathogens, increasing antimicrobialresistance, the influence of HIV infection, and the rising prevalence oftuberculosis in US communities.1-4 (Reference) There is also a stimulus tobe as cost-effective as possible, and the primary care physician must tryto balance reasonable use of diagnostic tests with empirical therapy. Thisreview focuses on diagnosis of community-acquired pneumonia in the contextof these changes.Clinical diagnosis   The diagnosis of community-acquired pneumonia is based on a combinationof clinical and laboratory data. These include characteristic clinicalfindings (fever, cough, and rhonchi or rales on auscultation), the presenceof a new infiltrate on chest films, and documentation of a causativemicroorganism.   Although patients with community-acquired pneumonia usually present withcough and fever, the differential diagnosis is extensive and includes upperand lower respiratory tract infections as well as noninfectious causes (ie,reactive airways disease, pulmonary embolism, pulmonary malignancy).Because most upper respiratory tract infections are of viral origin and areself-limited, little diagnostic testing or antimicrobial therapy iswarranted, thus reducing the use of resources. Similarly, antibiotics arenot warranted for acute bronchitis.5 (Reference) In contrast, antimicrobialtherapy is usually indicated for pneumonia.   Chest films--The definition of community-acquired pneumonia includes thefinding of new infiltrates on chest films. However, the prevalence ofpneumonia among adults with respiratory symptoms ranges from only 3% in ageneral outpatient setting to 28% in emergency departments.1 (Reference)Several factors have been found to be predictors of the presence ofpneumonic infiltrates on chest films: temperature higher than 37.7 degreesC (100 degrees F), pulse rate more than 100 beats per minute, rales,locally de-creased breath sounds, sputum production, and the absence ofasthma, sore throat, and rhinorrhea. Although these predictors serve asguidelines, they certainly do not replace clinical judgment.   We recognize that it is not practical to obtain a chest film in allsituations, but it can be helpful in differentiating conditions that mimicpneumonia, and the findings may suggest causes or conditions such aspneumocystic disease, tuberculosis, lung abscess, and pleural fluid.Elderly patients with pneumonia may present with nonspecificmanifestations, such as a change in mental status, and the threshold forconsidering pneumonia and obtaining chest films in such patients must belowered. Finally, pulmonary ``infiltrates'' may be falsely interpreted asacute pneumonia if old chest films are not available to differentiate acutefrom chronic changes; this is also a risk in patients with noninflammatorycauses of infiltration (ie, congestive heart failure, atelectasis). Thus,appropriate evaluation of the chest film relies on accurate clinicalassessment.   Hospital admission--Once pneumonia is suggested by findings on chestfilms, the primary care physician must determine who can be safely treatedas an outpatient and who should be hospitalized. Indications for hospitaladmission have been defined by a modified version of the appropriatenessevaluation protocol, a validated instrument used widely by qualityassurance organizations.6 (Reference) The specific indications for hospitaladmission and risk factors for death are listed in table 1. Laboratorystudies that help clarify the severity of community-acquired pneumoniainclude a hemogram, electrolyte determinations, and pulse oximetry ormeasurement of arterial blood gases.Etiology   As noted, determining a specific cause of community-acquired pneumoniahas been made more challenging by the growing number of possible pathogens.Streptococcus pneumoniae remains the leader, but recent reports haverecognized other microorganisms, such as Chlamydia pneumoniae, Legionellaspecies, Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis and, very recently, sin nombrevirus, which causes hantavirus pulmonary syndrome.1-4,7 (Reference) Otherknown causes include Haemophilus influenzae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, oralanaerobes (associated with aspiration pneumonia), and viruses (influenzavirus, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, and respiratory syncytial virus).Penicillin-resistant strains of S pneumoniae and beta-lactamase-producingstrains of H influenzae and M catarrhalis have been isolated withincreasing frequency.   Although secondary bacterial pneumonia after influenza is most commonlydue to S pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus also needs to be considered.Gram-negative bacilli should be suspected when the patient is from anursing home. Pneumonia due to Pneumocystis carinii and other opportunisticpatho-gens has emerged in the past several years in association with HIVinfection and should be included in the differential diagnosis. Inaddition, pulmonary tuberculosis has been increasingly implicated in casesof community-acquired pneumonia over the past several years and deservesconsideration whenever the cause cannot be readily explained. Table 2 showsthe expanding list of pathogens to be aware of when evaluatingcommunity-acquired pneumonia in either immunocompetent or immunocompromisedpatients.   Several recent studies have determined the relative proportion ofspecific causes of community-acquired pneumonia; table 3 shows data fromthree such studies3,4,8 (Reference) and distinguishes between pneumoniatreated on an outpatient basis and that treated in a hospital. Traditionalpathogens such as S pneumoniae and H influenzae account for 25% to 40% ofcases. Pneumonia due to Mycoplasma, Chlamydia, or Legionella species (oftenreferred to as ``atypical'') comprise another 15% to 30% of cases. In table4, the most common causes are correlated with patient categories that arebased on disease severity and comorbidities.   In most studies, a specific cause is not found for 30% to 50% of casesof community-acquired pneumonia. A percentage of such cases may indeed notbe infectious pneumonia. It is well known that other conditions, such asvasculitis, drug reactions, and pulmonary infarction, may present withmanifestations mimicking infectious pneumonia. Unrecognized pathogensundoubtedly account for a certain percentage of undefined cases.   Detailed history taking may be helpful in establishing a diagnosis.Epidemiologic clues to possible pathogens are listed in table 5. Acontroversial issue concerns whether the cause of pneumonia (eg,pneumococcus versus mycoplasma versus legionella) can be differentiated onthe basis of clinical features. Certain findings are likely to beassociated with specific causes: Acute onset and a single shaking chill(rigor) are cardinal features of streptococcal pneumonia; markedly elevatedtemperature (higher than 39.4 degrees C [103 degrees F]) is more commonwith legionella pneumonia; prodromal fever and myalgia followed bypulmonary edema and hypotension are characteristic of hantavirus pulmonarysyndrome; diarrhea is more common with atypical pneumonia; and underlyingchronic obstructive pulmonary disease is more often seen with bacterialpneumonia.3,8 (Reference) In addition, there are reports of associatedasthma in patients who have elevated chlamydial antibody titers.9(Reference) It is our experience, however, that asthma is unlikely to beassociated with the primary infection, and recent data from others do notsupport a significant role for acute C pneumoniae infection in provokingacute bronchospasm in adults.10,11 (Reference) Despite these clinicalclues, recent studies have shown that clinical findings overlap in cases ofpneumonia caused by different agents, rendering distinction on a clinicalbasis unreliable.5,6 (Reference)Specific diagnostic evaluation   Once the clinical diagnosis of community-acquired pneumonia has beenmade, consideration should be given to the microbiologic diagnosis. Suchinformation can be useful for both prognosis and therapy. Unfortunately,rapid diagnostic tests are not available for many of the microorganisms,and initial therapy is usually empirical. However, diagnostic proceduresthat provide information on a specific cause within 48 to 72 hours canstill help define continuing therapy.   Identification of the specific cause relies on isolating themicroorganism or on determining the presence of a specific antigen orantibody. Table 6 lists the diagnostic tests that we recommend forevaluation of community-acquired pneumonia. However, it must bereemphasized that even after extensive studies are done, the pathogenremains unidentified in 30% to 50% of cases.   The extent of diagnostic evaluation that is undertaken depends to adegree on the severity of illness. Patients under age 60 who do not haveunderlying disease can often be safely treated without diagnostic tests;oral antimicrobial agents directed against the pathogens that are mostcommonly seen in this group (S pneumoniae, Mycoplasma and Chlamydiaspecies) can be given.   Because of the greater potential for serious morbidity (and mortality),patients who require hospitalization should have diagnostic evaluation. Thedifficulty in specifying a cause on clinical grounds and the awareness ofantimicrobial resistance that reduces the predictability of response to anygiven antibiotic are additional important reasons to define the pathogen inthese patients.   Sputum evaluation--Although sputum evaluation may be helpful, often itis not available. Studies of sputum include both staining procedures andcultures. The significance and predictability of Gram's stain aredebatable.12 (Reference) Nevertheless, we believe that it can be useful indiagnosis and therapy when there is a predominance of gram-positive orgram-negative organisms from an appropriate specimen (ie, one with a largenumber of neutrophils and a paucity of squamous epithelial cells). All toooften, however, sputum smears demonstrate only normal oral flora, are ofpoor quality, or are unobtainable. Nonetheless, the direct results of asputum stain may be helpful in defining some pulmonary infections,including those caused by mycobacteria.   Similarly, routine sputum cultures are neither sensitive nor specific.They often show pathogens that are only colonizing the respiratory tract,and even in cases of bacteremic pneumonia, the causative pathogen can beisolated from sputum culture in only 40% to 60% of cases.   In contrast, recovery from cultures of organisms that are never part ofthe respiratory flora may be meaningful; therefore, in appropriatecircumstances, sputum should be cultured for mycobacteria, legionellae, andfungi. (The physician must be aware that special, selective media areneeded for such organisms and that the laboratory must be advised in thesesituations.) Isolation of penicillin-resistant pneumococci and otherantibiotic-resistant microorganisms can also be very meaningful and helpfulin directing subsequent therapy. Culture of M pneumoniae or C pneumoniae ispossible, but it is difficult and requires specialized techniques. Becauseof this, most microbiology laboratories are not set up to culture theseorganisms, and diagnosis is usually based on serologic tests.   Blood and pleural fluid cultures--Blood cultures should always be donewhen a patient requires hospitalization. Although they are positive in onlyabout 10% of cases of community-acquired pneumonia, diagnosis is specific.Similarly, cultures of pleural fluid, if it is present, are highly specificand should be done to rule out complicated parapneumonic fusion or empyemaas well as to establish the cause of community-acquired pneumonia.   Invasive techniques--More invasive diagnostic techniques, such asfiberoptic bronchoscopy, can be very sensitive in identifying the pathogen.Although such techniques are expensive and impractical for routine use,they should be considered for patients with a fulminant course, those whorequire admission to the intensive care unit, and those who are at risk foropportunistic pathogens or have complex pneumonias that are unresponsive toantimicrobial therapy.   Serologic tests--These are usually not helpful in the initial assessmentof patients with community-acquired pneumonia. They can be worthwhile forepidemiologic purposes when they show a fourfold rise between acute andconvalescent paired specimens. Cold agglutinins may be present in cases ofmycoplasmal infection, but tests are positive in only a minority of casesand are not specific. IgM antibodies may be present in serum within thefirst week of mycoplasmal infection, but the serologic response tochlamydia and legionella takes longer. The most reliable antibody test forC pneumoniae is a microimmunofluorescence technique. Complement-fixationantibody tests are available but are not as specific. In cases of primaryinfection due to C pneumoniae, the IgM antibody response may take up to 4weeks and the IgG antibody response up to 8 weeks to appear. Therefore, theabsence of detectable antibodies (even IgM) several weeks after infectiondoes not exclude the diagnosis. During reinfection, the IgG antibody levelrises rapidly, whereas the IgM antibody level may not change.   Results of the acute antibody test for legionella in cases oflegionnaires' disease are usually negative or of low titer because it istoo early in the course of illness to engender a response; thus, a negativeresult on an acute antibody test does not exclude this diagnosis.Unfortunately, we have observed cases of community-acquired pneumonia inwhich appropriate therapy was not administered because of misinterpretationof the ``negative'' acute antibody test. An elevated acute antibody titersuggests a diagnosis of pneumonia due to Mycoplasma, Legionella, orChlamydia species, but it is not definitive. It has been acceptable tolabel a case as ``probable'' or ``presumptive'' if the acute titer ishighly elevated (see following section on diagnostic criteria); however, itis our experience that a single elevated titer (without confirmation byanother test such as culture or antigen detection) often reflects oldrather than acute infection. In a study of legionnaires' disease in Ohio,we found that an acute antibody titer of more than 1:256 had a positivepredictive value for acute legionnaires' disease of only 15%.13 (Reference)The percentage of patients with elevated acute titers who had confirmedlegionnaires' disease was not significantly different from that of patientswho did not. Thus, on the basis of our own experience, we believe thatacute-phase serum specimens should be obtained for patients withcommunity-acquired pneumonia and saved. If the pathogen remains inquestion, a convalescent-phase specimen can be obtained and paired studiesperformed.   Rapid diagnostic tests--The urinary antigen test, which has recentlybecome available in most reference laboratories, has been shown to be veryvaluable for rapid identification of legionella. Present techniques testonly for Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1, but this organism accounts forabout 80% of clinical cases of community-acquired pneumonia due tolegionella. The urinary antigen test is positive in about 80% of caseswithin the first days of illness and is highly specific. A negative testdoes not exclude legionella pneumonia (particularly if caused by organismsother than serogroup 1), but a positive test is diagnostic.   Several rapid diagnostic tests, such as DNA probes or polymerase chainamplification for evaluation of respiratory secretions or serum, are beingdeveloped (especially for chlamydial, mycoplasmal, and legionellapneumonia) but are not routinely available at present. Once such testsbecome available, they should be extremely helpful in allowing directedtherapy at presentation.   Diagnostic criteria--The specificity of diagnosis varies with the testused. For example, a positive blood culture for S pneumoniae is much morespecific than a positive sputum culture without a positive blood culture.Accordingly, the following would generally be considered as evidence ofdefinite infection by a specific microorganism:   1. Blood or pleural fluid yielding a pathogen   2. A fourfold rise in antibody titer to L pneumophila, M pneumoniae, Cpneumoniae, or other specific pathogen   3. Isolation of L pneumophila, influenza virus, or Mycobacteriumtuberculosis from respiratory secretions   4. Positive legionella urinary antigen test   Isolation of a pathogen from purulent sputum with identification of acompatible organism on Gram's stain is generally considered to be evidenceof probable cause. Similarly, presence of a single elevated antibody titer(legionella immunofluorescent antibody titer greater than 1:250 or Cpneumoniae microimmunofluorescent antibody titer greater than 1:512 [IgG]or 1:16 [IgM]) has been considered evidence for presumptive diagnosis byseveral authorities. However, as we have stated previously, it is ourexperience that these criteria are often unreliable.   In conclusion, the physician must consider the usefulness of variousdiagnostic tests when formulating an initial plan of management for apatient with community-acquired pneumonia. While the results of certainprocedures (blood culture or legionella urinary antigen test) are specific,the results of others (sputum culture and initial serologic tests) are onlypresumptive. With the exception of the sputum Gram stain (with itsacknowledged pitfalls), there are no immediately available rapid diagnostictests; thus, initial therapy is usually empirical.Summary   Characteristic clinical findings of fever, cough, and rhonchi, togetherwith a new infiltrate on chest films and documentation of a pathogen,establish a diagnosis of infectious pneumonia. Several factors have had animpact on the approach to diagnosis of community-acquired pneumonia by theprimary care physician. These include the expanding number of possiblepathogens as well as their increasing resistance to antimicrobial therapy.   Although the clinical presentation may suggest a specific cause,findings often overlap too much for reliable identification of the specificagent on clinical grounds alone. Isolation of the micro-organism ordetermination of the presence of a specific antigen or antibody isnecessary. However, even after extensive studies are performed, thepathogen remains unidentified in 30% to 50% of cases. The primary carephysician therefore needs to balance reasonable use of diagnostic testswith empirical therapy.ReferencesTable 1. Indications for hospital admission and risk factors for death inpatients with community-acquired pneumoniaIndications for hospital admission:   Severe abnormality in vital signs (heart rate greater than 140beats/min, systolic blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg, respiratory rategreater than 30/min)   Altered mental status   Arterial hypoxemia (PO (subscript) 2 less than 60 mm Hg while breathingroom air)   Suppurative pneumonia-related infection (empyema, septic arthritis,meningitis, endocarditis)   Severe electrolyte, hematologic, or metabolic abnormality not known tobe chronic (eg, sodium less than 130 mEq/L, hematocrit less than 30%,absolute neutrophil count less than 1,000/mm (superscript) 3, blood ureanitrogen greater than 50 mg/dL or creatinine greater than 2.5 mg/dL)   Acute coexistent medical condition requiring admission that isindependent of pneumonia (eg, suspected acute myocardial infarction)Risk factors for death:   Age greater than 65 yr   Coexisting morbid illness (eg, diabetes mellitus, renal insufficiency,congestive heart failure) or hospitalization for pneumonia during yearbefore presentation   Temperature greater than 38.3 degrees C (101 degrees F)   Immunosuppression (defined as use of systemic corticosteroids orsystemic chemotherapy for malignant neoplasm during 6 mo beforepresentation with pneumonia)   High-risk pneumonia (defined as infection due to Staphylococcus aureus,gram-negative rods, or aspiration; or infection associated with obstructionof air passages)Adapted from Fine et al.6 (Reference)Table 2. Pathogens associated with community-acquired pneumoniaTraditional pathogens:Streptococcus pneumoniaeHaemophilus influenzaeMycoplasma pneumoniaeOral anaerobesGram-negative bacilli (less common)Staphylococcus aureus (less common)More recently recognized pathogens:Legionella speciesChlamydia pneumoniae (strain TWAR)Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalisSin nombre virus (hantavirus)Pathogens with increasing prevalence:Mycobacterium tuberculosisPneumocystis carinii (associated with HIV infection)Less common pathogens in immunocompetent host:Bacteria  Neisseria meningitidis  Streptococcus pyogenes  Alpha-hemolytic streptococci  Coxiella burnetii (Q fever)  Chlamydia psittaciFungi  Histoplasma capsulatum  Coccidioides immitis  Blastomyces dermatitidisViruses  Influenza  Parainfluenza  Adenovirus  Respiratory syncytial  VaricellaLess common pathogens in immunocompromised host:Bacteria  Nocardia species  Mycobacterium species (ie, avium complex)Fungi  Aspergillus species  Candida species  Cryptococcus species  Rhizopus speciesViruses  Herpes simplex  CytomegalovirusToxoplasma speciesTable 3. Pathogens identified as causes of community-acquired pneumonia inoutpatients and hospitalized patientsPathogen      Outpatients* (%)            Hospitalized patients+ (%)              Cassell et al 8       Fang et al3 (Reference) Marrie4(Reference)              (Reference)              (n = 120)                (n = 359)             (n = 719)Unknown                   41               33                  47Streptococcus pneumoniae  20               15                  16Haemophilus influenzae    18               11                   7Mycoplasma species        13                2                  11Chlamydia species         17                6                   6Legionella species        --                7                   4 *Column totals more than 100% because some patients had infection causedby more than one organism. +Columns total less than 100% because all pathogens are not listed.Table 4. Causes of community-acquired pneumonia according to patientcategoryPatient category                 Likely infecting organismsOUTPATIENTS60 yr old or younger             Streptococcus pneumoniaewithout comorbidity              Mycoplasma pneumoniae                                 Respiratory viruses                                 Chlamydia pneumoniae                                 Haemophilus influenzae60 yr old or older               S pneumoniaewith comorbidity                 Respiratory viruses                                 H influenzae                                 Aerobic gram-negative bacilli                                 Staphylococcus aureusHOSPITALIZED PATIENTSNot requiring                    S pneumoniaeintensive care                   H influenzae                                 Mixed anaerobes                                 Aerobic gram-negative bacilli                                 Legionella species                                 S aureus                                 C pneumoniae                                 Respiratory virusesRequiring intensive              S pneumoniaecare                             Legionella species                                 Aerobic gram-negative bacilli                                 M pneumoniae                                 Respiratory virusesAdapted from Niederman et al.12 (Reference)Table 5. Epidemiologic factors related to specific pathogens in patientswith community-acquired pneumoniaFactor                          Commonly encountered pathogensAlcoholism                        Oral anaerobes,                                  Streptococcus pneumoniae,                                  gram-negative bacilliChronic obstructive               Haemophilus influenzae,pulmonary disease                 S pneumoniae, Moraxellaor smoking                        (Branhamella) catarrhalisNursing home                      S pneumoniae, gram-residency                         negative bacilli, H influenzae,                                  Staphylococcus aureusPoor dental hygiene               Oral anaerobesRecent plumbing                   Legionella specieswork at residenceor unusual exposureto waterExposure to birds                 Chlamydia psittaciHIV infection                     Pneumocystis carinii,                                  S pneumoniae, H influenzae,Mycobacterium                                  tuberculosisExposure to excreta               Sin nombre virus (hantavirusof wild rodents                   pulmonary syndrome)Table 6. Diagnostic procedures for evaluation of community-acquiredpneumonia*Chest radiography (to support diagnosis of pneumonia)Hemogram, blood chemistry studies with electrolyte determinations, pulseoximetry or measurement of blood gases (to assess severity of illness ifadmission to hospital is considered)Procedures recommended for patients requiring hospital admission Blood culture Gram's stain and culture of sputum if cough is productive+ Freezing of serum for later serologic analysis if needed++ Urinary antigen test for Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1 Thoracentesis with stain and culture if significant pleural fluid ispresentOptional procedures Sputum smears for acid-fast staining, sputum culture, legionella culture,  fungus and virus cultures Silver stain of respiratory secretions HIV antibody test Invasive techniques (bronchoscopy with protected brush specimen orbronchoalveolar lavage; lung biopsy)*Authors' recommendations.+Gram's stain should be interpreted by trained personnel. Culture is doneonly if specimen is adequate.++Serologic tests include those for Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Legionellapneumophila, Chlamydia pneumoniae, or others, depending on circumstances(ie, viruses, Chlamydia psittaci, Coxiella burnetii).Photograph(s):Photograph: Thomas M. File, Jr, MD; James S. Tan, MD; Joseph F. Plouffe,MD.About the Author(s):Dr File is professor of internal medicine, Northeastern Ohio UniversitiesCollege of Medicine, and chief, infectious disease service, department ofinternal medicine, Summa Health System, Akron.   Dr Tan is professor of internal medicine and chairman, infectiousdisease section, Northeastern Ohio Universities College of Medicine. He isalso chairman, department of medicine, and program director, internalmedicine residency program, Summa Health System.   Dr Plouffe is professor of internal medicine and medical microbiologyand immunology, division of infectious diseases, Ohio State UniversityHospitals, Columbus.   Mailing address: Thomas M. File Jr, MD, 75 Arch St, Suite 105, Akron, OH44304. E-mail address: tfile@neoucom.eduReference(s):1. File TM Jr, Tan JS. Community-acquired pneumonia: the changing picture.Postgrad Med 1992;92(8):197-214 [Erratum, Postgrad Med 1993;93(4):50]2. Lynch JP III, Plouffe JF. CAP: new pathogens, new therapy. Int Med1994;Jan:41-593. Fang GD, Fine M, Orloff J, et al. New and emerging etiologies forcommunity-acquired pneumonia with implications for therapy: a pro-spectivemulticenter study of 359 cases. Medicine (Baltimore) 1990;69(5):307-164. Marrie TJ. Community-acquired pneumonia. Clin Infect Dis1994;18(4):501-135. Gonzales R, Sande M. What will it take to stop physicians fromprescribing antibiotics in acute bronchitis? Lancet 1995;345(8951):665-66. Fine MJ, Smith DN, Singer DE. Hospitalization decision in patients withcommunity-acquired pneumonia: a prospective cohort study. Am J Med1990;89(6):713-217. Duchin JS, Koster FT, Peters CJ, et al. Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome: aclinical description of 17 patients with a newly recognized disease. N EnglJ Med 1994;330(14):949-558. Cassell GH, Drnec J, Waites KB, et al. Efficacy of clarithromycinagainst Mycoplasma pneumoniae. J Antimicrob Chemother 1991;27(SupplA):47-599. Hahn DL, Dodge RW, Golubjatnikov R. Association of Chlamydia pneumoniae(strain TWAR) infection with wheezing, asthmatic bronchitis, andadult-onset asthma. JAMA 1991;266(2):225-3010. File TM Jr, Plouffe JF, Breiman RF, et al. Clinical characteristics ofChlamydia pneumoniae pneumonia based on serology. Abstracts of the 1995Infectious Disease Society of America (IDSA) Annual Meeting. Clin Inf Dis1995;21(3):75711. Weiss S, Quist J, Roblin P, et al. The relationship between Chlamydiapneumoniae and bronchospasm in adults. Abstract K39 of the 35thInterscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, SanFrancisco, 199512. Niederman MS, Bass JB Jr, Campbell GD, et al. Guidelines for theinitial management of adults with community-acquired pneumonia: diagnosis,assessment of severity, and initial antimicrobial therapy. AmericanThoracic Society. Medical Section of the American Lung Association. Am RevRespir Dis 1993;148(5):1418-2613. Plouffe JF, File TM Jr, Breiman RF, et al. Reevaluation of thedefinition of Legionnaires' disease: use of the urinary antigen assay. ClinInfect Dis 1995;20(5):1286-91Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1PNEUMONIA, A FIVE-ARTICLE SYMPOSIUM: INTRODUCTIONBy:Burke A. Cunha, MD, SYMPOSIUM COORDINATOR   Pneumonia is one of the most common infectious diseases encountered inpractice. The first step in evaluation should be to determine whether thepatient does, in fact, have pneumonia. Patients usually have a variety ofnonspecific respiratory symptoms, which should be sorted out as originatingin either the upper or lower respiratory tract. Upper respiratory tractinfections (eg, sinusitis, pharyngitis, tracheobronchitis) cause nopulmonary signs. The presence of pulmonary findings, with or withoutsymptoms of upper respiratory infection, points to pneumonia.   Clinical diagnosis of pneumonia rests on auscultatory and chest filmfindings. Laboratory findings may be absent very early in the infection andin the presence of leukopenia or dehydration. Similarly, the lungs areconspicuously quiet in viral or interstitial pneumonia (eg, viralinfluenza).   Sputum may originate in the bronchi or alveoli, and findings on testingof such samples are helpful in suggesting pneumonia only if they relate tothe infiltrate or chest film. Testing of a properly collected sputumspecimen from the lower respiratory tract is useful in suggesting thecausative agent in community-acquired pneumonia but is useless innosocomial pneumonia. In the right clinical context, a sputum Gram stain ishelpful, but unless it is absolutely diagnostic, initial treatment shouldbe empirical. Characteristics of sputum may provide diagnostic clues to thetype of community-acquired pneumonia. For example, thin, mucoid sputumsuggests atypical pneumonia, compared with the frankly purulent sputum thatsuggests a bacterial process.   Chest films are key in investigation of community-acquired pneumonia.They confirm the diagnosis, and specific findings often suggest aparticular organism. For example, pleural effusion, cavitation, and lobarinvolvement are helpful findings when interpreted in the proper clinicalcontext. The behavior of infiltrates over time may be diagnosticallyuseful. Those that clear rapidly (1 or 2 days) probably are not infectious,but rapidly progressive asymmetric infiltrates suggest legionellainfection. Infiltrates may be absent if chest films are obtained very earlyin the disease process but usually appear within 24 hours after the patientpresents for medical attention.   Even when an infiltrate is present, the diagnosis of community-acquiredpneumonia may be uncertain. Many conditions mimic pneumonia, and unless thecause is quickly recognized as noninfectious, needless expense, potentialantibiotic resistance, and delay in proper treatment may result.   Failure of pneumonia to resolve represents another issue. Delayedresolution of community-acquired pneumonia is being recognized increasinglyin elderly and immunocompromised patients.   Because virtually any antibiotic with an appropriate spectrum providesadequate treatment of pneumonia, the challenge is to find the mostcost-efficient approach and monitor clinical effectiveness. An importantnew development, particularly in terms of cost-effectiveness, is thecapability to switch from intravenous to oral antibiotic therapy. Forexample, at Winthrop-University Hospital, Mineola, New York, the differencebetween intravenous and oral therapy with one particular antibiotic is $74versus $5.44 per day. The goal is to select an oral antibiotic that isactive against both typical and atypical pathogens, has goodbioavailability and low resistance potential, and is cost-effective.Unfortunately, relatively few oral agents meet these criteria.   In patients requiring hospital admission, antibiotic therapy should bestarted intravenously and then, if clinically possible, switched after 3days to an oral form for completion of therapy. Recent studies have shownthat oral therapy is effective in a variety of infectious diseases, even invery ill patients. Although oral therapy will never be possible in allpatients, the era of oral antibiotic therapy is clearly upon us, not onlybecause of economic pressures but also because of new knowledge. Thissymposium presents an overview of the latest research findings, as well aspractical information gained from the school of clinical experience.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1ATYPICAL PNEUMONIA: EXTRAPULMONARY CLUES GUIDE THE WAY TO DIAGNOSISBy:Burke A. Cunha, MDAntonio M. Ortega, MDPreview   As the name implies, atypical pneumonia does not follow the usual form.However, infecting organisms do cause characteristic patterns of organinvolvement, which provide important clues to clinicians. The authorsdescribe clinical diagnosis of the most common causative organisms ofatypical pneumonia by means of a syndromic approach. They also discusswhich antimicrobial agents have been found to be useful against theseorganisms.   Certain pathogens are typically associated with community-acquiredpneumonia, including Streptococcus pneumoniae, group A streptococci,Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis, and, lessoften, Klebsiella species. In patients recovering from viral infection andoccasionally in diabetic patients, Staphylococcus aureus infection isfound.Community-acquired pneumonia can also be caused by less common pathogens.These atypical pneumonias are divided into two forms: nonzoonotic (ie, nottransmitted from animals to humans) and zoonotic (transmissible fromanimals). Nonzoonotic forms are the more common and are an importantdiagnostic consideration in evaluation of community-acquired pneumonia.   This article presents an overview of the clinical approach to threenonzoonotic atypical pneumonias: legionnaires' disease (caused byLegionella species), mycoplasmal pneumonia (caused by Mycoplasmapneumoniae), and Chlamydia pneumoniae (strain TWAR) pneumonia (table 1).Although zoonotic pneumonia is not discussed in detail, characteristics ofthree forms are summarized in table 2 for use in differential diagnosis:psittacosis (caused by Chlamydia psittaci), Q fever (caused by Coxiellaburnetii), and tularemia (caused by Francisella tularensis).   Thorough reviews of both typical and atypical causes ofcommunity-acquired pneumonia are available in the literature.1-4(Reference)Diagnostic approach   Although the microorganisms in atypical pneumonia usually causeprominent pulmonary manifestations, the illness should be viewed as asystemic infectious disease with a pulmonary component. Indeed, it is theextrapulmonary manifestations that are a hallmark, so if a case ofpneumonia is accompanied by otherwise unexplained extrapulmonary signs,symptoms, and laboratory abnormalities, atypical pneumonia should bepresumed.   Whether a patient has nonzoonotic or zoonotic atypical pneumonia shouldbe established if possible. A history of contact with animals or animalproducts is usually available to suggest a zoonotic form. If noepidemiologic associations or diagnostic clues point to a zoonotic atypicalpathogen, the working diagnosis is quickly narrowed to the more common,nonzoonotic forms.5-8 (Reference)   Carefully conducted history taking and physical examination should becompleted in an attempt to define organ involvement by the putativepathogen. All organisms causing atypical pneumonia have a characteristicpattern of organ involvement that provides clues to diagnosis of thesepneumonias. Key findings include relative bradycardia, upper respiratorytract involvement, diarrhea, abnormalities in liver function tests,elevation of cold agglutinin titer, and decreased serum phosphorus level.Very few findings are in themselves pathognomonic of any disease process;it is the pattern of occurrence that makes the constellation of findingsdiagnostically specific.5-7 (Reference) Thus, a syndromic approach, inwhich history, physical examination, and laboratory findings are combined,is best in establishing a working diagnosis of atypical pneumonia. Forexample, assume a patient with community-acquired pneumonia andextrapulmonary findings has atypical pneumonia. If he or she also hasdiarrhea, the diagnosis is clearly limited to legionnaires' disease ormycoplasmal pneumonia. If the patient has a pulse-temperature deficit (ie,relative bradycardia), diagnostic possibilities include legionnaires'disease, psittacosis, or Q fever. Similarly, even a slight unexplainableabnormality in results of liver function tests in a patient with atypicalpneumonia limits diagnostic possibilities to legionnaires' disease,psittacosis, or Q fever. Hyponatremia is a common but nonspecific finding,but the finding of hypophosphatemia points to legionnaires' disease.   Since legionnaires' disease, mycoplasmal pneumonia, and C pneumoniaepneumonia are the most often encountered atypical pneumonias, the maindiagnostic thrust should be to identify the pathogens responsible for theseforms. Mycoplasmal infection in normal hosts and C pneumoniae pneumonia inyoung adults are rarely fatal, so workup should first focus on identifyingor eliminating legionnaires' disease, which can be fatal if leftuntreated.   Serologic diagnosis of all these atypical pathogens is made on the basisof a single initial high titer or a fourfold increase between acute andconvalescent titers.Legionnaires' disease   Legionnaires' disease may be caused by any of the Legionella species.The highest incidence is in late summer and early fall, but cases can occurat any time of the year. Legionnaires' disease is transmitted byaerosolized droplets of water. For example, outbreaks have occurred inhospitals as a result of contaminated water sources or nearby excavation orconstruction. Although legionnaires' disease is treatable withtetracyclines and macrolide antibiotics, fatalities still occur in elderlypatients and compromised hosts. Therefore, early presumptive diagnosis isessential so appropriate treatment can be started as soon as possible.   Legionnaires' disease presents clinically and radiologically as atypicalpneumonia. Its onset is usually subacute but may be fulminant. Pulmonarymanifestations are not sufficiently different from those caused by otherpulmonary pathogens to permit a specific diagnosis. As noted earlier, theclinical clues lie in extrapulmonary findings, as they do in other types ofatypical pneumonia.   Signs and symptoms--Legionnaires' disease is characterized by relativebradycardia, mental status changes or mild headache, abdominal discomfortor pain, and diarrhea. The signs and symptoms do not respond to beta-lactamantibiotics. Ear pain, sore throat, or rash argues strongly against thediagnosis of legionnaires' disease.   Chest films--With atypical pneumonia, a specific diagnosis cannot bemade from the appearance on chest films. However, legionnaires' diseaseshould be suspected in patients who have pneumonia and rapidly progressiveasymmetric infiltrates.5,6 (Reference)   Laboratory findings--Certain laboratory tests are helpful in making apresumptive diagnosis of some atypical pneumonias. A slight increase inserum transaminase levels (without antecedent alcoholic cirrhosis or liverdisease) in a patient presumed to have atypical pneumonia immediatelylimits diagnostic possibilities to legionnaires' disease, psittacosis, or Qfever. Hyponatremia is more common in legionnaires' disease than in otheratypical pneumonias but is not specific for legionella infection.Hypophosphatemia (except in patients who have other causes of a low serumphosphorus level) strongly implicates a Legionella species as the infectingorganism in patients with atypical pneumonia.   Moderate to high elevation of cold agglutinin titers argues stronglyagainst the diagnosis of legionnaires' disease. (Elevation of these titersis useful primarily in diagnosis of mycoplasmal pneumonia.)   Initial serum legionella titers are diagnostically helpful only ifhighly elevated (ie, greater than or equal 1:256) in a patient with illnesscompatible with legionnaires' disease. The usual situation is that thephysician suspects legionnaires' disease and orders serologic workup, onlyto find that initial results are normal. In most patients withlegionnaires' disease, titers are not elevated early in the disease;therefore, normal levels should not exclude the diagnosis. About 6 to 8weeks after the onset of disease, titers should be obtained; at this point,a diagnostic elevation is usually present.   If a patient with legionella pneumonia has a productive cough and hasnot received prior antimicrobial therapy, a diagnosis of legionnaires'disease may be rapidly confirmed with a direct fluorescent antibody stainfor legionella organisms in the sputum. However, legionella positivity onthis stain decreases rapidly after effective antibiotic therapy has begun.Some patients do not have effective antibody responses, and antimicrobialtherapy itself may blunt, delay, or eliminate antibody responses so thatthere is little or no elevation in legionella titers. Therefore, without apositive sputum direct fluorescent antibody test for legionella, theinitial working diagnosis must be made on the basis of clinical findings byusing the syndromic approach mentioned.Mycoplasmal pneumonia   M pneumoniae infection is one of the most common causes of atypicalpneumonia. This agent and the Legionella species are capable of growth incell-free media, which sets them apart from all other causative agents inatypical pneumonia. Mycoplasmal pneumonia occurs at any time of the year,although small epidemics during the late fall or winter, coincident withthe school year, are common. This finding is not surprising, given the factthat transmission of the disease is from person to person via respiratorydroplets.   Patients with mycoplasmal pneumonia seen in the office probablyrepresent a small proportion of cases, since most infections are benign andself-limited. Many patients do not appear to be very ill, despiteabnormalities on chest films. This observation has led to the term``walking pneumonia'' to describe the illness. On the other hand, patientsmay appear very ill yet have only small, wispy infiltrates on chest films.   Signs and symptoms--Onset of the disease is insidious and follows a 2-to 3-week incubation period. The most characteristic sign is a dry cough,which is usually unproductive. Other symptoms include mild headache,malaise, nonpleuritic chest pain, and low-grade fever (usually between 101and 102 degrees F [38.3 and 38.8 degrees C]). Patients often reportchilliness, but frank chills are uncommon. Chest pain is uncommon but, ifpresent, is due to muscle strain from repeated coughing.   Its subacute onset and the absence of severe myalgias are importantclues distinguishing mycoplasmal pneumonia from viral pneumonia. Diarrheais common in mycoplasmal pneumonia, legionnaires' disease, and some of theadenoviral pneumonias.   Chest films--Despite the severity of cough, there is usually a paucityof chest findings and no evidence of consolidation. Chest films usuallyshow infiltrates in the lung interstitium.   Physical examination--Extrapulmonary manifestations are different fromand less evident than those of legionnaires' disease. Practically all organsystems can be involved, since mycoplasmal pneumonia is a systemicinfectious disease.   Skin manifestations are common and range from maculopapular eruptions toStevens-Johnson syndrome, which occurs in 5% to 10% of patients. Cardiacinvolvement is the next most common extrapulmonary manifestation;abnormalities may include arrhythmias, conduction defects, and congestiveheart failure. Neurologic complications are uncommon and includemeningoencephalitis and reversible transverse myelitis.   Laboratory findings--Except for demonstration of elevated coldagglutinin titers, routine laboratory tests are generally unhelpful indiagnosis of mycoplasmal pneumonia. Cold agglutinins, which also occur inviral infections, are not specific for mycoplasma, and they are elevated inless than 75% of patients with the infection. However, the degree of coldagglutinin response is greatest in mycoplasmal pneumonia; the higher thetiter is above 1:64 in a patient with pneumonia, the more likely thediagnosis of mycoplasmal pneumonia.   The agglutinin-dissociation test is a quick bedside procedure for makingthis determination. It consists of collecting blood in an oxalated tube andimmersing it, along with a control specimen, in wet ice for 1 to 2 minutes.Agglutination of erythrocytes (with a negative control) on the side of theglass tube and their disappearance on rewarming to 98.6 degrees F (37degrees C) indicate that cold agglutinins are present in a titer of 1:64 ormore. Repeated agglutination on repeated immersion after rewarmingindicates the presence of mycoplasma, since viral cold agglutinins do notexhibit this agglutination-dissociation behavior.   The enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for IgG antibodies cancause much diagnostic confusion. An elevated mycoplasma titer (otherwiseuncharacterized) is invariably an IgG determination. An elevated titerindicates past exposure rather than active disease, and patients should notbe diagnosed or treated on the basis of this finding. In contrast, anelevated IgM titer usually indicates active disease, especially whenaccompanied by extrapulmonary signs of mycoplasmal pneumonia.6,7(Reference)C pneumoniae pneumonia   C pneumoniae is a common causative agent in respiratory tract diseases;those seen most often by physicians are pneumonia and severe upperrespiratory tract infection. C pneumoniae pneumonia occurs sporadically butmay also present as outbreaks among college students or military recruits.Transmission is from person to person via respiratory droplets. Childrenare less likely than adults to acquire pneumonia; however, seropositivityincreases after the second decade of life, reflecting subliminal childhoodillness.   It is important to consider C pneumoniae pneumonia early in the illness,because macrolide antibiotics are relatively ineffective. Thecharacteristic presentation of C pneumoniae pneumonia is a mycoplasmalpneumonia-like illness with laryngitis and failure to improve with use oferythromycin. Tetracyclines (eg, doxycycline [Doryx, Vibramycin]) are thepreferred therapy for chlamydial pneumonias (eg, C pneumoniae pneumonia,psittacosis).   Signs and symptoms--C pneumoniae pneumonia may present in a mannersimilar to mycoplasmal pneumonia, except for the frequent finding ofconcurrent upper respiratory tract illness (eg, laryngitis). Sinusitis andpharyngitis sometimes precede the onset of C pneumoniae pneumonia by a fewdays to a week. Although pharyngitis and otitis are common findings inmycoplasmal pneumonia, sinusitis is not. The presence of laryngitis andhoarseness points to C pneumoniae pneumonia; laryngitis is not a feature ofother atypical pneumonias.   Chest films--Patchy consolidation or interstitial infiltrates may berevealed on chest films. Infiltrates are sometimes described asfunnel-shaped and, if present, may be a clue to the diagnosis. In Cpneumoniae pneumonia, unlike in mycoplasmal pneumonia, auscultation of thechest may reveal evidence of consolidation; however, like in mycoplasmalpneumonia, pleural effusions are uncommon.   Laboratory findings--Diagnosis is usually made by serologic testing,because the organism grows poorly in cell culture media and laboratoryfindings are not specific. Primary infection produces a rise in IgM titerwithin 2 to 4 weeks of onset of illness and a rise in IgG titer within 6 to8 weeks. Reinfection may not cause an IgM response, but an IgG increaseoccurs earlier than in primary infection. Complement fixation testing issensitive but not species-specific. Antibody testing specific for Cpneumoniae, rather than general chlamydial testing, should be requested.9(Reference)Therapy   The main problem for physicians has been to differentiate typicalbacterial from atypical community-acquired pneumonia. The distinction isparticularly important because of therapeutic implications.   Beta-lactam antibiotics have been used most often for typicalcommunity-acquired pneumonia, and doxycycline or erythromycin is used ifthe probable clinical diagnosis is an atypical pneumonia. If a case couldnot be established as typical or atypical pneumonia, doxycycline orerythromycin was added to the beta-lactam regimen.3,7 (Reference)Monotherapy is highly desirable, since adding a second antibiotic greatlyincreases the cost of treatment as well as the risk of side effects anddrug resistance.   Fluoroquinolones have been suggested as monotherapy forcommunity-acquired pneumonia. However, some investigators have voicedreservations regarding coverage against activity of S pneumoniae as well asLegionella and Mycoplasma species. Ofloxacin (Floxin) is the most activefluoroquinolone against S pneumoniae and is also effective clinicallyagainst Legionella and Mycoplasma species.10,11 (Reference) In addition, itis the least expensive fluoroquinolone and is available in both intravenousand oral forms. For these reasons, at Winthrop-University Hospital,Mineola, New York, we use ofloxacin as the first-choice fluoroquinolone forrespiratory infection and as monotherapy for typical and atypicalcommunity-acquired pneumonia. Further savings may be possible by switchingfrom intravenous therapy to oral administration after 3 days.   Switching from intravenous to oral therapy may also be accomplished withazithromycin (Zithromax) or doxycycline. Azithromycin has the advantage ofproviding 2 weeks' worth of therapy with only 5 days' worth of medication,because drug levels in blood and tissue are so prolonged. After the initialloading dose of 500 mg, only a single 25-mg capsule daily for 4 days isrequired. It is more expensive than erythromycin but causes fewergastrointestinal side effects. However, azithromycin is not yet availablein parenteral form.   Doxycycline has excellent bioavailability, making it an ideal agent fortransfer from intravenous to oral therapy. It is relatively inexpensive andis the most cost-effective form of monotherapy for community-acquiredpneumonia. It has a high degree of activity against both typical andatypical pathogens. If properly diluted, doxycycline is not associated withphlebitis, and if taken with food, it causes few if any gastrointestinalside effects.Summary   In atypical pneumonia, causative organisms are difficult to isolate, socareful clinical assessment is essential in arriving at a workingdiagnosis. Definitive diagnosis through serologic testing is usuallyretrospective. Either a high initial titer or a fourfold or greater risebetween the acute and convalescent titer is considered diagnostic in apatient with compatible illness. Legionella and mycoplasma organisms may becultured from respiratory secretions if plated on appropriate culturemedia. Using a syndromic approach, physicians can almost alwaysdifferentiate typical from atypical community-acquired pneumonia and narrowdiagnostic possibilities among the atypical pathogens, making possibleinstitution of early, possibly lifesaving, empirical therapy.Illustration(s):Table: Table 1. Diagnostic features of nonzoonotic atypical pneumonias(This table is not available electronically. Please see the January, 1996,issue.)Table: Table 2. Diagnostic features of zoonotic atypical pneumonias (Thistable is not available electronically. Please see the January, 1996issue.)About the Author(s):Dr Cunha is chief, infectious disease division, Winthrop-UniversityHospital, Mineola, New York, and professor of Medicine, State University ofNew York School of Medicine, Stony Brook.   Dr Ortega is a fellow, infectious disease division, Winthrop-UniversityHospital.   Mailing address: Burke A. Cunha, MD, Infectious Disease Division,Winthrop-University Hospital, Mineola, NY 11501.ReferencesReference(s):1. Sue DY. Community-acquired pneumonia in adults. West J Med1994;161(4):383-92. Campbell GD. Overview of community-acquired pneumonia: prognosis andclinical features. Med Clin North Am 1994;78(5):1035-483. Marrie TJ. Community-acquired pneumonia. Clin Infect Dis1994;8(4):501-134. Cunha BA. Antibiotic therapy of pulmonary infections. In: Karetzky M,Cunha BA, Brandstetter RD. The pneumonias. New York: Springer-Verlag,1993:255-765. Cunha BA. Atypical pneumonias: clinical diagnosis and empiricaltreatment. Postgrad Med 1991;90(5):89-1016. Johnson DH, Cunha BA. Atypical pneumonias: clinical and extrapulmonaryfeatures of Chlamydia, Mycoplasma, and Legionella infections. Postgrad Med1993;93(7):69-827. Cunha BA. The antibiotic treatment of community-acquired, atypical, andnosocomial pneumonias. Med Clin North Am 1995;79(3):581-978. Schonwald S, Skerk V, Petricevic I, et al. Comparison of three-day andfive-day courses of azithromycin in the treatment of atypical pneumonia.Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1991;10(10):877-809. Cunha BA. The chlamydial pneumonias. In: Chmel H, Bendinelli M, FriedmanH, eds. Pulmonary infections and immunity. New York: Plenum Press,1994:183-9610. Plouffe JF, Herbert M, File T, et al. Ofloxacin vs standard therapy inthe treatment of community-acquired pneumonia requiring hospitalization.(Abstr A123) Presented at annual meeting of American Society forMicrobiology. Washington, DC: 1995 May11. Gentry LO. Ofloxacin in the treatment of lower respiratory tractinfections due to Streptococcus pneumoniae. Presented at 5th InternationalSymposium on New Quinolones. Singapore: 1994 AugCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1COMMUNITY-ACQUIRED PNEUMONIA: COST-EFFECTIVE ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPYBy:Burke A. Cunha, MDBurke A. Cunha, MDDr Cunha is chief, infectious disease division, Winthrop-UniversityHospital, Mineola, New York, and professor of medicine, State University ofNew York School of Medicine, Stony Brook.Mailing address: Burke A. Cunha, MD, Infectious Disease Division,Winthrop-University Hospital, Mineola, NY 11501.Preview   Community-acquired pneumonia can now be treated by selecting a singleantibiotic that is active against both typical and atypical pulmonarypathogens. In the past, it was necessary to use two agents if the type ofpathogen could not be determined. In this article, Dr Cunha discusses hisapproach to management using cost-effective monotherapy that can be startedintravenously and then switched to the oral route.   Community-acquired pneumonia is a frequent problem in the ambulatory andhospital setting. The common respiratory pathogens are usually responsible(see box on page 110).1-4 (Reference)Factors in antibiotic selection   The main difficulty presented by community-acquired pneumonia isselection of a cost-effective antibiotic regimen.5-7 (Reference) Today, inthe managed care era, cost-effectiveness is second only to antibioticefficacy as a consideration in the selection process. A corollary impliedby the concept of cost-effective treatment is that intravenous therapy mustbe switched to oral therapy as soon as possible to maximize cost savings inhospital patients.   The most important factor in the empirical selection of an antibiotic isproven effectiveness in vivo. The antibiotic should readily penetratebronchopulmonary secretions and be pharmacologically active at the site ofinfection. Virtually all antibiotics used for pulmonary infections showgood penetration of the lungs. Aminoglycosides, for example, concentratewell in the lung but are less active at the site of infection, where thereis local hypoxia, acidosis, and white blood cell debris.   The antibiotic chosen should have an appropriate spectrum of activity.Optimal coverage should be provided for the usual respiratory pathogens,but unnecessary coverage of every possible pulmonary pathogen should beavoided. The expensive and potentially harmful practice of ``addingcoverage'' results from an underappreciation of the potential for pathogenresistance. The wasteful custom of adding antibiotics for unneeded``gram-negative'' coverage also has important implications in thedevelopment of resistant organisms in an institution, particularly inintensive care areas.   If the proper antibiotic monotherapy has been selected, there is no needto add anything.5-9 (Reference) For example, doxycycline may be chosen forinitial empirical monotherapy. This agent is active against all relevantgram-negative pulmonary pathogens, such as ampicillin-sensitive andampicillin-resistant strains of Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella(Branhamella) catarrhalis, and oral anaerobes (eg, Bacteroidesmelaninogenicus). Doxycycline is also effective againstpenicillin-resistant and penicillin-sensitive strains of Streptococcuspneumoniae as well as all atypical organisms (Chlamydia pneumoniae,Mycoplasma and Legionella species).10 (Reference) The only gram-negativeorganism not covered by doxycycline is klebsiella, which is uncommon as acause of pneumonia in the general population. If this organism is suspectedclinically, another agent, such as a fluoroquinolone or a cephalosporin,should be selected5,7,9 (Reference) (table 1).   When typical and atypical organisms cannot be differentiated, cliniciansoften elect to protect against both by using double-drug coverage. Althoughcoinfection is rare, a few patients have both pulmonary and extrapulmonaryfindings, and double coverage is reasonable in these cases. Fortunately,with the advent of intravenous-to-oral ``switch'' therapy (see the laterdiscussion), double coverage, which is not cost-effective, is almost nevernecessary if the right single agent (ie, doxycycline, ofloxacin [Floxin],or azithromycin [Zithromax]) is selected. These three antibiotics areeffective against all of the common typical and atypical pathogens thatcause community-acquired pneumonia. Prescribing a second antibiotic foradditional gram-negative coverage is expensive and unnecessary.   Although a number of factors are very important prognostically, theyhave no bearing on selection of an antibiotic for community-acquiredpneumonia.3,7 (Reference) (The author acknowledges that this is at variancewith the American Thoracic Society's approach.) These factors include ageof the patient, severity of illness, host defense status, potential forbeta-lactamase-producing organisms, and site of infection acquisition(table 2). For example, pneumococcal infection is treated the same way inyoung as in old adults, even though there are differences in prognosis.Similarly, community-acquired pneumonia in a non-leukopenic cancer patientis caused by the same pathogens as in a normal host and needs the samecoverage.Choosing an oral antibiotic   Because most beta-lactam agents are active against the usual pathogens,there are many parenteral antibiotics for treating community-acquiredpneumonia. The choice among oral antibiotics, however, is restricted. Oralpenicillin, for example, is ineffective against ampicillin-resistant Hinfluenzae, penicillin-resistant pneumococci, Klebsiella species, Mcatarrhalis, and all of the atypical pathogens. Its other disadvantagesinclude poor oral absorption and only moderate bioavailability, not tomention the inconvenience of dosing four times a day. Amoxicillin (Amoxil,Wymox) is given three times a day and has good bioavailability, but itlacks activity against H influenzae, M catarrhalis, and all atypicalpathogens. Newer oral cephalosporins may be given less frequently and haveenhanced activity against H influenzae, but they are more costly and missatypical pathogens. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ) (Bactrim,Cotrim, Septra) is an ideal oral antibiotic unless the patient is allergicto sulfa drugs, but it is suboptimal for community-acquired pneumoniabecause of its lack of anti-klebsiella and antistreptococcal activity. Thecommonly used erythromycin has limited activity against streptococci, Hinfluenzae, M catarrhalis, and Klebsiella species and is also anunsatisfactory choice because of poor bioavailability, short half-life, andgastrointestinal side effects. It is active against most atypicalpathogens. Penicillin-resistant S pneumoniae often is alsoerythromycin-resistant.   While many antibiotics have been used successfully to treatcommunity-acquired pneumonias, the three best antibiotics in terms ofspectrum, bioavailability, safety profile, and cost are ofloxacin,doxycycline, and azithromycin (table 3). These antibiotics permit optimalmonotherapy of community-acquired pneumonias, which has tremendouscost-saving implications.7 (Reference)   Because community-acquired pneumonia caused by atypical pathogens hasclinically distinguishable features, specific rather than empirical therapyis possible. For example, group A streptococcal pneumonia is characterizedby a large pleural effusion in addition to infiltrates; Staphylococcusaureus pneumonia rapidly cavitates in 1 to 2 days; and klebsiellapneumonia, which is usually in the upper lobe, cavitates after 3 to 5 days.In these circumstances, an antistaphylococcal cephalosporin would berecommended as the initial antibiotic selection.4,5 (Reference)Inpatient versus outpatient therapy   Traditionally, hospitalization for community-acquired pneumonia is basedon how ill the patient is as well as on the need for intravenous therapy.As intravenous-to-oral switch therapy and oral therapy alone become morewidely accepted, the rationale for intravenous therapy diminishes.Critically ill patients requiring ventilatory support will always needhospitalization. These patients are likely to be given intravenous therapyinitially and then switched to oral therapy as soon as possible.   When it is generally realized that antibiotics with excellentbioavailability are equally effective intravenously or orally, oral therapywill become the standard of care. Third-party payers also need to recognizethat oral antibiotic therapy in the hospital saves money and that the costshould be reimbursed.7,11,12 (Reference)Intravenous-to-oral switch therapy   Without compromising clinical effectiveness, oral antibiotics that arewell absorbed achieve essentially the same blood and tissue levels as suchintravenous drugs as fluoroquinolones, doxycycline, clindamycin (Cleocin),and chloramphenicol (Chloromycetin). Only a few antibiotics that have anappropriate spectrum for community-acquired pneumonias are available forboth intravenous and oral use. Ofloxacin is unique among fluoroquinolonesin being most active against Chlamydia species and, like otherfluoroquinolones, is also effective against Legionella and Mycoplasmaspecies.11 (Reference)   The therapeutic approach we use at Winthrop-University Hospital,Mineola, New York, is outlined in table 4. We begin intravenous therapywith ofloxacin, 400 mg every 12 hours, and after 72 hours switch to oralofloxacin therapy, 400 mg every 12 hours. Patients who are unable to takemedications orally or who improve slowly may need intravenous therapy formore than 3 days.   Doxycycline and azithromycin are also ideal agents for empiricalmonotherapy of community-acquired pneumonias and are most cost-effectivewhen given as part of an intravenous-to-oral switch program. Ofloxacin isour preferred respiratory fluoroquinolone because of its high degree ofactivity against S pneumoniae and, as was mentioned, Chlamydia, Legionella,and Mycoplasma species. Furthermore, it is the least expensivefluoroquinolone currently available.12 (Reference)Theoretically, ofloxacin eliminates bacteria in a concentration-dependentfashion and works optimally as a single 800-mg daily dose.* Recently, ithas been shown that oral administration of 400 mg of ofloxacin once dailyis as effective as and less expensive than 500 mg of ciprofloxacin (Cipro)twice daily for moderate to severe infections, including community-acquiredpneumonia.12 (Reference)Determining costs   As noted, the most effective cost-cutting measure in managingcommunity-acquired pneumonia is making a change from intravenous to oralantibiotic therapy as soon as clinically possible. For example, TMP-SMZcosts $72 a day when given intravenously but only $0.75 a day orally.Similarly, ciprofloxacin costs $74 a day intravenously and $5.68 a dayorally (table 5).   Determining the true cost of antibiotic therapy to an institution iscomplex, and it is not simply based on an accounting of pharmacyacquisition costs. Hidden expenses include the administrative costs perdose, cost of side effects, cost of monitoring antibiotic therapy, and costof measures to control outbreaks by resistant organisms. The total cost ofantibiotic therapy, therefore, is the sum of the charges for all thesefactors.5-8 (Reference)Summary   At present, three antibiotics (doxycycline, ofloxacin [Floxin], andazithromycin [Zithromax]) provide optimal therapy for both typical andatypical community-acquired pneumonias. These agents permit amonotherapeutic approach and are also ideal for intravenous-to-oral switchtherapy, which results in great cost savings for an institution and anearlier discharge for the patient.   The era of oral therapy has been ushered in because of economicimperatives. Fortunately, bioavailability of these three antibiotics isessentially the same when administered intravenously or orally. Moderatelyto severely ill patients may be safely and effectively treated via the oralroute alone; however, most patients who require admission to the hospitalare initially given intravenous therapy, after which a change is made to anoral antibiotic equivalent as soon as possible.13 (Reference)Which pathogens are the culprits in community-acquired pneumonia?   Streptococcus pneumoniae remains the most common cause ofcommunity-acquired pneumonias, but Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella(Branhamella) catarrhalis, and Mycoplasma and Legionella species areimportant also. Community-acquired pneumonias due to Klebsiella pneumoniae,Staphylococcus aureus, and group A streptococcus are seen less frequentlyand are usually associated with specific population subgroups. For example,S aureus pneumonia occurs almost entirely in diabetic patients or in thosewho have had viral influenza. Similarly, community-acquired pneumonias dueto K pneumoniae are seen primarily in alcoholics and, less commonly, innursing home patients.*Dosage not approved by Food and Drug Administration.ReferencesTable 1. Important factors in selecting antibiotic therapy forcommunity-acquired pneumonia   Proven susceptibility of pathogen and clinical effectiveness ofantibiotic in vivoNo need to cover ``all'' pulmonary pathogens, only the most common; thus,no rationale for prescribing more than one antibiotic for additional``gram-negative'' coverage if initial selection has proper spectrum   No need to cover ``nosocomial organisms'' (eg, Pseudomonas aeruginosa),which are not pathogens in community-acquired pneumonias   Favorable pharmacokinetic featuresGood concentration in infected pulmonary tissuesLongest possible dosing intervalMinimal or no monitoring needed   Safety profileMinimal side effects, none potentially seriousNo cross-reactions with other drugsNo ototoxicity, hepatotoxicity, or nephrotoxicity   Resistance potentialLow probability of pathogen resistanceAntibiotic not associated with emergence of fungi, methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureus, or vancomycin-resistant enterococciTable 2. Factors that do not affect selection of antibiotic therapy forcommunity-acquired pneumonia   Age of patientDetermines most likely pathogen but does not change initial antibiotictherapy   Affects dosage of antibiotic (eg, if renal insufficiency is present) butnot selection   Severity of illnessDetermines prognosis and length of hospital stay but not initial coverageAntibiotic selection unaffected by presence of bacteremia or lobarinvolvement or admission of critically ill patient to intensive care unit   Host defense statusAppropriate initial coverage not affected by presence of conditions such asasplenia or alcoholismAdditional ``gram-negative'' coverage needed only in hosts compromised byleukopenia   Potential for beta-lactamase-producing organismsEmpirical regimen should be effective against beta-lactamase-producing andnon-beta-lactamase-producing organisms without requiring additionalcoverage   Acquisition sitePneumonias acquired in community and chronic care facilities are caused bysame pathogens and therefore need same coverageTable 4. Agents used in intravenous-to-oral switch therapy forcommunity-acquired pneumonia at Winthrop-University Hospital, Mineola, NewYorkCause of pneumonia      Initial IV therapy      Oral therapy        (3 days)        (after 3 days)*Common pathogensStreptococcus pneumoniaeHaemophilus influenzaeMoraxella (Branhamella) catarrhalis                          Ofloxacin (Floxin)+    OfloxacinChlamydia pneumoniae            or                  or                          Doxycycline            DoxycyclineLegionella species                                  or                                                 AzithromycinMycoplasma species                               (Zithromax)Aspiration pneumonia**Uncommon pathogensKlebsiella pneumoniae   Third-generation cephalosporin  Cephalosporin                        Fluoroquinolone                 FluoroquinoloneStaphylococcus aureus   Antistaphylococcal penicillin   Antistaphylococcal             Antistaphylococcal      cephalosporin                  cephalosporinGroup A streptococcus   Any beta-lactam antibiotic      CephalosporinPenicillin-resistant    Doxycycline                     DoxycyclineS pneumoniae            Vancomycin (Lyphocin,           Ofloxacin                        Vancocin, Vancoled)                        Ofloxacin                       Clindamycin HCl                        Clindamycin (Cleocin) phosphate*Avoid unnecessary double-drug coverage for gram-negative organisms,anaerobes, or atypical pathogens.+Ofloxacin is most active fluoroquinolone against C pneumoniae and Spneumoniae. Ofloxacin and other fluoroquinolones are active againstLegionella and Mycoplasma species. Except for ofloxacin, fluoroquinolonesshould not be used as empirical monotherapy for community-acquiredpneumonia because of their relative lack of activity against S pneumoniae.**Refers to cases caused by oral anaerobes (eg, Bacteroidesmelaninogenicus), which are sensitive to almost all antibiotics.Table 5. Cost of empirical antibiotic monotherapy for community-acquiredpneumonia at Winthrop-University Hospital, Mineola, New YorkAntibiotic      Intravenous     Cost/   Adminis-        Total                dose            dose    trative         hospital                                        cost/day        cost/dayDoxycycline     200 mg q12h*    $2.40   $20.00        $24.80Azithromycin       NA            --      --            --(Zithromax)+Ciprofloxacin   500 mg q12h     $27.00  $20.00        $74.00(Cipro)Ofloxacin       400 mg q12h     $21.00  $20.00        $62.00(Floxin)Antibiotic      Oral dose           Cost/   Adminis-        Total                                    dose    trative         hospital                                            cost/day        cost/dayDoxycycline     200 mg q12h        $0.14      $0            $0.28Azithromycin    250 mg q24h        $5.00      $0            $5.00(Zithromax)+Ciprofloxacin   500 mg q12h        $2.84      $0            $5.68(Cipro)Ofloxacin       400 mg q12h        $2.78      $0            $5.56(Floxin) *Twice the usual nontoxic dose. +Intravenous azithromycin should be available in United States in nearfuture. Oral azithromycin is given in initial loading dose of 500 mg andthen continued as 250 mg daily.Illustration(s):Table: Table 3. Activity of various antibiotics against commoncommunity-acquired pneumonia pathogens (This table is not availableelectronically. Please see the January, 1996, issue.)Reference(s):1. The British Thoracic Society and the Public Health Laboratory Service.Community-acquired pneumonia in adults in British hospitals in 1982-1983: asurvey of aetiology, mortality, prognostic factors and outcome. Q J Med1987;62(239):195-2202. Marrie TJ. Community-acquired pneumonia. Clin Infect Dis1994;18(4):501-153. Brown RB. Community-acquired pneumonia: diagnosis and therapy of olderadults. Geriatrics 1993;48(2):43-504. Cunha BA. Pneumonias acquired from others. 1. History, examination,laboratory findings. Postgrad Med 1987;82(2):126-405. Cunha BA. Antibiotic therapy of pulmonary infections. In: Karetzky M,Cunha BA, Brandstetter RD. The pneumonias. New York: Springer-Verlag, 19936. Cunha BA. Antibiotic pharmacokinetic considerations in pulmonaryinfections. Semin Respir Infect 1991;6(3):168-827. Cunha BA. The antibiotic treatment of community-acquired, atypical, andnosocomial pneumonias. Med Clin North Am 1995;79(3):581-978. Gleckman RA. Oral empirical treatment of pneumonia: the challenge ofchoosing best agent. Postgrad Med 1994;95(2):165-729. McCue JD. Pneumonia in the elderly: special considerations in a specialpopulation. Postgrad Med 1993;94(5):39-5110. Shea KW, Uneno Y, Abumustafa F, et al. Doxycycline activity againstStreptococcus pneumoniae. Chest 1995;108:1775-611. Klein NC. Fluoroquinolones in respiratory infections. Semin RespirInfect 1991;6(3):131-512. Bassaris H, Akalin E, Calangu S, et al. A randomised, multinationalstudy with sequential therapy comparing ciprofloxacin twice daily andofloxacin once daily. Infection 1995;23(4):227-3313. Chan R, Hemeryck L, O'Regan M, et al. Oral versus intravenousantibiotics for community acquired lower respiratory tract infection in ageneral hospital: open, randomised controlled trial. BMJ 1995;310(May27):1360-2Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1DELAYED RESOLUTION OF PNEUMONIA: WHEN IS SLOW HEALING TOO SLOW?By:Hugh Cassiere, MDJohn C. Rodrigues, MDAlan M. Fein, MDPreview   Some cases of pneumonia can be expected to respond slowly to treatment.For example, resolution of bacteremic pneumococcal pneumonia in an85-year-old patient who smokes and has heart disease, diabetes, andmultilobar infiltrates is much more likely to be prolonged than ismycoplasmal pneumonia in a 25-year-old, healthy, nonsmoking patient with aunilobar infiltrate. The authors describe risk factors for and causes ofdelayed resolution and present a workup strategy for cases that do notrespond within expected time limits.   Community-acquired pneumonia is seen often by primary care physicians intheir daily practice, but in as many as half of cases, the causativepathogen remains unidentified even after extensive initial diagnostictesting. Recently published guidelines of the American Thoracic Society1(Reference) recommend a more limited initial workup than has been usedtraditionally and empirical antibiotic therapy aimed at the most common andprobable pathogens in a given patient. Although this approach is likely toprove cost-effective, it might not work in all situations. When it is used,clinical response must be diligently evaluated so patients who areresponding slowly or not at all are identified promptly.When is resolution considered delayed?   Most often, pneumonia responds to antibiotic therapy, with patientsexperiencing gradual resolution of symptoms (eg, cough, sputum production,fever, shortness of breath). However, in some cases pneumonia resolves moreslowly than expected or fails to resolve. The length of time that isconsidered normal for resolution is estimated on the basis of the naturalhistory of the common pneumonias. In evaluating resolution, two fairlydistinct parameters are used: symptomatic improvement and radiologicclearing of infiltrates.   Symptom resolution--If a patient's condition is responding appropriatelyto therapy, improvement in clinical findings is usually noted within 48 to72 hours.1 (Reference)Thus, if fever or leukocytosis, for example,persists for 48 to 96 hours, resolution of the pneumonia may be considereddelayed. Empirical therapy, chosen on the basis of symptoms, should not bechanged until 72 hours have passed unless clinical deterioration isidentified. Clinical deterioration may result from treatment failure or oneof many possible causes, discussed later.   Radiologic resolution--In most infectious processes, radiologicresolution lags behind symptomatic improvement. In general, patients whohave some response to therapy but persistent symptoms or radiologicabnormalities beyond the expected limits of resolution are considered tohave slowly resolving pneumonia. For example, Kirtland and Winterbauer2(Reference) defined slowly resolving pneumonia as symptomatic improvementbut less than 50% radiologic clearing after 4 weeks of therapy.Nonresolving pneumonia shows little or no clinical improvement orradiologic clearing after 4 weeks.   Radiologic deterioration during therapy for community-acquired pneumoniais common. However, a change in antibiotic coverage or initiation of anextensive diagnostic workup is not necessary unless clinical deteriorationis also present.Which coexisting conditions affect resolution of pneumonia?   When delayed resolution of pneumonia has been established, the firststep in management is to determine whether certain medical conditionscoexist. Conditions shown in table 1 can cause myriad host- defense defectsthat impair the body's response to infection.   Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and alcohol abuse are themost common contributing factors in delayed resolution of pneumonia.Alcohol's effects on host defenses are complex because coexisting factors,such as malnutrition, can impair immune function on their own.What causes delayed resolution of pneumonia?   When pneumonia caused by a common pathogen fails to respond to therapy,likely explanations include impaired host response, bacterial resistance(eg, penicillinase-producing organisms), and inadequate empirical coverage(eg, staphylococcal pneumonia). Nonresolving pneumonia may also be causedby an uncommon or resistant pathogen, a noninfectious condition, or acomplication (table 2).   Common pathogens--The nature of the host response plays a significantrole in resolution of pneumonia; normal resolution is often prolonged inpatients with significant coexisting conditions (eg, diabetes, COPD)(figure 1).   For example, in pneumococcal pneumonia (the most common type ofcommunity-acquired pneumonia), half of patients have clear chestradiographs at 5 weeks; most cases resolve in 8 to 12 weeks. However, theresolution process is prolonged in bacteremic pneumococcal pneumonia. By 9weeks, only half of patients have clear chest radiographs, and most casesare not resolved until 18 weeks have passed. In the study by Jay andassociates,3 (Reference) 60% of patients with bacteremic pneumococcalpneumonia and coexisting disease still had abnormalities on chest x-rayfilms more than 3 months after initiation of therapy. Resolution was evenmore prolonged in patients over age 55 who had COPD and alcoholism.   Mittl and colleagues4 (Reference) found that radiologic clearing ofcommunity-acquired pneumonia was influenced most by age and the number oflobes involved: Clearing decreased by 20% per decade, and multilobarinvolvement cleared more slowly than unilobar involvement.   Uncommon pathogens--Infection with an uncommon pathogen, such as aspecies of Nocardia or Actinomyces, may cause nonresolving pneumonia. Inone study on nonresolving pneumonia, eight patients using long-termcorticosteroid therapy for COPD were found to have opportunistic fungalinfections.5 (Reference) Fiberoptic bronchoscopy with lavage ortransbroncheal biopsy is useful in ruling out such pathogens.   Noninfectious causes--Conditions that mimic pneumonia but are actuallynoninfectious may produce slowly resolving or nonresolving infiltrates.Some, such as bronchogenic carcinoma (figure 2), may be found during thediagnostic workup, and others, such as Wegener's granulomatosis (figure 3),may require open lung biopsy for diagnosis. Congestive heart failure canproduce signs that mimic pneumonia.   Pulmonary complications--Such complications of pneumonia as abscess,empyema, pulmonary embolism, and pulmonary vascular congestion may delayresolution of pneumonia. Computed tomography of the chest is helpful inevaluating patients for these complications.What is known about the natural history of pneumonia?   Legionella infection has the longest resolution process of all thecommunity-acquired pneumonias. Its course is severe and rapidly progressiveand often ends in residual scarring and fibrosis. Its incidence is doubledin patients who require mechanical ventilation. Macfarlane and associates6(Reference) noted that only half of patients who have Legionella infectionhave radiographic resolution at 10 weeks, and in some, 12 to 20 weeks arerequired.   Mycoplasmal infection is at the other end of the resolution spectrum.Considered to have the shortest process, mycoplasmal pneumonia usuallyresolves completely in 2 to 4 weeks. Residual scarring and fibrosis arerare.6 (Reference)   To a large extent, resolution processes of other pathogens that mayresult in community-acquired pneumonia are unknown or poorly characterized.Among these pathogens are Staphylococcus aureus, enteric gram-negativebacilli, Haemophilus influenzae, Chlamydia species, Moraxella (Branhamella)catarrhalis, and certain viruses. Extensive and detailed discussions areavailable elsewhere.7,8 (Reference)How should workup be decided?   The unfortunate clinical reality is that the causative pathogen remainsunknown in many cases of community-acquired pneumonia. Thus, naturalhistory patterns are often unhelpful, and all pneumonias end up beinglumped together in the workup process. However, with use of a diagnosticstrategy such as that shown in figure 4, busy physicians can identify andcategorize patients who need further workup and consultation.   In patients with significant coexisting disease, host-defense impairmentcan delay the normal resolution process. Therefore, an early goal is todifferentiate impaired host responses from other causes of slowly resolvingand nonresolving infiltrates. Infiltrates that fail to clear at all over a4-week period of observation or that take more than 12 weeks to resolverequire further workup. In such cases, uncommon pathogens and noninfectiousmimicking diseases must be ruled out.Is there a typical presentation?   At our institution (Winthrop-University Hospital, Mineola, New York),nonresolving pneumonia accounted for 15% of all pulmonary consultations and10% of all diagnostic bronchoscopies over a recent 2-year period. About 60%of patients had community-acquired pneumonia that was slow to resolvebecause of an impaired host response. About 20% had infection with anuncommon pathogen (tuberculosis, Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia,actinomycosis, or cytomegalovirus) and 20% had a noninfectious cause(Wegener's granulomatosis, bronchiolitis obliterans with organizingpneumonia, bronchoalveolar carcinoma, or pulmonary infiltrationeosinophilia).9 (Reference) In our experience, a typical patient withdelayed resolution is an elderly man who has had symptoms for a month ormore before being referred for bronchoscopy.Summary and conclusion   Slowly resolving or nonresolving pneumonia is a clinical challenge, butwe believe it can be dealt with in a rational and decisive manner. Thefollowing risk factors have been established for delayed radiographicresolution of pneumonia and should be considered in patient evaluation:Coexisting medical conditionsHistory of smokingAdvanced ageMultilobar involvementPersistent fever or leukocytosisDiabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, renal failure, and alcoholabuse can impair immune function, which slows normal clearing ofinfiltrates. Common and uncommon infectious agents, conditions that mimicpneumonia (eg, a neoplasm, congestive heart failure), and pulmonarycomplications (eg, abscess) can also result in delayed resolution.Table 1. Conditions potentially coexisting with pneumonia and their effecton patientCondition                      EffectChronic obstructive              Impaired coughpulmonary disease                Impaired mucociliary clearanceHeart disease                    Impaired lymphatic drainage                                 Impaired alveolar macrophage function                                 Edema, promoting bacterial growthDiabetes mellitus                Defective neutrophil function                                 Reduced cell-mediated immunityRenal failure                    Depressed humoral response                                 Diminished leukocyte chemotaxis                                 Complement depletionNeoplasm                         Impaired cellular immunity                                 Neutropenia                                 Diminished humoral responseAlcohol abuse                    Impaired immune functionTable 2. Causes of nonresolving and slowly resolving pneumoniaInfectiousCommon  Pneumococci with impaired host response  Staphylococci and inadequate empirical coverage  Legionella  Haemophilus and penicillinase production  VirusesUncommon  Tuberculosis  Atypical mycobacteria  Nocardia  Actinomyces  Aspergillus  Endemic fungiNoninfectious (mimicking conditions)Neoplastic  Bronchogenic carcinoma  LymphomaImmunologic and idiopathic  Lupus pneumonitis  Wegener's granulomatosis  Bronchocentric granulomatosis  Bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneumonia  Pulmonary eosinophilic syndromesDrug-induced  Amiodarone HCl (Cordarone) toxicityCardiovascular  Congestive heart failurePulmonary complicationsCongestive heart failurePulmonary embolusAbscessEmpyemaIllustration(s):Illustration: Chart: Figure 4. Flow diagram showing workup of slowlyresolving and nonresolving pneumonia. COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonarydisease; CT, computed tomography; FOB, fiberoptic bronchoscopy; TNA,transthoracic needle aspiration.Photograph(s):Photograph: Figure 1. Prolonged resolution of community-acquired pneumoniain 67-year-old man with diabetes and congestive heart failure who hadundergone coronary artery bypass surgery 2 months before presentation. a.Initial chest film after development of pneumonia. b. Chest film 4 weekslater, at which point patient, although asymptomatic, was referred to ouroffice. Note that infiltrate had significantly cleared compared withinitial film. Treatment choice was watchful waiting, since coexistingdisease likely accounted for slow resolution. c. Chest film 9 weeks afterinitial film, showing nearly total resolution of infiltrate.Photograph: Figure 2. Computed tomograms of chest in 44-year-old patient,ordered because of slowly resolving infiltrate and lack of significantexplanation in medical history. A short time later, fiberoptic bronchoscopywas performed, which revealed bronchoalveolar carcinoma.Photograph: Figure 3. Chest film in 67-year-old man with multiple medicalproblems, showing nonresolving pneumonia. Open lung biopsy revealednoncaseating granulomas of lung; diagnosis was Wegener's granulomatosis.About the Author(s):The authors are at Winthrop-University Hospital, Mineola, New York, whereDr Cassiere is a fellow, Dr Rodrigues is director of the pulmonarydiagnostic and bronchoscopy laboratories, and Dr Fein is director, divisionof pulmonary and critical care medicine. Dr Fein is also codirector,Cardiopulmonary Research Institute, and associate chairman, department ofmedicine, at the hospital.   In addition, Dr Cassiere is instructor of medicine, Dr Rodrigues isassistant professor of medicine, and Dr Fein is professor of medicine,State University of New York at Stony Brook Health Sciences Center Schoolof Medicine.   Mailing address: Alan M. Fein, MD, Division of Pulmonary and CriticalCare Medicine, Winthrop-University Hospital, 222 Station Plaza N, Suite400, Mineola, NY 11501.ReferencesReference(s):1. American Thoracic Society. Guidelines for the initial management ofadults with community-acquired pneumonia: diagnosis, assessment ofseverity, and initial antimicrobial therapy. Am Rev Respir Dis1993;148(5):1418-262. Kirtland SH, Winterbauer RH. Slowly resolving, chronic, and recurrentpneumonia. Clin Chest Med 1991;12(2):303-183. Jay S, Johanson W, Pierce A. The radiologic resolution of Streptococcuspneumoniae pneumonia. N Engl J Med 1975;293(16):798-8014. Mittl RL Jr, Schwab RJ, Duchin JS, et al. Radiographic resolution ofcommunity-acquired pneumonia. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994;149(3 Pt1):630-55. Rodrigues J, Niederman MS, Fein AM, et al. Nonresolving pneumonia insteroid-treated patients with obstructive lung disease. Am J Med1992;93(1):29-346. Macfarlane JT, Miller AC, Roderick Smith WH, et al. Comparativeradiographic features of community acquired legionnaires' disease,pneu-mococcal pneumonia, Mycoplasma pneumonia, and psittacosis. Thorax1984;39(1):28-337. Fein AM, Feinsilver SH, Niederman MS, et al. When the pneumonia doesn'tget better. Clin Chest Med 1987;8(3):529-418. Fein AM, Feinsilver SH, Niederman MS. Nonresolving and slowly resolvingpneumonia: diagnosis and management in the elderly patient. Clin Chest Med1993;14(3):555-699. Feinsilver SH, Fein AM, Niederman MS, et al. Utility of fiberopticbronchoscopy in nonresolving pneumonia. Chest 1990;98(6):1322-6Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1RADIOGRAPHIC MIMICS OF PNEUMONIA: PULMONARY DISORDERS TO CONSIDER INDIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSISBy:Lorie J. Cabreros, MDRanganathan Rajendran, MDAthanassios Drimoussis, MDRobert D. Brandstetter, MDPreview   Pinpointing the source of roentgenographic lung abnormalities can bechallenging because many noninfectious pulmonary disorders mimic pneumonia.The authors of this article discuss the most common radiographicpresentations of lung disorders that may be mistaken for pneumonia,including focal and diffuse infiltrates, nodules, cavities, and pleuraleffusion. They also outline the role of thorough history taking andexamination in prompt and accurate diagnosis of pulmonary disorders.   Many organisms can cause serious pneumonias. Early suspicion and promptdiagnosis and management are essential to minimize morbidity and reducemortality. Clinicians often prescribe antibiotics empirically on the basisof various clinical, radiographic, and laboratory signs of infection (table1). The choice of antibiotics is influenced by the patient's age, thepresence of comorbid factors, the need for hospital admission, and theseverity of illness. In most patients whose symptoms resolve withantibiotics, a causative organism is not identified on culture, thoughclinical improvement suggests an infectious cause.   Various noninfectious pulmonary disorders can mimic infectiouspneumonia. When such a disorder is present but is not considered at thetime antibiotics are prescribed, the true source of symptoms andradiographic abnormalities may remain elusive. Thus, even when infectiouspneumonia is strongly suspected, the possibility of a noninfectiousdisorder should always be considered at the time a chest radiograph isobtained.   With AIDS more than with any other disease, roentgenographicabnormalities are thought to signify infection. Radiographic patternstypical of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia often prompt initiation ofantiprotozoal therapy, with or without corticosteroids. Clinical androentgenographic evidence of improvement usually indicates successfultherapy; lack of such improvement raises suspicion of another infection,usually one caused by an opportunistic organism. ``Drug failures'' andautopsy findings have made it clear, however, that AIDS patients are proneto numerous noninfectious pulmonary complications that mimic pneumoniaradiographically, including idiopathic interstitial pneumonitis andlymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis (table 2).   Awareness of the most common radiographic presentations of noninfectiouspulmonary diseases--focal and diffuse infiltrates, nodules, cavities, andpleural effusion--might lead to a better outcome for all patients withpulmonary ailments.Focal infiltrates   Localized infiltrates are the most commonly recognized roentgenographicpattern in infectious pneumonia, so it is not surprising that noninfectiouspulmonary disorders that cause a similar pattern are sometimes overlooked.Clinical signs and symptoms of these noninfectious lung ailments also maybe identical to those of infectious pneumonia. In these circumstances, thekey to correct diagnosis is an accurate history. For example, a history ofsmoking in a patient with fever, cough, and radiographic evidence of afocal infiltrate should raise suspicion of bronchogenic carcinoma. Alveolarcarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma may present in this way, with orwithout postobstructive infection.   Noninfectious pulmonary disorders are commonly missed in patients withcongestive heart failure and underlying chronic obstructive pulmonarydisease. Consider, for example, a patient with cough, shortness of breath,and a focal infiltrate who is hospitalized and treated with antibiotics forpresumed infection and an increase in diuretic dose. The next day, thepatient feels remarkably better and a chest radiograph demonstratesclearing of the infiltrate. In such a case, the likely source of theinfiltrate is asymmetric pulmonary edema, not infection. With certain typesof chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, the parenchyma of the lung isgreatly disturbed, resulting in widespread perfusion abnormalities. Whencongestive heart failure occurs, edema develops principally in regionswhere perfusion is maximized because of ventilation inequalities. The areawhere the infiltrate occurs has the best ventilation-perfusion match. Thisrelationship is compromised by edema that occurs with heart failure, whichleads to cough and shortness of breath.Diffuse infiltrates   Many noninfectious disorders are known to cause diffuse pulmonaryinfiltrates. Thorough history taking is essential to identify thesediseases early in their course. This is especially true in occupational anddrug-induced lung disease; knowledge of illicit drugs ingested,particularly poisons, is critical to a good outcome. A misdiagnosis ofinfectious pneumonia could obviously delay the benefit of appropriatetreatment, such as an antidote or even lung transplantation, which would berequired for accidental paraquat (herbicide) ingestion.   Most noninfectious pulmonary disorders responsible for bilateralinfiltrates do not have a known cause and consequently pose a diagnosticchallenge. Diffuse parenchymal disorders are most often mistaken forinfectious disease. Many such disorders are progressive, so promptdiagnosis and treatment are important. The collagen vascular disorders maypresent with fever, productive cough, and marked shortness of breath. Theyare usually suspected in patients with a history of either systemic lupuserythematosus or rheumatoid arthritis. However, these diseases can presentinitially with pulmonary manifestations, which can be a diagnosticchallenge.   Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is a final common pathway for many formsof severe lung injury and is often overlooked in differential diagnosis ofbilateral diffuse infiltrates. Although its pathogenesis is unknown,idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis may be, in part, immunologic in origin,resulting from a complex series of cellular and biochemical events.Corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive agents may help to control thedisease process, as is true with many noninfectious pulmonary disorders ofunknown cause that produce bilateral infiltrates. Early diagnosis (usuallyby open lung biopsy) is imperative to exclude infectious and malignantdisorders.   A noninfectious pulmonary disorder that is gaining attention in theliterature is bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneumonia (BOOP). Ithas been linked to connective-tissue disease, drug therapy, organ andmarrow transplantation, infection, and toxic fume inhalation. However, itmay occur without known parenchymal insults. Masses of granulation tissueform in the lumina of small airways and in alveolar ducts, and organizingpneumonia occurs distal to these obstructions. Figure 1 shows diffuseinfiltrates on the chest radiograph of a 36-year-old woman with BOOP andlymphomatoid granulomatosis, which were diagnosed on open lung biopsy.Specific chemotherapy was administered, and dramatic radiographic clearingof the infiltrates occurred.   Vasculitic disorders, such as Wegener's granulomatosis and Churg-Strausssyndrome, are often mistaken for infectious respiratory diseases.Confluence of infiltrates on chest radiographs in both alveolar andinterstitial patterns may be observed. Fever, cough, and productive sputumare often present. Open lung biopsy is required for diagnosis.Pulmonary nodules   Far more noninfectious than infectious pulmonary disorders cause diffusepulmonary nodules, which range in diameter from about 1 mm to 5 mm. Someexperts classify lesions smaller than 3 cm as nodules and those 3 cm orlarger as masses. Radiographically, nodules appear simply as patchyconsolidation, but careful analysis of the periphery of the lung--wherethere is less superimposition of abnormalities--should allow assessment ofthe nodular character. Table 3 lists, according to their location on chestradiographs, noninfectious pulmonary disorders that may present withmultiple pulmonary nodules.   Noninfectious diseases that have been known to cause nodular developmentinclude allergic alveolitis and sarcoidosis and vasculitic processes, suchas Wegener's granulomatosis. Sarcoidosis and vasculitic disorders may beparticularly elusive early in their course. Extrapulmonary manifestations,supported by serologic evidence of angiotensin-converting enzyme andantineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, may suggest the diagnosis. Lungbiopsy is necessary for confirmation.   Allergic alveolitis is a hypersensitivity reaction that affects theparenchyma of the lung. Causative agents are usually organic but may bereactive inorganic compounds. An increasing number of occupational,avocational, and even iatrogenic environments are responsible for thisnoninfectious disorder. Signs and symptoms resemble those of commonbacterial pneumonia, but a striking preponderance of complaints comes frompatients who are exposed to the offending antigen (eg, dusts, molds) in theworkplace. Flexible bronchoscopy and transbronchial biopsy revealnoncaseating granulomas. Cortico-steroids are the treatment of choice.Ideally, the source of the antigen should be identified, and the patientshould be removed from the offending environment.Pulmonary cavities   Parenchymal cavities may be fluid-filled or thick-walled (figure 2) orpossess an air-fluid level (figure 3). Presence of a parenchymal cavity, nomatter what the cause, implies necrosis and tissue breakdown. Cavitarydisease occurs most often with infection, but a number of noninfectiouspulmonary disorders may be overlooked in initial diagnosis.   When an air-fluid level is not visible in a cavity, a noninfectiouscause should be considered. A history of smoking should raise suspicion ofa bronchogenic carcinoma (eg, squamous cell carcinoma), and if multiplecavities are present, metastatic cancer from a distant primary site (eg,head, neck, cervix) should be considered. Wegener's granulomatosis oftenpresents with multiple cavitary lung nodules. Also, occupational exposureto coal (pneumoconiosis) by patients with rheumatoid lung disease mayresult in Caplan's syndrome and large cavitary nodules. Finally, upper-lobecavitary disease in a patient with risk factors for pulmonarythromboembolism should raise suspicion of pulmonary infarction.Pleural effusions   Most pleural effusions occur with a noninfectious disease process.Nonspecific symptoms, including fever, shortness of breath, and pleuriticpain, arise from inflammation of the pleura, compromise of pulmonarymechanics, or interference with gas exchange. They should promptconsideration of noninfectious disorders in differential diagnosis.   Metastatic disease of the pleura is the most common noninfectious causeof pleural effusions. Carcinoma of the lung and breast and lymphoma accountfor about 75% of pleural effusions related to malignant processes. Rarely,a neoplastic lesion causes occlusion of a large airway, promptingdevelopment of postobstructive infectious pneumonia. Analysis of pleuralfluid obtained by thoracentesis may demonstrate a high percentage ofpolymorphonuclear cells, organisms on Gram's stain, or bacterial growth onculture. Infection may coexist and go unrecognized.   Collagen vascular diseases, particularly systemic lupus erythematosusand rheumatoid arthritis, are notorious for their inflammatory nature andability to cause exudative pleural effusions. When there is also evidenceof a parenchymal infiltrate, an infectious cause is most often initiallyconsidered. Thoracentesis should be performed to confirm the diagnosis of acollagen vascular disease (eg, an extremely low glucose level and a low pH,as found in rheumatoid arthritis) and rule out an associated infection.   Adverse reactions to drugs produce only a small percentage of allpleural effusions. A level of suspicion is required so that the offendingmedication can be identified and discontinued. Hydralazine hydrochloride(Apresoline), procainamide hydrochloride (Pronestyl), isoniazid (Nydrazid),and phenytoin sodium (Dilantin) have been linked to lupuslike symptoms,including pleuritis. Nitrofurantoin (Furadantin), methysergide maleate(Sansert), and methotrexate (Folex, Rheumatrex Dose Pack) may causeaccumulation of pleural fluid and minimal nonspecific signs and symptoms.Conclusion   The appearance of any abnormality on a chest radiograph calls for acomplete differential diagnosis, no matter how straightforward a diagnosismay seem. Noninfectious pulmonary disorders are the most common sources ofradiographic abnormalities. Prompt recognition and timely, appropriatetreatment are essential to minimize morbidity. Because signs and symptomsof pulmonary disorders are usually nonspecific, a complete history andthorough physical examination are the best tools for identifying andmanaging noninfectious pulmonary disorders.Table 1. Diagnostic criteria for pneumonia*1. Crackles or dullness to percussion on physical examination of the chestand any of the following:         Isolation of organism from pleural space or parenchyma         New onset of sputum or change in the nature of sputum         Positive blood culture2. Radiographic evidence of new or progressive infiltrate, consolidation,cavitation, or pleural effusion and any of the following:         Isolation of organism from pleural space or parenchyma         Isolation of virus or detection of viral antigen in respiratory          secretions         New onset of sputum or change in the nature of sputum         Positive blood culture*At least one of these two criteria must be met.Table 2. Noninfectious pulmonary complications of AIDSAIDS-related malignancies   Kaposi's sarcoma   Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma   Other carcinomasAlveolar disease   Alveolar proteinosis   Cystic lesions   Emphysema   Lymphocytic alveolitisDiffuse interstitial parenchymal disease   Idiopathic interstitial pneumonitis   Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitisVascular disease   Pulmonary hypertensionTable 3. Interstitial nodular lung diseases classified by radiographiclocation of nodulesUpper-lung predominance   Histiocytosis X   Sarcoidosis   SilicosisPeripheral predominance   Eosinophilic pneumoniaHilar adenopathy   Berylliosis   Kaposi's sarcoma   SarcoidosisLower-lung predominance   Allergic alveolitis   Asbestosis   Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosisPhotograph(s):Photograph: Figure 1. Posteroanterior chest radiograph showing diffuseinfiltrates in patient with bronchiolitis obliterans with organizingpneumonia and lymphomatoid granulomatosis.Photograph: Figure 2. Tomogram of thoracic cavity showing thick-walledcavity in right upper lobe and consolidation in left upper lobe.Sarcoidosis was diagnosed by findings on transbronchial biopsy.Photograph: Figure 3. Posteroanterior chest radiograph showing massiveair-fluid level in left upper lobe of patient with large cell carcinoma.About the Author(s):Drs Cabreros, Rajendran, and Drimoussis are residents in internal medicineand Dr Brandstetter is associate director of medicine, New RochelleHospital Medical Center, New Rochelle, New York.Mailing address: Robert D. Brandstetter, MD, New Rochelle Hospital MedicalCenter, 16 Guion Pl, New Rochelle, NY 10802.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1ANOREXIA NERVOSA AND BULIMIA NERVOSA: WHEN THE PURSUIT OF BODILY`PERFECTION' BECOMES A KILLERBy:Kathryn J. Zerbe, MDPreview   The stereotypical picture of an anorexic or bulimic patient as a drivenyoung woman is no longer valid, if it ever was. The diseases may bemanifest in an athlete who insists on training despite injury, or in apainfully thin grandmother who thinks she's holding onto her youthfulfigure. Most of those affected are too obsessed with their appearance, asthey see it, to realize the medical damage being done. Dr Zerbe describesbehavioral clues to eating disorders and the role of primary carephysicians in intervention.   Anorexia nervosa and its cousin bulimia nervosa are on the rise inWestern industrial societies and now afflict about 1.2 million young womenin the United States. The morbidity and mortality associated with thesediseases are high; anorexia alone carries a mortality rate of 18% to 20%.Although lethality in an index year may be 1%, anorexia is often a chroniccondition and the probability of death increases over time.1,2 (Reference)The death rate for bulimia may be equally high, although, since bulimia wasfirst described as a syndrome in 1979, long-term studies are only now beingcarried out. Both disorders are devastating medically, socially, andpsychologically.Diagnostic considerations   A wasted, cachectic appearance is the obvious signifier of anorexia.Typically, female patients note the lack of menstrual periods for at leastseveral months. Patients usually place undue emphasis on their appearanceand body image. While others observe that patients look like victims ofstarvation, patients insist that they are fat. They may exercise to thepoint of exhaustion and diet incessantly to get thinner and thinner. Theytalk constantly about food, being fat, and losing weight (table 1) and mayalienate loved ones and health professionals with their relentless pursuitof bodily ``perfection.'' Their psychological obsession with weight is themost reliable historical guideline in helping rule out other medical causesof cachexia, such as cancer, infection (eg, AIDS), or hyperthyroidism.   Making the diagnosis of bulimia is trickier. Patients can beunderweight, normal weight, or overweight and still engage in binge eatingand purging, and they often keep bulimic symptoms secret. To fulfilldiagnostic criteria of bulimia, patients must eat excessively with anaccompanying sense of loss of control and attempt to compensate with suchmeasures as vomiting, excessive exercise, and misuse of laxatives toprevent weight gain (table 2).   Also preoccupied with weight, appearance, and body image, bulimicpatients may seek out physicians for ``help with their diet'' or formedications to help them lose weight. Even when physicians have a highindex of suspicion and ask patients if they are bingeing or are purging byvomiting, laxative or diuretic abuse, or misuse of insulin or thyroidmedication, patients may not tell the truth. Bulimic behaviors occur on acontinuum, from a few times a month to several times a day. Studies suggestthat as many as 17% of college-aged women engage in bulimic behaviors.3,4(Reference)   No single cause has been found for either anorexia or bulimia. Thespectrum of symptoms is generally conceded to result from an amalgam ofemotional, physical, sociologic, and family factors, and recent analysessupport the hypothesis that in some cases they may be genetically based.5(Reference) From a clinical perspective, it is wise to stress to patientsand their families that these disorders represent a common end point ofsome type of emotional turmoil. Because eating disorders are oftenaccompanied by depression, anxiety disorders (especiallyobsessive-compulsive traits), and personality disorders, diagnosis andtreatment may be complex. The presence of comorbid conditions significantlyimpacts prognosis and must be recognized for treatment to be effective.Special populations   Once believed to be afflictions of female adolescents and young adults,eating disorders are increasingly seen in both sexes over the course of theentire life cycle. In addition, they are now being found more often thanthey were in earlier decades, in special populations, and in allsocioeconomic and cultural groups.   Infants and children--Like adults who have gotten the media message thata thin body is desirable in women and a muscular build is desirable in men,young children have been influenced by the sociologic shift towardovervaluing appearance as a measure of personal worth. Eating disorders arebeing seen at a growing rate in young children.6-8 (Reference)   Sometimes failure among infants to gain weight and to thrive is called``infantile anorexia nervosa,'' but the roots of this problem aredistinctly different from the obsessive emphasis on thinness and thedisordered body image of children, adolescents, and adults with anorexia.Common contributors to this condition are a rift in the parents'relationship with each other or psychological difficulties of a parent.Occasionally, an infant or child loses weight or refuses food after anincident of choking or a painful diagnostic procedure (eg, suctioning).   In childhood anorexia, a common and important cause is unwittingintroduction of disturbed attitudes about food by mothers who themselveshave an eating disorder or are preoccupied with weight and appearance.Sometimes, parents insist that children be placed on a diet or evenwithhold food during the years of most rapid growth. Occasionally, parentsrequest diet pills for chubby youngsters, unaware that increasing activityand establishing appropriate eating habits are the best tools to preventlater obesity. These parents must be instructed about the potential ofinducing eating disorders in their children.   Males--One in every ten patients with an eating disorder is male. Youngmen who participate in seasonal sports that specify a particular weight(eg, wrestling) or that stress appearance and body build (eg, running,skating) are at special risk. In addition, physicians should be aware ofthe increased incidence of eating disorders in the male homosexualpopulation,9 (Reference) which may be first noted by excessive exercise andrelentless attempts to maintain a slender physique.   Some research suggests that male patients with eating disorders have ahigh incidence of substance abuse. This behavior appears to be part of animpulse-control problem, in which alcohol, drugs, and food are misused tocalm emotional storms.   Athletes--Young women and men who participate in dance, gymnastics,running, rowing, or other sports that emphasize thinness and appearance areat special risk for anorexia and bulimia. Coaches or teammates may noteprogressive weight loss in an athlete or may report the smell of vomitus inthe locker room. Athletes may confide that their sport is their life andthat they feel driven to achieve at any cost.10 (Reference) Primary carephysicians can help athletes, coaches, and parents see the potential fordisaster if this fixation with an athletic identity persists despitenegative consequences.   Some people use a high level of physical activity in an almost medicinalway to combat depression (through endorphin ``highs''). Many anorexicpatients misuse exercise; they expend enormous amounts of energy by stayingin almost constant motion (eg, fidgeting, running in place). Often they canbe stopped from doing so only by admission to the hospital for continuousbed rest and observation. Thus, compulsive exercise may accompany a bonafide eating disorder or be analogous to it. Such ``activity disorders'' mayaccount for the addiction to exercise that some patients experience; forexample, they exercise excessively despite exhaustion, multiple injuries,and warnings from physicians and coaches to stop.10 (Reference)   older women--Eating disorders are not uncommonly seen in women in theirfourth through eighth decades.11 (Reference) Some women have harbored adistorted body image since youth but could bring themselves to seek outtreatment only at mid life, when daughters, nieces, or granddaughters wererecognized to also have an eating disorder. More often, women begin toexperience long-term physical side effects of the eating disorder (table 3)and recognize the negative influence it has had on their social and worklives. Often, they have kept their eating problems a secret for years andconfess their struggles to their physician with much guilt and shame.   In the elderly, anorexia must be differentiated from major depressionwith melancholia. Depressed patients may have the delusional belief thatfood is poisonous. Somatic delusions about the body (eg, ``I cannot eatbecause I do not possess a stomach'') arise when primary depression has notbeen adequately diagnosed or treated. In contrast, elderly anorexicpatients may be preoccupied with losses sustained during their lifetime ora need to maintain a youthful figure as long as possible. Treatment methodsfor elderly, delusional, depressed patients range from carefully regulatedantidepressant and antipsychotic medications to electroconvulsive therapy.The latter treatment is particularly effective in elderly patients who aremedically compromised and imminently suicidal. Response of older anorexicpatients to psychotherapeutic intervention is best after nutritionaldifficulties have been corrected.Sexual abuse   Recent studies suggest that a significant number of patients with eatingdisorders have a past or present history of physical and sexual abuse.12,13(Reference) Eating disorders in adolescents or young adults should prompt asuspicion that normal intergenerational boundaries in the home may havebeen breached. Traditionally, fathers, grandfathers, and uncles have beensuspected as the perpetrators of violence leading to eating disorders.However, recent studies suggest that maternal incest may be alittle-recognized factor.   Women who have been the victims of rape may attempt to cope with thetrauma by restricting their eating or purging after a meal. These womenoften feel significant shame about what has happened to them and are morelikely to turn to their primary care physician than to a mental healthprovider for support and understanding.Medical complications   Medical complications of anorexia and bulimia can affect all of the bodysystems (table 3).   In patients with anorexia, physical examination often revealsbradycardia, hypotension with systolic blood pressure as low as 70 mm Hg,and electrocardiographic abnormalities. Replenishing circulatory volume inthe feeding process can precipitate congestive heart failure. Anorexicpatients have an increased incidence of cardiac arrhythmias and mitralvalve prolapse. Death occurring after long-term anorexia is likely to havea cardiac cause and may be sudden and unexpected.14 (Reference)   In patients with bulimia, cardiac and electrolyte disturbances secondaryto vomiting or to laxative or enema abuse are common. Most authoritiesstress that serum magnesium and potassium levels be routinely monitored inbulimic patients12 (Reference); however, sudden death has occurred evenafter cardiac status and electrolyte levels have been routinely monitoredand found to be normal.   The most common medical complications of bulimia are parotid glandhypertrophy, dental caries, and erosion of tooth enamel. Enamel can becomeeroded from the acidic effects of gastric contents in only a few months ofvomiting. Patients who cannot refrain from purging may be urged to rinsethe mouth with a neutralizing agent, such as sodium bicarbonate or tapwater. In addition, bulimia can lead to esophageal or gastric rupture.Excessive laxative use may damage the mesenteric plexus of the intestinalwall and cause persistent loss of bowel activity. Chronic pancreatitis,although rare, has also resulted from bulimia.Treatment considerations   Most important, patients must be educated that their eating disorder hassignificant medical complications. Before underlying psychological issuescan be tackled, patients need to be stabilized medically. For a significantminority of patients, hospitalization is necessary, and because the eatingdisorder may be so entrenched, a psychiatrist or psychologist must beconsulted.3 (Reference)No pharmacologic agent has been found to be a panacea for either anorexiaor bulimia.15-17 (Reference) Some recent studies suggest that fluoxetinehydrochloride (Prozac) in daily doses of 60 mg lessens the number of bingeepisodes and the dysphoria accompanying bulimia. Fluoxetine has hadameliorative effects in some patients with anorexia; however, it has alsobeen associated with weight loss in some.   All anorexic or bulimic patients need psychotherapy to reverse theirentrenched ideas and distorted body image and to achieve other life goals.Cognitive behavioral interventions and interpersonal therapies have bothbeen found to be helpful.18 (Reference) Patients should be taught ways toprevent relapse, such as minimizing exposure to high-risk foods anddeveloping appropriate additional supportive methods. Other highlyeffective techniques involve helping patients challenge negative beliefsabout body size and shape, examine and restructure thoughts about food, andacquire assertiveness and social skills. Aiding them in developing aneating pattern that focuses on regular balanced meals, particularly in aninterpersonal or group setting, may also be beneficial.19 (Reference)Patients learn to replace with companionship the comfort they had receivedfrom food, and they find role models in other people who eat normallywithout preoccupation over every morsel, calorie, or new diet technique.   Studies show that with psychotherapeutic help, as many as 75% ofpatients with eating disorders improve significantly over time. Thus, it isimportant for physicians to assume a firm, directive approach and to helppatients see the short- and long-term consequences of their disorderedeating. Using food diaries, seeking nutritional counseling, and planningmeals at least a day in advance help counter abnormal eatingbehaviors.20,21 (Reference)   In the case of severe anorexia, enteral or parenteral nutritionalintervention may be necessary. Although such intervention may help patientstemporarily increase their weight so therapy can proceed, it is not withoutmedical and psychological risks. Some patients react vehemently to havingcontrol taken away, even though they may be near death. Thus, it isadvisable to seek consultation with an eating-disorder specialist in atertiary setting, enlist family support whenever possible, and be preparedto advise temporary commitment for patients in acute jeopardy. Afterseveral weeks, when the starvation state is ameliorated and the nutritionalstatus normalized, patients become more receptive to psychological work.Therapy must be paced to enlist patients' strength and motivation inbuilding an identity less reliant on appearance as the source ofself-esteem and competence.Summary   Eating disorders probably result from a combination of emotional,physical, and sociologic factors and are encouraged by a society thatvalues appearance as a measure of worth. Once believed to be a problemlargely among young women, the disorders are being found increasingly amongchildren, young athletes, men, and elderly women.   Often accompanied by depression, anxiety, and personality disorders,eating disorders may be difficult to diagnose. Patients with anorexianervosa often deny that they have a problem, despite obvious physicalsigns. Patients with bulimia nervosa may hide their bingeing and purgingand have no overt signs. Primary care physicians may be the first tosuspect potential problems, including a patient's fixation on food, weight,dieting, physique, and exercise. Sometimes, patients who have struggled insilence for years turn to their trusted physician for support andunderstanding. The first step in treatment is to address the medicalcomplications caused by the unhealthy eating habits. Once nutritionalhealth has been restored, patients need to reverse their entrenched anddistorted body-image ideas through psychotherapy.Table 1. DSM-IV definition of anorexia nervosaCriteriaA. Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weightfor age and height (eg, weight loss leading to maintenance of body weightless than 85% of that expected; or failure to make expected weight gainduring period of growth, leading to body weight less than 85% of thatexpected)B. Intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat, even though underweightC. Disturbance in the way in which body weight or shape is experienced,undue influence of body weight or shape on self-evaluation, or denial ofthe seriousness of current low body weightD. In postmenarcheal females, amenorrhea (ie, absence of at least threeconsecutive menstrual cycles; a woman is considered to have amenorrhea ifperiods occur only after administration of hormone, such as estrogen)Types   Restricting: during current episode, the person has not regularlyengaged in binge eating or purging behavior (ie, self-induced vomiting ormisuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas)   Binge eating/purging: during current episode, the person has regularlyengaged in binge eating or purging behaviorAdapted from American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statisticalmanual of mental disorders. 4th ed. Washington, DC: Am Psychiatric Assn,1994:544-5.Table 2. DSM-IV definition of bulimia nervosaCriteriaA. Recurrent episodes of binge eating, characterized by both of thefollowing:   Eating, in a discrete period of time (eg, within any 2-hr period), anamount of food that is definitely larger than most people would eat in asimilar period of time and under similar circumstances   A sense of lack of control over eating during the episode (eg, a feelingthat one cannot stop eating or control what or how much one is eating)B. Recurrent inappropriate compensatory behavior to prevent weight gain,such as self-induced vomiting; misuse of laxatives, diuretics, enemas, orother medications; fasting; or excessive exerciseC. Binge eating and inappropriate compensatory behaviors both occur, onaverage, at least twice a week for 3 moD. Self-evaluation is unduly influenced by body shape and weightE. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during episodes of anorexianervosaTypes   Purging: during current episode, the person has regularly engaged inself-induced vomiting or misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas   Nonpurging: during current episode, the person has used otherinappropriate compensatory behaviors, such as fasting or excessiveexercise, but has not regularly engaged in self-induced vomiting or misuseof laxatives, diuretics, or enemasAdapted from American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statisticalmanual of mental disorders. 4th ed. Washington, DC: Am Psychiatric Assn,1994:549-50.Table 3. Medical complications of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosaCardiovascular   Arrhythmia   Bradycardia   Cardiomyopathy   Congestive heart failure   Edema   Hypotension   Peripheral cyanosisDermatologic   Callus formation on hands   Carotene pigmentation   Dry skin and nails   Irritation at corners of mouth   Lanugo hair   Thinning scalp hairEndocrine   Amenorrhea   Decreased triiodothyronine and thyroxine levels   Increased cortisol level   Increased growth hormone levelGastrointestinal   Bloating and early satiety   Constipation   Dental caries   Diarrhea   Esophageal or gastric dilation or rupture   Pancreatitis   Parotitis and hyperamylasemiaHematologic   Low erythrocyte sedimentation rate   Low white blood cell count   Mild anemiaMetabolic   Hypokalemia   Hypomagnesemia   Hyponatremia   Increased blood urea nitrogen levelMusculoskeletal   Delayed bone maturation   Osteoporosis   Reduced statureNeurologic   SeizuresAbout the Author(s):Dr Zerbe is staff psychoanalyst, staff psychiatrist, vice president foreducation and research, and the Helen Malsin Palley Professor ofPsychiatry, the Menninger Clinic, Topeka, Kansas. She has written andtaught extensively on women's mental health and eating disorders, and shewrote The Body Betrayed: Women, Eating Disorders, and Treatment, publishedin 1993.Mailing address: Kathryn J. Zerbe, MD, Menninger Clinic, Box 829, Topeka,KS 66601-0829.ReferencesReference(s):1. Andersen AE. Analysis of treatment experience and outcome from the JohnsHopkins Eating Disorders Program: 1975-1990. In: Halmi KA. Psychobiologyand treatment of anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Washington, DC:American Psychiatric Press, 1992:93-1242. Hsu LK. Critique of follow-up studies. In: Halmi, ed,1 (Reference) pp125-473. Zerbe KJ. The body betrayed: women, eating disorders, and treatment.Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press, 1993:321-724. Mitchell JE. The treatment of eating disorders. (Editorial)Psychosomatics 1990;31:1-35. Walters EE, Kendler KS. Anorexia nervosa and anorexic-like syndromes ina population-based female twin sample. Am J Psychiatry 1995;152(1):64-716. Childress AC, Brewerton TD, Hodges EL, et al. The Kids' Eating DisordersSurvey (KEDS): a study of middle school students. J Am Acad Child AdolescPsychiatry 1993;32(4):843-507. Schmidt U, Hodes M, Treasure J. Early onset bulimia nervosa: who is atrisk? A retrospective case-control study. Psychol Med 1992;22(3):623-88. Lask B, Bryant-Waugh R. Early-onset anorexia nervosa and related eatingdisorders. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 1992;33(1):281-3009. Andersen AE. Males with eating disorders. New York: Brunner/Mazel,1990:133-6210. Yates A. Compulsive exercise and the eating disorders: toward anintegrated theory of activity. New York: Brunner/Mazel, 199111. Boast N, Coker E, Wakeling A. Anorexia nervosa of late onset. Br JPsychiatry 1992;160:257-6012. Zerbe KJ. Eating disorders in the 1990s: clinical challenges andtreatment implications. Bull Menninger Clin 1992;56(2):167-8713. Zerbe KJ. Whose body is it anyway? Understanding and treatingpsychosomatic aspects of eating disorders. Bull Menninger Clin1993;57(2):161-7714. Mehler PS, Weiner KL. Frequently asked medical questions about eatingdisorder patients. J Treatment Prevention 1994;2(1):22-3015. Vanderlinden J, Norre J, Vandereycken W. A practical guide to thetreatment of bulimia nervosa. New York: Brunner/Mazel, 199216. Mickley DW. The Prozac hype. J Treatment Prevention 1994;2(2):188-9217. Gwirtzman HE, Guze BH, Yager J, et al. Fluoxetine treatment of anorexianervosa: an open clinical trial. J Clin Psychiatry 1990;51(9):378-8218. Agras WS, Rossiter EM, Arnow B, et al. Pharmacologic andcognitive-behavioral treatment for bulimia nervosa: a controlledcomparison. Am J Psychiatry 1992;149(1):82-719. Vogel AC, Andersen AE. The treatment of bulimia nervosa: which regimenis most efficacious? An analysis of the evidence for physician assistantsand primary care providers treating eating disorders. J TreatmentPrevention 1994;2(3):237-5020. Schlundt DG, Johnson WG. Eating disorders: assessment and treatment.Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 1990:321-5921. Fornari V, Kent J, Kabo L, et al. Anorexia nervosa: thirty something. JSubst Abuse 1994;11(1):45-54Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1TREATING PRURITUS: WHAT'S NEW IN SAFE RELIEF OF SYMPTOMS?By:Larry E. Millikan, MDPreview   Have you ever had poison ivy or another intensely pruritic condition? Ifso, you can probably sympathize with sufferers' common cry: ``It's drivingme crazy!'' Unfortunately, few pharmacologic agents have proven to beroutinely effective for pruritus. This article provides an overview ofcurrent therapeutic strategies, including use of a new topical agent.   Diagnosis and treatment of the underlying cause of pruritus are alwaysnecessary, but prompt relief of pruritus itself is also important.Discomfort can be considerable. Patients scratch in an effort to relievepruritus, but ironically, this may contribute to skin damage, inflammation,and recurrence. Interruption of the destructive itch-scratch cycle is aprimary goal in treatment of pruritus.Pruritic conditions   Pruritus is a common symptom of many dermatologic disorders and severalsystemic diseases.1 (Reference) Table 1 summarizes important diagnosticconsiderations.   Xerosis--By far, the most common cause of pruritus without rash isxerosis, or winter itch. This condition is characterized by moderate tosevere itching of dry, cracked, scaly skin, most often on the lower legs.Bathing too often, old age, and high temperatures with low humidity can becausative factors.   Infestations, bites, infections--Many patients experience moderate tosevere itching during such infestations as scabies or seabather's eruption(caused by jellyfish larvae) or after insect or other bites (figure 1).Although these conditions are self-limiting or amenable to pharmacologicintervention, some form of antipruritic therapy is usually employed forsymptomatic relief.   Viral exanthems (eg, varicella), superficial fungal infections, andoccasionally even cutaneous bacterial infections (eg, hot-tub folliculitus)can cause great discomfort. Again, treatment of the underlying condition iscrucial, but from the patient's standpoint, so is relief of symptoms.   Neurogenic disorders--Notalgia paresthetica may cause prickling,burning, and pruritic sensations in the region supplied by the lumbarnerves.   Inflammatory disorders--Intense, unrelenting pruritus is the hallmark ofseveral chronic cutaneous inflammatory disorders, ranging from atopicdermatitis to urticaria (figure 2). Historically, the terms ``eczema,''``dermatitis,'' and ``eczematous dermatitis'' have been used to describethe final common expression of various conditions, such as contactdermatitis, atopic dermatitis, lichen simplex chronicus, nummular eczema,and dyshidrotic eczema.2 (Reference) Other commonly encountered pruriticinflammatory skin diseases include lichen planus, nodular prurigo, anddermatitis herpetiformis. Patients with psoriasis may also be troubled bypruritus.   From the patient's perspective, the intensity of the pruritus determineshow severe he or she considers the dermatitis to be. Often, pruriticdermatitis elicits repetitive scratching, which leads to excoriationsfollowed by opportunistic infections, hyperkeratotic skin changes, andlichenification.1-3 (Reference)   Contact dermatitis--Accounting for up to 40% of all occupationalillnesses,3 (Reference) contact dermatitis consists of two types: irritantand allergic. Irritant contact dermatitis is caused by a direct toxiceffect on the skin. Implicated substances include cosmetics, industrialchemicals, cleansers, and lubricants. Allergic contact dermatitis resultsfrom a type IV hypersensitivity reaction to substances found in plants (eg,poison ivy), rubber, wool, nickel, or topically applied drugs (eg,``caine''-type anesthetics).   Atopic dermatitis--Up to 5% of children under age 7 experience atopicdermatitis (figure 3), and more than 90% outgrow the disease byadolescence. The etiology of this condition is unknown. There is anapparent genetic predisposition that can be exacerbated by such externalfactors as food allergy, irritating clothing, dry air, and emotionalstress. Patients tend to have a personal or family history of asthma,seasonal or perennial rhinitis, and various allergies.   Pruritus is the most distressing and prominent symptom of atopicdermatitis. Many physicians feel that pruritus may be the primary orinitiating event in a flare-up of atopic dermatitis and that rubbing andscratching damage the skin and induce inflammatory lesions. Acute flare-upsare generally followed by long quiescent periods. In infants, atopicdermatitis manifests as intensely pruritic lesions on the head and extensorareas. In older children and adults, the flexural folds are more oftenaffected4 (Reference) (figure 4).   Lichen simplex chronicus--In this localized disorder, repeatedscratching leads to a patch of chronic dermatitis that subsequently becomeslichenified and takes on a thickened, barklike appearance (figure 5). Thepatches of lichenified skin are intensely pruritic, leading to perpetuationof the itch-scratch cycle.   Lichen simplex chronicus seems to be precipitated by stress, depression,and frustration. Some patients have a history of emotional or psychiatricproblems, but most often, the condition begins simply as a nervous habit.   Nummular eczema--The elderly are most often affected by this form ofeczematous dermatitis. Lesions appear as coin-shaped eczematous plaques,and pruritus is the primary symptom.   Dyshidrotic eczema--This condition can be acute or chronic and ischaracterized by sudden onset of pruritic vesicles followed by scaling,fissures, and lichenification.3 (Reference) Dyshidrotic eczema most oftenaffects the hands (figure 6) and feet.   Systemic disorders--Several chronic conditions may be characterized bylocalized or generalized pruritus, including renal failure, cholecystitis,cholestasis, diabetes mellitus, mastocytosis, hyperthyroidism,hypothyroidism, polycythemia vera, iron deficiency, and malignant tumors.Pathophysiologic mechanisms leading to pruritus in these conditions areill-defined.1 (Reference)miscellaneous disorders--Anogenital pruritus (eg, pruritus ani, scroti, andvulvae) is a relatively common condition that is difficult to treat.Pruritic patches of lichenified skin are self-perpetuating and may besecondary to irritant dermatitis, lichen sclerosus, or infection.5(Reference) Senile pruritus and aquagenic pruritus are idiopathicconditions. Drug-induced eruptions can also result in bothersome pruritus.Treatment methods   Treatment of pruritus is directed at interruption of the destructiveitch-scratch cycle, control of the underlying condition, and relief ofcutaneous inflammation, if present (table 2). The most often prescribedtreatments for pruritus are oral antihistamines and topicalcorticosteroids.   Nonpharmacologic--Although some patients respond to nonpharmacologicmeasures (eg, trimming the nails, using cool-water compresses, avoidingirritants, behavior therapy), pharmacologic intervention is usuallyrequired.   Localized--Ultraviolet B phototherapy is effective in a wide variety ofpruritic conditions, although it is not very practical for most patientsand physicians.1,6 (Reference) In some situations, intralesional injectionsof corticosteroids are useful.   Systemic--Several classes of orally administered drugs can be effectivein relieving pruritus.   Antihistamines--Histamine1 (H (subscript) 1) antagonists, such asdiphenhydramine hydrochloride (Benadryl) and hydroxyzine, are occasionallybeneficial against pruritus. However, this is an untargeted pharmacologicapproach; histamine receptors are blocked in both the central nervoussystem and the periphery. As a result, somnolence is a common side effectwith antihistamines and can restrict their daytime use. To minimize theseeffects, physicians routinely prescribe low-dose therapy, and whether thisprovides adequate cutaneous histamine-receptor blockade to producelocalized antipruritic effects is questionable.   Second-generation, nonsedating antihistamines (terfenadine [Seldane],astemizole [Hismanal], loratadine [Claritin]) circumvent many of thecentral nervous system effects associated with traditional antihistamines,but studies of their use for pruritus have yielded inconsistent results.7(Reference) Additionally, terfenadine and astemizole can cause serioustoxicity when given with certain macrolide antibiotics (eg, erythromycin)and imidazole antifungals (eg, ketoconazole [Nizoral]). Ironically, thisfinding has led some to suggest that success with the older agents may beattributable to their sedative effects rather than to their peripheralantihistamine properties.   Corticosteroids--Corticosteroids (eg, prednisone, dexamethasone[Decadron, Hexadrol]) are used only as a last resort or for temporarycontrol of a flare. Side effects preclude more extensive use.   Topical--Several years ago, topical H (subscript) 1-receptor antagonistswere in widespread use. However, the discovery that the compounds wereassociated with a high incidence of contact sensitization andcross-reactivity has all but eliminated their use in dermatology.1,2(Reference) Several of these agents (topical ``caine''-type anesthetics andtopical antihistamines) are still available, but their use should beavoided. Several topical agents that are safer and more effective are nowavailable.   Corticosteroids--Local application of low- to medium-potencycorticosteroids (eg, hydrocortisone, triamcinolone acetonide [Aristocort,Flutex, Kenalog]) may be effective in moderately severe cases ofdermatitis. High-potency topical corticosteroids can be used for a shortperiod for more severe conditions. However, the antipruritic activity ofcorticosteroids is secondary to their anti-inflammatory andimmunosuppressive properties. Even topical corticosteroid therapy can causeundesirable local and systemic effects.   In spite of cautions regarding skin atrophy and hypothalamic pituitaryaxis suppression, some physicians continue to overuse and misuse topicalcorticosteroids for many self-limiting disorders. Many physicians areinclined, in an effort to provide rapid relief of pruritus, to prescribehigh-potency corticosteroids for conditions that normally respond tolower-potency analogues. For treatment of pruritic dermatoses, anantipruritic agent should be combined with the lowest-potencycorticosteroid that controls inflammation. This combination of agents oftenprovides quick symptomatic relief while maintaining a relatively highmargin of safety.   Pramoxine formulations--Pramoxine hydrochloride (Itch-X, PrameGel,Tronothane HCl) is a topical agent that seems to have an important role incontrolling mild to moderate pruritus, although frequent application isusually required. Pramoxine is often combined with other agents (eg,menthol, petrolatum, benzyl alcohol) to heighten effectiveness of theformulation.   Tricyclic compounds--These agents administered orally, in particulardoxepin hydrochloride (Adapin, Sinequan) and amitriptyline hydrochloride(Elavil, Endep), have proven to have antipruritic properties in a varietyof conditions, notably chronic urticaria. The exact pharmacologic actionresponsible for this effect is unknown but may be, in part, related totheir potent antagonistic properties at histamine-receptor sites. As with H(subscript) 1 antihistamines, sedation may be problematic, however.Tricyclic compounds are unique in their ability to block both histamine H(subscript) 1 and H (subscript) 2 receptors. Doxepin's affinity for H(subscript) 1 and H (subscript) 2 receptors exceeds that of other tricycliccompounds and histamine-receptor antagonists, such as hydroxyzine anddiphenhydramine (which block H (subscript) 1 receptors) and cimetidine(Tagamet) (which blocks H (subscript) 2 receptors).7-9 (Reference) Otherantipruritic mechanisms of doxepin may include antagonism of alphaadrenoceptors and muscarinic and serotonin receptors (5-HT (subscript) 2subtype), inhibition of norepinephrine and serotonin neuronal reuptake, andinhibition of the production of platelet-activating factor.7-13 (Reference)In addition, orally administered doxepin decreases histamine-induced whealreactions.   Unfortunately, orally administered tricyclic compounds are dose-limitedand poorly tolerated because of their anticholinergic and central nervoussystem effects.14 (Reference) Therefore, topical application, which targetsthe affected site and causes minimal side effects, is attractive. Solutionsof doxepin and amitriptyline have been shown experimentally to be effectiveantipruritic agents.15 (Reference) Recently, 5% doxepin cream (Zonalon) wasintroduced for treatment of pruritus. It differs from many other topicalantipruritics in that it has a low potential for sensitization reactions.In addition, although some systemic absorption can occur, clinicalexperience has shown that it is much better tolerated than the oral form ofdoxepin.   In two major clinical trials involving more than 500 patients withmoderate to severe pruritus secondary to eczematous dermatitis, thosetreated with doxepin cream (as monotherapy) experienced rapid andsignificant relief. Doxepin cream appeared to be equally effective foratopic dermatitis, lichen simplex chronicus, contact dermatitis, andnummular eczema.16 (Reference) In a preliminary report,17 (Reference)doxepin cream was found to be an effective adjuvant to topicalcorticosteroids. The only side effects reported were mild, temporarydrowsiness (for 1 to 2 days) and transient, local irritation at the site ofapplication.   The possible roles of doxepin cream in treatment algorithms for pruritusare numerous (table 2). In acute or self-limiting conditions, the agentcould be used instead of a corticosteroid to provide rapid relief as wellas safe and targeted treatment. In chronic conditions, concomitant use ofdoxepin cream and topical corticosteroids could have a steroid-sparingeffect by allowing for the use of low-potency corticosteroids or shortertreatment courses.   Adjunctive--Emollients are sometimes used as monotherapy in mildpruritus or as an adjunct in more severe cases. Tar compounds (eg, carbonisdetergens solutions, coal tar emulsions) can be efficacious when used alongwith topical corticosteroids but are aesthetically objectionable.Summary   In several cutaneous disorders, pruritus is both the primary symptom andthe cause or perpetuating factor. Therefore, one focus of therapy should beon treating pruritus and thereby preventing or aiding in the resolution ofskin lesions. Several treatment options are available, includingnonpharmacologic methods; use of emollients, tar preparations, and othertopical agents; ultraviolet B therapy; and use of oral antihistamines orcorticosteroids. A new topical tricyclic agent is now available that adds apromising therapeutic approach.Table 1. Diagnostic considerations in pruritusHistoryAcute pruritus  Known cause  Unknown causeChronic pruritusRecent changes in general healthNew disease  Hepatobiliary, renal, or hematopoietic disease  Severe diseasePhysical examinationPrimary lesions  Eczematous: atopy, contact dermatitis  Vesicular: contact dermatitis, skin disease (eg, psoriasis, seborrheic    dermatitis)Secondary lesions  Excoriation  Lichenification (connotes chronicity)DistributionContactPhotoallergy to contactantsTable 2. Therapeutic approaches to pruritusNonpharmacologic   Fingernail and toenail trimming   Cool-water compresses   Avoidance of irritants (eg, cold air, chemicals, wool)   Behavior therapyLocalized   Ultraviolet B phototherapy   Intralesional injections of corticosteroidsSystemic   Sedating histamine1 antagonists (eg, diphenhydramine HCl [Benadryl],    hydroxyzine)   Nonsedating histamine1 antagonists (eg, terfenadine [Seldane],astemizole    [Hismanal], loratadine [Claritin])   Corticosteroids (eg, prednisone, dexamethasone [Decadron, Hexadrol])Topical   Diphenhydramine-containing lotions, gels, and creams   Corticosteroid creams, ointments, and gels (with or without occlusive    dressing) (eg, hydrocortisone, triamcinolone acetonide [Aristocort,Flutex,    Kenalog])   Pramoxine HCl lotions and creams (alone or combined with menthol,petrolatum,    benzyl alcohol) (eg, Itch-X, PrameGel, Tronothane HCl)   Doxepin cream (Zonalon)AdjunctiveEmollients   Tar preparationsAdapted from Bernhard.6 (Reference)Photograph(s):Photograph: Figure 1. Sting from Portuguese man-of-war.Photograph: Figure 2. Acute urticarial plaques.Photograph: Figure 3. Flare-up of atopic dermatitis in child. Note chronicnummular lesions on leg and acute vesicular and eczematous lesions onhands.Photograph: Figure 4. Long-standing atopic dermatitis in popliteal region(a common site) in adult. Secondary infection, which occurs often in warm,humid climates, is also present.Photograph: Figure 5. Lichen simplex chronicus, with areas of hypertrophicsecondary changes resulting from chronic itching and scratching.Photograph: Figure 6. Severe dyshidrotic eczema, which started as pinpoint,intensely pruritic vesicles and progressed to vast bulla formation.About the Author(s):Dr Millikan is professor and chairman, department of dermatology, TulaneUniversity School of Medicine, New Orleans. His major interests aregeriatric dermatology, infectious drug eruptions, and immunity in theskin.Mailing address: Larry E. Millikan, MD, Department of Dermatology, TulaneUniversity School of Medicine, 1430 Tulane Ave, New Orleans, LA70112-2699.ReferencesReference(s):1. Greaves MW. Pathophysiology and clinical aspects of pruritus. In:Fitzpatrick TB, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, et al, eds. Dermatology in generalmedicine. 4th ed, vol 1. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993:413-212. Lawley TJ, Swerlick RA. Eczema, psoriasis, cutaneous infections, acne,and other common skin conditions. In: Wilson JD, Braunwald E, IsselbacherKJ, et al, eds. Harrison's principles of internal medicine. 12th ed. NewYork: McGraw-Hill, 1991:307-123. Lookingbill DP, Marks JG Jr. Eczematous rashes. In: Lookingbill DP,Marks JG Jr, eds. Principles of dermatology. 2d ed. Philadelphia: Saunders,1993:120-354. Sampson HA. Atopic dermatitis. Ann Allergy 1992;69(Dec):469-795. McKay M. Vulvodynia, scrotodynia, and other chronic dysesthesias of theanogenital region (including pruritus ani). In: Bernhard JD, ed. Itch:mechanisms and management of pruritus. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994:161-846. Bernhard JD. General principles, overview, and miscellaneous treatmentsof itching. In: Bernhard, ed,5 (Reference) pp 367-817. Behrendt H, Ring J. Histamine, antihistamines and atopic eczema. ClinExp Allergy 1990;20(Suppl 4):25-308. Richelson E. Tricyclic antidepressants and histamine H (subscript) 1receptors. Mayo Clin Proc 1979;54(10):669-749. Richelson E. Antimuscarinic and other receptor-blocking properties ofantidepressants. Mayo Clin Proc 1983;58(1):40-610. Richelson E. Tricyclic antidepressants and neurotransmitter receptors.Psychiatr Ann 1979;9:16-3211. Grandel KE, Farr RS, Wanderer AA, et al. Association ofplatelet-activating factor with primary acquired cold urticaria. N Engl JMed 1985;313(7):405-912. Wander TJ, Nelson A, Okazaki H, et al. Antagonism by antidepressants ofserotonin S1 and S2 receptors of normal human brain in vitro. Eur JPharmacol 1986;132(2-3):115-2113. Chapman CR, Butler SH. Effects of doxepin on perception oflaboratory-induced pain in man. Pain 1978;5(3):253-6214. Gupta MA, Gupta AK, Ellis CN. Antidepressant drugs in dermatology: anupdate. Arch Dermatol 1987;123(5):647-5215. Bernstein JE, Whitney DH, Soltani K. Inhibition of histamine-inducedpruritus by topical tricyclic antidepressants. J Am Acad Dermatol1981;5(5):582-516. Drake LA, Fallon JD, Sober A. Relief of pruritus in patients withatopic dermatitis after treatment with topical doxepin cream. J Am AcadDermatol 1994;31(4):613-617. Drake LA, Breneman D, Phillips S, et al. Topical doxepin hydrochlorideprovides an increased clinical benefit when added to topical corticosteroidtreatment for atopic dermatitis. (Abstr) Presented before American Academyof Dermatology. Washington, DC: 1993 DecCopyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1THE MECHANISMS OF PRURITUS   Biopsies of eczematous lesions in patients with chronic dermatitisreveal increased density of nerve fibers and mast cells compared withnormal skin.1,2 (Reference) Studies have also found increased density ofnerve fibers in lichenified skin.3 (Reference) These alterations indicate asignificant primary or compensatory role of mast cells together with Cfibers in the pathophysiology of pruritus caused by dermatitis.   Pruritic sensations arise from stimulation of nerve endings in thedermoepidermal junction. They are transmitted as electrical impulses to thecentral nervous system along unmyelinated C fibers (figure 1). When Cfibers are stimulated, they release substance P and other putativeneurotransmitters (calcitonin gene-related peptide, somatostatin,neurokinins, vasoactive intestinal peptide, and glutamate) into synapticjunctions at the spinal cord and into the extracellular milieu fromperipheral collateral nerve terminals.4,5 (Reference)   C fibers often terminate in the skin close to cutaneous mast cells,which contain potentially pruritic mediators, including histamine. Underbasal conditions, histamine is stored in granules within mast cells; itsrelease can be caused by various immunologic or nonimmunologic stimuli.After release, histamine acts on H (subscript) 1 and H (subscript) 2receptors in the skin to stimulate sensory nerve C fibers, cause cutaneousvasodilation, and increase vascular permeability. These activities producepruritus accompanied by erythema and edema.4,5 (Reference)   Other possible endogenous pruritic mediators are numerous. In general,these substances can be considered (1) mast cell constituents, (2)compounds causing pruritus secondary to mast cell stimulation and releaseof histamine and other mediators that activate C fibers, or (3) compoundsthat directly stimulate C fibers.ReferencesIllustration(s):Illustration: Figure 1. Neuroanatomic pathway mediating pruritus.Reference(s):1. Irani AM, Sampson HA, Schwartz LB. Mast cells in atopic dermatitis.Allergy 1989;44(Suppl 9):31-42. Eedy DJ. Neuropeptides in skin. Br J Dermatol 1993;128(6):597-6053. Al'Abadie MS, Senior HJ, Bleehen SS, et al. Neuropeptides and neuronalmarker in atopic dermatitis: a quantified immunohistochemical study. Eur JDermatol 1994;4(5):394-84. Greaves MW. Pathophysiology and clinical aspects of pruritus. In:Fitzpatrick TB, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, et al, eds. Dermatology in generalmedicine. 4th ed, vol 1. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993:413-215. Lerner EA. Chemical mediators of itching. In: Bernhard JD, ed. Itch:mechanisms and management of pruritus. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994:23-35Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1ACUTE BRONCHITIS   Bronchitis is inflammation of the air passages (called the bronchialtubes or the bronchi) that lead from the windpipe to the lungs. Acutebronchitis comes on suddenly and lasts a short time. Another type, calledchronic bronchitis, lingers and often gets worse as years go by.What causes acute bronchitis?   Very often, what begins as a cold or influenza turns into bronchitiswhen the virus spreads to the bronchial tubes. Sometimes the virusresponsible for a childhood disease, such as measles or whooping cough,causes acute bronchitis at the same time or after the childhood disease haspassed. People whose lungs are already irritated, such as those who smoke,breathe in a lot of pollution or dust, or have lung disease, are especiallysusceptible to bronchitis.What are the symptoms?   Persistent coughing that brings up plentiful amounts of phlegm isprobably the most typical symptom. Inflammation makes the bronchial tubessecrete sticky mucus, which your body tries to get rid of through coughing.Since this sticky substance blocks the normal flow of air, you may havetrouble getting your breath or you may wheeze (make a whistling sound) whenyou breathe. Pain behind your breastbone or in your back, especially whenyou cough, is common. So is congestion in your chest and a mild fever.Do I need to visit a doctor?   Most times, acute bronchitis takes care of itself in a week or so.Though it may get tiresome, coughing is nature's way of clearing thesecretions from your lungs, so try not to use cough medicine. If you feelthat you must (for example, to get some sleep), choose an expectorant,which is a type of medicine that helps loosen the mucus from the bronchialwalls. Drinking lots of fluids thins the mucus and makes it less sticky soit is easier to cough up.Keeping the bronchial tubes moist by running a humidifier or taking steamyshowers may help you breathe more easily, and acetaminophen or aspirinreduces fever.   Most people start feeling better after following these measures for 3 or4 days. If you do not improve or if you have a temperature of more than 101degrees F, blood in the phlegm, or serious trouble breathing, see yourdoctor.If you have repeated attacks of acute bronchitis, mention them to yourdoctor. They may lead to chronic bronchitis if not treated.Illustration(s):Illustration: Drinking lots of fluids thins the mucus and makes it lesssticky so it's easier to cough up.Illustration: Keeping the bronchial tubes moist by taking steamy showersmay help you breathe easier.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1THE NEED FOR URGENT MANAGEMENTBy:Joseph Varon, MD Robert E. Fromm Jr, MD, MPHPreview   Because hypertension is a common disorder in the United States, primarycare physicians may well see cases of hypertensive crisis. Patients maypresent to the office or clinic as well as to the emergency department. Inthis article, the authors emphasize the necessity of prompt recognition andmanagement of severe acute hypertension to limit end-organ damage.   An estimated 60 million people in the United States have hypertension,which is an important risk factor for cardiovascular disability and death.1(Reference) The high prevalence of the condition makes it of great concernto primary care physicians, who on occasion can expect to see cases ofhypertensive crisis.   Fortunately, the incidence of hypertensive crises has decreased sincethe 1940s, when hypertension was not considered a disease of major clinicalconsequence. Indeed, it was viewed by many as an ``essential element'' toforce blood through sclerotic arteries to end-organs. The introduction ofeffective pharmacologic treatment in the late 1940s decreased morbidity andmortality associated with hypertension, and as a result it is currentlyestimated that less than 1% of Americans with the condition are likely tohave hypertensive crises.2 (Reference)   Recognition and management of hypertensive crises may be a challenge toeven the most astute clinician. Unlike the chronic risks conferred byhypertension, these crises have the potential to be acutelylife-threatening,3,4 (Reference) and inadequate treatment increases bothmorbidity and mortality.5 (Reference)Definitions   A myriad of terms have been applied to acute elevations in bloodpressure. Unfortunately, definitions have not always been uniform, and thesame clinical presentation may be included under more than one descriptiveheading. The following common definitions are provided to clarify oursubsequent discussions on recognition and management of patients with acuteelevations of blood pressure.   Hypertensive crises. Situations resulting from elevated blood pressurethat are potentially life-threatening or organ-threatening   Hypertensive emergencies. Clinical situations in which blood pressureshould be lowered within 1 hour to avoid serious end-organ damage   Hypertensive urgencies. Elevations of blood pressure that can usually betreated with antihypertensive agents to reduce pressure within 24 hours ofpresentation   Malignant hypertension. A syndrome characterized by elevated bloodpressure accompanied by encephalopathy or nephropathy or by papilledemaand/or microangiopathic hemolytic anemia.4 (Reference) The term``accelerated hypertension'' has been used to describe acute elevations ofblood pressure with hemorrhages or exudates on funduscopy. These syndromesdo not connote different clinical features or prognoses, and thus the term``malignant-accelerated hypertension'' has been used.Causes   Common causes of hypertensive crises are shown in table 1. Most patientswho present with hypertensive crises have essential hypertension. In thesepatients, the most common cause for acute elevation of blood pressure iswithdrawal from an antihypertensive drug (eg, clonidine).1-3 (Reference)Diagnosis   Hypertensive crisis is not defined by a specific blood pressure reading;rather it is a clinical syndrome of end-organ disease that is associatedwith acute elevations of blood pressure.5,6 (Reference) As is the case withmany other conditions in clinical practice, the diagnosis depends on theresults of history taking, physical examination, and laboratory testing.After these initial evaluations, patients can be categorized into thosewith hypertensive emergencies, those with hypertensive urgencies, and thosewithout evidence of end-organ damage.   History taking--The primary focus of history taking in patients withhypertensive crises is assessment of end-organ dysfunction (table 2). Thephysician should obtain historical information on neurologic,cardiovascular, and renal symptoms. Specific manifestations, such asheadaches, seizures, chest pain, dyspnea, and edema, should be ascertained.In addition, a history of antihypertensive drug use and withdrawal shouldbe elicited, because as previously mentioned, abrupt discontinuation ofantihypertensive medications is one of the most common causes ofhypertensive crises.1,6 (Reference)   Other medication use should also be examined. Prescription andnonprescription drugs, including sympathomimetic or anticholinergic agents(eg, decongestants, antidepressants) may produce acute elevations of bloodpressure. Previous and current drug abuse should also be noted; agents suchas amphetamines and cocaine may precipitate hypertensive crises. Someherbal preparations may also elevate blood pressure.   Physical examination--As in patients with any other critical illness,physical examination starts with evaluation of the airway, breathing, andcirculation (ABCs) and is followed by assessment of mental status and levelof consciousness.6 (Reference) Blood pressure is measured in both arms witha cuff of appropriate size. A standard sphygmomanometer should be used toverify blood pressure levels in patients with readings outside normalrange. Automatic blood pressure recording devices may be inaccurate andshould not be routinely used when hypertensive crises are suspected.6   All patients with elevated blood pressure should have a funduscopicexamination to detect papilledema, hemorrhages, or exudates. A carefulcardiovascular examination should be followed by complete neurologicassessment to identify focal symptoms and signs.   Laboratory studies--These are guided by the results of history takingand physical examination. A complete blood cell count, measurement ofelectrolytes and blood urea nitrogen, and urinalysis should be considered.In addition, an electrocardiogram, chest radiograph, and computedtomographic scan of the head are obtained in selected patients withevidence of chest pain, shortness of breath, or neurologic changes. It mustbe emphasized that in many instances these tests are performedsimultaneously with the initiation of antihypertensive therapy.Principles of management   In the successful management of patients with hypertensive crises,primum non nocere should be the rule. The initial goal of antihypertensivetherapy is not to achieve a normal blood pressure, but rather to graduallydecrease the mean arterial pressure to minimize the risk of hypoperfusion,particularly in cerebral, coronary, and renal vascular beds.7 (Reference)   Patients who present with hypertensive emergencies should be consideredcritically ill and treated in an intensive care environment.6,8 (Reference)They are placed at bed rest, and intravenous access is established foradministration of medication and fluid. Continuous blood pressuremonitoring, electrocardiographic readings, and frequent assessments ofneurologic status are routine. Continuous blood pressure monitoring isachieved by placing intra-arterial lines. When properly applied, thistechnique provides the most accurate and most frequently updated bloodpressure information.6,9 (Reference) We recommend intra-arterial lineplacement in all patients who receive fast-acting, potent vasodilators (eg,sodium nitroprusside).   A reasonable approach for most patients with hypertensive emergencies isto lower the mean arterial pressure by 25% over the initial 2 to 4 hours.1(Reference) Some investigators recommend decreasing the diastolic bloodpressure to no less than 100 to 110 mm Hg because of the potential forcerebral and coronary hypoperfusion.2,6 (Reference)Specific agents   A number of pharmacologic agents are available in the United States forthe management of hypertensive crises. As mentioned before, the appropriatetherapeutic approach depends on the form and clinical presentation. Wegenerally recommend short-acting parenteral agents for patients withhypertensive crises (table 3).   Sodium nitroprusside--Still one of the most commonly used agents forhypertensive crises, especially in patients with documented severe,long-standing chronic hypertension,10 (Reference) sodium nitroprusside(Nitropress) stimulates the formation of cyclic guanosine monophosphate andrelaxes vascular smooth muscle. The drug is very potent, and cerebral bloodflow may decrease in a dose-dependent manner. Onset of action is withinseconds, with a duration of 1 to 2 minutes and a plasma half-life of 3 to 4minutes.11 (Reference) Blood pressure may rise abruptly when the drug isstopped. Sodium nitroprusside is light-sensitive, and the infusionreservoir should be covered.   One of the main concerns in using sodium nitroprusside in clinicalpractice is that it metabolizes into cyanogen and thiocyanate. Therefore,in patients with acute or chronic renal failure, cyanide poisoning mayoccur after prolonged administration. In most cases, toxic effects occurafter several days of infusion but may be seen within the first 24 hours ofhigh-dose administration (infusion rates higher than 2 mcg/kg per minute).   Calcium-channel blockers--These agents have been used worldwide in thetreatment of acute hypertension.12 (Reference)Nifedipine--Administration of 10 mg of nifedipine (Adalat, Procardia) every5 minutes has been suggested by some investigators as an adequate form oftherapy in patients with hypertensive crises.1,3,4 (Reference) It isimportant to mention that nifedipine is not absorbed through the buccalmucosa and that patients should bite and swallow the medication rather thanuse it sublingually.13 (Reference) Nifedipine causes arteriolarvasodilatation and rapidly reduces systemic vascular resistance. Onset ofaction is within 15 minutes of oral administration, and maximum effectoccurs at 30 minutes. A major word of caution: Administration of nifedipinemay precipitate ischemic events by sudden reduction in blood pressure.14(Reference) In our experience, particular caution should be exercised inpatients with preexisting coronary artery disease.   Nicardipine hydrochloride--An intravenous form of nicardipine (CardeneI.V.) has been approved for treatment of acute severe hypertension in theUnited States. This agent is a dihydropyridine derivative that differs fromnifedipine by addition of a tertiary amine structure in the ester sidechain. Because this makes nicardipine 100 times more water-soluble thannifedipine, it can be administered intravenously.15 (Reference) In a recentpaper, Halpern and associates16 (Reference) reported on a multicenter,prospective, randomized trial comparing the effect of this agent with thatof sodium nitroprusside in patients with severe postoperative hypertension.They found nicardipine to be as effective as sodium nitroprusside.   Nicardipine offers some unique advantages in the emergency treatment ofhypertensive crises. For example, it has been shown to reduce both cardiacand cerebral ischemia.17 (Reference) In addition, its dose is not dependenton the patient's weight. The manufacturer's recommendation for rapidcontrol of blood pressure is to give a continuous infusion that starts at 5mg/hr and increases by 2.5 mg/hr every 5 minutes (maximum, 15 mg/hr) untilthe desired reduction in blood pressure is achieved. Oral nicardipine(Cardene), 20 mg, can also be given for hypertensive urgencies, and itsefficacy is similar to that of nifedipine.18 (Reference)   Adrenergic-blocking agents--Three adrenergic-blocking agents may beconsidered for hypertensive crises: esmolol hydrochloride (Brevibloc),labetalol hydrochloride (Normodyne, Trandate), and phentolamine(Regitine).   Esmolol--This agent is a pure beta-adrenergic blocking agent that has anextremely short half-life of less than 10 minutes. Esmolol can beadministered both as an intravenous bolus and as an infusion. Therecommended initial dose is 0.5 to 1 mg/kg, followed by infusion at 50 to300 mcg/kg per minute.   Labetalol--When given intravenously, this blocker of both alpha- andbeta-adrenergic receptors produces a prompt and controlled reduction ofblood pressure in patients with hypertensive crises.2,19 (Reference)Antihypertensive effects start within 5 minutes of administration and maylast at least 4 to 6 hours. The fall in blood pressure results from acombined decrease in systemic vascular resistance and a slight fall incardiac output. Initial parenteral treatment can be followed by oraladministration. A reasonable intravenous protocol is an initial bolus of0.25 mg/kg, followed by larger boluses (0.5 mg/kg) every 15 minutes untileither blood pressure is controlled or a total dose of 3.25 mg/kg has beengiven.   Phentolamine--This adrenergic-blocking agent is used for management ofcatecholamine-induced hypertensive crises. Intravenous administration of 5-to 10-mg boluses is recommended.6,20 (Reference) The effect is immediateand may last up to 15 minutes. Unfortunately, phentolamine may causetachyarrhythmias or angina, and its use is contraindicated in patients withpreexisting coronary artery disease. Once blood pressure is under controlwith phentolamine, oral phenoxybenzamine (Dibenzyline), a long-actingalpha-adrenergic blocking agent, may be given.   Trimethaphan camsylate--A non-depolarizing ganglionic blocking drug,trimethaphan (Arfonad) blocks transmission of impulses at the sympatheticand parasympathetic ganglia.11 (Reference) The initial dose is 0.5 to 1mg/min by continuous infusion, titrated to therapeutic effect. The agent ispotent and has numerous side effects. Tachyphylaxis is a common occurrenceand usually is seen within the first 2 days of administration.   Diazoxide--Chemically related to the thiazide diuretics, diazoxide(Hyperstat IV) directly relaxes the arteriolar smooth muscle and thusreduces peripheral vascular resistance.21 (Reference) When urgent treatmentis required, diazoxide is given intravenously. The onset of action isimmediate, with peak action at 5 to 10 minutes and total duration of actionranging from 3 to 18 hours.11 (Reference) The current recommended dose is aminibolus of 1 to 3 mg/kg (to a maximum 150-mg single dose) injected over10 to 15 seconds. It was previously believed that larger doses (ie, 300 mg)were needed for therapeutic effect because this agent is 90% protein-bound.However, larger doses were associated with severe hypotension in up to 10%of patients. Diazoxide has other significant side effects that additionallylimit its use; salt and water retention is commonly seen, and hyperglycemiaand hyperuricemia may be significant.   Clonidine--Oral clonidine (Catapres), 0.1 mg every 20 minutes (to amaximum of 0.8 mg), has been used for the treatment of hypertensive crises,particularly hypertensive urgencies.22 (Reference) Oral ``loading'' allowsa smooth, rapid, predictable reduction of blood pressure.23 Sedation is acommon side effect and may be a useful adjunct in some patients. In ourexperience, this medication is an excellent choice when blood pressurecontrol within a few hours is desired.6 (Reference)   Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors--Captopril (Capoten) is theprototype of these agents and has been compared with several other agentsfor treatment of hypertensive crises. In a study by Angeli andassociates,24 (Reference) the effects of sublingual captopril were comparedwith those of nifedipine, and it was found that sublingual captopril couldbe effectively used as an alternative to nifedipine. The effects ofsublingual captopril occur within 5 minutes of its administration andpersist for about 4 hours.   Intravenous enalapril maleate (Vasotec I.V.) is now gaining popularityfor use in hypertensive crises.25,26 (Reference) In our experience, initialintravenous treatment followed by oral administration is a safe means ofmanagement.   Other agents--A number of other agents are used for hypertensive crises,including nitroglycerin (Nitro-Bid IV, Nitrostat) and hydralazinehydrochloride (Apresoline). Reserpine (Serpasil), methyldopa (Aldomet), andguanethidine monosulfate (Ismelin) have largely been replaced by neweragents and in our experience have no role in current treatment ofhypertensive crises.   Nitroglycerin--Although nitroglycerin has disadvantages, includingunpredictable antihypertensive effects, it may have a significant role inpatients with coronary artery disease.6 (Reference) It is still widely usedbecause it is inexpensive when compared with other agents.   Hydralazine--This agent is an arteriolar vasodilator that is commonlyused in pregnancy-related hypertensive crises. It may cause marked reflextachycardia and increase myocardial oxygen demand, which can lead toanginal symptoms in patients who have preexisting coronary artery disease.Special diagnostic and treatment situations   Hypertensive encephalopathy, aortic dissection, and myocardial ischemiapresent special management considerations in patients with hypertensivecrises.   Hypertensive encephalopathy--The central nervous system is one targetorgan that is damaged by acute elevations in blood pressure. The cerebralvasculature constricts and dilates as necessary to maintain a relativelyconstant level of cerebral blood flow. This process, also known asautoregulation, protects the brain from changing levels of systemic bloodpressure.27 (Reference) However, significant elevations of blood pressureovercome the homeostatic process and lead to cerebral hyperperfusion andthe development of cerebral edema. Chronic elevations of blood pressureshift the entire regulatory curve to the right.   The manifestations of hypertensive encephalopathy may be those of focalor diffuse cerebral dysfunction. In the management of this hypertensiveemergency, attention must be paid to the rate of decrease in blood pressurein order to avoid cerebral ischemic complications. Although drugs such asclonidine have been used in these patients, we prefer intravenoustitratable agents.6,28 (Reference)   Aortic dissection--About 80% of patients who develop aortic dissectionhave a history of hypertension. The mechanism of aortic dissection involvesnot only elevations of blood pressure per se but also pressure wavesassociated with the pulsatile waveform of systemic blood pressure.29(Reference) The rate at which the pressure wave rises is important to thepropagation of aortic dissection and an important factor to consider in itstreatment. Physicians who treat aortic dissection should administer agentsthat not only reduce the mean arterial pressure but also reduce the rate atwhich pressure rises. Classically, vasodilators have been used with theaddition of beta blockers; more recently, beta blockers with vasodilatoryproperties have been advised. Some investigators still advocate the use ofganglionic-blocking agents for this disorder.   Myocardial ischemia--Acute elevations of blood pressure may result in animbalance between oxygen demand and supply in the coronary circulation andin the development of ischemia. Thus, in patients with acute myocardialinfarction or unstable angina, acute blood pressure elevations may bedeleterious and should be managed promptly. Nitrates, which have been amainstay of therapy for myocardial ischemia for a number of reasons,including their ability to dilate vessels of the coronary bed, are alsoefficacious for the management of hypertension and may have a special placein the treatment of this syndrome.6 (Reference)Summary   Although hypertensive crises are now relatively uncommon, they often arelife-threatening when they do occur and demand early recognition andmanagement to minimize morbidity and mortality. Most patients haveessential hypertension, and withdrawal from an antihypertensive drug is themost common cause of acute elevation of blood pressure.   Short-acting parenteral agents are generally recommended for managementof hypertensive crises. In most patients with hypertensive emergencies, themean arterial pressure is lowered 25% over 2 to 4 hours. Both cerebral andcoronary hypoperfusion must be avoided.Table 1. Common causes of hypertensive crisesAcute glomerulonephritisAntihypertensive drug withdrawalAutonomic hyperactivityCollagen vascular diseasesDrug abuseHead traumaMalignant diseasePreeclampsia and eclampsiaRenovascular hypertensionTable 2. End-organ dysfunction in patients with hypertensive crisesAcute aortic dissectionAcute cerebrovascular accidentAcute congestive heart failureAcute hypertensive renal injuryAcute myocardial infarctionHypertensive encephalopathyTable 3. Suggested starting dose of selected intravenous medications foruse in hypertensive crisesMedication               Suggested starting doseNitroglycerin            5 mcg/min (increase by 5-10 mcg(Nitro-Bid IV)           every 3-5 min as needed)Labetalol HCl            20-mg bolus, then 2 mg/min(Normodyne, Trandate)    (maximum, 300 mg/day)Nicardipine HCl          5 mg/hr; titrate to therapeutic(Cardene I.V.)           effect by increasing 2.5 mg/hr                         every 5 min (maximum, 15 mg/hr)Sodium nitroprusside    0.25-8 mcg/kg per minute by(Nitropress)            infusionDiazoxide               25-150 mg over 5 min or(Hyperstat IV)          30 mg/min to therapeutic effectTrimethaphan camsylate  1-15 mg/min(Arfonad)About the Author(s):Dr Varon is assistant professor of anesthesiology, critical care, andmedicine and assistant director, surgical intensive care unit andpost-anesthesia care unit, department of anesthesiology and critical care,University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston.   Dr Fromm is associate professor of medicine, sections of cardiology andpulmonary and critical care, Baylor College of Medicine, and medicaldirector, department of emergency services, The Methodist Hospital,Houston.   Mailing address: Joseph Varon, MD, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Dept ofAnesthesiology and Critical Care, 1515 Holcombe Blvd, AC1.171, Houston, TX77030. E-mail address: josephvaron@qksurg.mda.uth.tmc.edu orjvaron@infocom.net.ReferencesReference(s):1. Calhoun DA, Oparil S. Treatment of hypertensive crisis. N Engl J Med1990;323(17):1177-832. Stumpf JL. Drug therapy of hypertensive crises. Clin Pharm1988;7(8):582-913. Reuler JB, Magarian GJ. Hypertensive emergencies and urgencies:definition, recognition, and management. J Gen Intern Med 1988;3(1):64-744. Gifford RW Jr. Management of hypertensive crises. JAMA1991;266(6):829-355. Meese RB, Ram CV. Hypertensive cardiovascular emergencies. Compr Ther1985;11(10):28-386. Fromm RE, Varon J. Cardiovascular disorders. In: Varon J, ed. Practicalguide to the care of the critically ill patient. St Louis: Mosby,1994:64-97. Vidt DG. Current concepts in treatment of hypertensive emergencies. AmHeart J 1986;111(1):220-58. Sanders AB. Hypertensive emergencies. Am Fam Physician1991;44(5):1767-749. Prisant LM, Carr AA, Hawkins DW. Treating hypertensive emergencies:controlled reduction of blood pressure and protection of target organs.Postgrad Med 1993;93(2):92-11010. Smith CB, Flower LW, Reinhardt CE. Control of hypertensive emergencies.Postgrad Med 1991;89(5):111-911. Garcia JY Jr, Vidt DG. Current management of hypertensive emergencies.Drugs 1987;34(2):263-7812. Ellrodt AG, Ault MJ. Calcium-channel blockers in acute hypertension. AmJ Emerg Med 1985;3(6 Suppl):16-2413. van Harten J, Burggraaf K, Danhof M, et al. Negligible sublingualabsorption of nifedipine. Lancet 1987;2(8572):1363-514. Woodmansey P, Channer KS. Nifedipine and hypotension. (Letter) Lancet1991;338(8769):763-415. Clifton GG, Cook ME, Bienvenu GS, et al. Intravenous nicardipine insevere systemic hypertension. Am J Cardiol 1989;64(15):16-8H16. Halpern NA, Goldberg M, Neely C, et al. Postoperative hypertension: amulticenter, prospective, randomized comparison between intravenousnicardipine and sodium nitroprusside. Crit Care Med 1992;20(12):1637-4317. Cheung DG, Gasster JL, Neutel JM, et al. Acute pharmacokinetic andhemodynamic effects of intravenous bolus dosing of nicardipine. Am Heart J1990;119(2 Pt 2):438-4218. Komsuoglu B, Sengun B, Bayram A, et al. Treatment of hypertensiveurgencies with oral nifedipine, nicardipine, and captopril. Angiology1991;42(6):447-5419. Huey J, Thomas JP, Hendricks DR, et al. Clinical evaluation ofintravenous labetalol for the treatment of hypertensive urgency. Am JHypertens 1988;1(3 Pt 3):284-9S20. Vidt DG, Gifford RW Jr. A compendium for the treatment of hypertensiveemergencies. Cleve Clin Q 1984;51:421-3021. Walters BN. Urgent treatment of acute hypertension. Br J Hosp Med1984;31(1):49-5222. Jaker M, Atkin S, Soto M, et al. Oral nifedipine vs oral clonidine inthe treatment of urgent hypertension. Arch Intern Med 1989;149(2):260-523. Houston MC. The comparative effects of clonidine hydrochloride andnifedipine in the treatment of hypertensive crises. Am Heart J 1988;115(1Pt 1):152-924. Angeli P, Chiesa M, Caregaro L, et al. Comparison of sublingualcaptopril and nifedipine in immediate treatment of hypertensiveemergencies: a randomized, single-blind clinical trial. Arch Intern Med1991;151(4):678-8225. DiPette DJ, Ferraro JC, Evans RR, et al. Enalaprilat, an intravenousangiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, in hypertensive crises. ClinPharmacol Ther 1985;38(2):199-20426. Strauss R, Gavras I, Vlahakos D, et al. Enalaprilat in hypertensiveemergencies. J Clin Pharmacol 1986;26(1):39-4327. Strandgaard S. Autoregulation of cerebral blood flow in hypertensivepatients: the modifying influence of prolonged antihypertensive treatmenton the tolerance to acute, drug-induced hypotension. Circulation1976;53(4):720-728. Greene CS, Gretler DD, Cervenka K, et al. Cerebral blood flow duringthe acute therapy of severe hypertension with oral clonidine. Am J EmergMed 1990;8(4):293-629. Lindsay J Jr. Aortic dissection. Heart Dis Stroke 1992;2:69-76Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1FOUL-SMELLING TODDLERSBy:Rashmi R. Abhyankar, MD, Terre Haute, Indiana   Toddlers have a tendency to push objects up their nose. When a smallchild is brought in for investigation of a foul odor of recent onset,inspect both of his or her nostrils well and ask if any foreign bodies havebeen noted before you make a referral or prescribe antibiotics.   I have retrieved toilet paper and pieces of foam and sponge from thesepatients.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1IS IT ULCERATIVE COLITIS?By:Monjur Ahmed, MD, Kew Gardens, New York   Amebic colitis may mimic or precipitate an attack of ulcerative colitis.Therefore, the stool should be examined for Entamoeba histolytica in anypatient with an exacerbation of ulcerative colitis before prescribingcorticosteroids, which disseminate this organism. The presence of Ehistolytica trophozoites in a fresh stool specimen justifies treatment withmetronidazole.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1APICAL EXAMINATION FOR LEFT VENTRICULAR ENLARGEMENTBy:Arup Achari, MD, Houston   Precordial examination is often considered less important than anelectrocardiogram (ECG) or a chest film in the evaluation of leftventricular size and volume. However, an impulse of more than 3 cm indiameter during palpation of the apex with the patient in the left lateraldecubitus position is 92% as sensitive and 91% as specific as anechocardiogram in indicating left ventricular enlargement* and is farsuperior to the ECG and chest film for this purpose.   The normal apical impulse covers an area of about 1 cm (the size of apenny). If the area is more than that of your stethoscope (about 3 cm), youcan be fairly sure that the patient has an enlarged left ventricle.   *Eilen SD, Crawford MH, O'Rourke RA. Accuracy of precordial palpationfor detecting increased left ventricular volume. Ann Intern Med1983;99(5):628-30Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List CopyrightPOSTGRADUATE MEDICINE via NewsNetJanuary 1996   Vol. 99, No. 1BURNS FROM DEFIBRILLATIONBy:I. K. Parikh, MD, Cincinnati   At an advanced cardiac life support meeting I attended at a localhospital, it was mentioned that a patient was burned during adefibrillation procedure. This happened because the patient had beensponged with tepid alcohol to lower his temperature before cardiac arrestoccurred.Copyright 1996 The McGraw-Hill CompaniesBack to Headline List WT03-B09-10IA087-000629-B021-35http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/me17.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035544 text/html 48891HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:53:47 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:53 GMTContent-length: 48704Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/me17.html Sample Issue Copyright REPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNet January 22, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES D NJ JURY FINDS NO DEFECT IN ABSENCE OF KEYBOARD WARNING (391 words) D RI PLAINTIFFS' COUNSEL CITES REASONS FOR MISTRIAL MOTION (789 words) DC FED. COURT CONSIDERS PLAINTIFFS' PRODUCT IDENTIFICATION OBLIGATIONS (859 words) ND GA JUDGE SAYS PLAINTIFF NEEDED TO CITE ALTERNATIVE DESIGN (1045 words) CAUSE OF ACTION DID NOT ACCRUE FROM SYMPTOM ONSET, ARGUES PLAINTIFF (1012 words) D NJ DECLINES TO APPLY DISCOVERY EXCEPTION TO CAUSE OF ACTION ACCRUAL (624 words) EEOC SAYS RSI SCREENING TESTS VIOLATED ADA (363 words) MANUFACTURERS GROUP REPORTS ON RSIs (496 words) 8TH CIR.: EVIDENTIARY ERROR WAS OF APPELLANT'S MAKING (459 words) MO CT. APP. FINDS INSURER AT TIME OF DISABILITY LIABLE FOR BENEFITS (383 words) PHYSICIAN'S INPUT TO DISABILITY RATING DEEMED INADMISSIBLE (612 words) CopyrightREPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996D NJ JURY FINDS NO DEFECT IN ABSENCE OF KEYBOARD WARNING     A 10-member federal district court jury in Trenton, NJ, onDec. 22 found that a plaintiff had not shown that the defendant'skeyboard was defective due to the absence of a warning that usingit could cause repetitive stress injuries.  Oliver v. AT&TTeletype Corp., No. 93-1806 (D NJ).     Plaintiff Janet C. Oliver, a service representative with NewJersey Bell, had used an AT&T keyboard in her employment since1980.  She filed a complaint in New Jersey Superior Court, MercerCounty, on Dec. 18, 1992, maintaining that AT&T was negligent infailing to warn "of the dangers and hazards of the [keyboard],and the dangers posed to the health and welfare of those comingin contact with or using the [keyboard]."  Oliver also advanced atheory of strict products liability, claiming that she sufferedher injury "[a]s a proximate result of the defective, unfit,unsuitable, unsafe and unreasonably dangerous condition of the[keyboard]."  Oliver sought compensatory and punitive damages.     The litigation was removed to the U.S. District Court forthe District of New Jersey on April 26, 1993.  The trial went tothe jury before Judge Garrett E. Brown Jr. on Dec. 5.     The jury, in reaching its verdict, answered "no" to thequestion, "Do you find that AT&T's keyboard was defective due tothe absence of a warning that the product could cause the type ofinjuries claimed by the plaintiff?"  Apparently the jury did notaccept the testimony of Oliver's expert witness, Dr. Sandra Mohr,linking repetitive stress injury to keyboard use.     In a May 30, 1995, order, Magistrate Judge John J. Hughesbarred evidence in the nature of Bureau of Labor Statistics dataregarding the proliferation of repetitive stress syndromeexcepting through testimonial reference.  Judge Hughes opinedthat the prejudice to AT&T resulting from the admission of suchevidence far outweighed its probative value.  Judge Hughes didallow evidence pertaining to workers' compensation claims filedby AT&T employees based on keyboard use, as well as evidence ofalternative keyboard designs and warnings utilized by othermanufacturers.     Oliver was represented by Moshe Maimon of Levy Phillips &Konigsberg in New York City; and by Bill Mathesius of Szafer,Lakind, Blumstein, Walter & Bader in Lawrenceville, NJ.  AT&T wasrepresented by Ira Greenberg and Andrew Fishkin of Edwards &Angell in New York City.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996D RI PLAINTIFFS' COUNSEL CITES REASONS FOR MISTRIAL MOTION     Citing the lack of a "level playing field" in thepresentation of the parties' cases, counsel for an RSI plaintiffwhose jury trial ended with a verdict adverse to her cause filed,on Dec. 11, an affidavit supporting his motions for a new trialand a mistrial.  Piester v. IBM Corp., No. 94-470 (D RI).     Counsel for plaintiffs Patricia and Richard Piester, StevenJ. Phillips, based his motion on his belief that "the Court atcritical junctures displayed what appeared to be an animus towardplaintiffs' cause generally, and toward [plaintiffs' counsel]especially."  Furthermore, Phillips asserts that Judge Raymond J.Pettine evidenced "an unmistakable approach of extreme liberalityfavoring all proofs and scheduling needs desired by defendant andharsh restrictiveness with respect to plaintiffs' proofs andscheduling needs."  These "simply cannot be squared with anynotion of basic fairness," Phillips argues.     For example, Phillips cites what he alleges is a disparityin the approach taken by Judge Pettine to the parties in pretrialproceedings.  Phillips asserts that Judge Pettine "promptlyforgave" IBM's failure to timely file a pretrial memorandum.Judge Pettine reopened discovery and otherwise let IBM "preparefor trial at a time after plaintiffs had already filed theirpretrial memo," Phillips says.  Phillips avers that thiscontrasts greatly with Judge Pettine's order finding inadmissiblethe testimony of plaintiffs' expert witnesses, Dr. Laura Welchand Dr. Laura Punnett.     Phillips asserts that IBM ignored Judge Pettine'sadmonishment to raise "serious" issues in limine prior to trialby not raising the admissibility issue until after the trialbegan.  "This tactic was richly successful, without once theCourt questioning why IBM had waited so long without waiving itsrights," Phillips says.     Phillips cites a number of examples of what he claims wereJudge Pettine's unequal treatment of the parties during trialproceedings.  Phillips says that he was told by Judge Pettinethat there would be no time set for openings, yet he asserts thatJudge Pettine suddenly imposed a time limit while his opening wasin progress.     Phillips also avers that he was frequently admonished to"get to the point" while he was trying to lay the foundation ofthe plaintiffs' case.  "In essence, the Court was mercilesslyrushing plaintiffs and preventing the careful laying offoundations and bases for opinions on the one hand and thensustaining objections for failing to lay such foundations on theother," Phillips says.     This contrasts with the latitude given IBM in itsquestioning of Patricia Piester, Phillips says.  He says that"the record will reveal that IBM counsel was given anunbelievable and unfettered freedom to make speeches and testifyrather than ask questions throughout these proceedings."     "It is not plaintiffs' belief that the Court intended [todeny a fair trial] or consciously acted with any impropriety,"says  Phillips, but he argued that that is precisely whatoccurred.     According to the original complaint, Patricia Piester usedan IBM keyboard in her employment as a medical secretary for aProvidence medical practice.  She began to experience numbnessand tingling in her upper extremities in August 1990 andunderwent carpal tunnel surgery in January 1991.     The jury in the Piester trial said on Oct. 20 that theplaintiff did not prove that a computer keyboard manufactured byIBM was a proximate cause of her repetitive stress injuries.     On Oct. 16, prior to the jury's verdict, Judge Pettine ruledon the admissibility of the testimony of Welch, a medical doctor,and Punnett, an occupational epidermologist and ergonomist.Judge Pettine ruled that Welch had sufficient knowledge andscientific foundation, under the standard of Daubert v. MerrellDow Pharmaceuticals, 113 S.Ct. 2786 (1993), to testify on thecause of Piester's injuries and on whether IBM's keyboard wasunreasonably dangerous.  However, the judge found her notqualified to opine on the value of keyboard warnings inpreventing injury or on the desirability of alternative keyboarddesigns.     As to Punnett, Judge Pettine said that her testimony "lacksthe required scientific reliability mandated by Daubert andpresents the conundrum of how you bridge the gap from subjectivesymptoms and objective signs to a defined disease."  JudgePettine found Punnett's testimony inadmissible, observing that"Dr. Punnett is not an M.D. and yet she jumps from symptoms todisease.  I find that bridging this hiatus is dependent onmedical expertise."     Attorneys for Piester were Steven J. Phillips of LevyPhillips & Konigsberg, New York City; Robert Corrente ofCorrente, Brill & Kusinitz, Providence; and Mark C. Hadden ofGidley, Sarli & Marusak, Providence.  IBM was represented byMichael A. Cerussi Jr. and Joseph A. D'Avanzo of Cerussi &Spring, White Plains, NY; and by Matthew F. Madeiros of Flanders& Madeiros, Providence.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996DC FED. COURT CONSIDERS PLAINTIFFS' PRODUCT IDENTIFICATIONOBLIGATIONS     The defendants in a repetitive stress injury productliability action filed separate briefs Dec. 11 opposing theplaintiff's motion to compel further discovery.  Fort et al. v.IBM et al., No. 95-20 (D DC).     The defendants say that the plaintiff has no ground forfurther discovery in light of her failure to provide requiredspecific product identification information to the defendants.     In its brief, defendant NEC Technologies points out that todate "no product identification information concerning NECTechnologies has been produced by [Fort]."  This is so despiteFort's being ordered by Judge Norma Holloway Johnson to presentthis information by June 30, 1995, says NEC.  NEC says that it isnot obligated to respond to Fort's interrogatories because thedisputed facts at issue had not been alleged with particularity.NEC argues that Fort's latest filing is nothing more than anattempt to forestall court action on the defendants' Sept. 7motion to dismiss based on Fort's failure to produce productidentification information.     NEC maintains that FRCP 26(a)(1) is inapplicable to theinstant litigation, pursuant to Local Rule 207(a), since it hadbeen assigned to the "complex track" by mutual consent of theparties.  Under Local Rule 207(a), the burden is on the parties"to make specific discovery requests to obtain the informationand material that is truly relevant...," says NEC.  Fort has notdemonstrated how additional discovery will help it meets itsproduct identification burden, adds NEC.     The opposition filed by IBM largely echoes the sentiments ofits co-defendant NEC on the applicability of FRCP 26(a)(1), thevalidity of Fort's interrogatories and Fort's delays in providingproduct identification information.  In addition, IBM assertsthat Fort seeks "to shift the burden of product identification toIBM in an attempt to avoid the results of the failure of theirown efforts."     IBM and NEC filed their briefs in response to Fort's Nov. 29motion to compel discovery.  In that motion, Fort argued that thedefendants have done "nothing to meet their obligations underFed.R.Civ.P. 26(a)(1) to disclose information within theircontrol which would permit the identification of the keyboardsand terminals used...."  Fort maintained that the defendants,even accounting for Local Rule 207(a), were obligated to discloseinformation pertaining to, among others things, (1) the types ofequipment sold to her employer, the Chesapeake & PotomacTelephone Co. (C&P); (2) sales information relevant to theproducts; and (3) sales and maintenance contracts with C&P.               Fort noted that she had served a second set ofinterrogatories in an attempt to moot the defendants' refusal tocomply with FRCP 26(a)(1), but that the defendants have filedobjections to these interrogatories.     In the alternative, Fort asked that should the court findthe defendants exempt from FRCP 26(a)(1), and from responding tothe second set of interrogatories, that she be granted leave tofile more interrogatories and requests for production ofdocuments.  "Otherwise, plaintiffs will effectively have beendenied any discovery on product identification because an oraldetermination by the Court placing the case on a complex trackhad the unintended retroactive effect of terminating discoverywhich the Federal Rules contemplate plaintiffs should have as amatter of right," Fort said.     On Dec. 18, Fort filed a reply in support of her motion tocompel discovery, disputing IBM's and NEC's categorizations ofher obligation to provide product identification information.Fort says that the order issued by U.S. Magistrate Judge John L.Caden of the Eastern District of New York, the court from whichthe instant litigation was transferred, called for her to provideproduct identification information only to the extent known.That order clearly rejected the defendants' argument that productidentification must include model and serial numbers, Fort said.Fort argues that "[t]he model and serial numbers of [defendants']19th century-style keyboards is irrelevant or at best marginallyrelevant to repetitive stress/carpal tunnel syndrome injuries."     Most recently, on Dec. 29, IBM filed a motion to strikeFort's reply of Dec. 18.  IBM argues that the memo should bestricken because it did not address Fort's earlier motion tocompel discovery, but instead raised issues that were immaterialto that motion.  IBM contends that Fort improperly used the replymemo "to oppose the defendants' motion to dismiss " even thoughthat opposition had already been filed on Sept. 21, 1995."     Fort filed her complaint in the U.S. District Court for theEastern District of New York on March 25, 1993, seekingcompensatory and punitive damages for the repetitive stressinjuries she allegedly incurred while using certain typewriterand computer equipment while working for C&P.  The complaintnamed IBM as the manufacturer of the typewriter equipment and NECand AT&T Corp. as the manufacturers of the computer equipment.The case was transferred to the U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Columbia on April 20, 1994.     Counsel for Fort is Bardyl R. Tirana, Washington DC.Counsel for IBM are J. Hardin Marion, John B. Isbister andStephen Weissman of Tydings and Rosenberg, Baltimore.  Counselfor NEC are James E. Gray and Colleen Rathbun of Goodell,DeVries, Leech & Gray, L.L.P., also in Baltimore.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996ND GA JUDGE SAYS PLAINTIFF NEEDED TO CITE ALTERNATIVE DESIGN     U.S. District Judge Frank M. Hull of the Northern Districtof Georgia on Dec. 7 granted summary judgment in favor of themanufacturer of a check encoding machine in the product liabilitycase brought by a bank employee who asserted that the machine hadcaused her repetitive stress injuries.  Little v. NCR Corp.,No. 93-1555 (ND GA).     Gwenette Little began working for Wachovia Bank in December1986 as an encoder operator.  According to her complaint, shebegan to experience pain and swelling in her hands inAugust 1991.  She was diagnosed with overuse syndrome in January1992 and with carpal tunnel syndrome in December 1992.  Littleattributed her condition to her use of the encoding machinemanufactured by NCR.  In her job, Little fed a check into amachine track with her left hand while typing on a keypad withher right hand.     Little's July 8, 1993, complaint alleged seven causes ofaction: (1) breach of implied warranty of merchantability;(2) breach of implied warranty of fitness for a particularpurpose; (3) breach of express warranty; (4) strict liability;(5) negligent design; (6) failure to warn; and (7) grossnegligence in the failure to warn.  Little sought actual andpunitive damages as well as special damages in the amount of$1 million.     First, Judge Hull agreed with NCR's argument that Little'scomplaint was time-barred under Georgia's two-year statute oflimitations.  While Little argued that her cause of action didnot accrue until she was diagnosed with overuse syndrome in early1992, Judge Hull noted that "Georgia law requires only that[Little] knew or should have known through reasonable diligencethat she was injured and that [NCR's] conduct caused the injury."Since her doctor had suggested that her problems with her handswere likely related to her job, Little was aware of the likelycause of her injuries more than two years prior to filing hercomplaint, said Judge Hull.     In addition to lack of timely filing, the judge indicatedthat there were other grounds to grant NCR's motion for summaryjudgment.     Judge Hull said that summary judgment in favor of NCR wasappropriate with respect to Little's strict liability andnegligent design claims, since Little failed to meet her burdento show defect and causation.     The judge agreed with NCR that the testimony of Little'sexpert witness, Dr. Ruston M. Hunt, was inadmissible because itwas not reliable under the U.S. Supreme Court's teaching inDaubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 113 S.Ct. 2786, 2795(1993).  Judge Hull said that Hunt's testimony "suffers from notjust unreliable methodology, but the complete absence of anydiscernible methodology."     The judge noted that Hunt: (1) had no experience withencoding machine design; (2) had never conducted originalresearch into overuse syndrome nor had he published or testifiedon that topic; (3) had spent only 10 to 12 hours on forming hisexpert opinion prior to being deposed; and (4) had never metLittle or her physicians nor had he seen her workstation.     Judge Hull rebuffed Little's attempt to support her claimwith statistical evidence showing a purportedly high incidence ofoveruse syndrome among encoder operators.  She stated thatLittle's use of statistical evidence "does not raise a genuineissue on the elements of (1) defect in the check-encodingmachine, and (2) causation between a defect in the check encodingmachine and [Little's] injury."     Judge Hull granted NCR's motion for summary judgment alsowith respect to Little's claim of breach of express warranty.  Henoted that under Georgia law, "an express warranty extends onlyto the original purchaser, unless the warranty 'makes it clearthat it is also intended to extend to some identifiable thirdparty or parties'" (quoting Stewart v. Gainesville Glass Co.,Inc., 131 Ga.App. 747 [1974]).  Here, there is nothing in NCR'ssales agreement with Little's employer, Wachovia Bank, "that anywarranties extend to [Little], as an employee," said Judge Hull.     Little's failure to warn theory of liability also fellvictim to NCR's motion for summary judgment.  Judge Hull foundsummary judgment in favor of NCR to be appropriate, as Little"has not produced evidence on defect and causation."  Further,Judge Hull noted that Little's suggestions on an appropriatewarning, i.e., "maintaining proper posture," did not relate tothe encoding machine but related to Little's job.     Judge Hull offered yet another basis to enter summaryjudgment in favor of NCR.  He found that Little failed to meether burden, under Georgia law, to "produce proof to a reasonabledegree of medical certainty that [her] injury resulted from heruse of [NCR's] machine."     Finally, Judge Hull said that Little's suit must fail due toher failure to propose an alternative design for the encoder.Following the "risk-utility analysis" set forth in Banks v. ICIAmericas, Inc., 264 Ga. 732, 734-37 (1994), an alternative designis one factor in determining whether a product's utilityoutweighs the risks inherent in its design, noted Judge Hull.Absent an alternative, Judge Hull concluded that Little did notshow that NCR's "design choice" was unreasonable.     When contacted by the Repetitive Stress Injury LR, NCR's co-counsel, Max Hess, opined that adoption of the "alternativedesign" requirement would make it much harder for RSI plaintiffs"down the road."     Little's breach of implied warranty claims were dismissed byan earlier order filed by Judge Hull on Feb. 22, 1995.  He ruledthat Little's lack of privity to NCR's sales contract withWachovia barred recovery under breach of warranty.  Alsodismissed at that time was Little's allegation that NCR wasgrossly negligent in its duty to warn and, by extension, Little'sclaim for punitive damages.  Judge Hull noted that, under Georgialaw, punitive damages are available only for "willful misconduct,malice, fraud, wantonness, oppression, or that entire want ofcare which would raise the presumption of conscious indifferenceto consequences."     While Little alleged that NCR "intentionally failed towarn," Judge Hull observed that Little's allegations "do not riseto the level of conscious indifference of the consequences so asto support [her] prayer for punitive damages."     Representing Little was Armando Rois-Mendez, Duluth, GA.Representing NCR were Max Hess and John Taylor of Vincent,Chorey, Taylor & Feil, Atlanta.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996CAUSE OF ACTION DID NOT ACCRUE FROM SYMPTOM ONSET, ARGUESPLAINTIFF     The question of whether her action is time-barred is notproper for summary judgment, repetitive stress injury plaintiffBernice Bush says in her Dec. 18 memorandum in opposition todefendant IBM's motion for summary judgment.  Smith et al. v.Memorex Corp. et al., No. 94-1163 (D DC).     In her Dec. 21 response to IBM's motion to dismiss forfailure to allow complete discovery, Bush maintains that she "hasnot deliberately failed to respond."     Bush argues that since she "continued to use [IBM's]products during the three-year period prior to filing her action,and because she has sustained new injuries caused by her use ofthose products in that three-year period, her claim is timelyunder New York law."     Bush rejects IBM's argument that her cause of action accruedfrom the date she first experienced symptoms of injury.  Thisissue is not settled in New York, Bush says, citing cases pendingbefore New York courts.     Bush also argues that summary judgment is inappropriate inthis case.  Quoting Ford v. AT&T, 154 Misc.2d 894, 586 N.Y.S.2d721, 724 (NY Sup. Ct., New York Cty. 1992), Bush asserts that thequestion of whether symptoms noticed before a diagnosis was made"were indications of the existence of the diagnosed [injury]," ispurely a question of fact to be resolved by a jury.Additionally, Bush claims that she "did not experience a singleinjury, but rather an accumulation of injuries through the periodof her use of the defendant's equipment."  Each of thesesubsequent injuries "gives rise to a new cause of action," Bushcontends.     Bush also cites "the aggravation of pre-existing injuriesduring the same period" in support of the timeliness of heraction.  "It is well-settled in New York that defendant may beheld liable to plaintiff not only for causing injury, but for theaggravation of a pre-existing condition," Bush says.     Bush discounts IBM's reliance on Wallen v. AT&T,No. 12336/91 (NY Sup. Ct., Bronx Cty., Sept. 17, 1992), and itsprogeny in support of its proposition that a cause of injuryaccrues from the onset of symptoms.  "In Wallen, onset ofsymptoms were never discussed and only uncontested dates ofdiagnoses were considered for accrual purposes," says Bush.  Inthis case, "where diagnosis and symptom onset are explicitlydifferent and unlinked," Wallen is not controlling, Bush says.     Finally, Bush asserts that her claim is timely under NewYork's discovery statute, C.P.L.R. Section 214-c, which states,in pertinent part:     ...the three year period within which an action to     recover damages for personal injury or injury to     property caused by the latent effects of exposure to     any substance or combination of substances, in any     form...shall be computed from the date of discovery of     the injury by the plaintiff...     Bush maintains that this statute applies because she "didnot discover, and should not have discovered, the nature or causeof any of her new injuries until she was diagnosed with themduring the three-year period prior to filing suit."     Anticipating IBM's possible response to her statutoryargument, Bush denies that C.P.L.R. Section 214-c is applicableonly to injuries stemming from exposure to toxic substances.Bush cites the court in DiMarco v. Hudson Valley Blood Services,147 A.D.2d 156, 542 N.Y.S.2d 521 (1st Dept. 1989) as emphasizingthat it applies to injuries from the "latent effects of exposureto any substance or combination of substances, in any form."     In her response to the motion to dismiss, Bush contends thatshe has answered all questions regarding her medical history tothe best of her ability.  In addition, she maintains that she hasprovided IBM with medical records and information about hermedical expenses and wages lost.     Bush further asserts that an upcoming expert report "willprovide a basis for establishing IBM's liability."  IBM, saysBush, has been in possession of an affidavit that lists"documents that support [her] claims for punitive damages, strictliability and negligence."     "The documents set forth...were either produced by IBMitself in other litigation or provided to IBM in otherlitigation," says Bush.  "IBM, therefore, is fully aware of thefacts set forth in those documents and their relationship to itsliability in this matter," she adds.     Bush was one of several individuals to file productliability actions against a number of computer equipmentmanufacturers in the Eastern District of New York on April 5,1993.  Bush seeks compensatory and punitive damages, allegingthat her repetitive stress injuries were caused by her use ofcomputer equipment manufactured by defendant IBM and others whileshe was employed by the Potomac Electric Power Co.  Her claim, aswell as that of lead plaintiff Joan P. Smith and anotherplaintiff, was transferred to the U.S. District Court for theDistrict of Columbia on May 27, 1994.     IBM moved for summary judgment on Dec. 6, arguing thatBush's complaint was untimely filed.  IBM asserted that NewYork's three-year statute of limitations is controlling and,citing to Wallen and In re New York County Data Entry WorkersLitigation, No. 499000/93 (NY Sup. Ct., New York Cty., Aug. 17,1994), argued that a repetitive stress injury plaintiff's causeof action accrues from the onset of symptoms.  IBM argued thatboth Bush's medical records and her own deposition indicate thatshe had symptoms of repetitive stress injury as early as March1985, some eight years prior to filing suit.     IBM also filed a motion to dismiss, maintaining that Bush'sresponse to Magistrate Judge Deborah A. Robinson's order tocompel Bush to respond to discovery was "woefully inadequate."In the motion, IBM argued that it still lacked "(1) any evidenceof wrongdoing on the part of IBM; (2) a complete medical historyof the plaintiff; and (3) an itemized list of the damages atissue."     Counsel for Bush are Marc P. Weingarten and Kim PalavoyKutler of Greitzer and Locks in Philadelphia; and Bardyl R.Tirana, Washington, DC.  Counsel for IBM are John B. Isbister andJennifer Holmes of Tydings & Rosenberg in Baltimore.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996D NJ DECLINES TO APPLY DISCOVERY EXCEPTION TO CAUSE OF ACTIONACCRUAL     In a letter opinion filed Dec. 12, U.S. District JudgeNicholas H. Politan of the District of New Jersey granted summaryjudgment in favor of manufacturers of the computer equipmentcited as the cause of a plaintiff's repetitive stress injuries.Sprueill v. NCR Corp. et al., No. 94-2233 (D NJ).               The judge held that the complaint was time-barred under NewYork's three-year statute of limitations.     In their motions for summary judgment, defendants NCR Corp.,Applied Digital Data Systems, an NCR subsidiary, and Hazeltine,Inc. argued that since plaintiff Mary Sprueill admitted to havingceased using their equipment more than three years before shefiled her complaint, the complaint was clearly untimely.     Sprueill argued that the complaint was timely with respectto these defendants because it was filed within one year of herdiscovery of the defendants' fault in causing her injuries.However, Judge Politan disagreed.  Citing to Wallen v. AT&T,No. 12336/91 (NY Sup. Ct., Bronx Cty., Sept. 17, 1992), JudgePolitan held that the discovery exception to the statute oflimitations is not applicable to repetitive stress injury claims.Also rejected was Sprueill's argument that her claim was timelyunder the theory of a continuing duty to warn.  "This theory hasrepeatedly been rejected by courts," Judge Politan said.     Defendants Digital Equipment Corp. and Wyse Technology movedfor summary judgment as well, arguing that Sprueill's actionagainst them was also time-barred because her cause of actionaccrued from the date of injury or symptoms of injury.  Sprueilladmitted to having pain as early as 1979, noted the defendants.     Sprueill argued against summary judgment on the basis thatshe had suffered new injuries during the statutory period thatwere qualitatively different from her prior injuries.  Sprueillcited the certification of Dr. Sandra N. Mohr to the effect thatshe had been diagnosed with tenosynovitis in her right fingers,flexor tenosynovitis of the wrists, and ulnar neuritis within thelast three years.     However, Judge Politan found Mohr's certification to beinadequate to deflect the defendants' motions for summaryjudgment.     "Dr. Mohr...never examined plaintiff before August of 1991,"said Judge Politan.  "Additionally, Dr. Mohr admits that therewere no medical records in existence prior to Oct. 9, 1989, whichshe could have reviewed regarding plaintiff's injuries," headded.  "Hence, the certification is based on Dr. Mohr's purespeculation, rather than any relevant medical facts," JudgePolitan concluded.     Sprueill filed her complaint in the U.S. District Court forthe Eastern District of New York on March 29, 1993.  In thecomplaint, Sprueill contends that her use of computer equipmentmanufactured by the defendants during her employment was thecause of her cervical radiculopathy, bilateral carpal tunnelsyndrome, and trigger finger syndrome.     The complaint cites causes of action in negligence andstrict products liability.  Sprueill asserts that she usedcomputer equipment manufactured by Unisys Corp. (formerlyBurroughs Corp.) until 1970; equipment manufactured by NCR until1979; equipment manufactured by Applied until 1989; equipmentmanufactured by Hazeltine until 1989; equipment manufactured byWyse through 1990; and equipment manufactured by Digital until1991.  Sprueill's action was transferred to the U.S. DistrictCourt for the District of New Jersey on April 20, 1994.  UnisysCorp. was dismissed as a defendant by order of Aug. 7, 1995.     Counsel for Sprueill was Arnold Carl Lakind of Szaferman,Lakind, Blumstein, Watter & Blader, P.C., Lawrenceville, NJ.Counsel for NCR and Applied was Lynne J. Urbanowicz of Edwards &Angell, Newark, NJ.  Counsel for Hazeltine was Thomas R. Curtinof Ribis, Graham, Verdon & Curtin, Morristown, NJ.  Counsel forWyse was Michael J. Tartini of Minichino & Mautone, P.A.  Counselfor Digital was Peter Russell Freed of Smith, Stratton, Wise,Heher & Brennan, Princeton, NJ.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996EEOC SAYS RSI SCREENING TESTS VIOLATED ADA     The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has accusedRockwell International Corp. of violating the Americans withDisabilities Act by conducting pre-employment testing designed toscreen out applicants with repetitive stress injuries and otherdisabilities.  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission v.Rockwell International Corp. et al., No. 95-3824 (ND IL).     In its amended complaint filed Dec. 14, the EEOC seeksinjunctive relief and compensatory and punitive damages for the12 rejected applicants who filed charges with the EEOC.     According to published reports, the 12 who filed charges hadapplied for work at Rockwell's auto parts plant in Centralia, IL,but were denied employment when they failed nerve conductionstudies designed to reveal RSIs or a propensity to incur RSIs.ADA regulations require that medical tests given to jobapplicants be job-related and consistent with the needs of thebusiness.  The EEOC has questioned the validity of nerveconduction studies as an indicator for RSIs.     The complaint alleges that Rockwell violated Sections102(a), 102(b)(1), and 102(b)(6) of the ADA, 42 U.S.C. Sections12112(a), 12112(b)(1), and 12112(b)(6), by "(a) failing to hirethe individuals listed...and other individuals because itperceived them to have a disability within the meaning of theADA; (b) using employment tests that screen out a class ofindividuals perceived to have disabilities; [and] (c) failing tohire the individuals listed...and other individuals because theyhad a record of a disability within the meaning of the ADA."     The complaint asserts that Rockwell's engagement indiscriminatory employment practices was intentional and was donewith "malice or reckless indifference to the federally protectedrights of a class of individuals perceived to have disabilities."     Also named in the complaint is Cambridge Industries, Inc. asthe successor to Rockwell at its Centralia facility.  Cambridgepurchased the facility from Rockwell in August 1994 and hascontinued the operation since then.  According to the complaint,Cambridge had notice of the charges at the time of the purchase.     Representing the EEOC are Jean Powers Kamp, Gordon G.Waldron and John C. Hendrickson of its Chicago office.Representing Rockwell International are Richard H. Schnadig andNina G. Stillman of Vedder, Price, Kaufman & Kammholz in Chicago.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996MANUFACTURERS GROUP REPORTS ON RSIs     "Many misconceptions exist concerning the associationbetween upper extremity musculoskeletal disorders and officework," the Office Ergonomics Research Committee (OERC) said in areport released Jan. 4, entitled "Musculoskeletal Disorders inthe U.S. Office Workforce."     "There is little scientific evidence on the exact causes of[repetitive stress injuries] and the value of prescribedinterventions," the OERC says.  It adds that "[a] long term,international research strategy is required to fill the voids inour understanding."     The OERC makes note of U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics datathat shows growth in the number of RSIs reported from 1990 to1994.  The statistics show that the number of these injuries hasalmost doubled in that period from 185,000 annually to 332,000.However, the OERC notes that RSIs accounted for only 4.9% of alloccupational injuries in 1994, and that the rate of increase inthese injuries has lessened since 1993.     The report goes on to examine the state of research intoinput devices, such as computer keyboards; pointing devices, suchas computer mouses; workstation ergonomics; psychosocialinfluences; medical considerations; and exercise.     For example, the report cites a University of Rochesterstudy that found that keyboard users strike the keys four to fivetimes harder than necessary to activate the key.  The reportnotes that the same study revealed that workers with symptoms ofRSIs strike the keys harder than do workers without symptoms.     The report also cites a study by the National Institute onOccupational Safety and Health that evaluated 127 exercisesrecommended for keyboard users.  While the exercises were easilyperformed in the office environment, 90% were seen asquestionable for workers with acute or chronic musculoskeletaldisorders, and 40% were judged to duplicate the "biomedicaldemands" of keyboard use, says the OERC.     The report concludes with descriptions of research projectsin the areas that the OERC has fully or partially funded.  Onesuch study by the University of California at San Francisco (UC-SF) seeks to determine whether using a computer mouse causesmuscle fatigue and whether there is a difference in the fatigueresulting from using a mouse with a drag lock compared to anormal mouse.  The report says that an earlier UC-SF study showedthat mouses are being used 31% of the time in word processingapplications and 65% of the time in graphics applications.     The OERC, a group composed of U.S. companies "concerned byreports of an increasing number of [RSIs] among office workers,"was formed in April 1991.  Its members include 3M, AppleComputer, AT&T Global Information Solutions Corp., CompaqComputer Corp. and Digital Equipment Corp.  The OERC lists as itsobjectives: (1) the development of "an understanding of officerelated [RSIs]"; (2) determining "the effect, if any, that officework has on causing or exacerbating them"; (3) identifying theinterventions that "are successful in preventing or resolvingthem"; and (4) ascertaining "whether appropriate medicaltreatment is generally available to deal with them."Back to Headline List CopyrightREPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 22, 19968TH CIR.: EVIDENTIARY ERROR WAS OF APPELLANT'S MAKING     A panel of the Eighth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals Dec. 20declined to overturn a district court ruling that found no badfaith in an employer's initial refusal to pay workers'compensation to a worker disabled by carpal tunnel syndrome.Roth v. Homestake Mining Co. of California, No. 95-1073(8th Cir.).     The district court's alleged error in allowing the fact ofthe employer's eventual agreement to settle the workers'compensation claim was of the plaintiff's own making and was notreversible, the panel said.     According to the record before the panel, Monty L. Rothbecame permanently and totally disabled in 1990 due to theeffects of carpal tunnel syndrome after 18 years of employmentwith Homestake Mining Co.  When Homestake refused to pay hisworkers' compensation claim, Roth filed a petition with the SouthDakota Department of Labor's Division of Labor and Management.Some three years later, during an administrative hearingconducted by that agency, Homestake agreed to settle Roth's claimfor $326,000.     However, Roth had filed a bad-faith action in federaldistrict court prior to the settlement.  In this suit, Rothsought actual and punitive damages.  A jury subsequently returnedthe verdict that Homestake had not acted in bad faith.               Roth appealed, arguing that the district court abused itsdiscretion in allowing the fact of the settlement into evidencewhile not allowing him to show that one-third of the settlementamount had been given to his attorney.     The Eighth Circuit panel, in a decision written by JudgePasco M. Bowman, affirmed the judgment of the district court.     The panel held that Roth's argument was "fatally flawedbecause it proceeds from the premise that Homestake introducedthe evidence of the settlement amount."     "The record reveals, however, that Roth, not Homestake,introduced the exhibit that included the settlement amount...whenhe included the exhibit in his pre-trial exhibit book," the panelsaid.  Roth was aware that the district court had ruled toexclude the payment to the attorney, but failed to withdraw theexhibit in a timely manner, noted the panel.  The panel held thatthere was no abuse of discretion on the part of the districtcourt where the complained-of error was invited by the partyseeking reversal of the judgment.     Absent a showing of bad faith on the part of Homestake, thepanel declined to consider Roth's argument that the districtcourt erred when it refused to submit the issue of punitivedamages to the jury.  "Homestake cannot be liable for punitivedamages absent a finding of bad faith," the panel said.     Representing Roth was Charles Lefholz in Rapid City, SD.Representing Homestake were Bradley Paul Gordon and A. PeterFuller of Fuller & Tellinghuisen in Lead, SD.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996MO CT. APP. FINDS INSURER AT TIME OF DISABILITY LIABLE FORBENEFITS     The workers' compensation insurer at the time a repetitivestress disability begins is liable for benefits, even if thedisease is diagnosed earlier while a different policy is ineffect, the Missouri Court of Appeals said in a unanimous Dec. 12opinion.  Oberg v. American Recreational Products et al.,No. 67026 (MO Ct. App.).     The panel declined to impose liability on the predecessorinsurer whose policy was in effect at the time of diagnosis butnot of disability.     Kathryn Oberg started work at American Recreational Productsin October 1987, sewing rope into tent hems.  In December 1988,she was diagnosed with bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome.  Thenext month, she underwent release surgery on her right hand only.She resumed work after surgery.  She underwent release surgery onher left hand on Oct. 3, 1989, three days after Liberty MutualInsurance replaced Home Insurance Co. as her employer's workers'compensation carrier.     After Oberg applied for disability benefits, anadministrative law judge found Liberty Mutual to be the insurerat risk and awarded benefits for 17.5% permanent partialdisability.  The Labor and Industrial Relations Commissionmodified by holding Home Insurance Co. liable rather than LibertyMutual.  Home was not a party to the claim.     The Court of Appeals, Eastern District, reinstated LibertyMutual's liability in an opinion by Judge Kent E. Karohl.Because Liberty Mutual's policy was in effect when Oberg's leftcarpal tunnel syndrome became disabling, Liberty Mutual isresponsible for the award of benefits, the court said.  Althoughthe diagnosis predated that policy, there was no evidence ofdisability until after the Liberty Mutual policy took effect, thecourt said.  As a result, Oberg would have been unable to file aclaim until a disability existed.     It also noted that Liberty Mutual was the insurer when Obergwas last exposed to the risk, namely the day before surgery.     Last, the court found the Commission's award against Homeimproper because Home was never a party and did not participatein the case.     There was no dispute over the amount of the award or whetherOberg's RSI was an occupational disease caused by the repetitiveactivity of her job.     Nile Griffiths of St. Louis represented Oberg.  Deborah L.Hellmann of St. Louis appeared for Liberty Mutual.Back to Headline List CopyrightREPETITIVE STRESS INJURY LIT. REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996PHYSICIAN'S INPUT TO DISABILITY RATING DEEMED INADMISSIBLE     A panel of the New Mexico Court of Appeals has reversed andremanded a workers' compensation judge's determination of thedisability rating of a worker with carpal tunnel syndrome.Jurado v. Levi Strauss & Co., No. 15,396 (NM Ct. App.)     The panel ruled that the testimony of a physician, on whichthe rating was partially based, was inadmissible under New Mexicolaw.     Olga Jurado suffered an injury to her wrists and hands whileworking at the "hem line" station of the Levi Strauss plant inRoswell, NM, on Dec. 11, 1991.  She ceased working on March 5,1992, and has not returned to work.  She had carpal tunnelrelease surgeries in March and June 1992.  On May 14, 1993,Jurado's orthopedist, a Dr. Allegretto, adjudged that she hadreached maximum medical improvement.  Allegretto assigned a 5%impairment rating to each upper extremity, which translated to a6% impairment for the "whole person."               However, Jurado also complained of pain in her neck sinceher injury.  After a number of doctors could find no explanationfor her symptoms, Jurado sought out the opinion of an independentmedical examiner, Dr. Guy R. Fogel.  Fogel examined Jurado andestablished her permanent partial impairment rating to the bodyas a whole at 5% for her neck and shoulder condition.     A workers' compensation judge (WCJ), Peter L. Dinelli,subsequently awarded Jurado a 14% permanent partial disabilityrating by adding the ratings established by Drs. Allegretto andFogel to a 3% rating for Jurado's "specific vocationalpreparation."     Prior to determining Jurado's disability rating, the WCJ haddenied Levi Strauss's motion in limine to exclude Fogel's report.Levi Strauss had argued that Fogel's report was inadmissibletestimony under NMSA Section 52-1-51(C) because Fogel was neitherJurado's "authorized health care provider" nor an independentmedical examiner (IME) agreed to by the parties or selected bythe WCJ on petition by the parties.  The WCJ determined thatFogel's report was not "testimony" within the meaning of Section52-1-51(C) since it was "undertaken to determine impairmentratings needed to calculate disability pursuant to the statutoryformula."     Levi Strauss appealed, arguing that the WCJ erred in findingFogel's report admissible under Section 52-1-51(C).     In its Nov. 1 opinion, the appellate panel agreed with LeviStrauss and reversed the WCJ's denial of its motion in limine.It noted that NMSA Section 52-1-51(C) limited physician testimonyat workers' compensation hearings to providers who had treatedthe workers and to IMEs agreed to by the parties or selected bythe WCJ on petition by the parties.     The panel said that it was clear, as did the WCJ, that Fogelhad not provided continuing medical care to Jurado.  The panelalso ruled that Fogel was not selected as an IME under thestatute since he was unilaterally chosen by Jurado.  The WCJ hadnoted this fact as well.  However, the panel held that the WCJhad misconstrued Workers' Compensation Act Rule 92.4.3E asstanding "for the proposition that the medical opinions of ahealth care provider prepared in the form of a written report donot constitute testimony under Section 52-1-52(C)."     "The fact that it was 'undertaken to determine impairmentratings needed to calculate disability pursuant to the statutoryformula' does not mean that it is admissible," said the panel.It added that "[t]he Act does not authorize such an evaluationexcept in connection with ongoing care from authorized treatinghealth care providers, ...or IMEs in situations where medicalissues are in dispute."     Counsel for Jurado was James G. Chakeres in Albuquerque.Counsel for Levi Strauss was Bryan D. Evans of Atwood, Malone,Mann & Turner, P.A. in Roswell.Back to Headline List WT03-B09-11IA087-000629-B021-61http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/me04.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035602 text/html 40124HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:54:04 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:56 GMTContent-length: 39937Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/me04.html Sample Issue Copyright TRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNet January 17, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Baboon bone marrow recipient Jeff Getty leaves hospital three weeks after historic transplant (895 words) Conservative physician group seeks investigation of Getty Transplant (153 words) After death sentence overturned, convicted confict causes controversy by seeking liver transplant (591 words) Japanese effort to pass donation legislation tabled again; 1995 controversies may have hurt cause (453 words) Newspaper poll reveals 70% of Japanese support organ transplants from brain dead donor (240 words) Transplant coordinators society formed to increase international communication (314 words) New Jersey law requires hospitals to report all deaths to state's OPO (196 words) Pennsylvania implements law which appropriates $300,000 to donor awareness trust fund (121 words) Wisconsin swine center fire kills 700 pigs; many had been used in transpalnt research (158 words) AMA "temporarily suspends" policy regarding procurement of organs from anencephalics (446 words) 1996 International Transplant Directory available from Transplant News in Feb. (553 words) Names in the News (274 words) Immunex receives FDA clearance to market Leukine as growth factor for peripheral blood progenitor cells (197 words) CryoLife awarded ISO 9001 Certification of its system for manufacturing of human, porcine heart valves (133 words) CellPro says FDA advisory committee will review its PMA for CEPRATE in late February (233 words) Medical Industry Conference Calendar Available (160 words) CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Baboon bone marrow recipient Jeff Getty leaveshospital three weeks after historic transplantThree weeks after undergoing an historic transfusion of baboon bonemarrow, AIDS patient Jeff Getty walked out of San Francisco GeneralHospital with a smile and an admonition - "To the naysayers whosaid that I would never recover from this procedure, well, here Iam.  And you were wrong."While the long-term prognosis on the success or failure of theexperimental procedure remains anybody's guess, the 38-year-oldGetty left the hospital with no signs of diseases endemic tobaboons, telling wellwishers, "It feels like I just came from themoon."  "So far, the only thing we can really conclude is that theprocedure was safe, safer than we had initially expected. Jefftolerated everything very well," said Steven Deeks, MD, whoperformed the procedure.  "The more critical question, aboutwhether or not this procedure actually provided any benefit forJeff, remains unclear.  Quite honestly, we just don't know."Getty will be seen as an outpatient three times a week for the nextfew weeks and if his recovery is deemed satisfactory, on a weeklybasis thereafter.  Blood drawn will be routinely sent to theCenters for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and Susan Ilstad,MD, the University of Pittsburgh researcher who developed theunique procedure and led the fight to get the Food and DrugAdministration (FDA) to approve the transplant. "We'll monitor him for six months at a minimum and hope to find thebaboon blood all through his blood stream looking for the virus,"Dr. Ilstad said in a Jan. 17 interview on ABC's Prime Time Live. In response to a question about the chance of an outbreak of aunknown baboon virus in humans, Dr. Ilstad answered curtly, "zero."However, the media was rife with articles and interviewsquestioning whether the transplant might lead to an "ebola-like"virus outbreak.  "This is a serious mistake," said Jonathan Allen, a primatevirologist, in an interview with Time magazine.  "It only takes onetransmission from one baboon to a human to start an epidemic.There's no way you can make it safe." Allen, who works for the Southwest Foundation for BiomedicalResearch in San Antonio, TX, the institution that supplied thebaboon for the experiment, also told the Washington Post that"baboons are an infectious disease nightmare."The FDA and CDC, the government agencies in charge of monitoringpublic health safety, are both said to be close to finalizing draftguidelines researchers and transplant teams will be urged to follow"voluntarily." Late last year, CDC's Louisa Chapman, MD, and five colleaguesobserved that a formal system of oversight must be established tostudy the implications of xenografting on society ."Clinicians and policy makers alike must recognize that althoughxenotransplantation promises benefits for specific patients, thatpromise is accompanied by an unquantifiable but undeniablepotential for harm to the wider community," wrote Dr. Chapman andfive colleagues in the New England Journal of Medicine (33 (22):1498-1501).  "Thus, in this new field the determination of whatconstitutes an acceptable risk in the balance between caution andprogress is a matter of public concern, not merely a private matterfor individual scientists, physicians and patients to decide."Alluding to Getty's (then) pending transplant, Dr. Chapman, et.aladded:  "If the risk of xenotransplant-associated infections isrestricted to the recipient, it simply constitutes one more factoraffecting the risks and benefits of transplantation.  However,there may be wider implications for the human community."Providing a preview of what the transplant community may expect tosee in the guidelines, the authors wrote: "Therefore, beforeproceeding further with xenotransplantation, we need amultidisciplinary consensus to facilitate the development ofmeasures designed to protect the safety of all, to indicate thedirections of further research, and to advance well-designedclinical trials as the use of xenogeneic tissue makes thetransition from animal models to medical practice."Phil Noguchi, MD, director of the FDA's division of cell and genetherapy and one of the authors of the report, told Transplant Newsthe NEJM article was not aimed at reining in current research beingconducted by biotech companies."Some companies took hits after the article but they have all beenworking closely with the FDA over the past year and half and theconcerns listed in the article are not aimed at them," Dr. Noguchisaid.Dr. Noguchi said the FDA guidelines will concentrate on how thexenografting process is carried out (could human's be infected withan animal virus), quality control to protect the patient, and doesthe process work (efficacy)."The process doesn't need to be a pharmaceutical model as in thepast," Dr. Noguchi added.  "There is a challenge to come up witha community based model.  We want to create a real revolution wherepatient need is the center of the regulation, not the productmaker."In the meantime, the transplant industry, AIDS community andfederal regulators will closely follow Getty's progress."If I let everyone have a sample of me who wants one, I'd be cutup in a million pieces," Getty told Prime Time Live.When asked his opinion of what had happened, Getty responded: "Ihave an intuitive feeling we have engraftment.  However, I do knowthis, we are going the learn something no matter what."Back to Headline List CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Conservative physician group seeksinvestigation of Getty TransplantThe Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, described as aconservative think tank for 3,500 physicians, has asked the federalOffice for Protection from Research Risks, to investigate whetherthe baboon bone marrow transplant to AIDS patient, Jeff Getty,could endanger the public.The group told the agency baboons carry numerous pathogens theyfear could infect people through such operations.The Physicians Committee specifically asked the Risks office tostudy whether the approval to go ahead with the operation by theFood and Drug Administration (FDA) was appropriate.  The Risksoffice is part of the National Institutes of Health and has acharge of guarding against dangerous medical research.Responding to the charges, Mary Pendergast, FDA deputycommissioner, noted, "The FDA's role was to build in more cautionto make (the experiment) safer than when it came to us," adding theagency is sure the experimental operation can withstand thescrutiny.Back to Headline List CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996After death sentence overturned,convicted confict causes controversyby seeking liver transplantA 400-pound convicted murderer who was spared the hangman's noosebecause a federal judge ruled his weight might have resulted in hisdecapitation has triggered yet another controversy in the state ofWashington because he needs a liver transplant.The unusual case has generated considerable media attention bothon the judge's ruling and the need for a transplant. The state's Attorney General Christine Gregoire is seeking to havethe medical records of the inmate, Mitchell Rupe, opened sotaxpayers and the victims' families should know more about it,United Press International reported."The public has a right to know Rupe's medical condition," Gregoiresaid.  "Mitch Rupe already has made his medical condition a matterof public record...He can't have it both ways."Rupe, who was convicted of slaying two women bank tellers inOlympia, WA, gained notoriety last year when a federal judgeoverturned his death sentence, ruling he could not be hangedbecause his weight might cause decapitation, and that would becruel and unusual punishment, UPI reported.Under Washington law, a condemned inmate has the choice of hangingor lethal injection and if he does not choose - as Rupe did not -he must be hanged.  It was that loophole that got the deathsentence overturned.  The state has appealed to the 9th U.S.Circuit Court of Appeal.Citing a provision of state law that says medical records areconfidential, corrections officials have refused to confirm areport saying Rupe was undergoing evaluation for a livertransplant.The case has created an uproar in the media and the public, aspokesperson for the Department of Corrections told TransplantNews.  "It has raised the blood pressure of the general public,"she said."The issue is confidentiality of medical records and it is adilemma," said the spokesperson.  "We have read the law and itcontradictory on the matter so we have asked the courts to decide."A ruling on the confidentiality is expected Jan. 26 or 27 thespokesperson said.  "If they rule we can release the data, we willdo so ASAP," she added.The furor also is fueling the threat of legislation being passedin the Washington legislation to ban any incarcerated offender fromreceiving a transplant."That would be a real problem," the spokesperson pointed out. "What if someone is on dialysis and a transplant could reduce thecosts of treatment significantly?  Or what if it is a mother witha couple of children who is a first time offender?  If legislationis passed it could cast a wide blanket over all."The Northwest Organ Procurement Agency has received only a fewcalls and only one torn up donor card, Karyn Denton, the OPOdirector told Transplant News."We were asked to refer all calls to the Department of Correctionsand that's what we have done," Denton said.Is the public outraged?  "We have just received a stack of mailfrom the governor's office," the corrections spokesperson said. "Many are sending in torn up donor cards.  People are so angry. We're telling people it is a personal decision but we hope theywon't hurt someone else by not donating just because of this case."Rupe is not on the waiting list for a liver at this time. However the courts decide, a thorny question will remain to beanswered: given the current donor shortage, should an expensive,life-saving liver transplant be considered to keep Rupe alive whenhe may eventually be executed? Back to Headline List CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Japanese effort to pass donation legislation tabled again; 1995 controversies may have hurt causeWhile the Japanese Diet is still struggling to come to adoptlegislation that will allow organ transplants from patientsdeclared brain dead, two scandals in recent months have possiblyadded to the difficulties of gaining passage any time soon.On Dec. 14 the Committee on Health Welfare of the Lower Housedecided that the Organ Transplant Bill, first presented in April1994, should be deliberated on a continual basis in futurecommittee meetings.  The action marked the sixth time the bill hasbeen shelved, according to Comline Japan Daily.Two weeks later, the Japanese official in charge of overseeingJapan's kidney transplant network admitted a faulty computer systemhad prevented three patients from receiving transplants after 1,006names were deleted from the waiting list and 395 were erroneouslylisted as deceased.Teruo Omae, executive director of the network, explained the oldcomputer system at the national hospital in Sakura, ChibaPrefecture, was defective and there had been problems with thetransfer of new information to a new system initiated last April,the Kyodo News Service reported.There are approximately 18,000 patients registered as waiting fora kidney in Japan.  Omae said the 1,006 lost names resulted in thepatients not receiving laboratory tests when a potential donor wasfound and three were apparently passed over who would have beengiven priority for the organs.The Health and Welfare Ministry has ordered an investigation intothe irregularities.The computer mishap caused a minor stir compared to a majorcontroversy that occurred in June which led to one of Japan's mostrenowned transplant surgeons, Professor Kazuo Ota, to apologizefor performing at least 13 transplants using kidneys that hadpreviously been rejected by the United Network for Organ Sharing(UNOS).In an article in the Lancet (Vol. 346: 41-2) and reprinted in theNovember issue of the ETCO Newsletter (European TransplantCoordinators Organization), Catrien Ross reported "at least fourof the operations done by Ota were unauthorized because they tookplace" after the National Kidney Transplant Network had beenlaunched last April.  Ross reported the UNOS-like network, had "specifically asked thatkidneys rejected in the U.S. not be used by Japanese surgeons. Some transplantations were allegedly done as much as 72 hours afterthe organs had been removed from the donors."Professor Ota defended his actions by saying he had been unable tocontact the network and that "he had to do the operations to ensurethat the U.S. continued to provide kidneys." UNOS has not providedorgans to Japan since early June, Ross said.Ota, a professor at Tokyo Women's Medical College, apologized for"causing trouble," and resigned as head of Japan's HemodialysisSociety.Back to Headline List CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Newspaper poll reveals 70% of Japanesesupport organ transplants from brain dead donorMore than 70% of Japanese polled in December said they supportedorgan transplants if the donor is declared brain dead and 46% werewilling to accept brain death as the death of a person, accordingto a report in the Lancet written by Catrien Ross.The nationwide poll of 3,000 eligible Japanese voters was conductedin December by the newspaper Yomiuri Shimbun.The poll also revealed about 61% supported passage of a lawpermitting transplants from patients declared brain dead, 20%opposed them, and 51% approved if the individual had given priorwritten consent.Ross also reported Soka Gakkai, Japan's largest lay Buddhistorganization, announced it will recognize brain death as thetermination of life "once the medical community has reached sucha consensus." Soka Gakkai has a membership of 8.3 million families- there are 124 million people in Japan.A report compiled by Soka Gakkai physician members saidtransplantation is "not in conflict with the organization'sBuddhist teachings," and recommends "a donor registration and donorcard-carrying system, creation of a transplant information network,training medical coordinators to arrange transplantations, and alaw to prohibit the sale of organs."The organization also favors the donation of organs from brain deadpeople only if the person has previously indicated their wish todonate.  This differs from the legislation being proposed in theDiet which would permit donation if the family of the deceasedgives consent.Back to Headline List CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Transplant coordinators society formedto increase international communicationA new international society for transplant coordinators has beenformed to increase communication and collaboration betweenindividual transplant coordinators and international associationsand societies.The society, dubbed the International Transplant CoordinatorsSociety (ITCS), has elected a board and plans to hold meetings andseminars to provide professional education for its members.Leo Roels, scientific program director of the ITCS, told TransplantNews the aims of the society include:"*fostering communication and collaboration amongst transplantcoordinators individually as well as with national andinternational associations or societies interested in the field oftransplantation, transplant coordination and related subjects;*providing its membership and the general public information on aninternational level concerning organ/tissue donation and thebenefits of organ and tissue transplantation;*providing professional education to its membership with a goal ofenhancing the profession of transplant coordinator.  The educationmay take the form of a biennial meeting with the presentation ofabstracts, formation of specific educational meetings, orendorsement of existing educational programs of transplantcoordinator societies and/or organizations;*promoting research and providing a forum for the presentation ofresearch findings on organ and tissue donation, procurement andtransplantation."Roels says the ITCS hopes to organize an international meeting inconjunction with the 4th International Meetings of the Society forOrgan Sharing (SOS), 4th International Samuel L. Kountz Symposiumand 2nd International Non-Heart-Beating Donor Workshop, to be heldJuly 9-13, 1997 in Washington, DC.The "founding board" of the ITCS includes: President - SeigoHiraga, MD, Tokai University School of Medicine, Bohsaidai,Isahara, Kanagawa, Japan; Vice President - Greg Armstrong, RN,Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Australia; Secretary - SallyKong, LSW, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore; Treasurer - Teresa Shafer, LifeGift Organ Donation Center, FortWorth, TX; Scientific Program Director - Leo Roels, CPTC,University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium.For information contact: Roels - Phone: 32-16-344-590; Fax: 32-18-344-599Back to Headline List CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996New Jersey law requires hospitals toreport all deaths to state's OPOA new law which contains a provision requiring hospitals to reportevery death when it occurs to the state's organ procurementorganization (OPO) has been passed and signed into law in NewJersey. The new law is similar, but not as far-reaching, as legislationpassed in Pennsylvania last year.The Donor Enhancement Act streamlines the state's donation processwith the hope of easing the state's donor shortage, according tothe New Jersey Organ and Tissue Sharing Network.Gov. Christine Todd Whitman signed the act into law on Nov. 6.  Theact was sponsored by Sen. Jack Sinagra (R-Middlesex) andAssemblyman Alex DeCroce (R-Morris).Hospitals are now required to report every death when it occurs toThe Sharing Network so it can determine donor suitability.  Tosimplify the donation process, the law also eliminates the need forhospitals to complete an Organ Donation Option Certificate.Other provisions of the law include:*training for transplant coordinators on how to seek consent;*allows certified surgical specialists to perform the procurementof tissues;*mandates medical record audits of all hospital deaths (practicehad been voluntary).Contact: Mara Barlow - (201) 379-4535Back to Headline List CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Pennsylvania implements law which appropriates$300,000 to donor awareness trust fundPennsylvania has implemented a new law which appropriated $300,000to the Organ Donation Awareness Trust Fund to administer the OrganDonor Card Program.  Gov. Tom Ridge signed the bill releasing theappropriation on Dec. 20.Senate Bill 1303, sponsored by Sen. Melissa Hart (R-Allegheny),reimburses the Department of Transportation for the administrativecosts of implementing the Organ Donor Law (Act 102 of 1994).  The law also created an Organ Donor Advisory Committee to advisethe Health Department of ways to encourage organ donation. (TN,11/30/95)Gov. Ridge is encouraging Pennsylvania residents to send incontributions to the Organ Donor Awareness Trust Fund, Departmentof Health, P.O. Box 90, Harrisburg, PA 17108-0090.  Contact: Jerry Feaser - (717) 783-1116Back to Headline List CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Wisconsin swine center fire kills 700 pigs;many had been used in transpalnt researchA fire at the swine center at the University of Wisconsin-Madison'sAgricultural Research Station in Arlington killed 700 pigs,including some that were being used in organ transplant research.The fire, which occurred on Dec. 20, also 80 killed pigs that hadbeen used in a 20-year research project on cholesterol.The blaze reduced the building that housed hogs, laboratories, asurgery room, gestation, maternity and nursery wards into asmoldering pile of ashes, the Knight-Ridder Business News reported. Officials said the cost of replacing the structure would be morethan $350 million.The fire destroyed decades of agricultural, biomedical andenvironmental research as well as animals that resulted from 30years of genetic selection."I think the toughest loss is the number of years some of thescientists had invested in their research here," said David Jensen,research program manager for the Swine Research and TeachingCenter.  "These animals were indispensable to their work." Back to Headline List CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996AMA "temporarily suspends" policy regardingprocurement of organs from anencephalicsResponding to criticism from its own membership, the AmericanMedical Association (AMA) has "temporarily suspended" its policyof regarding it ethically acceptable to procure organs fromanencephalic babies.The change, which is expected to remain for the next several years,will result in reinstatement of the AMA's previous policy whichfavors prohibiting the use of anencephalic babies as organ donorsuntil they meet the legal criterion for brain death - the completecessation of brain function.In June 1994, the AMA Council on Judicial and Ethical Affairsissued its opinion that anencephalic babies could be organ donorsas long as the request to donate came from the child's parents andnot the medical establishment caring for the baby.  The original opinion read in part:  "It is ethically permissibleto consider the anencephalic as a potential organ donor, althoughstill alive under the current definition of death only if: (1) thediagnosis of anencephaly is certain and is confirmed by twophysicians who are not part of the organ transplant team; (2) theparents of the infant desire to have the infant serve as an organdonor and indicate such in writing; and (3) there is compliancewith the Council's Guidelines for the Transplantation of Organs."Charles Plows, MD, council chairman, said the change reflectedconcern about the organ donors, especially children's organs, andthe case of parents who wanted to donate the organs of theiranencephalic newborn but were not allowed to by a Florida court,the New York Times reported."They were, if you want to call it that, actually deprived ofsalvaging something from this tragic experience," Dr. Plows said,"and we were left with nothing as far as feeling that they couldcontribute something in the way of transplants."While the 1994 opinion never led to any anencephalic donationsbefore brain death, the council's opinion drew heavy criticismbecause it broke the "dead donor rule."  The American Academy of Neurology had requested that the AMA changeits position."Whatever little benefit might occur from the organs would be morethan outweighed by the damage to society," said James Bernat, MD,a neurologist at the Dartmouth Medical Center and chair of theacademy's Ethics Committee.  "Once you start killing people fortheir organs, people would begin to push the envelope.  We felt itwas better to maintain the dead donor rule even if there would befewer organs around."The AMA says the change will give researchers time to do moreresearch on the brain function of anencephalic babies.  Ofparticular interest is whether the babies have the potential toexperience any degree of consciousness.Back to Headline List CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 19961996 International Transplant Directoryavailable from Transplant News in Feb.The 1996 edition of the International TransplantDirectory,published by Transplant News, is presently beingfinalized for publication. Every section of the directory has beenupdated.In addition, several new sections have been added including a listof transplant-related website internet and World Wide Webaddresses. As an added convenience we have compiled a list ofe-mail addresses of nearly every member of the United StatesCongress.The 1996 directory is available in three formats: the popularspiral bound printed version, on floppy disc in an ASCII format,and electronic "read-only" interactive version.The directory is organized in an easy-to-use format containing thenames, addresses, phone, fax and e-mail information of every organ,tissue, eye and bone marrow procurement and transplant organizationin the world we have been able to locate.Information included in the ]996 directory includes:*transplant programs and resources available in each state.Includes every transplant center (by program - kidney; heart;liver; kidney-pancreas; heart-lung; pancreas; bone marrow) and thedirector of the program; organ procurement organization; tissuebank; eye bank; National Kidney Foundation affiliate; AmericanLiver Fund chapter; American Association of Kidney Patientschapter; and Transplant Recipients International Organizationchapter;*transplant programs and resources available in each country in theworld. Includes every transplant center (by program) with thedirector of the program and transplant advocacy groups;*all U.S. government agencies dealing with transplantation andindividuals responsible for specific programs. Agencies includeNational Institutes of Health; Health Care Financing Administration; Food and Drug Administration; Division of OrganTransplantation; Public Health Service; National Institute ofAllergy and Infectious Diseases; National Institute of Diabetesand Digestive and Kidney Diseases; and National Heart, Lung, andBlood Institute;*members of the 104th Congress serving on the committees andsubcommittees responsible for passing legislation affecting solidorgan, tissue, eye and bone marrow procurement and transplantation.Includes e-mail addresses for the Senate and House committees andmembers of congress.*national offices of all professional transplant organizations;*all pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies involved inbusiness and research in organ, tissue, eye and bone marrowtransplantation;*insurance and managed care companies with centers of excellenceprograms. The centers in each network will be are listed under theorgan covered.*U.S. and international histocompatibility laboratories.The directory also includes the dates of the annual meetings of allnational and international organizations and a phone number for acontact person.Interactive "read-only" versionThe electronic version of the 1996 directory has searchcapabilities, and includes World Wide Web page links using anInternet browser (Netscape, Mosaic, etc.). The electronic versionis written in Portable Document Format (PDF) and distributed withan Adobe Acrobat Reader (provided free with special licensingagreement). All the information in the printed version is containedin an electronic "read-only" format with easy navigation andprinting - plus the efficiency of electronic access. Hypertextnavigational links allow easy navigation through all sections. AllWorld Wide Web addresses (URLs) will be accessible through weblinksusing your Internet browser software. Versions are available in IBMor Macintosh formats. Users are licensed to print (one copy) andunlimited electronic access. A licensing agreement is provided.Transplant News subscribers receive a special discount whenordering and prepaying bsefore Feb. 22.  Call (800) 689-4262 forinformation.Back to Headline List CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Names in the News*Maree Wall has accepted the position of vice president, investorrelations and business development at SangStat, The TransplantCompany, Menlo Park, CA.  Previously, Wall was associate directorin the Transplant Business Unit at Sandoz Pharmaceuticals, EastHanover, NJ.*Denise Payne is the new executive director of the New YorkRegional Transplant Program in New York, NY.  Previously, Payne hadbeen executive director of the New Jersey Organ and Tissue SharingNetwork in Springfield, NJ.*Robert A. Metzger, MD, has been appointed full-time medicaldirector of TransLife at Florida Hospital in Orlando, FL.  Dr.Metzger was a co-founder of TransLife in 1973. *Mark Mannis, MD, has been selected to receive the 1996 R. TownleyPaton, MD Award by the Eye Bank Association of America (EBAA).  Dr.Mannis is professor of Ophthalmology at the University ofCalifornia, Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, and priorchairman of the EBAA.  The award will be presented on June 29during the EBAA Annual Meeting in Santa Barbara, CA.*Mark Kroeker, founder and chairman of the board of the WorldChildren's Transplant Fund (WCTF) is the 1995 recipient of theinternationally renowned and prestigious Raoul Wallenberg "Save TheChildren Award.  Kroeker and the WCTF is credited with being afounding member organization of the American Share Coalition onTransplantation and the Biliary Atresia & Liver Transplant Network.*Delia Blackler, executive editor of The Biliary Tree, has beenawarded the prestigious Reader's Digest 1995 Excellence inJournalism Award.  The Biliary Tree is the newsletter of theBiliary Atresia & Liver Transplant Network.  Blackler is currentlygetting her Master's in Journalism from Northwestern's MedillSchool of Journalism.Back to Headline List CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Immunex receives FDA clearance to market Leukine as growth factor for peripheral blood progenitor cells Immunex Corp., Seattle, WA, announced it has received marketingclearance from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) forLeukine(R) (sargramostim), as the first growth factor indicated foruse in mobilizing peripheral blood progenitor cells (PBPC) and foruse after PBPC transplantation.The company reports in a study of 196 patients, Leukine given tomobilize PBPCs significantly increased the number of progenitorcells collected.  When Leukine was given after transplantation withmobilized PBPSs, there was further acceleration in white blood cellrecovery.  In addition, the number of platelet transfusions andred blood cell transfusions needed was decreased and patients weredischarged from the hospital earlier when compared to patients notreceiving Leukine. Leukine was originally licensed by the FDA in March, 1991 for usefollowing autologous bone marrow transplantation (BMT) and waslicensed in Dec. 1991 to prevent death following BMT engraftmentdelay or failure. In Sept. 1995 Leukine was licensed to preventearly death from infection following induction chemotherapy forolder patients suffering from acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) In Nov. 195, Immunex also received FDA marketing clearance forLeukine's use in allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. (TN,11/30/95)Contact:  Valoree Dowell - (206) 587-0430Back to Headline List CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996CryoLife awarded ISO 9001 Certification of its system for manufacturing of human, porcine heart valvesCryoLife, Inc., Marietta, GA, has been awarded ISO 9001Certification, a worldwide system of quality assurance guidelinesfor manufacturing and laboratory companies.  The certification wasgranted by Lloyd's Register Quality Assurance, Ltd., of Croydon,England, following an independent, in-depth audit of the company'squality management systems, as applied to processing andmanufacturing of human and porcine tissue heart valves.CryoLife says it is one of only about 8,000 U.S. companies thathave passed the ISO 9001 quality certification series and believesit is the only the only processor of human tissue to have receivedsuch certification.Steve Anderson, CryoLife president and CEO, says the certificationwill permit "virtually unrestricted commercial distribution of theCompany's line of stentless porcine heart valves within theEuropean Community."Contact: Suzanne Gabbert - (800) 438-8285 Back to Headline List CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996CellPro says FDA advisory committee will reviewits PMA for CEPRATE in late February CellPro, Inc., Seattle, WA, has received notification from the FDAthat the company's pre-market approval application (PMA) for theCEPRATE(R) SC Stem Cell Concentration System will be reviewed bythe FDAs Biological Response Modifiers Advisory Committee in lateFebruary.  The CEPRATE SC System completed a Phase III clinicaltrial in autologous bone marrow transplantation in May 1993, andCellPro filed a PMA with the FDA in December of that year.  In Dec.1994, the FDA requested additional information from the company,which was provided in Aug. and Sept. 1995.The CEPRATE SC System is CellPro's first product to completeclinical testing in the U.S.  The CEPRATE SC System is a medicaldevice that separates human stem cells from the other cells of thebone marrow of peripheral blood.CellPro began sales of the CEPRATE SC System in Europe during 1993. The product received the CE mark for marketing approval from the18-nation European Economic Union in July 1995 and ISO 9002 qualitycertification in Sept. 1995.  In addition to countries in Europe,the company has marketing approval for the CEPRATE SC System inCanada.The system is currently being used in clinical trials for variousapplications at over 175 institutions in the U.S. and Europe.  Thecompany's CEPRATE LC Laboratory Cell Separation System line ofproducts for nonclinical research is available worldwide.Contact: Lee M. Parker - (206) 485-7644Back to Headline List CopyrightTRANSPLANT NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Medical Industry Conference Calendar AvailableBiomedical Market Newsletter, Inc., is accepting orders for it 1996Medical Industry Conference Calendar Directory, 5th Annual Edition. It includes meeting dates, topics, complete address and contactinformation, phone, fax, e-mail, Internet World Wide Web home pageaddresses and expected attendance.Meetings featured include: medical industry, biomed, biotech,devices, equipment, instruments, pharmaceuticals, managed care,research, hospital and providers.  For the first time, the directory is available in a database diskversion that is searchable by topic or subject matter.  Informationcan also be sorted by any of the database fields and mailing labelsand mail merge letters can be printed.The special pre-publication, pre-paid prices are: $45.00 for theprinted version (plus $5.00 shipping and handling; $10.00international) plus 7.75% tax for CA residents only;  ($95.00 forthe floppy disk version (IBM or Mac) plus shipping and handling. Call (800) 875-8181 or (714) 434-9500 to order.  Or write: BMN,3237 Idaho Place, Costa Mesa, CA 92626-2207Back to Headline List WT03-B09-12IA087-000629-B021-100http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/po03.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035656 text/html 66121HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:54:48 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:14 GMTContent-length: 65934Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/po03.html Sample Issue Copyright ASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNet January 1, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES MYANMAR OPPOSITION LEADER TIN U GIVEN JAIL SENTENCE+ (111 words) CHINA DENIES REPORT+ (118 words) N. KOREA EVENTUALLY TO TAKE REFORM POLICY+ (66 words) NORTH KOREAN JUDGES LIKELY TO VISIT SEOUL+ (122 words) ROMANIAN EMBASSY IN BEIJING BACKS NATIONAL FRONT+ (76 words) 301 CHINESE DEPORTEES ARRIVE IN FUJIAN PROVINCE+ (174 words) NAKAYAMA TO VISIT THAILAND, MALAYSIA JANUARY 2-6+ (156 words) SEOUL HOPES CEAUSESCU'S FALL MAY ENCOURAGE N. KOREA REFORM+ (503 words) CHINESE INTELLECTUALS OPPOSE PARTY IDEOLOGY, SAYS PAPER+ (218 words) RANKING PHILIPPINES COMMUNIST PARTY OFFICIAL ESCAPES+ (346 words) CHINA TO GIVE AID, MAINTAIN FRIENDLY TIES WITH ROMANIA+ (151 words) CHINA HINTS AT RECOGNITION OF NEW ROMANIAN GOVERNMENT+ (161 words) N. KOREA RECOGNIZES NEW ROMANIAN GOV'T+ (204 words) INDONESIAN PAPER COMPARES CEAUSESCU TO DRACULA+ (219 words) PHILIPPINES RECOGNIZES NEW ROMANIAN GOV'T+ (109 words) KOREAN, NEPALESE CLIMBERS DEAD IN NEPAL CLIMB+ (214 words) PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON ILL-GOTTEN WEALTH RESIGNS+ (269 words) N. KOREA HOLDS EMERGENCY SESSION OVER EAST EUROPE+ (295 words) S. KOREA, YUGOSLAVIA SET UP FULL DIPLOMATIC TIES+ (141 words) KIM IL SUNG CONGRATULATES NEW ROMANIAN PRESIDENT+ (126 words) CHINESE ARMY REFUSED TO CRUSH BEIJING DEMOS, PAPER SAYS+ (439 words) MARTIAL LAW STAYS IN BEIJING AFTER CEAUSESCU'S DEMISE+ (229 words) INDIA TO WITHDRAW TROOPS IN SRI LANKA BY NEXT MARCH+ (263 words) THAI HOSTESS INDICTED FOR VIOLATING IMMIGRATION LAW+ (131 words) INDONESIA TO RECOGNIZE NEW ROMANIAN GOVERNMENT+ (90 words) PHILIPPINE INVESTIGATORS LINK ENRILE TO COUP+ (317 words) THAI DEPUTY PREMIER BHICHAI RESIGNS+ (227 words) JIANG ZEMIN PLANS TO VISIT N. KOREA IN SPRING+ (125 words) PHILIPPINES TO EXPAND INDOCHINESE REFUGEE CENTER+ (281 words) COMMUNIST REBELS CLAIM STRAFING OF U.S. INFORMATION CENTER+ (185 words) CHINA DENIES ANY IMPACT FROM ROMANIAN REVOLUTION+ (85 words) CHINA HINTS AT SOVIET "PRESSURE" ON EASTERN EUROPE+ (249 words) NEPAL-INDIA DISPUTE CAN BE RESOLVED, INDIAN PREMIER SAYS+ (165 words) PHILIPPINE TRANSPORTATION SECRETARY RESIGNS+ (159 words) CHINA MAKES CONTRADICTORY RESPONSE TO ROMANIAN REVOLUTION+ (328 words) IRIANESE, ASYLUM SEEKERS LEAVE NEW GUINEA CONSULATE+ (147 words) BEIJING STUDENTS HECKLE TO CHINESE PARTY OFFICIAL+ (356 words) 5,000 MIGRANTS SLEEPING ROUGH IN CHINESE CITY, REPORT SAYS+ (182 words) PAKISTAN RECOGNIZES NEW ROMANIAN GOVERNMENT+ (117 words) KWANGJU GENERAL QUITS PARLIAMENTARY POST+ (265 words) CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990MYANMAR OPPOSITION LEADER TIN U GIVEN JAIL SENTENCE+     YANGON, DEC. 23 KYODO - A MILITARY TRIBUNAL HERE ON FRIDAYSENTENCED OPPOSITION LEADER TIN U TO THREE YEARS IN JAIL ON SEDITIONCHARGES, STATE RADIO SAID.     FORMER ARMY GEN. TIN U, 63, CHAIRMAN OF THE NATIONAL LEAGUE FORDEMOCRACY (NLD), WAS GIVEN THE JAIL SENTENCE FOR ALLEGEDLY INCITINGUNREST AND TRYING TO DIVIDE THE ARMY IN AUGUST AND SEPTEMBER LASTYEAR.     HE HAS BEEN UNDER HOUSE ARREST SINCE JULY 20 ALONG WITH NLDGENERAL SECRETARY AUNG SAN SUU KYI, DAUGHTER OF THE LATE NATIONALHERO GEN. AUNG SAN.     UNDER A NEW ELECTION LAW, THE CONVICTION DEPRIVES TIN U OF HISQUALIFICATIONS TO RUN IN GENERAL ELECTIONS SLATED FOR NEXT MAY.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990CHINA DENIES REPORT+     BEIJING, DEC. 23 KYODO - CHINA SATURDAY DENIED A PRESS REPORTTHAT ROMANIAN PRESIDENT NICOLAE CEAUSESCU HAS FLED TO CHINA.     A CHINESE FOREIGN MINISTRY SPOKESMAN CALLED THE REPORT"GROUNDLESS."     AUSTRIAN NEWS AGENCY APA REPORTED FRIDAY THAT CEAUSESCU ISSEEKING ASYLUM IN CHINA.     THE OFFICIAL XINHUA NEWS AGENCY RAN A BRIEF REPORT FROM THEROMANIAN CAPITAL SATURDAY AFTERNOON, SAYING, "ROMANIA HAS FALLENINTO CHAOS SINCE FRIDAY AND THERE IS FIERCE SHOOTING IN THE CITY."     BUT CHINESE NEWSPAPERS HAVE KEPT SILENT ABOUT THE UNREST INROMANIA.     XINHUA'S REPORT SAID ANTIGOVERNMENT FORCES HAVE SEIZED ROMANIANCOMMUNIST PARTY HEADQUARTERS AND RADIO AND TV STATIONS.     XINHUA, QUOTING LOCAL REPORTS, SAID, "(PRESIDENT) NICOLAECEAUSESCU HAS LEFT THE PRESIDENTIAL PALACE AND HIS WHEREABOUTS AREUNKNOWN."Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990N. KOREA EVENTUALLY TO TAKE REFORM POLICY+     SEOUL, DEC. 23 KYODO - ROMANIAN PRESIDENT NICOLAE CEAUSESCU'SDOWNFALL EVENTUALLY WILL HELP ENCOURAGE REFORMS IN NORTH KOREA,YONHAP NEWS AGENCY SAID ON SATURDAY.     NORTH KOREA, WHICH HAS MAINTAINED CLOSE LINKS WITH ROMANIA, WILLFACE SERIOUS ISOLATION IN THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY, YONHAP SAID,QUOTING AN UNIDENTIFIED GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL.     IT SAID NORTH KOREA IS EXPECTED TO TRY REFORM AND OPEN-DOORPOLICIES, INITIALLY IN THE AREA OF ECONOMIC.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990NORTH KOREAN JUDGES LIKELY TO VISIT SEOUL+     SEOUL, DEC. 23 KYODO - TWO NORTH KOREAN ICE HOCKEY JUDGES WILLATTEND AN INSTITUTE CLASS FOR JUDGES NEXT FEBRUARY IN SEOUL, THEYONHAP NEWS AGENCY REPORTED SATURDAY.     THE REPORT SAID THE FIRST VISIT BY NORTH KOREAN SPORTS PEOPLE TOSOUTH KOREA SINCE THE KOREAN PENINSULA WAS DIVIDED IN 1948 WASCONFIRMED IN A TELEGRAM SENT BY THE INTERNATIONAL ICE HOCKEYFEDERATION TO THE SOUTH KOREAN ICE HOCKEY ASSOCIATION.     THE REPORT SAID THE INSTITUTE CLASS IS REQUIRED BEFORE THEEXPECTED VARIOUS INTERNATIONAL COMPETITIONS OF THE SPORT NEXT YEAR,SO THE JUDGES ARE EXPECTED TO ATTEND.     NORTH KOREA WILL HOST THE THIRD WINTER ASIAN GAMES IN 1995 ANDTHIS ALSO WILL WORK IN FAVOR OF SUCH A TRIP TO SEOUL, THE REPORTADDED.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990ROMANIAN EMBASSY IN BEIJING BACKS NATIONAL FRONT+     BEIJING, DEC. 24 KYODO - THE ROMANIAN EMBASSY IN BEIJING HASDECLARED ITS BACKING FOR THE NATIONAL SALVATION FRONT COUNCIL WHICHCAPTURED POWER AFTER THE GOVERNMENT OF PRESIDENT NICOLAE CEAUSESCUWAS OVERTHROWN TWO DAYS AGO.     A MINISTER AT THE EMBASSY CALLED ON THE OFFICIAL CHINESE XINHUANEWS AGENCY TO REPORT THE EMBASSY'S DECLARATION OF SUPPORT FOR THECOUNCIL.     THE MINISTER SAID HE WILL INFORM THE CHINESE FOREIGN MINISTRYOF THE EMBASSY'S BACKING FOR THE NEW REGIME.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990301 CHINESE DEPORTEES ARRIVE IN FUJIAN PROVINCE+     SHANGHAI, DEC. 24 KYODO - A CHINESE-CHARTERED SHIP CARRYING 301CHINESE WHO ENTERED JAPAN POSING AS VIETNAMESE REFUGEES ON ARRIVED ONSUNDAY IN FUZHOU IN THE SOUTHEASTERN CHINESE PROVINCE OF FUJIAN.     AFTER ARRIVING A FUZHOU PORT ABOARD THE 7,889-TON CHANG BAI, THE301 CHINESE -- 270 MEN AND 31 WOMEN -- WERE SENT TO THEIR NATIVEPROVINCES, OFFICIALS OF THE FUJIAN PROVINCIAL PEOPLE'S GOVERNMENTSAID.     THE 301 LEFT NAGASAKI PORT IN WESTERN JAPAN ON THURSDAY FORREPATRIATION TO CHINA.     CHINESE OFFICIALS SAID THAT THEY WILL TREAT THE REPATRIATEDPEOPLE IN ACCORDANCE WITH THEIR CIRCUMSTANCES AND CHINESE LAW.     THE 301 WERE AMONG 1,668 CHINESE NATIONALS THE JAPANESE JUSTICEMINISTRY HAS DECIDED TO DEPORT ON GROUNDS THAT THEY ARE NOT GENUINEREFUGEES BUT PEOPLE WHO ILLEGALLY ENTERED JAPAN TO SEEK EMPLOYMENT.     THE REMAINING 1,367 CHINESE WILL BE FORCIBLY REPATRIATED AS SOONAS CHINA CONFIRMS THEM TO BE CHINESE NATIONALS, WITH THE SECOND ROUNDOF DEPORTATIONS EXPECTED IN JANUARY.     THE FUJIAN GOVERNMENT DID NOT ALLOW JAPANESE REPORTERS TO COVERTHE ARRIVAL OF THE SHIP AT THE PORT.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990NAKAYAMA TO VISIT THAILAND, MALAYSIA JANUARY 2-6+     TOKYO, DEC. 26 KYODO - FOREIGN MINISTER TARO NAKAYAMA WILL PAYAN OFFICIAL VISIT TO THAILAND AND MALAYSIA FROM JANUARY 2 TO 6 TOHOLD TALKS WITH LEADERS OF THE TWO COUNTRIES ON THE KAMPUCHEANCONFLICT AND OTHER ISSUES, GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS SAID TUESDAY.     THE TRIP WAS CONFIRMED AT A CABINET MEETING HELD TUESDAYMORNING.     THE OFFICIALS SAID NAKAYAMA IS SCHEDULED TO STAY IN THAILAND FORTHREE DAYS BEGINING JANUARY 2 AND TO MEET PRIME MINISTER CHATICHAICHOONHAVAN AND FOREIGN MINISTER SIDDHI SAVETSILA.     THE FOREIGN MINISTER WILL VISIT MALAYSIA FROM JANUARY 4 TO 6 ANDMEET PRIME MINISTER MAHATHIR MOHAMAD AND HIS COUNTERPART ABU HASSANOMAR.     DURING HIS STAY IN KUALA LUMPUR, NAKAYAMA WILL HOLD A SPECIALMEETING WITH JAPANESE AMBASSADORS TO VIETNAM, SINGAPORE, THAILAND,SOUTH KOREA, CHINA, AND MALAYSIA TO DISCUSS THE FORMULATION OFJAPAN'S FOREIGN POLICY IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC REGION AMID THE TRENDTOWARD EAST-WEST RECONCILIATION FOLLOWING RAPID DEVELOPMENTS INEASTERN EUROPE, THE OFFICIALS SAID.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990SEOUL HOPES CEAUSESCU'S FALL MAY ENCOURAGE N. KOREA REFORM+     SEOUL, DEC. 26 KYODO - THE DRAMATIC DOWNFALL OF ROMANIA'SPRESIDENT NICOLAE CEAUSESCU WILL BRING HEAVY PRESSURE TO NORTH KOREATO REORIENT ITS CLOSED SOCIETY TOWARD OPENNESS AND REFORMS, ANALYSTSHERE SAID TUESDAY.     IT MUST HAVE COME AS A BIGGER SURPRISE THAN ANY DEVELOPMENT INOTHER EAST EUROPEAN COUNTRIES SINCE PYONGYANG HAS MAINTAINED CLOSETIES WITH ROMANIA.     NORTH KOREAN LEADERS ARE, HOWEVER, CONCENTRATING THEIR EFFORTSON MORE INTENSIVE INDOCTRINATION OF THE PEOPLE RATHER THAN COMPLYINGWITH A WAVE OF DEMOCRATIC CHANGE AND ECONOMIC REFORMS SWEEPING THEEAST BLOC, ACCORDING TO THE OBSERVERS INSIDE AND OUTSIDE THE SOUTHKOREAN GOVERNMENT.     "THE NORTH NOW SEEMS TO FEEL A SENSE OF ISOLATION FROM THEINTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY WITH THE FALL OF THE STALINIST ROMANIANLEADER WITH WHOM NORTH KOREAN LEADER KIM IL SUNG HAD SO FAR FELTAFFINITY," SAID CHOI MOON HYUN, DIRECTOR GENERAL FOR POLICY AT THENATIONAL UNIFICATION BOARD.     NORTH KOREA SENT A CONGRATULATORY MESSAGE TO CEAUSESCU ON THEOCCASION OF THE 14TH ROMANIAN COMMUNIST PARTY CONGRESS LAST MONTH INWHICH IT STRESSED A JOINT STRUGGLE AGAINST CAPITALISM.  EARLY THISMONTH, FOREIGN MINISTER KIM YONG NAM VISITED BUCHAREST TO REAFFIRMSOLIDARITY IN THE FACE OF DRASTIC CHANGES IN EASTERN EUROPE, CHOINOTED.     "PYONGYANG WILL FIND NO OPTION BUT TO TAKE A POSITIVE POSTUREIN GLASNOST AND PERESTROIKA IN THE LONG RUN.  THERE ARE SIGNS THAT ITWOULD EMERGE FROM THE LONG-HELD ISOLATION POLICY DURING THE FIRSTHALF OF NEXT YEAR, IT MAY BE SENSED IN DIALOGUE WITH THE SOUTH,"HE SAID.     CHOI BYUNG BO, SPOKESMAN FOR THE BOARD, SOUTH KOREA'S TOPUNIFICATION AUTHORITY, SAID THE NORTH MIGHT EXPERIMENT WITH OPENNESSIN ITS SLUGGISH ECONOMY AMONG OTHER FIELDS, LIKE CHINA.     "WE HEAR THAT THE PACE OF OPENNESS WAS ON THE AGENDA FOR THEMEETING KIM IL SUNG HAD WITH DENG XIAOPING DURING HIS SUDDEN VISIT TOBEIJING EARLY LAST MONTH," THE SPOKESMAN SAID.     THE ANALYSTS GENERALLY RULED OUT THE POSSIBILITY OF A SURGE FROMBELOW, SAYING THOUGH THE LEADERSHIP IS EXPECTED TO ADOPT GRADUALREFORMS FROM ABOVE.     SHIN YOUNG SUK, DIRECTOR OF THE PRIVATE, PEACE RESEARCHINSTITUTE, ATTRIBUTED THE COLLAPSE OF CEAUSESCU TO THE ROMANIANPEOPLE, AWAKENED BY A SERIES OF DEMOCRATIC CHANGES AND THE EAST-WESTTHAW IN NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES AND A LOT OF "PRO-SOVIET"GENERALS IN THE ARMED FORCES WHO SUPPORT REFORMS.     "THE CASE IS QUITE DIFFERENT FROM THAT OF NORTH KOREA.PYONGYANG'S DEPENDENCY ON MOSCOW IS NOTABLY LOW IN ITS ADROITEQUI-DISTANCE DIPLOMACY.  THE MILITARY IS LOYAL TO KIM IL SUNG, ANDTHE PEOPLE ARE NOT WELL AWARE OF CURRENT EAST EUROPEAN EVENTS DUE TOTIGHT CONTROL OF INFORMATION," HE SAID.     THE NORTH KOREAN MEDIA ON SUNDAY BRIEFLY REPORTED ON UPRISINGSIN "A FEW" ROMANIAN CITIES WITHOUT MENTIONING ABOUTCEAUSESCU'S ARREST.     THE RODONG SHINMUN, THE OFFICIAL PAPER OF NORTH KOREA'SWORKERS' PARTY, CARRIED A LENGTHY EDITORIAL IN ITS FRONT AND SECONDPAGES FRIDAY ENCOURAGING PEOPLE TO "DRIVE AWAY IMPERIALISTCHALLENGES AND MARCH ON THE PATH OF SOCIALISM WITH MORE VIGOR,"THE VERY DAY THE ROMANIAN SITUATION CAPTURED HEADLINES IN MOST PAPERSAROUND THE WORLD.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990CHINESE INTELLECTUALS OPPOSE PARTY IDEOLOGY, SAYS PAPER+     HONG KONG, DEC. 26 KYODO - THE MAJORITY OF ACADEMICS ANDSTUDENTS IN BEIJING UNIVERSITIES DISAGREE WITH THE CHINESE COMMUNISTPARTY'S PRESENT IDEOLOGICAL STANCE ACCORDING TO A SURVEY REPORTED INTUESDAY'S MING PAO NEWSPAPER.     THE SURVEY WAS CARRIED OUT JOINTLY BY THE NATIONAL COMMITTEE OFTHE CHINESE PEOPLE'S POLITICAL CONSULTATIVE CONFERENCE AND BEIJINGMUNICIPAL AUTHORITIES, THE REPORT SAID.     DATA WAS COLLECTED FROM BEIJING UNIVERSITY, QING HUA UNIVERSITYAND 11 OTHER LEADING HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTES IN BEIJING, ANDRESULTS WERE REVEALED DURING A TWO-MONTH SESSION OF THE COMMITTEEWHICH BEGAN IN SEPTEMBER, THE REPORT SAID.     ACCORDING TO THE POLL, ONLY 20 PERCENT OF UNIVERSITY STUDENTSWANT THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY TO MAINTAIN ITS PRESENT IDEOLOGICALPOSITION, WHILE 40 PERCENT STRONGLY DISAGREE WITH THE PARTY.     THE REMAINING 40 PERCENT OF STUDENTS WERE UNWILLING TO EXPRESSAN OPINION, THE REPORT ADDED.     THE VAST MAJORITY OF YOUNG AND MIDDLE AGED TEACHING STAFF POLLEDIN THE SURVEY WERE FOUND TO BE IN STRONG DISAGREEMENT WITH THE PARTY.     RESULTS OF THE SURVEY SENT A SHOCK WAVE THROUGH THE UPPERECHELONS OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY, THE REPORT SAID.     THE COMMITTEE HAS ALREADY PROPOSED SEVERE MEASURES FOR DEALINGWITH THOSE ACADEMICS UNWILLING TO CORRECT THEIR ANTIGOVERNMENTATTITUDES.     SUCH MEASURES ARE SAID TO INCLUDE SACKING AND THE BANISHING OFSPOUSES TO PLACES OF BIRTH OUTSIDE THE CAPITAL.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990RANKING PHILIPPINES COMMUNIST PARTY OFFICIAL ESCAPES+     MANILA, DEC. 26 KYODO - A SUSPECTED MEMBER OF THE EXECUTIVECOMMITTEE OF THE OUTLAWED COMMUNIST PARTY OF THE PHILIPPINES HASESCAPED FROM HER DETENTION CELL IN SUBURBAN CAMP CRAME, AUTHORITIESSAID TUESDAY.     COL. ALFREDO FILLER OF THE CONSTABULARY, SAID WILMA TIAMZON,CHIEF OF THE PARTY'S FINANCE COMMISSION AND WIFE OF BENITO TIAMZON,ACTING CHAIRMAN OF THE PARTY, ESCAPED ON MONDAY, THE DAY BEFORE THE21ST FOUNDING ANNIVERSARY OF THE PARTY.     GEN. RAMON MONTANO, CHIEF OF THE CONSTABULARY, HAS ORDERED THEARREST OF CAPT. VICTOR DIEGO AND THREE UNNAMED SOLDIERS FOR LAXITY.     THE FOUR WERE GUARDING THE DETENTION CELLS AT THE TIME OFTIAMZON'S ESCAPE "AT THE HEIGHT OF CHRISTMAS CELEBRATIONS" INTHE MAXIMUM SECURITY AREA OF THE CAMP.     OFFICIALS SAID TIAMZON "APPARENTLY MIXED WITH VISITORS WHOWERE ALLOWED INSIDE THE PHILIPPINE CONSTABULARY JAIL AND SLIPPED OUTWITHOUT BEING NOTICED."     FILLER SAID CIVILIANS WERE PERMITTED TO MINGLE WITH THEIRDETAINED RELATIVES INSIDE THE CELLS, A PRACTICE NOT NORMALLY ALLOWED.     DETAINED WITH TIAMZON IN THE MAXIMUM SECURITY AREA WERE 12RANKING OFFICIALS OF THE PARTY AND 212 SUSPECTED PARTY MEMBERS.     TIAMZON, WHO RANKS 8TH ON THE MILITARY LIST OF MOST WANTED PARTYMEMBERS, CARRIES A REWARD OF ONE MILLION PESOS (ABOUT 45,000 DOLLARS)FOR HER ARREST.     SHE WAS ARRESTED IN THE SUBURB OF SAN JUAN LAST OCTOBER DURING ARAID ON A REBEL SAFEHOUSE.     IN NOVEMBER 1988, TWO OTHER COMMUNIST PARTY MEMBERS, ROMULOKINTANAR AND HIS WIFE GLORIA, ESCAPED FROM THE CAMP AFTER ATTENDINGTHE BIRTHDAY PARTY OF THEIR JAIL WARDEN.  THE TWO WERE ARRESTED MARCH1988.     KINTANAR, DESCRIBED BY THE MILITARY AS THE CHIEF OF THE PARTYARMED WING, THE NEW PEOPLE'S ARMY, HAS A PRIZE OF ONE MILLION PESOSFOR HIS CAPTURE WHILE GLORIA CARRIES 100,000 PESOS.     LAST JULY, MILITARY AGENTS NABBED TWO LEADERS OF THE NATIONALDEMOCRATIC FRONT, SATUR OCAMPO AND HIS WIFE CAROLINA, IN SUBURBANMAKATI. OCAMPO, THE FRONT'S SPOKESMAN, HAD A REWARD OF ONE MILLIONPESOS FOR HIS ARREST WHILE HIS WIFE HAD 500,000 PESOS.     THE COMMUNIST PARTY IS A MEMBER OF THE FRONT, WHICH HAS 12UNDERGROUND ORGANIZATIONS UNDER ITS WING.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990CHINA TO GIVE AID, MAINTAIN FRIENDLY TIES WITH ROMANIA+     BEIJING, DEC. 26 KYODO - CHINA IS READY TO MAINTAIN FRIENDLYTIES WITH ROMANIA AND EXTEND HUMANITARIAN AID IN THE WAKE OF A BLOODYUPRISING THAT ENDED THE 24-YEAR DICTATORSHIP OF NICOLAE CEAUSESCU,CHINA'S DEPUTY FOREIGN MINISTER TIAN ZENGPEI SAID TUESDAY.     CHINA'S POLICY TOWARD ROMANIA FOLLOWING THE EXECUTION MONDAY OFROMANIAN PRESIDENT CEAUSESCU, A FORMER STAUNCH ALLY OF CHINA, WILLCONTINUE TO BE BASED ON THE PRINCIPLES OF PEACEFUL COEXISTENCE, THEOFFICIAL XINHUA NEWS AGENCY QUOTED TIAN AS SAYING.     THE CHINESE RED CROSS WILL PROVIDE EMERGENCY AID TO ROMANIA,TIAN WAS ALSO QUOTED AS SAYING IN A MEETING WITH ANGELO MICULESCU,ROMANIA'S AMBASSADOR TO BEIJING, THE AGENCY SAID.     TIAN TOLD THE AMBASSADOR THAT THE CHINESE PEOPLE HAVE CHERISHEDTHEIR FRIENDLY TIES WITH ROMANIANS AND RESPECT THEIR FREEDOM OFCHOICE.     THE CHINESE FOREIGN MINISTRY ALSO ISSUED A STATEMENT EARLIER INTHE DAY SAYING THAT CHINA WILL NOT INTERFERE IN ROMANIA'S INTERNALAFFAIRS.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990CHINA HINTS AT RECOGNITION OF NEW ROMANIAN GOVERNMENT+     BEIJING, DEC. 26 KYODO - CHINA, WHICH HAD A CLOSE RELATIONSHIPWITH  EXECUTED ROMANIAN DICTATOR NICOLAE CEAUSESCU, HINTED AT ITSRECOGNITION OF THE NEW GOVERNMENT OF ROMANIA ON TUESDAY.     IN A STATEMENT ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL SALVATIONFRONT IN ROMANIA, A CHINESE FOREIGN MINISTRY SPOKESMAN SAID THECHINESE GOVERNMENT IS READY TO CONTINUE TO MAINTAIN AND DEVELOP ITSFRIENDLY RELATIONS WITH ROMANIA ON THE BASIS OF THE FIVE PRINCIPLESOF PEACEFUL COEXISTENCE.     THE STATEMENT SAID CHINA WILL NEVER INTERFERE IN ROMANIA'SINTERNAL AFFAIRS AND RESPECTS THE CHOICE MADE BY THE ROMANIAN PEOPLE.     THE STATEMENT ACKNOWLEDGED THAT THE NATIONAL SALVATION FRONT HASBEEN ESTABLISHED IN ROMANIA AND HAS FORMALLY BRIEFED THE CHINESE SIDEABOUT DEVELOPMENTS THERE THROUGH THE ROMANIAN EMBASSY IN CHINA.     CHINA'S OFFICIAL NEWS AGENCY XINHUA BRIEFLY REPORTED IN ADISPATCH FROM BUCHAREST THAT ROMANIAN TELEVISION ANNOUNCED NICOLAECEAUSESCU AND HIS WIFE ELENA WERE SENTENCED TO DEATH BY A MILITARYTRIBUNAL AND THE EXECUTION HAS ALREADY BEEN CARRIED OUT.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990N. KOREA RECOGNIZES NEW ROMANIAN GOV'T+     TOKYO, DEC. 27 KYODO - NORTH KOREA ON TUESDAY RECOGNIZED THE NEWROMANIAN GOVERNMENT FORMED AFTER THE OVERTHROW OF PRESIDENT NICOLAECEAUSESCU, ACCORDING TO A REPORT BY THE (NORTH) KOREAN CENTRAL NEWSAGENCY.     THE KCNA REPORT, MONITORED IN TOKYO, QUOTED A STATEMENT ISSUEDBY THE NORTH KOREAN FOREIGN MINISTRY AS SAYING, "WE RESPECT THEROAD CHOSEN BY THE ROMANIAN PEOPLE AND RECOGNIZE THE COUNCIL OF THEROMANIAN NATIONAL SALVATION FRONT AS THE REPRESENTATIVE OF THEROMANIAN PEOPLE."     THE STATEMENT SAID NORTH KOREA REGARDS DEVELOPMENTS IN ROMANIAAS "AN INTERNAL AFFAIR OF THE ROMANIAN PEOPLE."     IT SAID THE COUNCIL AND THE NEW GOVERNMENT FORMED TO REPLACE THEFORMER POWER HAVE PUT FORWARD A NEW PROGRAM AND ARE STRIVING TOSTABILIZE THE SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC LIFE OF THE COUNTRY.     NORTH KOREA HAS MAINTAINED FRIENDLY RELATIONS WITH THE ROMANIANPEOPLE AND WILL CONTINUE TO STRENGTHEN AND DEVELOP THEM IN THEFUTURE, IT SAID.     THE STATEMENT ALSO SAID NORTH KOREA DEEPLY REGRETTED THE HEAVYLOSS OF LIFE CAUSED BY THE BLOODY EVENTS IN ROMANIA.     IT EXPRESSED NORTH KOREA'S SUPPORT AND SOLIDARITY FOR THEEFFORTS OF THE ROMANIAN PEOPLE TO RESOLVE THE SITUATION AS SOON ASPOSSIBLE, ACHIEVE STABILITY, AND NORMALIZE SOCIO-ECONOMIC LIFE UNDERTHE GUIDANCE OF THE COUNCIL.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990INDONESIAN PAPER COMPARES CEAUSESCU TO DRACULA+     JAKARTA, DEC. 27 KYODO - AN INDONESIAN DAILY NEWSPAPER COMMENTEDON THE EXECUTION OF ROMANIAN PRESIDENT NICOLAE CEAUSESCU ONWEDNESDAY, COMPARING HIM TO DRACULA AND SAYING NOBODY WHO IS SANEWILL MOURN HIS DEATH.     THE ENGLISH-LANGUAGE INDONESIAN OBSERVER SAID, "IT'S KIND OFHARD TO EXPECT A ROMANIAN CITIZEN, OR ANYBODY SANE FOR THAT MATTER,TO MOURN THE DEATH BY A FIRING SQUAD OF ROMANIAN LEADER, DICTATORNICOLAE CEAUSESCU AND HIS WIFE, ELENA."     IT ADDED, "SOME PEOPLE, WHILE SAYING 'GOOD RIDDANCE,' MIGHTHAVE WISHED THE EXECUTION TO HAVE TAKEN PLACE YEARS BEFORE CEAUSESCUAND HIS SECRET POLICE HAD THE CHANCE TO COMMIT SUCH GENOCIDE AGAINSTROMANIAN PEOPLE EVEN COUNT DRACULA WOULD HAVE BEEN REAL SICK OF."     COUNT DRACULA WAS A FICTIONAL VAMPIRE WHO LIVED INTRANNSYLVANIA, A REGION IN WESTERN ROMANIA.     THE EDITORIAL SAID CEAUSESCU HAD NOT ALWAYS BEEN REGARDED AS"SATANIC," AND AT ONE POINT IN HISTORY HE EVEN DELIGHTED THEWEST WITH HIS INDEPENDENT VIEWS AS FAR AS MOSCOW-LED COMMUNISM WASCONCERNED.     "CEAUSESCU WAS AFTER ALL ANOTHER DICTATOR WHO HAS FOUND HISDEMISE IN A WAY THAT SEEMS TO HAVE BECOME A SOMBER PROMISE FOR RULERSREFUSING TO CLIMB OFF THE TIGER THEY ARE RIDING WHILE THE DISMOUNTINGIS STILL SAFE," THE EDITORIAL CONCLUDED.     INDONESIAN NEWSPAPERS HEADLINED THE EXECUTION OF CEAUSESCU ANDHIS WIFE IN THEIR WEDNESDAY EDITIONS.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990PHILIPPINES RECOGNIZES NEW ROMANIAN GOV'T+     MANILA, DEC. 27 KYODO - PHILIPPINE FOREIGN AFFAIRS SECRETARYRAUL MANGLAPUS ANNOUNCED WEDNESDAY THAT THE PHILIPPINES HASRECOGNIZED THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT OF ROMANIA.     MANGLAPUS ALSO TOLD REPORTERS HE HAS BEEN INFORMED BY THEROMANIAN CHARGE D'AFFAIRES, DUMITRU MOCIOU, THAT THE NATIONALSALVATION FRONT WILL HOLD ELECTIONS IN APRIL NEXT YEAR TO "ABOLISHTHE OLD STRUCTURES OFPOWER."     "I HOPE THAT WITH TREMENDOUS CHANGES BEING UNDERTAKEN INEASTERN EUROPE, THE PHILIPPINES WOULD BE ABLE TO ENTER INTO MOREDYNAMIC RELATIONS WITH THESE COUNTRIES," HE SAID.     MANILA ESTABLISHED DIPLOMATIC TIES WITH BUCHAREST IN 1972.PRESIDENT NICOLAE CEAUSESCU AND HIS WIFE ELENA, WHO WERE EXECUTED ONMONDAY, VISITED THE PHILIPPINES IN 1977.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990KOREAN, NEPALESE CLIMBERS DEAD IN NEPAL CLIMB+     KATHMANDU, DEC. 27 KYODO - ONE SOUTH KOREAN CLIMBER AND TWONEPALESE HIGH ALTITUDE HELPERS IN A WINTER EXPEDITION PERISHED AFTERSUCCESSFULLY SCALING MOUNT YALUNG KANG IN EAST NEPAL LAST WEEK, THENEPAL TOURISM MINISTRY SAID HERE WEDNESDAY.     THE DEAD WERE KYO SUB JIN, 26, A STUDENT FROM TAEGU, SOUTHKOREA, AND TSHRING TSEMBA, 36, AND ANG DAWA, 29, FROM NEPAL.     THE TRIO REACHED THE 8,505 METER HIGH SUMMIT VIA THE SOUTHEASTFACE OF THE MOUNTAIN AT 4:05 P.M. ON DECEMBER 20.     AFTER SPENDING ABOUT FIVE MINUTES AT THE SUMMIT, THE GROUPREMAINED IN RADIO CONTACT WITH SUPPORT CAMPS DURING THEIR DESCENTTILL 4:15 P.M.     THEREAFTER CONTACT WAS SUDDENLY LOST AND THEY WERE NOT HEARDFROM ANYMORE, THE MINISTRY SAID, QUOTING A MESSAGE RECEIVED HERE FROMTHE MOUNTAIN.     THE WEATHER WAS CLOUDY AND A STRONG GALE WAS BLOWING IN THE AREADURING BOTH THE ASCENT AND DESCENT, IT WAS ALSO STATED.     THE THREE HAD LAUNCHED THEIR FINAL ASSAULT ON THE SUMMIT FROMTHE SOUTH KOREAN EXPEDITION'S FOURTH CAMP AT 8,100 METERS AT 4:30A.M.     THE REMAINING MEMBERS OF THE EXPEDITION LED BY TEUK HEE KIM, 42,A BUSINESSMAN FROM DAEGU, MOUNTED A SEARCH FOR THE MISSING CLIMBERSTHE NEXT MORNING, BUT GAVE THEM UP FOR DEAD AFTER NO TRACES WEREFOUND, THE MINISTRY ADDED.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON ILL-GOTTEN WEALTH RESIGNS+     MANILA, DEC. 27 KYODO - THE FIVE-MEMBER PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSIONON GOOD GOVERNMENT (PCGG) RESIGNED WEDNESDAY TO GIVE PRESIDENTCORAZON AQUINO "A FREE HAND" IN SELECTING A NEW CABINET FOLLOWINGTHIS MONTH'S FAILED COUP, A COMMISSION MEMBER SAID.     COMMISSIONER DAVID CASTRO SAID THE THREE DIRECTORS AND 50COMMISSION NOMINEES OF THE PCGG SITTING AS BOARD DIRECTORS INNUMEROUS FIRMS SEQUESTERED BY THE COMMISSION WILL ALSO BE ASKED TOTENDER THEIR RESIGNATIONS.     THOSE WHO RESIGNED WERE MATEO CAPARAS, COMMISSION CHAIRMAN, ANDCOMMISSIONERS CASTRO, AUGUSTO VILLARIN, ROSALIO DE LEON AND MAXIMOMACEREN.     "THESE RESIGNATIONS ARE NEEDED TO GIVE THE PRESIDENT A FREEHAND IN REORGANIZING THE GOVERNMENT," CASTRO SAID.     THE PCGG IS RESPONSIBLE FOR SEARCHING FOR AND RECOVERINGALLEGEDLY ILL-GOTTEN WEALTH AMASSED BY THE FAMILY OF OUSTED LEADERFERDINAND MARCOS AND HIS CLOSE ASSOCIATES.  IT IS DIRECTLY UNDER THEOFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT.     CASTRO DESCRIBED THE MOVE AS "DECISIVE" AND SAID THE FIVEMEMBERS AGREED TO RESIGN AFTER CAPARAS MET AQUINO AT THE PRESIDENTIALPALACE WEDNESDAY.     CASTRO DID NOT REVEAL OTHER DETAILS OF THE TALKS BETWEEN THEPRESIDENT AND THE COMMISSION CHAIRMAN.     THE COMMISSION CHAIRMAN HAS BEEN CRITICIZED FOR STATING THATPRESIDENT AQUINO'S COUSIN EDUARDO COJUANGCO JR. WAS NOT ON A LIST OFPEOPLE TO BE INVESTIGATED BY THE COMMISSION.  THE STATEMENT PROMPTEDLAWYERS OF COJUANGCO, AN AVID MARCOS SUPPORTER, TO WORK FOR THEISSUANCE OF PASSPORTS TO HIM AND HIS FAMILY.     THE PHILIPPINE CONSULATE IN LOS ANGELES LATER ISSUED PASSPORTSTO THE COJUANGCO FAMILY, ENABLING COJUANGCO TO RETURN TO THE COUNTRYIN LATE NOVEMBER.     AQUINO HAS LINKED COJUANGCO TO THE DECEMBER 1-9 COUP ATTEMPTTHAT LEFT 113 DEAD AND 635 WOUNDED.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990N. KOREA HOLDS EMERGENCY SESSION OVER EAST EUROPE+     TOKYO, DEC. 27 KYODO - NORTH KOREA HAS URGENTLY RECALLED ITSENVOYS ABROAD TO DISCUSS WAYS OF DEALING WITH THE TURBULENT SITUATIONIN EASTERN EUROPE, DIPLOMATIC SOURCES IN TOKYO SAID WEDNESDAY.     THE FALL AND EXECUTION OF ROMANIAN PRESIDENT NICOLAE CEAUSESCU,AMONG OTHER CHANGES, HAS SENT SHOCK WAVES THROUGH NORTH KOREA WHICHHAD FREQUENTLY BEEN DENOTED AS ROMANIA'S FAREAST ALLY, THE SOURCESSAID.     IN HIS DESIRE FOR DYNASTIC MONOPOLY, NORTH KOREAN PRESIDENT KIMIL SUNG, WHO IS PLANNING TO HAND THE PRESIDENCY ON TO HIS OWN SON,JONG IL RESEMBLES CEAUSESCU, THEY SAID, NOTING THAT THE SIMILARECONOMIC CRISES OF THE TWO COUNTRIES ARE ANOTHER CAUSE FOR CONCERN INPYONGYANG.     ADHERING TO THE SOCIALIST LINE, PYONGYANG HAS LABELLED REFORMSIN EASTERN EUROPE AS AN IMPERIALIST PLOT.     THE COUNTRY WILL UNAVOIDABLY FACE INCREASING INTERNATIONALPRESSURES TO OPEN UP TO THE REST OF THE WORLD AND CARRY OUT REFORMSIN THE WAKE OF THE FALL OF THE BERLIN WALL, EAST-WEST DETENTE ANDOTHER RAPID CHANGES IN EASTERN EUROPE, THE SOURCES SAID.     THE EMERGENCY MEETING OF AMBASSADORS FROM 30 COUNTRIES,INCLUDING POLAND, HUNGARY, CHINA AND THE SOVIET UNION, UNDER WAYSINCE DECEMBER 20, APPEARS TO BE AN ATTEMPT AT ANALYZING THESITUATION, THE DIPLOMATIC SOURCES SAID.     THE NORTH KOREANS COMMUNIST PARTY, THE WORKERS PARTY, HAS BEGUNSTRENGTHENING ITS INFLUENCE BY SUCH MEASURES AS RUNNING THE FULL TEXTOF KIM'S 1958 SPEECH EMPHASIZING THE SUPREMACY OF COMMUNIST IDEOLOGYIN A RECENT EDITION OF ITS PAPER, RODONG SHINMUN.     ONE PARTY OFFICIAL RECENTLY TOLD THE LEADER OF A JAPANESEPARLIAMENTARY MISSION IN PYONGYANG THAT NORTH KOREA WOULD NOT OVERLYDEVOTE ITS ATTENTION TO THE CHANGES IN EASTERN EUROPE.     JAPANESE GOVERNMENT SOURCES SAY IT IS UNTHINKABLE THAT DEMANDSFOR REFORMS WOULD COME FROM CITIZENS IN NORTH KOREA AS THEY DID INEASTERN EUROPE.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990S. KOREA, YUGOSLAVIA SET UP FULL DIPLOMATIC TIES+     SEOUL, DEC. 28 KYODO - SOUTH KOREA AND YUGOSLAVIA HAVEESTABLISHED FULL DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS, THE SOUTH KOREAN FOREIGNMINISTRY SAID THURSDAY.     YUGOSLAVIA IS THE THIRD EAST EUROPEAN COUNTRY TO HAVE TIES WITHSOUTH KOREA, FOLLOWING HUNGARY AND POLAND.     SOUTH KOREAN AND YUGOSLAV REPRESENTATIVES AT THE UNITED NATIONSEXCHANGED DIPLOMATIC NOTES EXPRESSING AGREEMENT ON THE ESTABLISHMENTOF BILATERAL TIES ON WEDNESDAY.     THIS BROUGHT TO 134 THE NUMBER OF THE COUNTRIES WHICH HAVEDIPLOMATIC RELATIONS WITH SEOUL, THE MINISTRY SAID.     IN A JOINT STATEMENT ISSUED IN NEW YORK, THE TWO COUNTRIESPLEDGED TO FURTHER PROMOTE BILATERAL FRIENDLY AND COOPERATIVE TIES.     SOUTH KOREA SET UP DIPLOMATIC TIES WITH HUNGARY IN FEBRUARY ANDWITH POLAND IN NOVEMBER. SEOUL ALSO ESTABLISHED A DE FACTO CONSULARRELATIONSHIP WITH THE SOVIET UNION ON DECEMBER 4 IN LINE WITH ITSDIPLOMATIC STRATEGY AIMING AT IMPROVING RELATIONS WITH COMMUNISTCOUNTRIES.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990KIM IL SUNG CONGRATULATES NEW ROMANIAN PRESIDENT+     TOKYO, DEC. 28 KYODO - NORTH KOREA'S PRESIDENT KIM IL SUNG HASSENT A CONGRATULATORY MESSAGE TO THE NEW ROMANIAN LEADERSHIP, THEOFFICIAL NORTH KOREAN NEWS AGENCY KCNA SAID THURSDAY.     "I HOPE THAT THE FRIENDLY AND COOPERATIVE RELATIONS BETWEENTHE KOREAN AND ROMANIAN PEOPLES WILL GROW STRONGER AND DEVELOP IN THEFUTURE," KIM SAID IN THE MESSAGE ADDRESSED TO NEW ROMANIANPRESIDENT ION ILIESCU.     KCNA, MONITORED IN TOKYO, SAID KIM SENT THE MESSAGE ONWEDNESDAY.     KIM SAID HE WISHES THE ROMANIAN PEOPLE SUCCESS IN "ACHIEVINGSOCIAL, POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC STABILITY."     NORTH KOREA RECOGNIZED THE NEW GOVERNMENT IN ROMANIAN ONWEDNESDAY AFTER THE COLLAPSE OF NICOLAE CEAUSESCU'S HARDLINECOMMUNIST REGIME.     CEAUSESCU AND HIS WIFE ELENA WERE EXECUTED MONDAY FOLLOWING ASECRET MILITARY TRIAL ON CHARGES OF GENOCIDE.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990CHINESE ARMY REFUSED TO CRUSH BEIJING DEMOS, PAPER SAYS+     HONG KONG, DEC. 28 KYODO - OVER 1,500 SOLDIERS AND OFFICERS OFCHINA'S 38TH GROUP ARMY REFUSED ORDERS OR DESERTED THEIR POSTSDURING THE MILITARY CRACKDOWN ON BEIJING'S PRO-DEMOCRACY MOVEMENT INAPRIL AND JUNE, HONG KONG'S SOUTH CHINA MORNING POST SAID THURSDAY.     THE BEIJING-BASED 38TH GROUP ARMY WAS FIRST ORDERED BY SENIORCHINESE LEADER DENG XIAOPING, THE THEN CHAIRMAN OF THE PARTY'SCENTRAL MILITARY COMMISSION (CMC), TO SEVERELY RESTRICTDEMONSTRATORS' ACTIVITIES IN LATE APRIL THE REPORT SAID.     BUT THE 38TH GROUP'S ARMY'S COMMANDER AND 110 OTHER OFFICERS"BREACHED DISCIPLINE IN A SERIOUS MANNER DURING THE STRUGGLE TOCRUSH THE COUNTER-REVELUTIONARY REBELLION," ACCORDING TO A SENIORPEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY (PLA) LEADER QUOTED BY THE DAILY.     THE REVELATION CAME IN AN UNPUBLISHED SPEECH MADE IN BEIJINGEARLIER THIS MONTH BY YANG BAIBING, CHIEF POLITICAL COMMISSAR OFCHINA'S PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY, THE REPORT SAID.    YANG BAIBING, YOUNGER BROTHER OF CHINESE PRESIDENT YANG SHANGKUN,MADE THE SPEECH AT A CONFERENCE TO BOOST THE ARMY'S POLITICALPROGRAM.    IN THE SPEECH -- COPIES OF WHICH ARE SAID TO BE CIRCULATING AMONGSENIOR ARMY AND PARTY OFFICIALS -- YANG STRESSED THE NEED FORINCREASED IDEOLOGICAL WORK TO PREVENT A RECURRENCE OF DISCIPLINEPROBLEMS, THE REPORT SAID.     THE NEWSPAPER QUOTED YANG AS SAYING THAT 1,400 SOLDIERS OF THE38TH GROUP ARMY "SHED THEIR WEAPONS AND RAN AWAY."     YANG NAMED 38TH GROUP ARMY COMMANDER XU QINXIAN AS ONE OF 21SENIOR OFFICERS WHO DISOBEYED CMC ORDERS.     XU QINXIAN WAS COURT-MARTIALED AND GIVEN A STIFF SENTENCE IN THEAUTUMN, THE REPORT SAID.     YANG'S SPEECH MARKS THE FIRST TIME CHINESE AUTHORITIES HAVEADMITTED THE EXTENT TO WHICH ARMY OFFICERS DISOBEYED TOP-LEVEL ORDERSTO ENFORCE MARTIAL LAW IN BEIJING AND OTHER PARTS OF CHINA.     PREVIOUS STATEMENTS HAVE STRESSED ARMY AND PARTY UNITY OVER THEWAY THE PRO-DEMOCRACY MOVEMEMT WAS PUT DOWN, ANALYSTS SAID.     THE TOPPLING AND EXECUTION OF HARD-LINE ROMANIAN COMMUNISTLEADER NICOLAE CEAUSESCU, IN WHICH THE ROMANIAN ARMY PLAYED A MAJORROLE, HAS PROMPTED THE CMC TO TIGHTEN ITS CONTROL OVER THE PLA THEYSAID.     YANG BAIBING ALSO MADE A STRONG ATTACK ON FORMER CHINESECOMMUNIST PARTY CHIEF ZHAO ZIYANG, THE REPORT SAID.     ZHAO -- WIDELY SEEN AS THE ARCHITECT OF CHINA'S ECONOMIC REFORMPOLICIES -- WAS STRIPPED OF ALL POSTS FOR HIS SUPPORT OF THEPRO-DEMOCRACY MOVEMENT IN JUNE.     YANG ACCUSED ZHAO OF HAVING UNDERMINED THE WORK OF THE PLA'SGENERAL POLITICAL DEPARTMENT.     ZHAO'S AIM WAS "TO MEET THE POLITICAL NEEDS OF THOSE WHOADVOCATE BOURGEOIS LIBERALIZATION," YANG WAS QUOTED AS SAYING.     "THEIR GOAL IS TO OVERTHROW (THE EXISTING ORDER) AND TO BUILDUP A NEW ONE," YANG ADDED IN THE STRONGEST CRITICISM YET OF THEFORMER LIBERAL LEADER.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990MARTIAL LAW STAYS IN BEIJING AFTER CEAUSESCU'S DEMISE+     TOKYO, DEC. 28 KYODO - CHINA'S COMMUNIST PARTY LEADERSHIPHAS REVOKED A DECISION TO LIFT MARTIAL LAW IN BEIJING BECAUSE OFFEARS OF A RECURRENCE OF PRO-DEMOCRACY DEMONSTRATIONS FOLLOWING THEDOWNFALL OF ROMANIAN LEADER NICOLAE CEAUSESCU, INFORMED CHINESESOURCES SAID THURSDAY.     THE SOURCES ALSO TOLD KYODO NEWS SERVICE THAT THE PARTYLEADERSHIP HAS INSTRUCTED MARTIAL LAW TROOPS AND PUBLIC SECURITYAUTHORITIES TO BE  PUT ON STRICT ALERT PARTICULARLY IN COLLEGEDISTRICTS IN NORTHWESTERN BEIJING.     THE SOURCES SAID UNIDENTIFIED STUDENTS FROM SUCH MAJORUNIVERSITIES AS BEIJING UNIVERSITY AND QINGHUA UNIVERSITY HADPUBLISHED WALL NEWSPAPERS DETAILING THE COLLAPSE OF THE CEAUSESCUREGIME IN ROMANIA AND CALLING ON READERS TO LEARN FROM THE INCIDENT.     THE PARTY LEADERSHIP WAS ORIGINALLY SCHEDULED TO ANNOUNCE THELIFTING OF MARTIAL LAW LAST SATURDAY, THE SOURCES SAID.     BUT THE LEADERSHIP POSTPONED THE ANNOUNCEMENT AFTER CEAUSESCU, AFORMER STAUNCH ALLY OF CHINA, WAS OUSTED IN THE WAKE OF A BLOODYUPRISING.     AUTHORITIES THEN ORDERED SECURITY FORCES TO BE ON FULL ALERT,THE SOURCES ADDED.     THE MILITIA IN CHARGE OF SECURITY ARE FREE TO TAKE ANY NECESSARYMEASURES IN REGULATING MEETINGS, DEMONSTRATIONS AND WALL NEWSPAPERSUNDER THE TERMS OF THE ALERT, THE SOURCES SAID.     MEANWHILE, GOVERNMENT SPOKESMAN YUAN MU WAS EMBARASSED SEVERALTIMES BY STUDENT PROTESTS DURING A DIALOGUE WITH SOME 300 STUDENTS ONDEVELOPMENTS IN ROMANIA AND CHINA AT BEIJING UNIVERSITY WEDNESDAY,ANOTHER WESTERN INFORMED SOURCE SAID THURSDAY.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990INDIA TO WITHDRAW TROOPS IN SRI LANKA BY NEXT MARCH+     NEW DELHI, DEC. 28 KYODO - INDIA WILL POSSIBLY WITHDRAW ITSPEACE-KEEPING FORCE FROM SRI LANKA BY MARCH 31 NEXT YEAR, FOREIGNMINISTER INDER KUMAR GUJRAL INFORMED THE LOWER HOUSE THURSDAY.     THE FOREIGN MINISTER SAID THAT THE INDIAN PEACE-KEEPING FORCEWOULD VACATE MOST OF THE NORTHEASTERN PROVINCE OF THE ISLAND NATIONBY DECEMBER 31.     EARLIER, SRI LANKAN FOREIGN MINISTER RANJAN WIJERATNE VISITEDINDIA FROM DECEMBER 6-8 FOR DISCUSSIONS WITH NEW DELHI'S NEWNATIONAL FRONT GOVERNMENT ON THE WITHDRAWAL OF THE PEACE-KEEPINGFORCE.     INDIA HAD UP TO 52,000 TROOPS IN THE NORTHEASTERN PROVINCE OFSRI LANKA IN LINE WITH THE 1987 INDO-SRI LANKA PEACE ACCORD WHICHSOUGHT TO END A BLOODY TAMIL SEPARATIST CAMPAIGN.     THE LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM, THE LARGEST AND MOSTMILITANT OF TAMIL GROUPS, REPUDIATED THE PEACE PACT PROMPTING A MAJORINDIAN OFFENSIVE TO DISARM THE GROUP AND PROTECT TAMILS IN THEREGION.     HOWEVER, TO CURB THE ETHNIC VIOLENCE WHICH HAS CLAIMED OVER17,000 LIVES IN THE LAST SIX YEARS, SRI LANKAN PRESIDENT RANASINGHEPREMADSA HAS DEMANDED THAT THE INDIAN TROOPS LEAVE BY JULY 29, THESECOND ANNIVERSARY OF THE SIGNING OF THE PEACE ACCORD.     THE THEN INDIAN PRIME MINISTER, RAJIV GANDHI, REJECTED THEDEMAND, SAYING A HASTY WITHDRAWAL COULD LEAD TO MORE BLOODSHED.     THE THREE-MONTH DIPLOMATIC DEADLOCK ENDED ON SEPTEMBER 18 WHENTHE TWO COUNTRIES SIGNED AN AGREEMENT IN WHICH INDIA AGREED TOWITHDRAW ITS REMAINING 43,000 TROOPS AND TO END HOSTILITIES WITH THEMILITANT TAMIL GROUP.     SINCE THEN A PHASED PULLOUT OF THE TROOPS HAS TAKEN PLACE ANDTHERE ARE AROUND 25,000 TROOPS STILL IN THE NORTHEASTERN PART.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990THAI HOSTESS INDICTED FOR VIOLATING IMMIGRATION LAW+     TSU, DEC. 28 KYODO - LOCAL PROSECUTORS FILED ADDITIONAL CHARGESTHURSDAY AGAINST A THAI HOSTESS BEING HELD IN CONNECTION WITH THEMURDER OF ANOTHER THAI WOMAN.     THE TSU DISTRICT PUBLIC PROSECUTORS OFFICE SAID NAMKHANGPETCHUCHAT, 29, ENTERED JAPAN ILLEGALLY UNDER THE NAME OF PORNPHANLAPSAKULKAN IN DECEMBER 1987 AND LIVED IN MIE PREFECTURE WORKING AS AHOSTESS WITHOUT REGISTRATION.     NAMKHANG WAS CHARGED FOR VIOLATING THE IMMIGRATION LAW AND ALIENREGISTRATION LAW, THE OFFICE SAID.     SHE WAS ARRESTED IN NOVEMBER IN CONNECTION WITH THE MURDER OFCHUTIMA TANGTHAMCHARI, 24, ANOTHER HOSTESS. THE PROSECUTORS OFFICEHAVE NOT FILED MURDER CHARGESAGAINST NAMKHANG, BUT INDICTED HER ON ONTHEFT CHARGES.     LEGAL EXPERTS SAY IT IS RARE FOR AUTHORITIES TO FILE CHARGES FORVIOLATION OF THE IMMIGRATION LAW. NORMALLY ILLEGAL FOREIGN ENTRANTSTO JAPAN ARE DEPORTED.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990INDONESIA TO RECOGNIZE NEW ROMANIAN GOVERNMENT+     JAKARTA, DEC. 28 KYODO - INDONESIA FACES NO PROBLEMS INRECOGNIZING THE NEW ROMANIAN GOVERNMENT, FOREIGN MINISTER ALI ALATASSAID THURSDAY.     "INDONESIAN ACTIVE AND INDEPENDENT FOREIGN POLICY RECOGNIZESTHE STATE AND NOT THE GOVERNMENT," ALATAS SAID.  "THEREFORETHERE IS NO PROBLEM TO RECOGNIZE THE NEW ROMANIAN GOVERNMENT."     ALATAS SAID INDONESIA FULLY APPRECIATES THE SOVEREIGN RIGHT OFTHE ROMANIAN PEOPLE TO SET UP THE FORM AND SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT OFTHEIR CHOICE.     HE SAID HE HOPES RELATIONS BETWEEN THE TWO COUNTRIES WILLCONTINUE AND WILL BE PROMOTED BY THE NEW GOVERNMENT.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990PHILIPPINE INVESTIGATORS LINK ENRILE TO COUP+     MANILA, DEC. 28 KYODO - OPPOSITION SEN. JUAN PONCE ENRILE WASIMPLICATED IN THIS MONTH'S COUP ATTEMPT BY WITNESSES WHO WEREINTERVIEWED BY THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (NBI), JUSTICESECRETARY SEDFREY ORDONEZ SAID THURSDAY.     ORDONEZ SAID THE NBI SUBMITTED REPORTS TO THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENTCONTAINING THE SWORN STATEMENTS OF THREE WITNESSES WHO CLAIMED TOHAVE PERSONAL KNOWLEDGE OF ENRILE'S INVOLVEMENT IN THE DECEMBER 1-9COUP ATTEMPT, THE SIXTH AND BLOODIEST ATTEMPT YET TO UNSEAT PRESIDENTCORAZON AQUINO.     A SPOKESMAN FOR THE SENATOR DENIED THE ACCUSATIONS AND SAID THEYWERE MEANT TO "HARASS AND MUZZLE THE OPPOSITION ONCE AND FOR ALL BYLINKING THEM TO THE COUP."     ALSO ON THURSDAY, LAWYER FOR JAILED COUP LEADER BRIG. GEN. JOSECOMENDADOR REFUSED TO LET THE MILITARY OFFICER TESTIFY BEFORE APRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION PROBING THE LATEST COUP ATTEMPT.     LAWYER OLIVER LOZANO INSTEAD SUBMITTED AN AFFIDAVIT DENYINGPARTICIPATION BY COMENDADOR IN THE COUP.  COMENDADOR IS ACCUSED OFLEADING REBEL TROOPS IN SEIZING THE MACTAN AIR BASE, NEAR CEBU, INTHE CENTRAL PHILIPPINES.     "WE EVALUATED THE PAPERS WHICH WE HAVE IN OUR POSSESSION AND WEAGREED WE HAVE ENOUGH PAPERS TO HELP US IN THE PRELIMINARYINVESTIGATION," ORDONEZ SAID.     IN A LETTER TO ORDONEZ, NBI CHIEF ALFREDO LIM SAID EARLY THISMONTH THAT THE SILAHIS INTERNATIONAL HOTEL RENDERED CATERING SERVICESIN THE RESIDENCE OF SEN. ENRILE IN DASMARINAS IN MAKATI.     QUOTING TESTIMONIES BY WITNESSES, HE SAID THE GUESTS WERE MOSTLY"MILITARY PERSONNEL ALL IN COMBAT UNIFORM" AND WITH "WHITEINSIGNIA ON THEIR LEFT ARM PATCH," THE REBEL IDENTIFICATION MARK.     LIM SAID THAT ACCORDING TO THE WITNESSES, ONE OF THE GUESTS WASFUGITIVE LT. COL. GREGORIO HONASAN.     HONASAN'S "REFORM THE ARMED FORCES MOVEMENT" LED MUTINOUSSOLDIERS IN LAUNCHING THE DECEMBER COUP.     THE REPORT ALSO NAMED FORMER ENERGY MINISTER GERONIMO VELASCO,HOTELIER REBECCO PANLILIO AND HIS WIFE ERLINDA, AND MAKATI COUNCILMANROBERTO BRILLANTE AS AMONG THE GUESTS IN THE GATHERING AT THE ENRILERESIDENCE.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990THAI DEPUTY PREMIER BHICHAI RESIGNS+     BANGKOK, DEC. 28, KYODO - DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER BHICHAIRATTAKUL HAS RESIGNED FOLLOWING A CABINET DISAGREEMENT ON THENOMINATION OF A SENIOR OFFICIAL, PRIME MINISTER CHATICHAICHOONHAVAN SAID THURSDAY.     CHATICHAI SAID HE RECEIVED BHICHAI'S LETTER OF RESIGNATIONTHURSDAY MORNING AND THAT IT TOOK EFFECT IMMEDIATELY.     THE PRIME MINISTER SAID BHICHAI'S RESIGNATION DID NOT AFFECTHIS GOVERNMENT'S STABILITY SINCE BHICHAI'S DEMOCRAT PARTY IS NOTINTENDING TO WITHDRAW FROM THE SIX-PARTY COALITION GOVERNMENT,HEADED BY CHATICHAI'S CHAT THAI PARTY.     BHICHAI'S RESIGNATION CAME AFTER A WEEKLY CABINET MEETINGSESSION WEDNESDAY IN WHICH BHICHAI WAS REPORTEDLY ANGERED BY AHEATED DEBATE OVER THE CONTROVERSIAL APPOINTMENT OF A SENIORCIVIL SERVANT.     A CABINET SOURCE SAID BHICHAI REQUESTED THE CABINET TOCONSIDER A REVOCATION OF THE APPOINTMENT BUT FACED STRONGOPPOSITION FROM OTHER CABINET MEMBERS, PROMPTING HIM TO QUIT.     THE DEMOCRAT PARTY, WITH EIGHT MINISTERS IN CHATICHAI'S 44-MEMBER CABINET, WILL HOLD A FORMAL EXECUTIVE BOARD MEETING FRIDAYTO DECIDE ON ITS COALITION POSITION WITH THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT.     SPEAKING BRIEFLY THURSDAY FROM CHIENGMAI, A RESORT CITY IN THENORTH, BHICHAI SAID HIS DECISION TO RESIGN WAS FOR A PERSONAL REASONWHICH HE WAS NOT PREPARED TO REVEAL.     HE AFFIRMED THAT HIS RESIGNATION WOULD NOT AFFECT THE DEMOCRATPARTY'S STATUS WITH THE GOVERNMENT.     BHICHAI'S RESIGNATION IS THE FIRST PUBLIC INDICATION OFESCALATING TENSION IN CHATICHAI'S COALITION GOVERNMENT, WHICH CAMETO POWER IN AUGUST 1988.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990JIANG ZEMIN PLANS TO VISIT N. KOREA IN SPRING+     BEIJING, DEC. 28 KYODO - CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY LEADERJIANG ZEMIN IS PLANNING TO VISIT NORTH KOREA AS EARLY AS NEXTSPRING TO STRENGTHEN TIES, RELIABLE SOURCES SAID THURSDAY.     JIANG HAS PUT OFF ANOTHER VISIT TO THE SOVIET UNION,ORIGINALLY PLANNED FOR THE FIRST HALF OF 1990, THE SOURCES SAID.     JIANG'S VISIT TO PYONGYANG IS AIMED AT TIGHTENING SINO-NORTHKOREAN SOLIDARITY IN THE WAKE OF THE DOWNFALL OF PRESIDENTNICOLAE CEAUSESCU IN ROMANINA.     JIANG'S PREDECESSOR ZHAO ZIYANG VISITED NORTH KOREA LASTAPRIL, WHILE NORTH KOREAN PRESIDENT KIM IL SUNG CAME TO BEIJINGIN NOVEMBER.     CHINA AND NORTH KOREA CONTINUE TO MAINTAIN CONSERVATIVECOMMUNIST RULE AND HOPE TO CHECK ANY INFLUENCE FROM THE ONGOING WAVEOF DEMOCRATIC REFORMS CURRENTLY SWEEPING THROUGH EASTERN EUROPE, THESOURCES SAID.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990PHILIPPINES TO EXPAND INDOCHINESE REFUGEE CENTER+     MANILA, DEC. 28 KYODO - THE PHILIPPINES HAS AGREED TO SET UP ANEXPANDED REGIONAL RESETTLEMENT CENTER FOR INDOCHINESE REFUGEESDESPITE VIETNAM'S REFUSAL TO RECIPROCATE WITH A SIMILAR CENTER, THEDEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS ANNOUNCED THURSDAY.     FOREIGN AFFAIRS SECRETARY RAUL MANGLAPUS OFFERED TO HOST THEFACILITY DURING THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON INDOCHINESE REFUGEESIN GENEVA, SWITZERLAND, LAST JUNE.     BUT MANGLAPUS SET FOUR CONDITIONS, ONE OF THEM BEING THAT ASIMILAR CENTER BE ESTABLISHED BY HANOI.  OTHER CONDITIONS WERE THATREFUGEE NUMBERS WOULD BE LIMITED, THAT THE CENTER WOULD REMAINOPERATIONAL FOR ONLY THREE YEARS AND THAT MANILA WOULD NOT BEFINANCIALLY COMMITED TO THE CENTER'S OPERATIONS.     PRESIDENT CORAZON AQUINO, HOWEVER, DECIDED TO BE "FLEXIBLE"AND MADE THE DECISION AFTER THE U.N. HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEESASSURED HER LAST NOVEMBER 29 THAT A VIABLE ALTERNATIVE NOW EXISTED TOSOLVING THE PROBLEM OF THE PLACEMENT OF THOSE REFUGEES WHO REMAIN INCAMPS AFTER OTHERS ARE CHOSEN FOR RESETTLEMENT.     A DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS STATEMENT SAID THE DECISION WASALSO MOTIVATED BY "THE PHILIPPINES' GENUINE COMMITMENT INASSISTING THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY IN THE SEARCH FOR A DURABLE ANDHUMANITARIAN SOLUTION TO THE REFUGEE PROBLEM AS WELL AS OUR SINCERECONCERN AND RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS."     ABOUT 17.8 MILLION DOLLARS WILL BE SPENT TO EXPAND THE PRESENTREFUGEE PROCESSING CENTER IN MORONG, BATAAN PROVINCE, 50 KILOMETERSNORTHWEST OF MANILA, AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF ANOTHER FACILITY IN THESAME AREA.     FUNDS FOR THE CENTER, INCLUDING THE ANNUAL BUDGET OF 5 MILLIONDOLLARS, WILL COME FROM BRITAIN THE UNITED STATES, JAPAN AND OTHERRESETTLEMENT COUNTRIES, THE STATEMENT SAID.     THERE ARE ABOUT 15,000 INDOCHINESE REFUGEES IN THREE PROCESSINGCENTERS IN THE PHILIPPINES WAITING FOR TRANSSHIPMENT TO RESETTLEMENTCOUNTRIES.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990COMMUNIST REBELS CLAIM STRAFING OF U.S. INFORMATION CENTER+     DAVAO, PHILIPPINES, DEC. 28 KYODO - COMMUNIST REBELS WARNED OFMORE ATTACKS AGAINST U.S. FACILITIES AS IT CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY FORLAST SUNDAY'S STRAFING OF THE U.S. INFORMATION OFFICE IN SOUTHERNPHILIPPINES.     IN A STATEMENT RECEIVED BY NEWS AGENCIES THURSDAY, THE EDILBERTOCANOY COMMAND, THE REBEL URBAN UNIT OPERATING HERE, SAID THE DECEMBER24 ATTACK WAS ITS "RESPONSE TO THE INTERVENTION OF THE PEOPLE'SNUMBER ONE A ENEMY, U.S. IMPERIALISM."     GUNMEN IN A COMMANDEERED TAXICAB FIRED AT THE U.S. INFORMATIONOFFICE IN DAVAO, SOME 650 KILOMETERS SOUTHEAST OF MANILA, CAUSINGMINOR PROPERTY DAMAGE BUT NO INJURIES IN THE EARLY MORNING ATTACK.     LAST FRIDAY, U.S. AMBASSADOR NICHOLAS PLATT BLAMED COMMUNISTREBELS FOR THE DECEMBER 14 GRENADE ATTACK ON AN AMERICAN HOUSING ANDRECREATIONAL COMPOUND ALONG ROXAS BOULEVARD IN MANILA.     THERE WERE NO INJURIES IN THE INCIDENT, BUT A SEPARATE EXPLOSIONON THE ROOF OF A U.S. DIPLOMAT'S HOUSE ON THE SAME DAY INJURED AFILIPINO WORKER.     THERE WERE SPECULATIONS EARLIER THAT REMANANTS OF THE REBELMILITARY FORCE RETALIATING AGAINST U.S. AIR SUPPORT FOR PRESIDENTCORAZON AQUINO DURING THE FAILED DECEMBER COUP ATTEMPT WERERESPONSIBLE FOR THE ATTACKS.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990CHINA DENIES ANY IMPACT FROM ROMANIAN REVOLUTION+     BEIJING, DEC. 28 KYODO - CHINA ON THURSDAY DENIED ANY IMPACTFROM THE ROMANIAN REVOLUTION, SAYING IT WILL "BUILD ITS SOCIALISMWITH CHINESE CHARACTERISTICS."     A FOREIGN MINISTRY SPOKESMAN TOLD A PRESS CONFERENCE THAT"EACH COUNTRY HAS ITS OWN CIRCUMSTANCES".     CHINA IS CONCERNED ABOUT THE DEVELOPMENT IN ROMANIA BUTBELIEVES IT IS ROMANIA'S INTERNAL AFFAIR, THE SPOKESMAN SAID.     TERMING ONGOING REFORMS SWEEPING EASTERN EUROPE AS "INTERNALAFFAIRS," THE SPOKESMAN SAID "CHINA WILL CONTINUE TO MAINTAINAND DEVELOP THE FRIENDLY RELATIONS OF COOPERATION WITH EASTERNEUROPEAN COUNTRIES."Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990CHINA HINTS AT SOVIET "PRESSURE" ON EASTERN EUROPE+     BEIJING, DEC. 29 KYODO - CHINA'S VICE PREMIER WU XUEQIAN ONTHURSDAY INDICATED THAT THE NEW POLITICAL THINKING OF SOVIETPRESIDENT MIKHAIL GORBACHEV WAS EXERTING "POLITICAL PRESSURE"ON EASTERN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES, A JAPANESE LEGISLATOR SAID.     IN A MEETING IN BEIJING WITH LIBERAL DEMOCRATIC PARTY DIETMEMBER SHINYA TOTSUKA, WU SAID THAT THE SOVIET UNION, BEING THEBIGGEST SOCIALIST COUNTRY, HAD EXERTED INFLUENCE ON EASTERN EUROPEANCOUNTRIES TO FOLLOW HE "NEW POLITICAL THINKING" OF GORBACHEVIN CONNECTION WITH CRUCIAL CHANGES IN THOSE COUNTRIES, ACCORDING TOTOTSUKA.     MEANWHILE, CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY GENERAL SECRETARY JIANG ZEMINSAID THE SAME DAY IN A MEETING WITH VALENTIN FALIN, VISITING DIRECTOROF THE SOVIET COMMUNIST PARTY'S INTERNATIONAL DEPARTMENT, THAT CHINAWOULD NEVER INTERFERE IN THE AFFAIRS OF OTHER COUNTRIES AND ALSOOPPOSES OTHER COUNTRIES INTERFERING IN ITS OWN INTERNAL AFFAIRS.     WU ALSO SAID IT IS QUITE DIFFICULT FOR EASTERN EUROPEANCOUNTRIES, WHICH "HAVE BEEN PROMOTING SOCIALISM FOR 40 YEARS,"TO SUDDENLY ABANDON IT, ALTHOUGH ALL THOSE COUNTRIES EXCEPT ALBANIAWANT ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL LIBERALIZATION, ACCORDING TO TOTSUKA, AMEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES NOW VISITING CHINA.     WU SAID HE WOULD LIKE OBSERVE CAREFULLY THE FUTURE OF SOCIALISMIN EASTERN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES, TOTSUKA ADDED.     THE VICE PREMIER ALSO SAID THAT AS A RESULT OF THE U.S.-SOVIETSUMMIT IN MALTA THERE WAS LESS CHANCE OF A GLOBAL WAR BREAKING OUT.     CONFRONTATIONS, HOWEVER, WOULD CONTINUE IN SPITE OF INCESSANTDIALOGUES, WU SAID, APPARENTLY CHANGING CHINA'S VIEW THAT THE WORLDWAS MOVING FROM CONFRONTATION TOWARD DIALOGUE, TOTSUKA SAID.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990NEPAL-INDIA DISPUTE CAN BE RESOLVED, INDIAN PREMIER SAYS+     KATHMANDU, DEC. 29 KYODO - INDIAN PRIME MINISTER VISHWANATHPRATAP SINGH HAS SENT A MESSAGE TO KING BIRENDRA OF NEPAL SAYING THATOUTSTANDING ISSUES BETWEEN THE TWO NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES CAN BERESOLVED ON THE BASIS OF MUTUAL SENSITIVITY TO EACH OTHER'S CONCERN.     IN THE MESSAGE OF GREETINGS TO THE KING ON HIS 45TH BIRTHDAY,SINGH SAID INDIA AND NEPAL HAVE A UNIQUE RELATIONSHIP LINKED BY TIESOF HISTORY, GEOGRAPHY, CULTURE AND PERSONAL BONDS.  THE MESSAGE WASRELEASED ON FRIDAY.     BOTH GOVERNMENTS ANNOUNCED THURSDAY THAT THE FOREIGN MINISTERSOF THE TWO COUNTRIES WILL START TALKS TO IMPROVE THEIR TIES IN NEWDELHI NEXT WEEK.     A DISPUTE BETWEEN THE TWO NEIGHBORS WAS SPARKED OFF AFTER THEYFAILED TO RENEW THE BILATERAL TRADE AND TRANSIT TREATIES WHICH LAPSEDIN MARCH THIS YEAR.     THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT UNDER FORMER PRIME MINISTER RAJIV GANDHIHAD ALSO ALLEGED THAT NEPAL SHOWED DISREGARD TO MATTERS OF INDIA'SSECURITY WHEN IT BOUGHT ARMS FROM CHINA -- NEPAL'S NEIGHBOR TO THENORTH -- LAST YEAR.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990PHILIPPINE TRANSPORTATION SECRETARY RESIGNS+     MANILA, DEC. 29 KYODO - PRESIDENT CORAZON AQUINO'S SECRETARY OFTRANSPORATION AND COMMUNICATIONS RAINERIO REYES RESIGNED ON FRIDAY,PRESS SECRETARY ADOLFO AZCUNA SAID.     AZCUNA SAID IN A STATEMENT THE PRESIDENT EXPRESSED "DEEPREGRETS OVER THE LOSS OF THE SERVICES OF THIS PARTICULAR TECHNOCRATAT A TIMEWHEN THE ADMINISTRATION'S MASTER PLAN FOR MODERNIZING THENATION'S TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE, PREPAREDDURING REYES' TENURE, HAS FINALLY GOTTEN UNDER WAY."     REYES HAS BEEN ATTACKED FOR HIS FAILURE TO SOLVE METROPOLITANMANILA'S TRANSPORTATION CRISIS.     HIS MOVE FOLLOWED THE RESIGNATION WEDNESDAY OF THE FIVE-MEMBERPRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON GOOD GOVERNMENT, AN AGENCY ASSIGNED TORECOVER THE ALLEGED ILL-GOTTEN WEALTH OF THE LATE PRESIDENT FERDINANDMARCOS, HIS FAMILY AND ASSOCIATES, TO GIVE AQUINO A FREE HAND INREORGANIZING THE BUREAUCRACY.     AQUINO WILL ANNOUNCE HER NEW CABINET ON SUNDAY FOLLOWING STRONGCLAMOR TO REVAMP THE GOVERNMENT EVEN BEFORE THE OUTBREAK OF THEDECEMBER 1-9 BLOODY COUP ATTEMPT WHICH LEFT AT LEAST 113 PERSONS DEADAND 635 WOUNDED.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990CHINA MAKES CONTRADICTORY RESPONSE TO  ROMANIAN REVOLUTION+     HONG KONG, DEC. 29 KYODO - CHINESE LEADERS HAVE BOTH PRAISED ANDCRITICIZED FALLEN ROMANIAN LEADER NICOLAE CEAUSESCU IN ACONTRADICTORY ANALYSIS OF THE ROMANIAN REVOLUTION, ACCORDING TO THECHINESE LANGUAGE DAILY MING PAO ON FRIDAY.     THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE OF THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY (CCP)PRAISED CEAUSESCU FOR FIRMLY ADHERING TO THE SOCIALIST ROAD BUT SAIDHIS REFUSAL TO CONTEMPLATE REFORM WAS HIS BIGGEST MISTAKE AND THEMAIN REASON FOR HIS RAPID FALL FROM POWER, THE MING PAO REPORT SAID.     THE POLITICAL BUREAU OF THE CCP'S CENTRAL COMMITTEE HAS HELDFOUR EMERGENCY MEETINGS SINCE THE ROMANIAN REVOLUTION SENT SHOCKWAVES THROUGH THE BEIJING LEADERSHIP, THE REPORT REVEALED.     AT MEETINGS HELD ON SUNDAY AND MONDAY -- ATTENDED BY CCP GENERALSECRETARY JIANG ZEMIN AND CHINESE PREMIER LI PENG -- A PAPER WASPUBLISHED ANALYZING THE FALL OF CEAUSESCU AND OUTLINING CHINA'SRESPONSE.     CHINESE LEADERS HAD PREDICTED THE FALL OF CEAUSESCU AT THE TIMEOF THE VISIT TO ROMANIA BY QIAO SHI, A MEMBER OF THE STANDINGCOMMITTEE OF THE POLITBURO, IT SAID.     BUT THE CHINESE HAD  EXPECTED CEAUSESCU TO REMAIN IN POWER UNTILNEXT SPRING AND WERE TAKEN ABACK BY THE RAPID PACE OF CHANGE, THEMING PAO REPORT SAID.     THE POLITICAL BUREAU PAPER STRESSED THAT THE REFORMS CURRENTLYSWEEPING EASTERN EUROPE WERE DEVIATING FROM THE SOCIALIST ROAD ANDCALLED FOR A TIGHTENING OF SECURITY TO PREVENT THE WAVE OF REFORMFROM REACHING CHINA.     THE MILITARY AND POLICE HAVE BEEN PUT ON ALERT AND ALL LEAVE HASBEEN CANCELLED AS A PRECAUTIONARY MEASURE, THE REPORT SAID.     AT A MEETING OF THE POLITICAL BUREAU HELD ON SATURDAY, ATHREE-POINT PLAN WAS ISSUED IN RESPONSE TO THE ROMANIAN CRISIS.     IT INCLUDES A CALL MADE TO ENSURE THAT THE MILITARY IS KEPTUNDER THE FIRM LEADERSHIP OF THE PARTY AND AN EXHORTATION TO CADRESTO BE UNREMITTING IN THEIR ATTACK ON "CAPITALIST ROADERS."     THE PLAN ALSO URGED THAT PROTEST STRIKES BY STUDENTS OR WORKERSBE NIPPED IN THE BUD, MING PAO SAID.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990IRIANESE, ASYLUM SEEKERS LEAVE NEW GUINEA CONSULATE+     JAKARTA, DEC. 29 KYODO - SEVEN IRIANESE WHO HAVE BEEN SEEKINGPOLITICAL ASYLUM FOR THE PAST SEVERAL DAYS HAVE LEFT PAPUA NEWGUINEA'S CONSULATE GENERAL AT JAYAPURA, IRIAN JAYA, A FOREIGNMINISTRY PRESS STATEMENT SAID FRIDAY.     THE STATEMENT SAID THE GROUP WAS PERSUADED TO LEAVE THURSDAY BYOFFICIALS OF THE TWO GOVERNMENTS.     INDONESIAN ARMED FORCES SPOKESMAN NURHADI PURWOSAPUTRO PREDICTEDEARLIER THAT THOSE WHO SOUGHT ASYLUM HAD BEEN INVOLVED IN A STREETDEMONSTRATION ON THE FIRST ANNIVERSARY OF THE RAISING OF THE FREEMELANESIAN NATIONAL MOVEMENT FLAG BY SEPARATIST LEADER THOMASWANGGAI.     THE STREET MARCH LAST DECEMBER 14 INVOLVED 400 PEOPLE ON THEMAIN STREET OF JAYAPURA AND WAS LED BY WANGGAI AND 36 FOLLOWERS WHORAISED THE FLAG AND DECLARED AN INDEPENDENT MELANESIAN STATE.     WANGGAI, WHO GRADUATED FROM OKAYAMA UNIVERSITY OF JAPAN,RECEIVED A 20-YEAR PRISON SENTENCE FOR HIS ROLE, WHILE HIS FOLLOWERSALSO GOT SEVERE SENTENCES.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990BEIJING STUDENTS HECKLE TO CHINESE PARTY OFFICIAL+     HONG KONG, DEC. 29 KYODO - BEIJING UNIVERSITY STUDENTS HECLED ASTATE COUNCIL SPOKESMAN WHEN HE TOLD THEM CHINA WILL ALWAYS "WALKTHE PATH OF SOCIALISM," ACCORDING TO VARIOUS HONG KONG PRESSREPORTS FRIDAY.     STATE COUNCIL SPOKESMAN YUAN MU -- A CLOSE AIDE OF CHINESEPREMIER LI PENG -- DREW HISSES FROM A HAND-PICKED AUDIENCE OF 300STUDENTS DURING A SUPRISE VISIT TO THE UNIVERSITY ON THURSDAY,REPORTS SAID.     IN A TWO-HOUR "DIALOGUE," YUAN ANSWERED QUESTIONS WHICHHAD BEEN SUBMITTED IN ADVANCE AND POSED BY APPROVED STUDENT LEADERSREGARDING CHINA'S RESPONSE TO EVENTS IN ROMANIA.     BUT YUAN REFUSED TO ANSWER WHEN A STUDENT SHOUTED A QUESTIONABOUT WHY OUSTED COMMUNIST PARTY CHIEF ZHAO ZIYANG HAD BEEN BLAMEDFOR ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL PROBLEMS CAUSED BY SENIOR LEADER DENGXIAOPING'S POLICIES.     HE ALSO IGNORED A QUESTION ON WHY DENG HAD SUDDENLY APPOINTEDJIANG ZEMIN AS SUCCESSOR TO ZHAO ZIYANG AFTER ALLOWING THE FALL OFEXPERIENCED REVOLUTIONARIES LIKE ZHAO AND HU YAOBANG.     HU YAOBANG WAS DISMISSED IN 1987 FOR FAILING TO QUELL STUDENTDISSENT AND HIS DEATH IN APRIL THIS YEAR SPARKED THE PRO-DEMOCRACYMOVEMENT WHICH WAS CRUSHED IN THE TIANANMEN MILITARY CRACKDOWN INJUNE.     IT WAS REVEALED, HOWEVER, THAT ZHAO - WHO HAS NOT BEEN SEENIN PUBLIC SINCE VISITING STUDENT DEMONSTRATORS IN MAY - IS STILLIN BEIJING.     YUAN WAS HISSED WHEN HE RESPONDED TO A QUESTION ABOUT ROMANIABY SAYING, "NO MATTER WHAT THE SITUATION IS IN THE REST OF THEWORLD, CHINA WILL ALWAYS WALK THE PATH OF SOCIALISM."     YUAN'S UNANNOUNCED VISIT TO THE UNIVERSITY SHOWS THE ANXIETYFELT BY THE CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY LEADERSHIP ABOUT THE POSSIBLEREPERCUSSIONS OF THE FALL OF THE HARD-LINE COMMUNIST GOVERNMENT INROMANIA, ANALYSTS SAID.     THE DEFIANCE SHOWN BY A HAND-PICKED STUDENT AUDIENCE INDICATESTHE CURRENT LEVEL OF DISTRUST THAT EXISTS BETWEEN STUDENTS AND THEPARTY, THEY ADDED.     MEANWHILE, IN FURTHER SIGNS OF DISSENT, LARGE-CHARACTER POSTERSHAVE APPEARED AT BEIJING AND QINGHUA UNIVERSITIES COMMENTING ON THEROMANIAN UPRISING, ACCORDING TO A REPORT IN FRIDAY'S HONG KONGSTANDARD, AN ENGLISH LANGUAGE DAILY.     ONE POSTER READ: "LEARN FROM ROMANIA," THE REPORT SAID.ALL POSTERS WERE SWIFTLY TORN DOWN BY THE AUTHORITIES.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 19905,000 MIGRANTS SLEEPING ROUGH IN CHINESE CITY, REPORT SAYS+     HONG KONG, DEC. 29 KYODO - OVER 5,000 ECONOMIC MIGRANTS ARESLEEPING ROUGH IN THE CITY OF GUANGZHOU IN SOUTHERN CHINA, THE HONGKONG CHINA NEWS AGENCY REPORTED FRIDAY.     A TEAM FROM GUANGZHOU'S POPULATION RESEARCH OFFICE CALCULATEDTHE FIGURE WHEN IT TOURED THE CITY LATE TUESDAY NIGHT TO PREPAREPOPULATION FIGURESS, THE REPORT SAID.     THE TEAM VISITED EIGHT DISTRICTS OF THE CITY AND COVERED 112STREETS.  IT FIND OVER 5,000 PEOPLE SLEEPING OUTDOORS UNDER BRIDGES,ON ROOFS, UNDER BUILDINGS, AND IN MAKESHIFT SHELTERS.     DESPITE CHINA'S ECONOMIC AUSTERITY PROGRAM AND THE RECENTRECESSION IT IS ESTIMATED THAT GUANGZHOU, A PORT CITY WHICH IS THECAPITAL OF GUANGDONG PROVINCE, STILL HAS AROUND A MILLION MIGRANTLABORERS, THE REPORT SAYS.     MOST OF THE MIGRANTS COME FROM CHINA'S POORER NORTHERN ANDWESTERN PROVINCES SUCH AS ANHUI, HUNAN, SICHUAN, AND HENAN TO LOOKFOR WORK IN GUANGZHOU, WHICH HAS ENJOYED AN ECONOMIC BOOM IN RECENTYEARS.     THOSE WHO ARE UNSUCCESFUL IN THEIR SEARCH FOR WORK SPEND THEDAYTIME SCRAPING A LIVING BUYING AND SELLING JUNK, COLLECTING RAGS ORBUSKING, AND SPEND THE NIGHT OUTDOORS, THE REPORT SAID.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990PAKISTAN RECOGNIZES NEW ROMANIAN GOVERNMENT+     ISLAMABAD, DEC. 29 KYODO - PAKISTAN FRIDAY RECOGNIZED THE NEWROMANIAN GOVERNMENT OF THE NATIONAL SALVATION FRONT.     A FOREIGN OFFICE SPOKESMAN SAID THAT PAKISTAN AND ROMANIA ARETIED IN BONDS OF TRADITIONAL FRIENDSHIP AND IT IS HOPED THAT THESETIES WILL BE FURTHER STRENGTHENED UNDER THE NEW GOVERNMENT.     STATE-OWNED RADIO PAKISTAN ALSO QUOTED THE FOREIGN OFFICESPOKESMAN AS EXPRESSING THE HOPE THAT ALL THOSE ARRESTED IN ROMANIAFOR BEING LOYAL TO THE OUSTED AND EXECUTED PRESIDENT NICOLAECEAUSESCU WOULD GET A FAIR TRIAL.     THE  STATEMENT BY THE FOREIGN OFFICE SPOKESMAN WAS THE FIRSTOFFICIAL COMMENT BY PAKISTAN SINCE THE UPRISING IN ROMANIA LASTFRIDAY IN WHICH AN ESTIMATED 60,000 PEOPLE ARE REPORTED TO HAVE LOSTTHEIR LIVES.Back to Headline List CopyrightASIAN POLITICAL NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1990KWANGJU GENERAL QUITS PARLIAMENTARY POST+     SEOUL, DEC. 29 KYODO - A FORMER SOUTH KOREAN GENERAL WHO WASSERVING AT THE TIME OF THE MILITARY'S 1980 MASSACRE OF CIVILIANS INKWANGJU SAID FRIDAY HE IS RESIGNING FROM HIS PARLIAMENTARY AND OTHERPUBLIC POSTS.     CHUNG HO YONG, A RULING DEMOCRATIC JUSTICE PARTY (DJP) MEMBER OFPARLIAMENTARY AND FORMER DEFENSE MINISTER, SAID HE IS RESIGNING TOCONTRIBUTE TO POLITICAL STABILITY.     HE WILL ALSO QUIT AS A MEMBER OF THE PARTY'S CENTRAL EXECUTIVECOMMITTEE AND AS REGIONAL PARTY CHIEF.     BUT CHUNG SAID THE RESIGNATIONS ARE NOT LINKED TO THE QUESTIONOF ACCEPTANCE OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE KWANGJU UPRISING.     THE OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT COUNT OF THOSE KILLED IN THE UPRISING IS200, BUT LOCAL CITIZENS CLAIM THE FIGURE IS HIGHER.     CHUNG HEADED THE SPECIAL WARFARE COMMAND WHICH WAS PART OF THEMILITARY FORCE USED TO QUELL THE UNREST.     CHUNG'S RESIGNATION, WHICH WAS DEMANDED BY OPPOSITION PARTIES,CLEARS THE WAY FOR PRESIDENT ROH TAE WOO TO TACKLE THE POLITICALIMPLICATIONS OF A DECISION BY FORMER PRESIDENT CHUN DO HWAN TOTESTIFY BEFORE THE PARLIAMENT ON SUNDAY.     ALSO ON FRIDAY, A PRESIDENTIAL SPOKESMAN SAID DJP CHAIRMAN PARKJYUN KYU WOULD RESIGN FROM HIS POST.     THE SPOKESMAN SAID ROH, WHO IS ALSO PRESIDENT OF THE DJP,ACCEPTED HIS LETTER OF RESIGNATION WHICH HAD BEEN SUBMITTED EARLIER.     PARK'S RESIGNATION IS SAID TO BE AN ATTEMPT TO ASSUMERESPONSIBILITY FOR HIS COMMENTS IN A SEOUL DAILY IN WHICH HE SAID ROHCOULD LEAVE THE GOVERNING PARTY AFTER CLEARING THE QUESTION OFINJUSTICES UNDER CHUN'S REGIME.     DJP OFFICIALS SAID A PARTY OFFICIAL NAM JAE HEE WILL REPLACEPARK FOR THE TIME BEING.Back to Headline List WT03-B09-13IA087-000629-B021-124http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/po06.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035715 text/html 19218HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:55:23 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:14 GMTContent-length: 19031Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/po06.html Sample Issue Copyright EVANS-NOVAK POLITICAL REPORT via NewsNet November 19, 1991 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FRONT PAGE NEWS Friday's market plunge after credit card capping reveals the (1330 words) PRESIDENTIAL '92 (954 words) POLITICS '91 (405 words) SPECIAL REPORT FROM ISRAEL (236 words) CopyrightEVANS-NOVAK POLITICAL REPORT via NewsNetNovember 19, 1991     Friday's market plunge after credit card capping reveals the     Friday's market plunge after credit card capping reveals theextent of Administration dismay on economic policy and shows asplit between the President's advisers.     Pat Buchanan's sudden appearance as a challenger signals realproblems for Bush presidential campaign, which is a long way fromgetting started. He also may face David Duke and possibly others.     Is this the week for Mario Cuomo? Nobody knows for sure. It isunthinkable that he won't announce after all the backing andfilling, but it is still not a done deal.     Despite being badly beaten, David Duke still poses seriousproblems for the Republican Party and George Bush.     Senate outlook for Republicans is so grim that Majority LeaderRobert Dole is dead serious in possibly bowing out rather thanseeking re-election.BUSH ADMINISTRATION     Economic Policy: Amid all the confusion, it is now clear thatBush will not press for a tax cut package until the State of theUnion address. In so doing, the President has put himself in themiddle of three groups inside his Administration on strategy abouthow to handle the recession.     Group #1: This is largely Treasury Secretary Nicholas Bradyall by himself. He is into optimism on the economy, contending thatrecovery is at hand and arguing against "talking down" the economy.His comments on Meet the Press Sunday were viewed as "not helpful"by one key Republican insider but nobody wants to take on thePresident's close associate.     Group #2: The economy is in bad shape and it's absolutelyessential that something be done now. HUD Secretary Jack Kemp isthe only cabinet member who publicly takes this position, but hehas substantial support from conservatives in Congress led by Rep.Vin Weber (R-Minn.).     Group #3: The economy is poor, but this is not the time tomove. Since it will be very difficult to make any progress in theDemocratic Congress at any rate, why not wait until next year? Thisis the view of a majority inside the Administration (includingBudget Director Richard Darman) and much of the CongressionalRepublican leadership.     Bush has moved quietly from Group #1 to Group #3. On hispolitical travels he has heard the sad story of economic woe from"Team 100" members (GOP heavy financial contributors) who tell himthey simply no longer have the resources to put out thecontributions that they used to. He wants action, but doesn'treally know what to do and isn't ready to do it now.     Against this backdrop is deep irritation, particularly fromChief-of-Staff John Sununu, that Kemp went public in declaring hiswishes for an immediate tax cut. Kemp has no intention of quitting,and the President has no intention of firing him. But the tensionis such that it is hard to imagine how the current state of affairscan continue indefinitely.     Kemp is privately urging Bush to call for a special session ofCongress to deal with the economy, but his status is shown by thefact that the President signed the bill gouging Kemp's efforts toprivatize public housing.     Credit Card Cap: The President's support of a "voluntary"credit card cap and subsequent Senate passage of a "mandatory" capreflect the lack of economic strategy both in the White House andon Capitol Hill.     1) The idea originated at a secret political planning meetingNov. 6 by formal and informal Bush advisers. Ex-White House Chief-of-Staff Ken Duberstein urged that the President start "demagoging"on credit card interest rates. The reaction around the dinner wasmixed.     2) Duberstein's idea crept into the White House bloodstreamand got some support from Sununu. Although it was not officiallypart of the text, the President included it in a New Yorkspeech.     3) Sen. Alfonse D'Amato (R.-N.Y.), facing a tough re-election,took off with the idea and ran; and a Senate wanting to dosomething passed the proposal. Speaker Thomas Foley (D.-Wash.)responded that he would hurry the bill through the House pronto.Bush's economic gurus were apoplectic, and CEA Chief Michael Boskinrailed against it at the senior staff meeting two days later.     4) That set up two distinct schools of thought in the Bushcamp. The policy people--Brady, Darman, Boskin, Kemp--are appalledby the whole idea. The politicians--Republican National ChairmanClayton Yuetter, Charlie Black, Craig Fuller and Duberstein--thinkit's a terrific idea.     5) Last Saturday after the credit card cap appeared to haveplayed its part in the Friday market drop, Kemp--appearing on theEvans & Novak program on CNN--declared Bush would veto the D'Amatobill. It is extremely doubtful that Kemp had a real authorizationfrom the President to go this far, but he is a fearless soul notaverse to taking chances. The next day, Brady and VP Dan Quayletook the same stance, though a little bit more chary aboutpredicting a veto.     6) That leaves Bush in the position of making sure that a billwill not pass that embodies the position he wanted the banks totake voluntarily. It is a straddle that would make any politicianlook uncomfortable.     7) It is clear now that the credit card cap will not becomelaw, but the mischief of a policy vacuum becomes obvious. With theeconomy down, deadlock between the branches of government and thebudget deal impeding action, frustration both downtown and on theHill can cause severe trouble.     RTC Financing: The coming battleground, perhaps this week, isthe attempt by Weber and other House conservatives not to let theRTC financing bill pass without aa economic growth packageattached. Weber is insisting on a capital gains rate reduction andan elimination of the "passive loss" provision from  the '86 reformact.     Kemp, as befits his character, has jumped in to support theWeber proposal. Establishment Republican Senators, intimidated byDemocratic power, think messing around with the bailout is sheermadness. This is the kind of proposal that the Bush Administrationwould veer away from quickly, but oddly it has said nothing aboutit one way or another as we go to press.     The question is whether the House GOPers can even bring thisonto the floor under the right rules there, which is why they wouldlike some collaborators in the Senate to take advantage of theeasier rules there. Conservative House members are looking at HouseMinority Whip Newt Gingrich (R-Ga.) to see which way he will go onthis one; some colleagues see him trying to straddle the Bush WhiteHouse and the House bomb-throwers.     U.S-China: If Secretary of State James Baker has actuallysucceeded in reducing China's arm sales proclivity, not many inWashington believe it. But there is no doubt that Beijing'shardliners are not as powerful as they were in the aftermath ofTiananmen Square. Outside Beijing, the Chinese are paying verylittle attention to their government and the free-marketexperiments continue in the South.     This is the China that White House advocates of continued MFNstatus point to whenever the topic is broached. Denying thosepotential markets to U.S. business, they say, will guarantee thatthe Japanese and other Asian players will dominate the Pacific foryears to come. Both the Japanese and Taiwanese believe they can usethe coming integration of Hong Kong into China as a springboard forventures in South China.     All of this will come to the fore when Congress reacts toBaker's failure to get human rights pledges from the Chinese. Withonly limited success on other fronts, the Administration willlikely fall back on economic arguments to keep the MFN window toChina open. Beijing's conditional pledge not to sell missiles toSyria or Pakistan won't carry much weight with Congressmen whothink such sales shouldn't even be contemplated and does nothing toaddress nuclear assistance to Iran. But the White House is helpedby the Democrats' insistence on focusing on domestic events.Back to Headline List CopyrightEVANS-NOVAK POLITICAL REPORT via NewsNetNovember 19, 1991PRESIDENTIAL '92     Buchanan: His sudden appearance at the door, presumably torun, makes life difficult for the White House. What does he have inmind?     1) Almost certainly, he will run. He cannot again pull up tothe line as he did in '87 and then pull away. His announcement isexpected at the end of next week.     2) He is not merely interested in pulling Bush back to theReaganite conservative positions that Buchanan thinks the Presidenthas abandoned (notably the tax issue and quotas) but to stake outthe nationalistic "America First" agenda he has been airing outover television and in his column: protectionist on trade,exclusionist on immigration, isolationist on foreign intervention.     3) A realist, Buchanan knows he cannot be nominated. But animpressive performance would put him on the top of the '96 list,where he would now be an also-ran. His underlying premise must be:can '92 do for Buchanan in '96 what '76 did for Reagan in '80?     4) That means Buchanan is not interested in a quick pop in NewHampshire but wants to stay in as long as possible, picking up lotsof delegates to take to Houston.     All this hinges on how Buchanan does in N.H.:     1) Apart from the Manchester Union Leader and possibly ex-Rep.Chuck Douglas (R), Buchanan does not have much in the way ofconventional endorsements. Even State Sen. (and ex-U.S. Sen.)Gordon Humphrey (R) is not helping.     2) Sununu, who guided Bush to victory there in '88, is lessinfluential as Chief-of-Staff and has not enhanced his popularitywith repeated political interventions from the White House the pastthree years.     3) Buchanan's right-wing populism--and anti-foreign aidstrictures--should play well in New Hampshire's deep recession.     4) His opposition to Desert Storm is a negative, but less sotoday than it would have been nine months ago.     5) The question of how Bush reacts to Buchanan is a difficultone, and has not even been addressed at the White House.     Duke: There has never been any doubt that once Duke lost hisrace for Governor of Louisiana, he would enter the presidentialprimaries. It looks as though he will stay out of N.H. to see howBuchanan does there but enter all the southern primaries.     Other Republican Candidates: Critics of Bush who don't carefor Buchanan would like a supply-side, pro-Israel, free trade, freeimmigration, internationalist alternative. Kemp and formerEducation Secretary William J. Bennett both fill the bill, butneither has the slightest intention of running against Bush.     Bush: He is his own campaign manager and all reports show thathe is not happy about the way things are going. The delay in namingthe proposed triumvirate of Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher,political consultant Robert Teeter and businessman Fred Malek leadsto musing that he is not happy with that set-up.     Reports from the inside suggest that Sununu may be broughtover from the White House to run the campaign with either Brady orTransportation Secretary Sam Skinner taking over at the WhiteHouse. But the odds are against it. Another version has a moreimportant role for Charlie Black.     Cuomo: Almost everybody thinks this is the week he willannounce his candidacy, but nobody is sure. They are swimmingupstream but two astute Mario-watchers think he will sayno--figuring in the end his unsureness will lead him not to run.     No other figure in American political life would go throughthe process that Cuomo has for the last month and then destroyhimself by saying no, but with the Governor that is barelypossible.     If on the other hand, he does what is rational and announceshis candidacy shortly before or after Thanksgiving, here is theoutlook:     1) By design or not, Cuomo's delay has radically shortened thegame--to his advantage and to the disadvantage of lesser knowncandidates. In a short campaign for the New Hampshire primary, hehas a huge edge in name i.d., money and campaigning experience. Ifhe wins comfortably in New Hampshire, he could be off and runningfor the nomination.     2) How much Cuomo has hurt himself with this minuet is hard tosay. The reporters don't like it and neither do many politicians,but it shouldn't make much difference to politicians.     3) The conventional wisdom of six months ago, that Cuomo wasthe only Democrat who could have a chance to overtake an invincibleBush, has turned into the current conventional wisdom that he isthe one of the least effective challengers of a wounded Bush.     4) Cuomo's greatest liability is the fiscal crisis of NewYork. Whereas Dukakis in '88 campaigned with the benefit of theMassachusetts Miracle, Cuomo this time would have to campaign withthe burden of the New York Nightmare. Cuomo was a bit rough twoweeks ago in answering questions from his own constituents over thetelevised ombudsman's program. Think what it will be like with themedia.     Clinton: Mario-mania has eclipsed Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton,but so far he looks like the pick of the Demo litter. He has hisact in order and impresses everywhere. He is a long way from beinga regional candidate and is on the verge of locking up some big NewYork money.     Kerrey: Those who expected Sen. Bob Kerrey (D-Neb.) to be thesalvation of the Democratic party are a little disappointed. Oneparty insider told us he personally looks a little "weak"--astrange description for a war hero. He did attract some attentionfor audacity this week, however, by going after some anti-Mariopublic employees' unions in New York.Back to Headline List CopyrightEVANS-NOVAK POLITICAL REPORT via NewsNetNovember 19, 1991POLITICS '91     Louisiana Governor: Edwin Edwards (D) prevented what waswidely regarded across the political spectrum as a politicalcatastrophe in the election of David Duke. But neither party cantake much satisfaction in the results--particularly the Republicans(who from Washington provided more strategic and logistic help inbeating Duke than was generally realized).     1) Even with all the incredibly heavy baggage carried by Duke,Democrats still showed they have a terrible time getting whitevotes in the South--particularly white, middle-class males. WhileDuke's 55 per cent of the white vote was lower than conventionalRepublican candidates get in Louisiana, he collected more than 60per cent of white males, white Protestants and middle-incomevoters.     2) Apart from the catastrophe of Duke running as the GOPcandidate for governor, the state GOP was nearly wiped out. Lt.Gov. Paul Hardy (R) was defeated for re-election, and Secretary ofState Fox McKeithen's (R) re-election was the only statewide win.The state party is set back about 12 years by Duke.     3) The GOP is not through with Duke. He seems set oncontinuing his '92 game plan of running against Bush in thesouthern primaries and then running back in La. either against Sen.John Breaux (D) or Rep. Jerry Huckaby (D).     4) Worst of all, Bush did not get the specter of DD off hisback. Democrats now will accuse any Republican, including thePresident, who raises the quota issue of imitating David Duke (evenEdwards attempted it in his victory statement Saturday night).SENATE '92     In the wake of the Pennsylvania debacle, Senate GOP CampaignCommittee Chairman Phil Gramm (R-Tex.)is putting the best face onit, saying the race showed that insiders are vulnerable and thereare more Democratic insiders than Republicans. The key, however, isfor Republicans to run on "issues not on your resume" as Grammthinks Dick Thornburgh did in Pennsylvania. But the bottomlineremains that the GOP has not been able to recruit top-drawercandidates for several vulnerable seats.     Dole was really stricken by the Thornburgh loss and what itmeans for his leadership in the Senate. He never really expected tobe returned to Majority Leader after the '92 election, but worriesnow of forces so depleted that he will be leading a corporal'sguard. If Thornburgh can go down in Pennsylvania, can the Demospick up open seats in Utah and Idaho?Back to Headline List CopyrightEVANS-NOVAK POLITICAL REPORT via NewsNetNovember 19, 1991SPECIAL REPORT FROM ISRAEL     With bilateral talks between Israel and, separately, Jordan-Palestinians, Syrians, and Lebanese likely to start soon, Israelconfronts severe problems. Reporting from the scene, we make thefollowing points:     1) Pressures grow from American Jewish leaders for territorialand political compromises with Palestinians, who gained stature outof the Madrid meeting. An Israeli poll shows 70 per cent of Israelivoters favor the land-for-peace concept, but leaders say no.     2) Record unemployment plus huge costs of handling SovietJewish emigres threaten Israel's worst economic crisis. Currentrecord jobless of 145,000 will swell close to 250,000 in 1992. Thestate-controlled economy does not seem able to convert fully tofree-market.     3) Despite a new settlement on the Golan Heights and three onthe West Bank, doubts increase as to long-term viability ofsettlements. Jewish immigrants are being quietly steered tosettlements despite U.S. warnings. Government officials now fearanother major battle with President Bush in January over the $10million loan guarantees denied Israel in September.     4) But there is an up-beat note: private talks with topleaders show definite movement toward a general agreement thatIsrael not only must but will make real compromises at least on thePalestinian question. Heavy political pressures from the BushAdministration, U.S. Jewish lobby and Western Europeans are helpingchange winds here in Israel, the most politically sensitive countryin the world.Back to Headline List WT03-B09-14IA087-000629-B021-175http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/po01.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035735 text/html 66435HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:55:36 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:15 GMTContent-length: 66248Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/po01.html Sample Issue Copyright THE HOTLINE via NewsNet January 2, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES SUMMARY QUOTE OF THE DAY (40 words) OVERLOOKED (41 words) TV SOUNDBITE (39 words) WHITE HOUSE '96 THE BIG EVENTS: SCHEDULE THROUGH END OF MARCH (230 words) MATCHING FUNDS: DOLE CERTIFIED FOR BIGGEST PAYOUT TODAY (149 words) NEW HAMPSHIRE: DOLE RISES IN LATE-DECEMBER POLL (179 words) IOWA: SIX WEEKS TO GO, LAST HURRAH FOR THE HAWKEYE STATE? (175 words) SOUTH CAROLINA: DOLE SLIPS, BUT SO DOES GRAMM (291 words) OTHER EARLY STATES: A RHODE TO NOWHERE (525 words) NATIONAL ISSUES CONVENTION: LIST OF NO-SHOWS GROWS (150 words) DOLE: GET READY FOR THE CAVALCADE OF GOVS (330 words) FORBES: IN PERSON AND ON THE TUBE (363 words) GRAMM: FAULTS DOLE IN BUDGET BATTLE (460 words) ALEXANDER: SAYS FOCUS ON BALANCED BUDGET HURTS GOP (630 words) BUCHANAN: AIRS RADIO AD IN NEW YORK, WANTS TO REACH BALLOT (310 words) LUGAR: MIXED REVIEWS OF BOMB THREAT ADS (150 words) CLINTON: A SPRING OFFENSIVE? THE REAGAN PLAYBOOK? (373 words) A FEW YEAR-END THOUGHTS (369 words) NATIONAL BRIEFING WHITEWATER: WHILE YOU WERE AWAY ... (309 words) GINGRICH: A HAPPY NEWT YEAR? (364 words) OTHER STUFF: SCHUNDLER SPILLS THE BEANS (174 words) COVER TO COVER (79 words) YEAR-ENDERS 1996 PREDICTIONS (593 words) 1995 IN REVIEW: (270 words) SENATE WATCH ILLINOIS: DURBIN CHALLENGES KRISLOV PETITIONS (175 words) KANSAS: FRAHM FROWNS ON SENATE BID (141 words) LOUISIANA: TAUZIN WON'T RUN, SHAKES UP POLITICAL LANDSCAPE (603 words) MASSACHUSETTS: WELD DOES AN ABOUT-FACE ON PACS (100 words) SOUTH CAROLINA: STROM NOT STRONG IN NEW POLL (276 words) ON THE HOUSE ILLINOIS: FILING DEADLINE 12/18, PRIMARY 3/19 (415 words) MD 07: THIRTY-TWO VIE TO REPLACE MFUME (224 words) HOUSE HUNTING: CHANGE OF HEART FOR BATEMAN (317 words) TV MONITOR TV MONITOR (203 words) CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996QUOTE OF THE DAY       "If you took Gumby and spent a quarter of a million        dollars, he would also reflect well in the polls."        -- Phil Gramm's SC director Jim Merrill on Steve            Forbes' rise in polls, Columbia STATE, 1/2Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OVERLOOKED                   ONE YEAR AGO IN THE HOTLINECNN's Bill Schneider offered this prediction for '96: "Clintongoes into his 1996 re-election campaign virtually certain to losenext month's New Hampshire primary to Jesse Jackson."  For thisyear's prognostications.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996TV SOUNDBITE   "It is almost impossible to be in a room with Bill Clinton    and not have some sense that you're dealing with just an               extraordinarily charming person."          -- Newt Gingrich, "Evans & Novak," CNN, 12/30Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996THE BIG EVENTS:  SCHEDULE THROUGH END OF MARCH     Here's a schedule of early events brought to you by TheHOTLINE, with special assistance from Manchester UNION LEADER'sDiStaso and the RNC Counsel's Office:1/6:   SC debate, carried by CNN.1/7:   NH GOP fund-raiser, $1,000/head, each candidate expected          to speak to an estimated 1,000 in Manchester.1/13:  Des Moines Register debate, on a Saturday afternoon, to be          broadcast by PBS.1/18-21: Nat'l Issues Convention in Austin, TX.  PBS will air          this nat'l focus group.  All major candidates,          including Pres. Clinton, are invited to speak.  Dole          and Alexander have said they won't show.  Only Forbes          says he will.1/29:  AK GOP caucuses.2/6:   LA caucuses (by cong. district, primary 3/12).2/12:  IA caucuses (by precinct).2/15:  WMUR debate, to be aired nationally by CNN.2/18:  The "Chuck Douglas" debate in Concord, sponsored by the          John Stark Foundation, Granite State Taxpayers Assn and          NH United We Stand.  Dole's refusal to appear "has          placed this event in jeopardy."2/20:  NH primary.2/24:  DE primary.2/27:  AZ, SD, ND primaries.3/2:   SC "first-in-South" primary.3/5:   Yankee Primary (MA, CT, RI, VT, ME)       GA, CO, MD primaries; MN caucuses3/7:   NY primary3/12:  Super Tuesday (FL, TX, TN, OK, MS)       OR primary3/19:  Rust Belt Primary (IL, MI, OH, WI)3/26:  CA, WA, NV primaries.     There are to be 1,988 GOP convention delegates.  995delegates are needed to win the nomination.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MATCHING FUNDS:  DOLE CERTIFIED FOR BIGGEST PAYOUT TODAY     The FEC has certified more than $37 million in matchingfunds to go to 10 pres. candidates in the first pay-out for theprimaries.  The Treasury Dept. will make the disbursements todaybut due to a shortfall in the presidential campaign fund, theactual amounts sent will be less than the certified amount.  Thecampaigns will receive the full allotment once the the fund isreplenished from checkoffs from '95 income tax returns.  Duringthe primaries, campaigns can qualify for federal matching fundsif they receive $5,000 in contributions of $250 or less perindivudal in 20 states.  The govt. then matches contributions of$250 or less raised by qualified campaigns.  In return,candidates must abide by spending limits in the different states.           AMOUNT CERTIFIED 12/27Dole         $ 9,265,291Clinton        9,014,645Gramm          6,653,919Buchanan       3,977,007Alexander      3,226,450Lugar          2,275,051Wilson         1,591,393Specter          988,976LaRouche         261,235Hagelin          100,000Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996NEW HAMPSHIRE:  DOLE RISES IN LATE-DECEMBER POLL     16 delegates.  An American Research Group poll, conducted12/19-22, surveyed 560 likely GOP primary voters; margin of error+/- 4.2% (release, 12/27).       12/19-22   12/5-7   11/8-9Dole      42%       30%     27%Forbes    11         9       7Buchanan  10        13      17Gramm      9         3       3Alexander  6         5       6Lugar      2         2       6Dornan     1         0       0Keyes      1         0       3Taylor     1         0       0Undec.    17        37      31     Pollster Dick Bennett said the poll and focus groups "showthe negative advertising by Forbes aimed at Dole and Gramm hasbackfired. ... Bennett said the ads have only strengthened theloyalty of voters previously leaning toward Dole and Gramm"(Rezendes, BOSTON GLOBE, 12/29).     FINAL STAGE:  Manchester UNION LEADER's DiStaso writes theNH primary "moves into its final, frenzied stage" today as NHvoters will be "bombarded" with TV, radio and mail messages forthe next six weeks (1/1).  Both Dole and Buchanan attendedConcord's famed "First Night" festivities.  300 revelers waitedin line to have their pictures taken with Bob and Liddy.  Anestimated 12,000 attended (Schmitt, CONCORD MONITOR, 1/1).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996IOWA:  SIX WEEKS TO GO, LAST HURRAH FOR THE HAWKEYE STATE?     25 delegates.  DES MOINES REGISTER's Yepsen writes for"political addicts" it's already been a "long campaign" in IA andthe "most intense phase is just starting."  For "real people" thecampaign thus far has been "background music" and they are justnow tuning in.  It is possible '96 will mark the last time the IAcaucuses will "amount to much" as LA has successfully supplantedIA's first in the nation status.  Up to now, "there's been littlemovement.  Bob Dole is ahead."  But there is a "softness" toDole's support which leaves him "vulnerable."   The current"flavor-of-the-month" challenging Dole is Steve Forbes, buthistory shows such flavors "melt on caucus night for lack oforganization."  Forbes, Gramm, Alexander and Buchanan are all"bunched up" behind Dole and anyone of them could finish second.Polls currently show it will be Forbes, but county GOP officialssay it will "probably" be Gramm.  "The truth is, no one knows."One thing certain: "whoever finishes in fourth place or below canstart to shut down their campaigns" (1/1).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996SOUTH CAROLINA:  DOLE SLIPS, BUT SO DOES GRAMM     37 delegates.  A Columbia STATE/WIS-TV poll, conducted12/26-27 by Mason-Dixon/PMR, surveyed 427 likely GOP primaryvoters; margin of error +/- 4.7% (1/2).  The SC primary is 3/2.GOP PRIMARY   NOW   5/95      FAV/UNFAV    IDDole          40%   49%       46%/19%      100%Gramm         17    22        35 /18       81Forbes        14    --        34 /12       73Buchanan       8     4        31 /32       93Alexander      3     5        20 /11       59Lugar          2     1        12 / 8       54Keyes          0     0        11 / 6       44Dornan         0     0        13 / 7       45Taylor         0    --         3 / 5       31Undec.        16    16     ANALYSIS:  While Gramm "has practically moved into SouthCarolina, turning it into a make-or-break state," he "has failedto make any headway" against Dole.  Gramm SC dir. Jim Merrill"downplay[ed] the lack of movement, saying things will turnaround when they start buying their own TV time this year":"There's no doubt Forbes is climbing.  Let's face it: If you tookGumby and spent a quarter of a million dollars, he would alsoreflect well in the polls.  [Forbes is] kind of like a crazyprofessor out there saying nice things about himself.  Peopledon't know that he's pro-choice, that he's probably more liberalthan Bob Dole is."  Pat Buchanan's "poor showing isn'tsurprising, considering the issues driving the electorate."  Thepoll shows voters are "far more interested in economic issuesthan in the social issues he's more closely identified with"(Scoppe, Columbia STATE, 1/2).     DEBATE:  The SC GOP will hold a one-hour debate 1/6, to betelevised on CNN and WIS-TV.  At the close of filing 12/31, theparty reported Alexander, Gramm, Lugar, Buchanan, Forbes, Dole,Taylor and Keyes will be on the SC primary ballot (SC GOPrelease, 12/31).  Dornan did not file.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OTHER EARLY STATES:  A RHODE TO NOWHERE     LOUISIANA (30 delegates):  USA TODAY's Keen profiles the 2/6LA caucus battle between Phil Gramm and Pat Buchanan.  The othercandidates have pledged to stay out in deference to IA.  GOPactivist Bryan Wagner: "Unfortunately for Buchanan, Louisiana islocated next to Texas, and Gramm has spent years doingfundraisers and making himself known and appreciated inLouisiana."  Buchanan predicts he'll "take delegates away fromGramm in his own back yard": "[Gramm] came down here on theproposition that he's the only one who can beat Dole.  Well, Philknows he's now in the race with an authentic conservative. ... Ifwe can come out of Louisiana with a dramatic showing, I thinkit's all over for Phil Gramm" (1/2).  Morry Taylor and "severalLouisiana residents" filed a lawsuit to block the LA caucuses,contending the event violates the Voting Rights Act,discriminating against minorities by making it more difficult forthem to participate.  LA also holds a 3/12 primary, but the bulkof delegates are selected 2/6.  IA GOP Chair Brian Kennedy"praised" Taylor for "taking action" (Yepsen, DES MOINESREGISTER, 12/23).     DELAWARE (12 delegates):  Only Phil Gramm and Steve Forbeshave filed for the GOP primary so the chairs of DE's two partieswant the DE legislature to pass a law that allows the parties tohave the power to place candidates on the ballot (DiStaso,Manchester UNION LEADER, 12/28).  At the 12/27 filing deadline,ex-Gov. Elbert Carvel, 85, filed as the only other candidate onthe Dem primary ballot, besides Lyndon LaRouche.  Carvel is onthe ballot to keep LaRouche from winning delegates.  Carvel saidhe would surrender his delegates to Pres. Clinton.  Clinton didnot file due to the state's decision to hold its primary insidethe NH's one-week "window" on 2/24.  If LaRouche were to windelegates, the DNC would undoubtedly deny credentialling them, asthe party has not sanctioned DE's primary date.     RHODE ISLAND (16 delegates):  Three candidates failed toqualify for the 3/5 RI GOP primary ballot.  The official ballot,as announced 12/28 by RI Sec/State James Langevin (D), does notcontain the names of Phil Gramm, Pat Buchanan and Steve Forbes.1,000 valid signatures were required to qualify.  The Buchanancampaign, just 19 signatures short, said it would challenge thedecision.  The Gramm campaign said RI was not a big priority andwould focus on other states that day.   Alexander manager DanPero: "The Gramm campaign has spent $20 million winning strawpolls, but it doesn't even get on the ballot in a state with realdelegates" (release, 12/29).     MINNESOTA (33 delegates):  Dole "has largely fallen off theradar screen" in MN, a state he won in '88.  His once "smallpresence" in MN "disappeared completely" when a small office wasshut down.  Dole aides "dispute that it was even a campaignoffice, but backers see the move as virtually conceding" the 3/5MN caucuses to Phil Gramm.  MN GOP chair Chris Georgacas:"There's no question Gramm's got a very strong organization builtdown to the lower echelons of the party."  Conservative activistAllen Quist: "Dole does not receive much enthusiasm fromconservatives" (Glover, AP, 12/30).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996NATIONAL ISSUES CONVENTION:  LIST OF NO-SHOWS GROWS     The Nat'l Issues Convention -- a four-day conference to takeplace in Austin, TX 1/18-21, billed as an "experiment in informeddemocracy" -- is "having difficulty wooing presidentialcandidates to participate."  Bob Dole and Lamar Alexander havealready declined invitations, and a Phil Gramm spokesperson saidGramm "likely will not participate."  Only Steve Forbes said hewould go; neither Pres. Clinton nor Pat Buchanan has announced adecision on attending.  Univ. of TX's James Fishkin, one of theconvention organizers (along with PBS), said the NIC was supposedto be a "social science experiment and not a candidate forum,"with about 600 people picked randomly from across the nation tolearn about issues.  Fishkin: "The candidates who want to speakto the concerns of the public can do so. ... We think that in thelong run we will have more participation than you think" (Walt,HOUSTON CHRONICLE, 12/28).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996DOLE:  GET READY FOR THE CAVALCADE OF GOVS     DES MOINES REGISTER's Yepsen reports the Dole campaign isplanning a 1/6 rally in Des Moines to showcase some of the 20 GOPgov. endorsements they have.  There are currently 31 GOP govs.nationwide (including LA's Foster).  IA Dole manager DarrellKearney expects "at least" 9 or 10 govs. will attend, that willbe followed by "caucus training session" in some of IA's largercities to work on "boosting turnout" and generating some mediaattention.  Kearney: "It's quite a coup for us to have thesegovernors here blitzing the state" (12/29).     THE FEAR FACTOR:  Dole Dep. Chair Bill Lacy: "I am morescared of this campaign making a mistake than anything the otherguys can do. ... We are in control of or own fate at this point.I don't think there is a single thing out there that Phil Grammor Steve Forbes or Lamar Alexander or Pat Buchanan can do thatcould sort of alter the dynamics of the race so fundamentallythat it would deny us the nomination" (Raasch, GANNETT, 12/28).     THE AGE FACTOR:  BOSTON GLOBE's Nyhan, urging LamarAlexander to utilize the age issue, notes the Pope was born5/18/20, Dole 7/22/23 (12/27).  NEWSWEEK's Fineman profiles Boband Liddy Dole under header, "This is their Washington life --the one you won't see in Dole's campaign ads" (1/8 issue).     NEW ADS:  Dole's campaign began running new ads 12/22 in NHand IA.  IA FULL TEXT ("One of Us/Midwestern Values"; 30 secs.,produced by Stuart Stevens) -- DOLE: "As a young man in a smalltown, my parents taught me to put faith in God, not governmentand never confuse the two."  ANNCR: "Bob Dole's midwest valuesmake him one of us.  He's fighting for our conservative agenda:1) Demanding Hollywood stop corrupting our children; 2)Protecting our children's future with a balanced budget;  3)Strengthening working families with a $500 per child tax credit.Bob Dole. The character and courage to lead America" (AP, 12/28).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FORBES:  IN PERSON AND ON THE TUBE     In a profile, N.Y. TIMES' Kolbert notes in his publicremarks, Forbes "mentions his opponents only in passing.  But inhis commercials, he takes aim at them directly.  He was the firstcandidate in the race to run negative commercials, and his mediacampaign has been devoted at least as much to attacking Mr. Doleand Mr. Gramm as it has been to touting his own ideas."  Forbes'ad strategy "is unusual for someone so little known.  Generally,candidates try to establish their own credentials before startingto attack their opponents, and even some of Mr. Forbes' alliesworry privately that the approach is flawed.  But at least fornow, it appears to be having the desired impact."  GOP consultantSal Russo, "who has conducted focus groups for Mr. Forbes but isnot working on his campaign": "He's rewriting the Presidentialrules."  Forbes manager Bill Dal Col "predicted Forbes would do'exceptionally well'" in DE 2/24 and "forecasted a strongshowing" in the 2/27 AZ primary, "where the Forbes campaignappears to be breaking spending records."  Gramm media adviserAlex Castellanos: "Nobody wants to get chased down the street bya mad billionaire with a squash racket. ... Money can buy youlove.  But it can't buy you the Presidency" (1/1).     LATEST ANTI-DOLE AD:  The Forbes campaign began airing a newTV ad.  ANNCR: "A choice for Republicans on wasteful spending.Million dollar pensions for Congress paid for by taxpayers?Steve Forbes says no, politicians shouldn't receive taxpayer-funded pensions.  Bob Dole says yes.  Bob Dole voted to increasetax-payer-funded congressional pensions.  Two men.  Differentvalues.  Bob Dole -- Washington values.  Steve Forbes --conservative values" (Forbes release, 12/21).     FLAT TAX:  TIME's Birnbaum writes "the flat tax is becomingthe hottest new issue" in the race.  On 1/9, Jack Kemp's taxreform commission "will make its own proposal to flatten thefederal income tax."  Bob Dole, a co-sponsor of the commission,"is expected to endorse it."  The idea "is picking up so muchsteam that the real estate lobby is planning" to broadcast radioads in IA and NH "to pressure candidates not to make their taxplans too flat" (1/8 issue).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996GRAMM:  FAULTS DOLE IN BUDGET BATTLE     At breakfast with 150 IA supporters, Phil Gramm "criticized"GOP leaders -- Bob Dole "in particular -- for bungling thefederal budget battle."  Gramm "said Dole ... has failed to getthe Republican Party's point across in the debate": "This is oneof those deals where virtually everything our leadership has donehas been a mistake and everything Bill Clinton has done has beenright politically. ... When was the last time you heard Bob Dolegive a response to Bill Clinton where you said, 'That hit isexactly on the head'?  I can tell you I don't remember the lasttime it happened."  Gramm added that failure to deliver the GOPmessage to voters is giving Clinton the edge in opinion polls,and may lead to his re-election: "If we're going to deliver it,we're going to win or lose against Clinton based on our abilityto communicate with independents, conservative Democrats, blue-collar workers, people who get their hands dirty working for aliving.  I believe I can do that.  I think there's no chance inthis world Senator Dole can do it."  He said a GOP compromise onthe budget would cause voters to lose confidence in the party:"Republicans did not say we would balance the budget only if BillClinton joins us.  We didn't say we'd balance the federal budgetif it's easy.  We didn't even say we would do it if it waspopular.  We said we would do it. ... If we don't live up to thecommitment we made in 1994, how is anybody going to believeanything we say in 1996?" (Hartman, DES MOINES REGISTER, 12/29).     WINS DOLE BACKERS IN IA:  Two of Dole's IA county chairshave switched to Gramm, "who they say is stronger anti-abortionadvocate."  Dallas Co. co-chair Peggy Hermann and Warren Co. co-chair Terri Hall "said Dole has waffled on the abortion issue."Hall: "[Dole] led me to believe he was 100 percent pro-life --clearly he is not" (REGISTER, 12/29).     TRASHES THE BUREAUCRATS:  Gramm, on "Brinkley": "Have youmissed the government?  I mean, doesn't it strike you funny that200 government -- 280,000 government employees -- are furloughed,large segments of the government are shut down.  I think thisproves beyond a shadow of a doubt that we need to go back andeliminate another 150- to 200,000 bureaucratic positions in thefederal government."  Gramm asked whether his campaign was"washed up": "I believe that I am in good shape in Iowa, I thinkwe're building a base of support in New Hampshire.  There areonly two candidates that have a nationwide organization.  Thereare only two candidates that in the end can win the nomination,and they're Bob Dole and myself" (ABC, 12/31).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ALEXANDER:  SAYS FOCUS ON BALANCED BUDGET HURTS GOP     Lamar Alexander in IA 12/28 said the "preoccupation" ofother GOP candidates with balancing the federal budget is"playing into President Clinton's hands."  Alexander said neitherBob Dole nor Phil Gramm is providing voters with "a vision ofAmerica's future."  Alexander: "We've got nobody talking aboutwhat kind of country we're going to have or how we're going toget there.  We've got a lot of people talking about less fromWashington and nobody is talking about more from us.  If all wecan talk about in the next year is balancing the budget, if wehave no more vision than that, Bill Clinton is going to be thenext president of the United States of America and he's going tohave a Speaker Gephardt to work with."  The budget impasse inWashington has given Alexander a "fresh context for his anti-Washington theme."  He stressed GOP leaders should "stand firm"on their budget priorities, but he said he would focus on othergoals like creating jobs and rebuilding communities (Roos, DESMOINES REGISTER, 12/29).     "SEVERITY WITH A SMILE":  NEWSWEEK's Klein writes Alexander"has a rare political talent, the ability to make the radicalsound reasonable."  This ability would "seem a marketable qualityin our overripe era.  But it hasn't clicked ... One problemAlexander won't -- can't -- acknowledge is that he's chosen thewrong central organizing gimmick for his campaign.  He is runningas that hoariest of political cliches, the 'outsider.'  It seemsa threadbare conceit, too slick by half for the '90s. ... A moreprofitable route might have been to emphasize his low-key style;a calm, smart, reasonable person in a party that seems mesmerizedby its lunatic fringe."  Still, despite his problems, the race"may be ready for a late-breaking dark horse" and Lamar has"begun to position himself cleverly" by "courting the GOP'ssmarter cadres, the neoconservatives and 'empowerment' activistswho cluster around Newt Gingrich and Bill Kristol."  Lamar willgive a speech incorporating their ideas and offering a "NewCitizenship" this week.  Alexander "has belatedly recognizedRonald Reagan's great secret: Republican primary voters liketheir severity with a smile."  He ran "the cleverest ad of thecampaign so far" over the holidays "tweaking" Gramm and Forbesfor their negative ads and offering a "different message inrebuttal" (1/8 issue).     THE AD:  The 30-sec. "5th Grade" spot featured Lamar walkingbetween TV monitors showing the Gramm and Forbes negative ads.The spot ran over the holidays and is now off the air.  TEXT(produced by Murphy Pintak Gautier): "Here they go -- Washingtonmudslinging.  These guys act like they are running for presidentof the 5th grade.  I'm Lamar Alexander.  My campaign isdifferent.  In January, I'll be talking about my ideas for goodjobs, better schools, and strong citizenship.  Where we expectless from Washington and more from ourselves.  But this week,while the others are so busy telling you their best insults, Ihave something to say to you as well.  Have a Merry Christmas anda Happy New Year!" (release 12/21).     RESN REWIND:  In a front page story, W. POST' Marcus &Babcock reported on the Alexander campaign's release of documentsshowing the candidate raised "millions of dollars" for theRepublican Exchange Satellite Network -- which he founded in 1993-- and that those donors "later formed the financial base" of hiscampaign.  Center for Public Integrity's Charles Lewis calledRESN "a rather thinly disguised campaign mechanism" which was notsubject to FEC rules.  Alexander comm. dir. Mark Merritt calledLewis' assertion "totally false" and said while it might haveoffered him a platform, the primary purpose of RESN "was never toelect Lamar Alexander president."  The POST ran a list of thosewho gave RESN $100K or more (12/30).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996BUCHANAN:  AIRS RADIO AD IN NEW YORK, WANTS TO REACH BALLOT     Pat Buchanan released a "last-minute" radio ad attackingNY's GOP leadership and primary process.  Only Bob Dole, who issupported by Sen. Al D'Amato (R) and Gov. George Pataki (R) isexpected to "easily qualify" for NY's ballot.  The rest of Dole'srivals, except Buchanan and Steve Forbes, have "written off" NYand its 102 delegates.  Buchanan spokesperson K.B. Forbes saidthe ads were designed "to boost up numbers" on petitions to reachthe ballot in each of NY's 31 counties.  The petitions are due1/4.  AP's Humbert: "Notable is that Buchanan avoids attackingD'Amato and Pataki ... by name in the ad. ... The late appearanceof the radio ad in select markets across the state indicates twothings:  Buchanan believes New York could be a key battlegroundand he is worried about being kept off the battlefield" (12/28).     "FACE"-ING DOLE:  Buchanan, on "Face the Nation," when askedif he could support Bob Dole as the GOP nominee if he chooses apro-choice VP: "Bob Dole's a friend of mine. ... I deeply regretthat he moves around on every single issue. ... If Bob Dole picksa liberal running mate, he will risk a real debacle at theconvention, but we're not going to have that problem because Bobis going to be standing up there nominating me for president ofthe United States" (12/31).     WON'T BE EXCLUDED FROM WMUR DEBATE:  After announcing 12/20that Buchanan would be excluded from a 2/15 debate, WMUR-TVreversed itself 12/22.  Buchanan will be allowed to participate(Manchester UNION-LEADER, 12/22).     WON'T MISS DEFECTORS:  Responding to the defection in IA  ofMarlene Elwell and Guy Rodgers, Buchanan aides said the two are"consultants who went to work for candidates who paid them more ... [but] have no knowledge of campaign secrets that might beturned against Buchanan" (Yepsen, DES MOINES REGISTER, 12/27).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996LUGAR:  MIXED REVIEWS OF BOMB THREAT ADS     A Manchester UNION LEADER editorial: "Whoever Dick Lugarhired to produce his latest series of TV ads raising the specterof nuclear terrorism should be given the boot. ... The adcampaign is a dud. ... Even as a scare tactic the ads come acropper.  The 'spine chilling' spots are so hokey as to be funny.Somewhere Ed Wood is grinning ear to ear" (12/26).  W. POSTeditorial: "A certain amount of the tut-tutting the ad hasoccasioned seems to us misfocused.  The sensationalistic qualityof the message ... does not fit with the persona of Mr. Lugar anddiminishes him by making him look a bit desperate. ... But thatis not the most troublesome part of the story.  What'stroublesome is what the ad says ... about the apparentlyuniversal understanding of what it finally takes to win attention-- and support -- in politics" (12/31).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996CLINTON:  A SPRING OFFENSIVE?  THE REAGAN PLAYBOOK?     NEWSWEEK's "Periscope" reports Pres. Clinton's re-electionstrategists are focusing on a likely Dole nomination and "expectDole ... to be cash-strapped by early spring ... and they'rehoping that moment of weakness will allow Clinton, already flushwith about $28 million, to 'do some real damage' to Dole, whowill be 'out of money and a sitting duck" (1/8 issue).  U.S.NEWS' "Washington Whispers" reports strategists are urgingClinton to formally announce for re-election the week before the2/12 IA caucuses.  "The reason: to make political mischief."They say announcements in IA and NH on 2/8-9 "would divertpublicity from the GOP.  It would also let Clinton fire a fewrhetorical shots that might capture voters' attention. ... Aidesbelieve that an effective theme" against Dole would be to castClinton as "the future," Dole as "the past" (1/8 issue).     REAGAN REDUX:  In an interview with AP's Fournier, Clinton-Gore dep. chair Ann Lewis pulled out a binder entitled, "Reagan-Bush '84, Review and Analysis," and said, "This is my Bible.These are my secrets."  Although saying she was using hyperbole,Lewis admitted, "I use the Reagan campaign for a lot of mypointers.  What they did well was make it clear what RonaldReagan did, and why he did it."  Fornier reports one Clintoncampaign slogan "under discussion" is "Leadership for theFuture," which is meant to "create the same warm, fuzzy feelingconjured" by Reagan's "Morning in America" (12/28).     HAPPY NEW YEAR:  U.S. NEWS' Barone calls Clinton "The dead-end kid": "Clinton, who campaigned in 1992 as a champion ofchange, seeking to win younger voters, is now campaigning as anenemy of change trying to scare older voters. ... His previousarguments -- that the [CBO] numbers that were the only good onesin 1993 need not be used in 1995, that smaller increases inMedicare spending like the ones his wife proposed are now viciouscuts -- cannot be sustained. ... Clinton does well enough in thepolls when voters are asked about Republican proposals.  But inthe electoral endgame 11 months from now, voters will be askingwhat both parties will do, and for that Clinton has no clearanswers -- or perhaps too many" (1/8 issue).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996A FEW YEAR-END THOUGHTS     BOSTON GLOBE'S SHRIBMAN: "For Bill Clinton, 1995 was theyear everything changed -- and yet nothing did. ... He is, inshort, once again strongly positioned to conduct a politicalcampaign but weakly positioned to exert political leadership"(12/28).  N.Y. TIMES' MITCHELL & PURDUM:  "Clinton ... will runon the record of a very different Presidency than he and hissupporters seemed to imagine when the man from Hope, the youngestPresident since [JFK], came into office speaking of generationaland social change" (1/2).  ANALYST KEVIN PHILLIPS writes 1996"looks like a minefield": "With no more than a bit of bad luck,1996 could bring a recession, an unpopular U.S. militaryinvolvement in Bosnia and the first case in U.S. history of thepresident of one party and the speaker of the other party bothfacing special investigative counsel."  As for the economy, "Therecovery that began in 1991 will be starting its sixth year in1996 -- about as long as most cycles run.  But the GOP'sunpopular budget package puts the Republicans in a position topay for what may be a cyclical downturn, something they shouldhave thought of whne they approved the script.  A 1996 recession,occurring while the Repoublicans have grabbed the economic-policyball, could make the Democrats' 1994 congressional electiondisaster one of the great forward fumbles of modern politics"(L.A. TIMES, 12/31).  TIMES' "Chronicles" flips the argument andcalls Bob Dole a winner of the week: "Worst season in decadesfuels talk of slowing economy on eve of election year" (1/8issue).  BOSTON GLOBE'S CANELLOS: "So far ... the surprise is howmild and statesmanlike the race has been ... Candidates seem tobe fighting to claim two titles, tax-cutter -- and nice guy.Wedge issues are locked away, at least for now" (1/2).  BOSTONGLOBE'S LEHIGH rates the GOP pres. candidates on the "substance"of their candidacies:  Alexander "D";  Buchanan "A-";  Dole "C+";Forbes "B-";  Gramm "B";  Lugar "F" (12/24).     ELECTORAL COLLEGE COUNT:  W. TIMES' Lambro sees the GOPnominee with a 197-153 electoral vote edge over Clinton.  Butwhen leaning states are added, the count is tied 242-242, with 54EVs considered "tossup."  Tossup states: WA, IL, OH (1/2).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WHITEWATER:  WHILE YOU WERE AWAY ...     NEWSWEEK's Hosenball & Isikoff report that one month afterBill Clinton's election in '92, Tyson Foods general counsel JamesBlair, the family friend who assisted Hillary Rodham Clinton inher highly lucrative cattle futures investments in '79 and amember of a "defensive research team" to fend off Whitewaterallegations, loaned Jim McDougal $1,000 so that McDougal couldbuy the Clintons out of their Whitewater investment.  Atty VinceFoster "handl[ed] the transaction."  Blair: "I didn't think theClintons should go to Washington tied in to McDougal."  Blair'sloan "is one more sign of the Little Rock crowd's strangesensitivity about the scandal that would not die."  While an aideto Senate Whitewater chair Al D'Amato (R-NY) said Clinton mayhave violated financial disclosure laws by failing to reportBlair's loan as a "gift" to the Clintons, Clinton atty DavidKendall disagreed: "The money came from McDougal.  Legally,there's no issue."  But just-released notes from a 11/93 meetingby then-WH Assoc. Counsel William Kennedy say, "Blair could haveknowledge.  Could be source of money to allo McD to purchasestock."  Writes NEWSWEEK, "The emerging record suggests that theClintons' friends were worried about something -- and thebehavior of the First Couple's advisers, both before and afterFoster's suicide, looks like a bungled cover-up" (1/8 issue).     MCDOUGAL TO D'AMATO:  After a federal court refusedMcDougal's demand that D'Amato "be subpoenaed to answer questionsabout his Senate probe," McDougal called D'Amato a "crook,"adding that he was disappointed D'Amato wasn't coming to LittleRock "because nobody in Arkansas has seen a member of the Mafia."He challenged D'Amato "to dueling lie-detector tests" that wouldcover D'Amato's past ethics problems and "mob ties" (Galvin, N.Y.POST, 12/29).     NEW SUBPOENAS:  The Senate Whitewater cmte issued subpoenasto hear from 16 Arkansans, including Gov. Jim Guy Tucker (D) andJim and Susan McDougal.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996GINGRICH:  A HAPPY NEWT YEAR?     Speaker Newt Gingrich, appearing on CNN's "Evans & Novak,"was asked about his high disapproval ratings: "If I were theperson they see in seven-second sound bites, I wouldn't like meeither" (12/30).  U.S. NEWS' Borger writes, "The professor needstime to explain himself, but that is not how his world works.Unless the networks invent the 35-minute sound bite, Gingrichwill remain difficult to stomach" (1/8 issue).  Gingrich, on theAir Force One incident: "There's no question that there are timesthat I describe that were like throwing an interception straightinto the other team's defense.  And on several occasions, andthat's one, I did things that weren't wise."  Gingrich, on whathe will do differently in '96: "Listen more carefully and try tobe more precise in what I'm saying. ... I think, frankly, I'mgoing to work harder at interacting with individual editors andindividual reporters to try to see if we can't get our storythrough, if by no other means, than just embarrassing them intobeing professional."  Commenting on the president's persona,Gingrich said that it is "almost impossible to be in a room withBill Clinton and not have some sense that you're dealing withjust an extraordinarily charming person" (CNN, 12/30).     FROSH FOLLOWERS:  Rep. Zach Wamp (R-TN), asked whetherGingrich has the freshmen's "proxy" in the budget negotiations:"The Republican freshmen are the ones that have forced theprincipal issues time and time again.  And the leadership hascome back to us, over and over again, and said: what will youagree to? ... If we stick to the agenda of the Republicanrevolution, not the personality of the speaker or the presidentor other personalities, we're going to win because we're on solidground."  Rep. Mark Neumann (R-WI), asked if he was prepared togo the last mile for Gingrich: "I always look at Speaker Gingrichkind of like I look at a basketball team, where Speaker Gingrichis the point guard, and maybe [House Budget Chair] Mr. Kasich andGingrich together are the point guard on this team.  The rest ofus make up the rest of the team" ("Meet the Press," NBC, 12/31).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996OTHER STUFF:  SCHUNDLER SPILLS THE BEANS     AT THE RENAISSANCE/DARK AGES WEEKENDS:  Pres. and Mrs.Clinton arrived in Hilton Head, SC on New Year's Eve in time tokeep their 12-year streak of attending the event alive.  Perhapsthe most interesting revelation of the weekend came from JerseyCity Mayor Bret Schundler (R).  NEWSWEEK's Kosova reportsSchundler "sheepishly admitted he had cut taxes too quickly,leaving his city with a budget shortfall" (1/8 issue).   About1,200 attended Renaissance Weekend; about 300 attended the newGOP-only "Dark Ages Weekend" at Miami's Doral Golf Resort,organized by DC attys Laura Ingraham and Jay Lefkowitz.  Guestsreceived a set of rules including: "No group hugs" andencouragement for wearing furs and using chlorofluorocarbons(Burleigh, TIME, 1/8 issue).     RUSH:  L.A. TIMES' Randolph reported "there is a faint whiffof trouble" in Rush Limbaugh's "formidable kingdom."  Programmanagers at radio stations that carry Limbaugh's show "have beguncomplaining about a slight dip" in his ratings.  Why?  "In sum,he is now a member of the conservative political establishment;"the outsider is now an insider (12/28).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996COVER TO COVER     NEWSWEEK:  Cartoon of the '70's smiley face button frowning."Cheer Up America!  It's Not as Bad as You Think."  Exclusivebook excerpt by Robert J. Samuelson (1/8).     TIME: "Fat Free Fat" (1/8).     U.S. NEWS:  "Are You Too Fat?" (1/8)     NEW REPUBLIC:  "Bumper Holiday Double Issue" (1/8-15).     THE STANDARD: Graphic of Big Bird being beaten senseless byother cartoon characters.  "The Myth of Educational Television"(1/8).     THE NATION:  "Haiti Under the Gun: How U.S.-BackedParamilitaries Rule Through Fear" (1/15).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 19961996 PREDICTIONS     GEORGE WILL: "The Republicans will gain seats in the Houseand the Senate and will have enough to pass a balanced budgetconstitutional amendment."     SAM DONALDSON: "There'll be a serious effort to say NATO nolonger needs to exist because the Soviet Union doesn't exist."     JIM WOOTEN: "If nothing goes badly wrong [in Bosnia], BillClinton does not profit from that.  That becomes a kind ofpolitical wash.  If something goes wrong, Bill Clinton isseriously damaged by that" ("Brinkley," ABC, 12/31).     DAVID BRODER: "I'm afraid that we may be in for anothernegative campaign year, with a lot of talk about character andage, and things that are a lot less important to most Americans."     WILLIAM SAFIRE: "The Democrats are going to try to make theissue abortion and gun control, and divide the Republicans onthat.  I don't think the Republicans will bite.  I think they'llfuzz it up."     ANDREA MITCHELL: "I wouldn't bet the ranch on this being aClinton-Dole race.  Republicans are getting increasingly nervousabout Bob Dole's ability to defeat a revitalized Bill Clinton. ... Since none of the other Republican candidates look likewinners, I wouldn't rule out ... Colin Powell."     CHARLIE COOK: "You'll see Republicans picking up two to fourseats in the Senate, minimal changes in the House ... and apresidential election between Bill Clinton and Bob Dole that willbe much, much closer than it looks right now."     AL HUNT: "The presidential race will be very close -- thatBill Clinton and the Republican nominee will go right to thewire.  I also suspect there will be, at least, a third-partycandidate, probably Mr. Perot, and maybe one or two others."     LISA MYERS: "Two of the biggest issues in 1996 will beleadership and character, which is one reason I think SenatorDole has a lot better chance against President Clinton than awhole lot of people now think."     PAUL GIGOT: "The big issue of 1996 is going to be character-- President Clinton's and the country's. ... 1996 is going toshow that Dan Quayle was a man ahead of his time when he putthese issues on the table, or tried to, in 1992."     JACK GERMOND: "If we assume that Bosnia doesn't go sour,which would probably destroy the president's chances of beingre-elected ... I don't think the campaign of '96 is going to turnon any of the things they're talking about now -- not the budgetor foreign policy. It's going to turn on Clinton's ...character."     JAMES CARVILLE: "In the vice presidential selection -- myprediction is Dole is going to pick John Engler of Michigan."     JIM MIKLASZEWSKI: "Even though he says he's not interested,Colin Powell will be Dole's running mate.  There could be as manya four candidates on the ballot, including two independents. ...As long as the economy's good and Bosnia and Whitewater arequiet, he's still the favorite, because Bill Clinton is still thebest campaigner to ever hit the White House" ("Meet the Press,"NBC, 12/31).     KEN DUBERSTEIN: "Big political story of the year is going tobe the House freshmen and that they will by and large be re-elected. ... Bob Dole is going to be elected president. ... NoDemocrat, with the exception of Jimmy Carter in 1976, has gottenmore than 45.6 percent of the vote.  Bill Clinton can't get abovethat, period."     FRANK RICH: "I have to go with conventional wisdom and sayit looks pretty good for Clinton right now" ("Face the Nation,"CBS, 12/31).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 19961995 IN REVIEW:     TIME's Winners & Losers --P.R. Coup of the year: "The Colin Powell presidential  campaign/book tour.  Runner-up: The Newt Gingrich presidential  campaign/book tour."P.R. Calamity of the year: "Dull San Francisco Mayor Frank Jordan  campaigning from a shower stall.  He lost.  Runner-up: White  House guards wearing rubber gloves while escorting gay  officials" (12/25 issue).     NEWSWEEK's Conventional Wisdom --B. Clinton (Up arrow): "Back from the dead.  Campaign slogan:   'He's not quite as bad as you think.'"N. Gingrich (Down arrow): "Old CW: Man of the Year.  New CW: Just   another blowhard."B. Dole (Up arrow): "Survives GOP free fall.  Campaign slogan:  'Check out my cardiogram!'"P. Gramm (Down arrow): "Old CW: Mean ugly s.o.b.  New CW: Mean,   ugly s.o.b. loser."L. Alexander (Sideways arrow): "Nobody's heard of him, which   means he has a chance.  But don't bet your shirt."P. Buchanan (Down arrow): "He's mad as hell and nobody seems to   care too much.  Crank it up, Pat."S. Forbes (Up arrow): "GOP Dough Boy spending millions.  But   he'll get 'em back if his flat tax passes" (12/25 issue).U.S. NEWS dubs George W. Bush the "Best Little Governor inTexas" (12/25 issue).     W. POST's Out/In List -- (1/1)Out: The old, mean Bob Dole.  In:  The new, nice Bob Dole.Out: Tom Arnold.              In:  Joe Waldholtz.Out: Jesse Jackson            In:  Jesse Jackson Jr.Out: John F. Kennedy Jr.      In:  Malcolm S. Forbes Jr.     PHILA. INQUIRER In/Out List -- (12/31)In:  GEORGE                   Out: VANITY FAIRIn:  Courtney Cox             Out: Courtney LoveIn:  C. DeLores Tucker        Out: Bob DoleIn:  Colin Powell             Out: Pete WilsonBack to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ILLINOIS:  DURBIN CHALLENGES KRISLOV PETITIONS     Rep. Richard Durbin (D-20) has asked state electionofficials to bar Clinton Krislov (D), a millionaire atty, fromthe ballot because of "alleged wholesale nominating petitionirregularities."  Krislov filed 10,080 signatures by the 12/18deadline and Durbin is challenging 9,200 of them.  Krislov calledthe allegations "evidence that his candidacy was giving thejitters" to Durbin (Secter, CHICAGO TRIBUNE, 12/27).  MoreKrislov: "I am the only serious candidate in this race who is 100percent pro-choice, no restrictions."  He said Durbin, "who nowsays he is pro-choice, 'voted 25 times with the radical right' onabortion issues."  Durbin "has said he went to Congress as a pro-life candidate, but switched to pro-choice in part because hefound that some pro-life advocates there were also against familyplanning to reduce the number of abortions" (Schoenburg,Springfield STATE JOURNAL-REGISTER, 12/28).  Other Dems: ex-Treas. Pat Quinn, p.r. exec. Ron Gibbs, businessman Paul Park,and Jalil Ahmad.  GOPers: LG Bob Kustra, state Rep. Al Salvi,radiologist Robert Marshall, Wayne Kurzeja, and Martin PaulGallagher.  Primary: 3/19.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996KANSAS:  FRAHM FROWNS ON SENATE BID     LG Sheila Frahm (R), a moderate, said she would not run forthe seat being vacated by Sen. Nancy Kassebaum (R): "The rightthing for me to do in 1996 is to continue to serve my state aslieutenant governor."  Frahm's decision leaves conservative stateSen. Eric Yost (R) as the only announced candidate (Petterson,K.C. STAR, 12/27).  Frahm acknowledged that her decision "leavesthe moderate wing of the Republican Party without a candidate":"It's a very difficult decision. ... If I was the moderatecandidate, maybe there are others who were hesitant and may beinterested in stepping forward" (AP/WICHITA EAGLE, 12/27).Possibles: frosh Rep. Sam Brownback (R-02), real estate exec/'90gov. primary cand. Nestor Weigand (R), retiring Rep. Jan Meyers(R-03), Treas. Sally Thompson (D), stockbroker Jill Docking (D),and Dole aide Dan Stanley (R).  Filing deadline: 6/10.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996LOUISIANA:  TAUZIN WON'T RUN, SHAKES UP POLITICAL LANDSCAPE     The battle for the seat being vacated by Sen. J. BennettJohnston (D) was "turned on its ear" by the decision of Rep.Billy Tauzin (R-03), a recent GOP convert who was considered the"leading" Republican candidate, not to run.  Tauzin was seen as alikely candidate when he switched parties in 8/95, but "said hedecided to stay out of the race because he is up for a keychairmanship in the House": "I have been looking at the race forsome time, but there has been a new development."  He said theretirement of Rep. Jack Fields (R-TX) "puts him in line" to chairthe subcmte on Telecommunications and Finance, which he calledthe "most important subcommittee post in the House."  Tauzin saidhe has been assured by the GOP leadership that he will head thepanel, assuming of course he wins re-election and the GOPmaintains control of the House.  Tauzin: "I think I can helpLouisiana better in that position than as a freshman senator.The decision is best for me, personally, too."  The decision camejust three days after the release of a poll conducted of 800 LAvoters by Southern Media & Opinion Research, which showed Tauzinand outgoing Treas./'95 gov. hopeful Mary Landrieu (D) the"front-runners" in the race: Landrieu received 19% to Tauzin's14%, with 22% undecided.  AG Richard Ieyoub (D) got 12%, witheveryone else in single digits (Wardlaw, N.O. TIMES-PIC, 12/27).     OPEN THE GATES:  Rep. Jimmy Hayes (R-07), like Tauzin arecent GOP convert, said he would get in and insisted he wasn'tdismayed by early poor numbers: "When I first ran for Congress,my poll was 2 percent.  I won with 57 percent of the vote.  But Iran when I thought I could win.  I wasn't interested in thecompetition" (AP, 12/27).  Baton Rouge consultant Bernie Pinsonatsaid that the election of Gov.-elect Mike Foster (R) "proved thatthere's no longer any penalty for party-switching."  Ex-Gov. DaveTreen (R), who flirted with the '95 gov. race, said he is"interested if he can take care of the business obligations thatcaused him to get out" of the gov. campaign.  Rep. Bob Livingston(R-01), who had considered a Senate bid until he was named HouseAppropriations chair, said Treen will be the "front-runner if hegets in."  Also announced is ex-state Rep. David Duke (R), whohasn't run for office since he "fared poorly" in the '92 GOPpresidential primaries.  State Rep. Woody Jenkins (R), the"darling of religious conservatives" who has twice run for theSenate, is interested in running, as are New OrleansCouncilmember Peggy Wilson (R) and oilman Pat Taylor (R).  Taylorhad announced but then withdrew because of illness; Livingston"said he is recovering and may change his mind."  Ex-Gov. BuddyRoemer (R) "has long wanted" a Senate seat, and some of hisbackers "urged him to sit out the 1995 governor's race and waitfor the 1996 Senate race."  But Roemer ran and finished fourth.No Republican has won a Senate seat in LA since Reconstruction.On the Dem side, Landrieu said she is looking at the race, "butat this time I'm leaning against it."  Rep. Bill Jefferson (D-02)said he would run for the Senate when he pulled out of the gov.race last summer, "but he would have to leave a safe House seatto do so."  Pinsonat "said he thinks Fields will more likely"run, especially if he loses in his battle to keep his CD intact(Wardlaw, TIMES-PICAYUNE, 12/28).  Other possible cands.: Rep.Richard Baker (R-06) and Insurance Commis. Jim Brown.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MASSACHUSETTS:  WELD DOES AN ABOUT-FACE ON PACS     Gov. Bill Weld (R) is "tossing aside some of his politicalprinciples" by agreeing to accept PAC funding for his raceagainst Sen. John Kerry.  Weld said in 9/93 that PACs "just tryto buy influence and buy incumbents. ... I'd like to see an endto this type of money funding" in MA.  Now Weld is justifying hisswitch on the grounds that Kerry -- not a "paragon ofconsistency" either -- "refused to agree" to a $5M campaignspending cap.  Kerry, a "self-styled advocate of campaignreforms," has in the past promoted spending caps (BOSTON GLOBE,12/24).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996SOUTH CAROLINA:  STROM NOT STRONG IN NEW POLL     A Columbia STATE/WIS-TV poll, conducted 12/26-27 by Mason-Dixon, surveyed 427 likely GOP primary voters; margin of error+/- 4.7% (STATE, 12/31).  Tested: Sen. Strom Thurmond (R), ex-Gov. Carroll Campbell (R) and Sec/State Jim Miles (R).THURMOND SHOULD ...Not seek another term    59%Run for re-election      33WILL YOU VOTE FOR THURMOND IN PRIMARY?Consider voting for someone else   56%Will vote for Thurmond             44PRIMARY MATCHUPThurmond       40%            Thurmond  53%Campbell       37             Miles     26Miles           8     ANALYSIS:  Although the poll shows Campbell within themargin of error of Thurmond, Campbell insisted he will not runagainst him: "I'm for Strom Thurmond.  As long as he runs, Isupport him."  Miles "is more elusive" about his plans.  Whenasked the chances of his entering the race, Miles "side-steppedthe question entirely."  Although Miles "couldn't topple"Thurmond, "his interest could spur others to run.  Associates sayCampbell will jump into the race if Miles does" (Scoppe, ColumbiaSTATE, 12/31).  Southern political analyst Earl Black: "The onlyway for Republicans to lose that seat is for the Senator to gofor one more term when his day is past. ... People are lookingfor somebody younger."  Although only educator Charlie Thompsonhas entered the GOP primary, Miles, "a maverick Republican, isbelieved to be positioning himself to run."  Miles recentlymailed a "cleverly worded fund-raising letter saying" SC's nextsenator will be one "who can energetically advance theconservative values of our state."  Left unsaid in the letter iswhether the next senator will be elected in '96 or '98 (Bandy,STATE, 12/31).  Announced Dem: businessman Elliott Close.  Filingdeadline: 4/30.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996ILLINOIS:  FILING DEADLINE 12/18, PRIMARY 3/19     4th CD:  Rep. Luis Gutierrez (D) gets a primary challengefrom John Holowinski (D).     5th CD:  Frosh Rep. Michael Flanagan (R) will face primarychallenges from Chester Hornowski and Charles Prignano.  On theDem side, state Reps. Rod Blagojevich and Nancy Kaszak areconsidered the favorites; other Dems to file were Ray Romero andEric Puchala.     7th CD:  Retiring Sen. Paul Simon (D) has endorsed Cook Co.Commis. Danny Davis for the seat being vacated by Rep. CardissCollins (D).  Simon: "I think he has the stuff that real leadersare made of" (Kuczka, CHICAGO TRIBUNE, 12/18).  Other major Demcandidates in the overwhelmingly Dem CD: Chicago Aldermen DorothyTillman, Ed Smith & Percy Giles, and Cook Co. Commis. BobbieSteele.     8th CD:  Don Huff (R), a political neophyte who was laid offlast summer as a manufacturing sales mgr., filed against 14-termRep. Phil Crane (R), calling for a "less confrontationalatmosphere" in DC and taking "more moderate positions" thanCrane.  Huff called the uphill battle a "Donald versus Goliathfight" (Martinez, CHICAGO TRIBUNE, 12/19).     9th CD:  Given the large number of Dem retirements, "no onewould have second-guessed" Rep. Sidney Yates (D) if he decided tojoin the crowd; Yates is 86 and was first elected to the House in'48.  But "to the surprise, and mild consternation" of some, hefiled for a 24th term.  Atty J.B. Pritzker (D) filed but "said hewould withdraw by the January deadline if Yates remains acandidate."  Other Dems: Terrence Gilhooly, Mark Matheney andSeth Tillman (Pearson/Fegelman, CHICAGO TRIBUNE, 12/12).     10th CD:  Businessman Richard Rinaolo (R) has filed againstRep. John Porter (R), calling for a "sweeping joint agreement toprohibit acceptance or use of out-of-district PAC money."Rinaolo: "It's time to stop preaching about campaign financereform and start practicing it. ... Porter, despite his piousprofessions, has been part of the problem, not part of thesolution."  Rinaolo calls himself a "staunch supporter" of theGOP Contract, while Porter "has alienated many Republicans byvoting against half of the Contract" (Rinaolo release, 12/26).     20th CD:  In the race to succeed Senate candidate DickDurbin (D), the top ballot spots went to Bill Owens (R) and JohnGlynn (D).  Also running: state Rep. Jay Hoffman (D), Madison Co.Treas. John Shimkus (R), state official Patrick Baikauskas (R),Sangamon Co. Circuit Clerk Carl Oblinger (R), student Dave Green(R), atty James Zerkle (R), Rick Angel (R), and Sam Cahnman (D)(Springfield STATE JOURNAL-REGISTER, 12/28).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996MD 07:  THIRTY-TWO VIE TO REPLACE MFUME     A record 32 candidates -- 28 Dems, 4 GOPers -- filed by the12/26 deadline to succeed Rep. Kweisi Mfume (D), who is resigningeffective 2/15 to head up the NAACP.  The field includes stateSens. Delores Kelley (D) & Nathaniel McFadden (D), Dels. ClarenceDavis (D), Elijah Cummings (D), Salima Mariott (D) & KennethMontague Jr. (D), plus several clergy members including BaltimoreCity Register of Wills Mary Conaway (D) and Rev. Frank Reid III(D), who leads a 10,000 member church and is the brother-in-lawof Baltimore Mayor Kurt Schmoke (D) (Zorzi, Balto. SUN, 12/27).The seat has "historically been" held by a resident of WestBaltimore City, but with a large field and redistricting thatextended the CD further into E. Baltimore and Baltimore Co.,nothing is certain.  The only major candidate with ties toBaltimore Co. -- "where nearly a third of the vote lies" -- isKelley, who "could be the beneficiary of a race with a largenumber of city candidates" because her district "straddles"Baltimore City and Baltimore Co.  State Del. "Pete" Rawlings (D):"It is creating a situation where [Kelley] has an excellentchance.  Reid lives in the County, but has few political orchurch ties there" (SUN, 12/26).  Mfume said he did not think hewould make an endorsement (SUN, 12/29).  Special primary: 3/5.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996HOUSE HUNTING:  CHANGE OF HEART FOR BATEMAN     TX 05:  Two Dems who were expected to run for the seat ofSenate hopeful John Bryant (D), Dallas school board pres. SandyKress and atty Ken Molberg, will not.  A third potential Dem,John Pouland, who like the other two is an ex-Dallas Co. Demchair, "said he is still on the fence."  Dems thought that Kress"might have been the best-positioned to finance a Democraticcampaign."  He was expected to run in '90 when Bryant toyed witha bid for AG.  Molberg said he didn't have enough money to makethe race: "That was the only thing that stayed in the way.  Thisis a district that is tailor-made for an anti-Gingrich message"(Stahl, DALLAS MORNING NEWS, 12/29).  Two GOPers are alreadyrunning: businessman Pete Sessions, who won 48% of the voteagainst Bryant in '94, and ex-Dallas City Councilmember GlennBox.     TX 15:  State Rep. Renato Cuellar (D), a 68-year old nine-year veteran of the TX legislature, became the third Dem toannounce for the seat being vacated by Rep. Kika de la Garza (D).Other Dems in race: atty Jim Selman and businessman RubenHinojosa (AP, 12/27).     VA 01:  Rep. Herb Bateman (R), who during the '94 campaignsaid that would be his last race, changed his mind and will runfor an eighth term.  He said the GOP sweep of Congress "has madehim more powerful and effective -- and eager to stay in office."Bateman said his "health is not an issue," but he had bypasssurgery in '89, underwent radiation for prostate cancer in '92,and "discovered during a routine examination this past July thathe had suffered a minor heart attack without realizing it whilethe House was keeping a busy schedule."  1st CD Dem chair JohnMcGlennon said no Dems have come forward to run but promised an"aggressive recruiting effort" (Petkofsky, RICHMOND TIMES-DISPATCH, 12/30).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE HOTLINE via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996TV MONITOR     THIS MORNING:  "CBS This Morning" hosted John Dean, Nixonbiographer Stephen Ambrose, ex-Nixon speechwriter Ray Price, andcolumnist Robert Sheer.  NBC's "Today" hosted frosh Reps. SueMyrick (R-NC) and Roger Wicker (R-MS).  "FOX Morning News" hostedDel. Eleanor Holmes Norton (D-DC), TIME's Jeffrey Birnbaum, ex-Clinton aide Bill Galston, ex-Quayle press sec. David Beckwith,and retiring Rep. Pat Schroeder (D-CO).           TOP TEN SIGNS THE PRESSURE OF THE CAMPAIGN                   IS GETTING TO MORRY TAYLOR            (submitted by a suburban HOTLINE staffer)10.  Thinks Oliver Stone's "Nixon" was named after him.9.   Out: Pollsters and consultants.     In: Psychic Friends Network.8.   While the other candidates talk about Medigap, he's opening     a Medibenetton.7.   Thinks Syndey Pollack's "Sabrina" was named after him.6.   Promises to fight crime every time the Commissioner flashes     the Bat Signal.5.   Claims to be the father of singing sensation Alanis Morry-     sette.4.   Claims to be the father of singing sensation Snoop Morry     Dogg.3.   His opening statement at debates: "I'm Morry Safer.  Those     stories and more when 60 Minutes continues."2.   Half his campaign staff is married, the other half is dating     someone named Bon Jovi.1.   When you yell "Morry!" he yells "Polo!"Back to Headline List WT03-B09-15IA087-000629-B021-215http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/po04.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035804 text/html 82177HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:55:56 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:14 GMTContent-length: 81990Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/po04.html Sample Issue Copyright JAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Komatsu residents file suit demanding halt to fighter flights+ (249 words) Metropolitan panel calls for 'realistic' project review+ (187 words) Clinton likely to visit Japan April 16-18+ (249 words) SDP member resigns as head of policy research panel+ (227 words) Okinawa mayor to refuse signing land-lease contract+ (175 words) AIDS: no finished problem in Japan+ (729 words) Gov't adopts administrative reform program+ (228 words) Gov't approves defense personnel shifts+ (138 words) Japan disappointed at French objection to its CE status+ (134 words) Princess Chichibu's memoirs to be published in English+ (335 words) Murayama aims to discuss Okinawa with Clinton+ (151 words) Kono lauds Japan's U.N. 'achievements' in '95+ (178 words) Murayama to visit Moscow in April, meet with Yeltsin++ (52 words) Clinton to visit Japan on April 16-18, gov't announces++ (40 words) Murayama to meet Clinton, Yeltsin in April++ (349 words) Hiroshima, Nagasaki to send A-bomb expo to U.S., France+ (322 words) MOF releases transparent, stricter auditing measures++ (911 words) Kono, Christopher to meet in France on Jan. 10+ (79 words) 100 new plaintiffs join HIV-hemophiliac suit in Tokyo+ (273 words) Agency warns of rising sentiment against U.S. military+ (374 words) Shinshinto's new head likely to be chosen Wed.+ (292 words) Member of SDP left-wing runs for party leadership+ (282 words) Local political funds hit 160 bil. yen+ (162 words) Dailies cautiously welcome new Shinshinto chief Ozawa+ (304 words) Murayama's new year visit to shrine OK, gov't says+ (175 words) Takemura predicts general election by next fall+ (97 words) Japan deplores 5th French nuclear test+ (673 words) 13 Diet members to leave for Palestine election monitoring+ (117 words) GSDF says 30 garrison towns could be streamlined+ (188 words) Hashimoto says he will push for LDP gov't+ (253 words) Kuwaiti-Palestinian gains rare refugee status in Japan+ (306 words) U.S. forces to ease 'off-limits' for Okinawa servicemen+ (227 words) Ozawa gets 3 ex-premiers to accept party jobs+ (579 words) U.S. serviceman indicted for possession of rifle+ (192 words) Japan's defense chief may visit Russia next year: Tass+ (114 words) Japanese envoy protests at French nuclear test+ (126 words) U.S. plans int'l investment forum for ex-communist states+ (314 words) Ozawa names Yonezawa, Hata's aides for key party posts+ (235 words) MOF vice minister to quit over ministry scandals++ (555 words) Upper house VP agrees to pay debts with expense money+ (137 words) CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Komatsu residents file suit demanding halt to fighter flights+KANAZAWA, Japan, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Residents around the Komatsu base of the Air Self-Defense Force(ASDF) filed a suit Monday against the state demanding a halt tofighter flights and compensation for distress caused by aircraftnoise.     This is the third suit filed by residents of Komatsu, IshikawaPrefecture, on the Sea of Japan coast, demanding halt to flights tomilitary aircraft.     In the suit lodged with the Kanazawa District Court, the 1,653plaintiffs call for a halt to flights of both ASDF and U.S. militaryaircraft between noon and 2 p.m. and between 6 p.m. and 7 a.m.     They also demand 1.2 million yen for each of the plaintiffs forthe past distress caused by noise and 50,000 yen per month for futuredistress.     The plaintiffs say the Self-Defense Forces is unconstitutional.     They also cited two incidents as illustrating dangers from thebase.  In October an F-15 fighter burst into flames after failing totake off, and in November an F-15 fighter fired a missile which hitand downed another F-15 while the two fighters were engaged in adrill over the Sea of Japan.     In December last year the Kanazawa branch of the Nagoya HighCourt ordered the state to pay 180 million yen compensation to 213residents out of 330 plaintiffs from Komatsu but rejected theplaintiffs' pleas filed by 1975 and 1983 for a halt to flights andcompensation for future distress caused by noise.     Neither the plaintiffs nor the government appealed the ruling.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Metropolitan panel calls for 'realistic' project review+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     A panel advising Tokyo Gov. Yukio Aoshima recommended Mondaythat a ''realistic review'' be conducted of the Tokyo metropolitangovernment's waterfront development project.     In a report submitted to Aoshima, the panel said the project isalready well under way, with a huge amount of money invested forconstruction of a 63,000-population ''city'' in the area surroundingthe Tokyo Bay.     The report also called for measures aimed at advancinginternationalization, more effective disaster handling, solvingvarious urban problems and deregulation of business activities.     During the seven meetings since September, the panel was splitbetween members calling for a sweeping review of the project andthose arguing for maintaining it, panel members said.     The panel was established as a private advisory group byAoshima, who pledged a review of the project in his election campaign.     Aoshima has reassured executives of companies planning to investin the waterfront development project, saying he plans to continuethe project.     Aoshima dismayed some business concerns when he canceled aninternational city expo that was set to open next spring, a pledge hehad made during his election campaign.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Clinton likely to visit Japan April 16-18+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     U.S. President Bill Clinton is likely to make a three-day statevisit to Japan on April 16-18, rescheduling one that was canceled inNovember, the top government spokesman said Monday.     ''We will officially announce the schedule tomorrow afternoon,''Chief Cabinet Secretary Koken Nosaka told a press conference, addingthat the Japanese and U.S. governments are close to agreeing on theschedule.     Besides meeting Emperor Akihito, Clinton will hold talks withPrime Minister Tomiichi Murayama and they will issue a jointstatement on the bilateral security system.  He also hopes to talkdirectly to the Japanese public to stress the importance of thesecurity arrangements, Nosaka said.     The joint statement is expected to include mention of the twogovernments' efforts to reduce U.S. bases in Okinawa, following therape of a local schoolgirl in September, for which three U.S.servicemen are on trial.     Clinton was scheduled to visit Japan in November to attend theAsia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum gathering in Osaka, westernJapan, and for a summit meeting with Murayama but postponed the visitbecause of a federal budget crisis.     The United States previously hoped to reschedule the visit forearly January, but Japan has declined the proposal because of theemperor's tight schedule.  In February and March, Clinton will bebusy with presidential primaries.     There still is a possibility that the April visit could bechanged because Clinton plans to attend a Moscow summit meeting onnuclear safety in late April, government sources said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SDP member resigns as head of policy research panel+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     A member of the Social Democratic Party (SDP) resigned Mondayas chief of the party's policy research panel in protest over anearlier decision by the SDP's policy-making Central ExecutiveCommittee to postpone disbanding the party and forming a new partyas originally set for Jan. 19.     Nobuyuki Sekiyama, chairman of the SDP Policy Board, handed inhis resignation to SDP Secretary General Wataru Kubo, an advocate ofa scheme to change the SDP into a new ''liberal'' party with a betterchance of winning coming elections.     Sekiyama is the second SDP member to quit a key party post inprotest over the Central Executive Committee's decision earlier thismonth.     SDP members are at odds over when to form such a new party, withPrime Minister and SDP head Tomiichi Murayama cautious about settingup such a party early but Kubo willing to see the SDP make the change.     Kubo and his followers have failed in several attempts to builda new party around the SDP out of concern over the party's sinkingprofile in a political landscape dominated by the Liberal DemocraticParty, the biggest group in the tripartite ruling coalition, and themain opposition Shinshinto (New Frontier Party).     Kubo himself has suggested he may step down as the party's No. 2man at a party convention set for Jan. 19.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Okinawa mayor to refuse signing land-lease contract+NAHA, Japan, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Okinawa Mayor Shusei Arakawa said Monday he will refuse to signa contract for renewal of leasing the municipality's land to theU.S. military.     The mayor told the city assembly that he will not agree to therenewal of the lease of the land for use as an ammunition dump inview of public opinion calling for scaling down of the U.S. militarybases in the prefecture.     Okinawa will be the second city in Okinawa Prefecture to refuseto renew a lease of municipal land to the U.S. military, followingthe capital city Naha, which has decided not to renew a lease for anaval facility.     The city of Okinawa has to begin legal proceedings as early as1997 for the renewal of the land lease, the contract for whichofficially expires in 2000.     The city owns 474 hectares of land which accounts for aboutone-sixth of the Kadena ammunition depot of the U.S. forces.     The city concluded the present lease contract before Arakawawas elected mayor in 1991.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996AIDS: no finished problem in Japan+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     A Health and Welfare Ministry official was recently quitepuzzled when she was asked a question, ''Is the AIDS problem inJapan over now?''     ''The questioner said, 'I haven't seen any AIDS-related storiesin newspapers or magazines recently,'' said Tamami Umeda, deputydirector of the ministry's AIDS, TB and Infectious Diseases ControlDivision.     Of course, the issue is not over.  According to the latestannouncement by the ministry's AIDS Surveillance Committee, 85 newpeople with HIV and AIDS were reported in September and October inJapan, bringing the official total to 4,003.     The 85 cases comprised 60 Japanese and 25 foreigners.  The 60Japanese cases were the largest number ever for a two-month period,the committee said.     The record, which would have made banner headlines a few yearsago, was almost invisible in the domestic newspapers.     The only prominent news reports about the disease this year werethose about people, mostly hemophiliacs, who were infected with HIVafter being treated with contaminated blood-clotting agents.     Of some 4,500 hemophiliacs in Japan, an estimated 2,000 havecontracted the virus in the 1980s from HIV-contaminated bloodproducts imported mainly from the United States.     Public calls for redress for those infected people have mountedafter the Tokyo and Osaka District courts in October proposed asolution to suits filed by HIV-infected hemophiliacs, asking thestate and five pharmaceutical companies to compensate the plaintiffs.     Umeda, while admitting the grave nature of the issue, criticizesthe media for being ''badly balanced'' in reporting on AIDS.     ''The media focus on HIV infections caused by blood products isincreasing the number of people who do not think of AIDS as their ownproblem,'' she said.     ''Not many people are aware of the simple fact that anyone cancatch the virus through sexual contact,'' she added.     Marii Goto, secretary general of the Japan HIV Center, anonprofit private group supporting AIDS patients, is also concernedabout growing public apathy.     Since 1990, the group has been organizing the annual ''36 HoursAIDS Hotline'' campaign around the Dec. 1 World AIDS Day, in whichvolunteers throughout the nation offer information and counseling bytelephone.     She said ''the telephones never stopped ringing'' during theevents in the first three years, with the 181 calls in 1990,increasing to 1,771 in 1991 and further rising to 3,100 in 1992.     However, to the volunteers' disappointment, the responses havekept decreasing since 1993 to some 1,100 calls this year, Goto said.     A government survey on the number of people who have visitedpublic health centers for HIV tests forms a similar curve -- peakingin 1992.     Goto said although less people are coming forward to undergo thetests, the percentage of those tested who were found HIV positivekeeps increasing, indicating that the virus is spreading certainly inJapan.     Umeda said Japan may be in the stage of seeing HIV spreadingslowly, but steadly, a symptom which in the experience of manycountries was the precursor of a sudden surge.     Goto said out of all the problems related with AIDS, she is mostanxious about the public becoming indifferent to the disease.     ''I believe the antonym of love is not hatred, but disregard.People who discriminate against AIDS patients can change theirthinking,'' she said.     In explaining the transition of the public's attitude towardAIDS, Goto said, ''First there was fear, which aroused interest.  Thelevel of interest peaked in 1992 when several foreign celebritieslike Magic Johnson announced they were infected, because Japanesepeople love to keep up with foreign news.''     But at the same time, the Japanese are the owners of transiententhusiasm, and their interest in AIDS has faded, she said.     ''Some people say the recurrence of fear, by telling howhorrible the disease is, would create public interest again.  Butsuch a method would only promote discrimination,'' she said.     Goto believes that providing information on AIDS constantly isthe only solution, which is very dependent on the media andadministration.     Umeda said the government expects private support groups toreach out to certain communities in need of information about thedisease, such as gay people and foreigners.     ''Our words would not influence them easily because they wouldbe guarded toward us,'' she said, adding the government hopes to helpprivate groups create a network among them by creating situations inwhich they can exchange information.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Gov't adopts administrative reform program+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama's cabinet Monday adopted aprogram on administrative reform that calls for scrapping or mergingseven public corporations by the end of March 1997.     The seven concerns include Livestock Industry Promotion Corp.and the Japan Raw Silk and Sugar Price Stabilization Agency, bothunder the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry andFisheries.     The program comes in line with a pledge made by Murayama tostreamline public corporations as part of administrative reform, apolicy target given priority by Murayama.     The program also sets an April 1, 1997 deadline for thegovernment to abolish the salt monopoly under Japan Tobacco Corp. andprivatize a mutual fund for compensation of job-related injuries forfirefighters.     It also stipulates that the cabinet's functions be strengthenedwith the introduction of up to three advisers to the prime ministerso that the premier can receive vital information more quickly.     The program requires the government to take into accountproposals by the Administrative Reform Committee, a governmentadvisory body, in reviewing the current deregulation program by theend of next March.     Among other policy targets, the program calls for reducing thenumber of public servants even after the current retrenchment programexpires at the end of March 1998.     It also points to the need to streamline the postal service,state forest business and national hospitals.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Gov't approves defense personnel shifts+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The government defense council on Monday adopted minorpersonnel shifts from the Self-Defense Forces to the Joint StaffCouncil in fiscal 1996, beginning April 1.     The Security Council of Japan, headed by Prime Minister TomiichiMurayama, decided to cut the number of staff members of the GroundSelf-Defense Force (GSDF) by 570, the Maritime Self-Defense Force(MSDF) by 333, the Air Self-Defense Force (ASDF) by 349, and toincrease the Joint Staff Council staff by 1,202.     The set number of members for the GSDF is 180,000, 46,085 forthe MSDF and 47,556 for the ASDF, but their actual numbers currentlyfall short of the fixed figures.     The council also endorsed equipment procurement plans under thegovernment plan for the fiscal 1996 budget, including 11 F-2 fightersupport planes and four F-15 fighter-interceptor planes.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Japan disappointed at French objection to its CE status+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     France's opposition to Japan's bid for observer status on theCouncil of Europe (CE) is ''regrettable,'' Vice Foreign MinisterSadayuki Hayashi said Monday.     The Foreign Ministry's top bureaucrat made the remark at a newsconference, replying to a question about Japan's failure earlier thismonth to acquire the status due to the French objection.     Hayashi said Tokyo will ask Paris the reason for its oppositionand continue to seek to participate in the council's activities as anobserver.     He brushed aside speculation that France's opposition was due toJapan's criticism of French nuclear tests.     The 38-member council, founded in 1949, aims to achieve agreater unity among its members, to facilitate their economic andsocial progress and to uphold the principles of parliamentarydemocracy and respect for human rights.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Princess Chichibu's memoirs to be published in English+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     The English translation of the memoirs of the late PrincessChichibu, widow of Prince Chichibu and an aunt of Emperor Akihito,will soon go on sale in Britain and the United States.     It is the first time that memoirs of a member of the ImperialFamily have been translated into English for sale abroad.  The 1991book, originally titled ''the silver bonbonniere'' will be called''Silver Drum'' in English and published by the British publishinghouse Global Oriental.     The princess, whose given name was Setsuko, died in August atage 85 of complications resulting from chronic heart disease.     An acquaintance who knew her from her work as honorary presidentof the Japan-Britain Society said, ''(Unfortunately) the translationdid not come out while she was still alive, but I think she wouldhave been delighted.''     In the book the princess, who was born in London as the daughterof a Japanese diplomat, describes her life with Prince Chichibu, whomshe married in 1928.  The prince, younger brother of the late EmperorShowa, contracted tuberculosis in 1940 and died of the disease in1953 at the age of 50.     She also provided some detail about the realities of life as amember of Japanese royalty.  British author Dorothy Briton, who livesin Hayama, Kanagawa Prefecture, translated the memoirs uponinitiative by the son of Prince Mikasa, a cousin of the Emperor.     Briton said she consulted the princess, who was fluent inEnglish, on the manuscript when about one third of the Englishversion had been completed.  She said the translation is a loose oneaimed at deepening understanding of Japan.     Just four days before her death the princess was shown the coverpicture for her English-language memoirs.     The first copy of the book was sent over from Britain at the endof November and was put in front of the princess' mortuary tablet.Briton said the book shows how Prince Chichibu's love helped turn herarranged marriage into a fairy-tale love story.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Murayama aims to discuss Okinawa with Clinton+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama said Monday he will discussrequests from the southernmost Japanese prefecture of Okinawa toreduce the number of local U.S. bases with U.S. President BillClinton when he visits Japan in April.     Murayama told reporters, ''We will discuss the adjustment andreduction of bases giving due thought to the feelings of the peopleof Okinawa.''     ''We will discuss Japan-U.S. bilateral issues well, and theOkinawa issue in particular.  It is important for us to speakcandidly with each other,'' he said.     Tokyo and Washington are close to agreeing to rescheduleClinton's state visit to April 16-18, following the cancellation of avisit in November.     The rape of a local schoolgirl in Okinawa in September, forwhich three U.S. servicemen are currently on trial, stirred the localJapanese populace to demand reductions in the large number of U.S.bases which are concentrated there.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Kono lauds Japan's U.N. 'achievements' in '95+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Foreign Minister Yohei Kono said Tuesday Japan largelysucceeded in showing an active stance at the United Nations in 1995on global peace and socioeconomic development.     ''We made some achievements as far as our U.N. diplomacy isconcerned,'' he told a news conference in looking back on the pastyear.     As its major victory in the 185-member world body, Kono singledout adoption of peace- and disarmament-related U.N. resolutions thatJapan proposed along with other countries, including a resolutioncalling for an immediate halt to nuclear testing.     ''I can safely say Japan is now in a position to take theinitiative in promoting disarmament, peace, nuclear nonproliferationand stemming nuclear testing,'' he said.     The foreign minister also said Japan played an active role inthe field of economic and social development in the past year, whichmarks the 50th anniversary of the U.N.'s founding.     Kono expressed disappointment, however, at a slower pace in U.N.reform efforts.  He also said Tokyo will have to set a new strategyfor its U.N. diplomacy for 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Murayama to visit Moscow in April, meet with Yeltsin++TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama will visit Moscow in April toattend an international nuclear power safety summit and a meetingwith Russian President Boris Yeltsin is also slated, a topgovernment spokesman said Tuesday.     The summit is slated for April 19-20, Chief Cabinet SecretaryKoken Nosaka said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Clinton to visit Japan on April 16-18, gov't announces++TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     U.S. President Bill Clinton will visit Japan on April 16-18 fortalks with Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama, the governmentannounced Tuesday.     The Clinton-Murayama meeting is set for April 17, top governmentspokesman Koken Nosaka said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Murayama to meet Clinton, Yeltsin in April++TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama will meet with U.S. PresidentBill Clinton in Tokyo in April and is expected to confer withRussian President Boris Yeltsin in Moscow immediately thereafter,the government said Tuesday.     Clinton will make a three-day state visit to Japan on April16-18 in place of one canceled in November, a top governmentspokesman said.     The Japanese and U.S. governments have officially agreed on theschedule, with Foreign Minister Yohei Kono and Secretary of StateWarren Christopher discussing it over the phone, Chief CabinetSecretary Koken Nosaka told a press conference.     Clinton will meet Murayama on April 17 and the two leaders willissue a joint statement reconfirming the Japan-U.S. securityalliance, Nosaka said.     The statement is expected to give a fresh significance to thesecurity system, while mentioning efforts to respond to wishes fromthe southernmost Japanese prefecture of Okinawa to reduce theconcentration of U.S. bases there.     Okinawa has stepped up demands for local base cutbacks followingthe rape of an Okinawa schoolgirl in September, for which three U.S.servicemen are currently on trial.     The president also hopes to speak directly to the Japanesepublic on the importance of the bilateral security arrangements,according to government sources.     Despite an international summit on nuclear safety set for April19-20 in Moscow, the schedule of Clinton's visit will not be changed,Nosaka said, adding that Japan and the United States have arranged itvery carefully.     Murayama will attend the Moscow summit and a meeting withRussian President Yeltsin is likely to take place, he said.     Clinton originally planned to visit Japan in November to attenda summit of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum inOsaka, western Japan, and stay on for the state visit but postponedthe trip amid a federal budget crisis.     The U.S. side previously hoped to reschedule the visit for earlyJanuary, but Japan declined the proposal because of the tight NewYear schedule of Emperor Akihito, with whom Clinton is to meet as astate guest.     In February and March, Clinton will be busy with presidentialprimaries.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Hiroshima, Nagasaki to send A-bomb expo to U.S., France+HIROSHIMA, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the only cities ever hit by an atomicbomb, announced plans Tuesday to send an exhibition around the worldon a three-year mission to promote an end to nuclear weapons,starting in the United States and France next year.     City officials said they plan to stage the exposition for abouttwo weeks in the two cities a year over the coming three years.     The two cities will send photographs and atomic bombingartifacts for the first exposition in U.S. and French cities nextyear, adding they want people to know the actual situation ofatom-bomb victims.     The sites will be determined with the cooperation of 410 membersof the World Conference of Mayors for Peace Through Inter-CitySolidarity, an antinuclear group formed and headed by Hiroshima MayorTakashi Hiraoka.     The mayor, through the cooperation of the two cities, took partin an exhibition held at a university in Washington in July.     In October, Nagasaki Mayor Itcho Ito visited France to protestover the series of nuclear tests planned by Paris in the SouthPacific, the first of which was carried out in September.     Both mayors expressed the feeling that there is a difference inawareness concerning nuclear weapons between the citizens of the twoatom-bombed cities and nations that possess nuclear arms.     They decided to organize the exhibition in order to inform morepeople of the terrors of nuclear weapons, hoping this will eventuallylead to their elimination in the future.     ''We are currently planning to hold this exhibition for threeyears, but we would like to continue until nuclear weapons areeliminated,'' said Hiraoka.     Last week the mayors called on Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayamato make the holding of the exposition in various countries a nationalproject.     They asked that the state cover the costs associated withproviding photographs and other materials about the 1945 atomicbombings of the cities to other countries.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MOF releases transparent, stricter auditing measures++TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Finance Minister Masayoshi Takemura announced Tuesday a set ofmeasures to help Japanese banks strengthen their risk management,auditing and checking systems as a way to prevent illicit financialoperations like the Daiwa Bank scandal.     ''It is necessary for Japan to make a drastic shift in itsfinancial policy,'' Takemura said at a news conference, acknowledgingthe Finance Ministry's failure in the past to adequately checkexpanding bank operations after the onset of the ''bubble'' economyin the late 1980s.     To try to remedy the situation, he said the ministry will makesure that two key principles will be established in Japan's bankingsystem -- self-responsibility of the sector and transparent financialpolicy based on market mechanisms.     Specifically, Takemura said, the ministry will introduce anearly warning system meant to detect irregularities in the bankingsector, such as the use of objective criteria for ordering businessimprovements at faltering financial institutions.     Banks with their capital-to-asset ratio below certain levels,for example, would be ordered to rectify the situation under thewarning system, Takemura said.     As a means to accurately assess the capital ratio and otherfinancial standings of certain banks, the new system will requirebanks to entrust outside accountants with the auditing of theirfinancial records, Takemura said.     The package also features expanding financial inspectors withinthe ministry by 66 from some 400 people at present, Takemura said,citing a larger scale of about 8,000 at U.S. financial authorities.     The Daiwa scandal, which involved the cover-up of 1.1 billiondollars in U.S. Treasury securities trading over 11 years from 1984,undermined Japan's financial sector already battered by a series offinancial failures this year.     Reflecting global concern over Japan's banking system, Japanesebanks have been slapped with the so-called ''Japan premium,'' or anextra interest rate on their fund raising overseas.     Takemura said the Finance Ministry's slowness in shifting itspolicy from regulation-oriented protectionism to a policy based onmarket forces has been partly responsible for the current lack ofself-responsibility at Japan's financial institutions.     The recent series of financial failures and the Daiwa Bankscandal stemmed from the banking sector's inadequate risk managementas they mistakenly perceived the extraordinary financial expansion ofthe bubble economy as sound financial development, Takemura said.     The Finance Ministry was looking the other way while thesituation was deteriorating, Takemura said, confirming the ministry'srole in the current problem with the banking system.     Takemura also admitted that relations between the ministry andthe financial sector could be seen as ''nontransparent'' as itsinstructions on key policies were not explained to the public.     ''The early warning system and the outside auditing under thenew package will ensure objectivity in banking inspections andincrease a certain level of distance between authorities andfinancial institutions,'' Takemura said.     Takemura said the Finance Ministry promises immediate reportingto local financial authorities in the case of new overseas scandalsinvolving Japanese financial institutions.     ''The package will fundamentally change Japan's financialpolicy,'' Takemura said.     The introduction of the early warning system means that any bankoperating ineffectively would go under as a natural consequence ofthe market mechanism, ministry officials said, in briefing reporterson the package.     ''The package is absolutely indispensable for Japan's financialsystem.  The Japan premium will not be abolished unless Japanesefinancial institutions correct their attitude,'' a senior ministryofficial said.     The package pushes financial institutions to improve theirinternal inspection systems from fiscal 1996 starting next April, asa lesson learned from the Daiwa scandal, the ministry officials said.     To this end, the ministry will draw up a set of guidelines onsoundness of assets, operation in compliance with related laws andregulations, risk management of market trading, including derivativesdeals, and computer system management, they said.     The package also asks financial institutions to have outsideexperts inspect their overseas operations, as well as to employinternal auditors and compliance officers at their overseas branches,who are to be independent from branch managers and report directly toheadquarters.     As part of measures to secure sound banking operations,financial institutions are also requested to give longer vacations ofsome two weeks to employees.     The Finance Ministry will translate data from internalinspections by banks into credit ratings that show the soundness oftheir capital and other financial conditions, the officials said.     Banks with lower credit ratings will face closer scrutiny by theministry on their overall risk management, they said.     With an eye to ways to prevent the recurrence of incidents suchas the Daiwa scandal, the ministry will increase the number ofoverseas inspections, the officials said.     For that purpose, the ministry will form a team specialized inoverseas examinations, the officials said, noting that someinspectors will be stationed abroad.     The Finance Ministry will keep in touch with its overseascounterparts and share information on a regular basis, the officialssaid.     The range of mandatory reporting of financial accidents andirregularities to authorities will expand to cover subsidiaries withan equity holding by a parent firm of more than 50%, the ministryofficials said.     Takemura said he hopes the fresh package will help liftauditing and inspection levels in the Japanese banking sector to U.S.levels in the near future.     He said bills to revise relevant laws for the package will bepresented to the ordinary Diet session to be convened in January nextyear.     He added that steps that do not require any legal revision willbe implemented immediately.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Kono, Christopher to meet in France on Jan. 10+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Foreign Minister Yohei Kono will meet U.S. Secretary of StateWarren Christopher in France on Jan. 10, the Foreign Ministryannounced Tuesday.     The two men will confer on the fringe of a meeting onmultilateral assistance for Palestinians.  Kono will stay Jan. 8-10in France.     Kono and Christopher will discuss issues relating to bilateralties, including U.S. President Bill Clinton's state visit to Japan onApril 16-18, and major international issues, the ministry said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996100 new plaintiffs join HIV-hemophiliac suit in Tokyo+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Another 100 hemophiliacs who contracted HIV from contaminatedimported blood products joined a large-scale compensation suitTuesday against the state and five pharmaceutical makers thatmarketed the products.     The new group, which brings the total number of plaintiffs to218, demands a total of 11.3 billion yen in compensation, swellingthe overall damages sought to 24.7 billion yen in the suit, pendingat the Tokyo District Court.     The move comes after the Tokyo and Osaka District courts inOctober proposed a solution to suits filed by HIV-infectedhemophiliacs, asking the state and five pharmaceutical makers tocompensate the plaintiffs.     Some 1,800 people across Japan, almost all of them hemophiliacs,have contracted the AIDS-inducing human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)from contaminated imported blood products.     According to the plaintiffs' lawyers, more victims areconsidering joining the suit in the wake of the proposed out-of-courtsettlement.     The latest plaintiffs group, the eighth, includes people fromfive prefectures not previously represented in the suit -- Aomori,Gifu, Mie, Tokushima and Kumamoto.     The number includes a woman who contracted the virus when sheaccidentally pricked herself with a syringe needle whileadministering an injection to her hemophiliac HIV-infected child.     Both courts are currently negotiating with the plaintiffs andthe defendants in an effort to reach an out-of-court settlement bynext spring.  The most recent plaintiff group would be covered bysuch a settlement.     In a first proposal the pharmaceutical makers have offered tocompensate each plaintiff with 45 million yen for the time being.The courts are, however, expected to come up with a second proposalmapping out a final settlement of the matter.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Agency warns of rising sentiment against U.S. military+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     The Public Security Investigation Agency predicted Tuesday thatthe domestic movement against the U.S. military presence in Japanand the U.S.-Japan security alliance will grow stronger in 1996, anddid not rule out illegal acts.     ''Political extremists and the Japanese Communist Party areexpected to continue to try to fan the struggle against the U.S.(military presence) and the bilateral security treaty,'' the agencysaid in its outlook on domestic and international security risks.     It warned that extremists could stage attacks particularly inprotest at the forced lease of private land to U.S. bases in OkinawaPrefecture.     Calls for a reduction of the heavy U.S. presence in theprefecture have grown louder since the Sept. 4 rape of an Okinawanschoolgirl, for which three U.S. servicemen are on trial.     The report says that the religious cult AUM Shinrikyo emergedthis year as the perpetrator of an unprecedented series of crimessuch as the March 20 sarin attack on Tokyo subways.     The agency launched measures toward dissolving the cult based onthe Antisubversive Activities Law because ''there is an evidentdanger that the cult will engage in similar activities in thefuture,'' the report said.     Noting that ultranationalist extremists staged three guerrillaattacks in 1995, which abounded with World War II commemorations, theagency cites concerns that such activities might become morepronounced depending on government and opposition politicians' viewson the nation's war guilt.     As for the situation abroad, the report says North Korea has asyet apparently refrained from officially naming a new head of statefollowing the death in July 1994 of President Kim Il Sung so as tomake use of the late leader's charisma, as the nation is faced withnatural disasters and international scrutiny over its nuclear program.     It also said that the North's de facto leader, Kim Jong Il,might hide behind the power of his late father, who wielded stronginfluence over the military, to ensure the continuity of thecountry's system.     In China, a September reshuffle in the Communist Party's CentralCommittee has strengthened President Jiang Zemin's camp, the reportsaid, while warning that domestic trouble first of all on theeconomic front could unleash another struggle about the nation'sdirection.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Shinshinto's new head likely to be chosen Wed.+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Ballot counting will begin Wednesday morning for thepresidential election of the main opposition Shinshinto (NewFrontier Party), with observers seeing the party's Secretary GeneralIchiro Ozawa leading his rival Tsutomu Hata.     If the counting go smoothly, the winner will be known within theday and the new president will officially assume office at a generalassembly of the party's Diet members Thursday.     Both declaring that, if elected, they would aim to wrest powerfrom the ruling coalition, Ozawa, 53, and Hata, 60, have run thetwo-horse race since Dec. 16.     Ending the campaign, Ozawa told reporters, ''I am pleased thatthe party could discuss policy issues'' during the campaign.  Hata, aformer prime minister, said, ''I feel confident of victory.''     By Tuesday, when postal voting ended, some 1.68 million voteshad been cast -- 220,000 by party members and associated members plussome 1.46 million by other Japanese citizens aged 18 or older whopaid 1,000 yen each to vote.     Ozawa's camp has expressed confidence of winning a majority bysecuring at least one million votes, while Hata's camp predicts votesranging from 600,000 to 900,000 have already been obtained.     According to a survey conducted by Kyodo News Service onShinshinto's senior local chapter members, Ozawa led Hata, but thereis uncertainty about how ordinary Japanese citizens have voted.     Ozawa and Hata, though long-time allies, are seeking thepresidency after the first president, Toshiki Kaifu, decided notto seek reelection, having thrown his weight behind Ozawa.     Ozawa was instrumental in creating Shinshinto a year ago througha merger of all the main opposition forces, excluding the JapaneseCommunist Party.  Hata briefly served as prime minister while servingas the head of one of Shinshinto's predecessor parties.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Member of SDP left-wing runs for party leadership+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     A leading member of the Social Democratic Party's staunchleft-wing said Tuesday that he will run for the party leadershipnext month when Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama's term as partychairman expires.     Tadatoshi Akiba, a House of Representatives member fromHiroshima, telephoned Murayama of his decision to run for thechairmanship in an intraparty election scheduled for Jan. 14-15.     The outcome of the poll is to be announced Jan. 16 and a new SDPleadership selected at an annual party convention set for Jan. 19.Applications for candidacy will be accepted Jan. 5.     Murayama, 71, has suggested he will run for another term as theparty's leader and different quarters in the SDP have been floatingdifferent names as potential opponents.     Akiba, 53, has been a member of an SDP group opposed to policychanges within the party and to the formation of a new liberal partysought by a right-of-center group led by the party's No. 2 man,Secretary General Wataru Kubo.     Akiba's group opposes the dispatch of Self-Defense Forces troopsto the Golan Heights in the Middle East on a U.N. peacekeepingmission and is against any increases in Japanese military might.     The group, the Roundtable to Guard the Constitution, went so faras to hold its own celebrations in November to mark the 50thanniversary of the founding of the socialist party.     Eligible to vote in the January election are some 110,000 SDPmembers and supporters who have been cooperating with the party formore than a year.     The SDP is a partner in the tripartite ruling coalition thatalso includes the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and New PartySakigake, an LDP splinter group.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Local political funds hit 160 bil. yen+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Political parties and fund-raising organizations collected atotal of 159.5 billion yen in local political funds in 1994,according to a count by Kyodo News Service from reports toprefectural election administration committees.     The amount was larger, for the first time ever, than the totalof political funds collected in Tokyo and reported to the HomeAffairs Ministry, which was 148.4 billion yen.     In total, the political funds collected in 1994 amounted to307.9 billion yen, down 6.8% from the previous year, for thethird consecutive year-on-year decline since peaking at 359.1 billionyen in 1991.     Local fund-raising parties with proceeds of 10 million yen ormore numbered 225, for total funds of 7.7 billion yen, marking a2.9-fold jump.     The Japanese Communist Party topped the list of the fund raisersin the prefectures, with 29.2 billion yen, followed by the LiberalDemocratic Party with 14.9 billion yen, and the Social DemocraticParty with 6.6 billion yen.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Dailies cautiously welcome new Shinshinto chief Ozawa+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Major Japanese dailies gave a cautious welcome in theireditorials Thursday to the election of Ichiro Ozawa as president ofthe main opposition Shinshinto (New Frontier Party).     ''Although there are various concerns, it is a good thing thatMr. Ozawa has emerged as the starring figure at center stage frombackstage,'' the Asahi Shimbun said, referring to Ozawa's role as theparty's backstage power broker.     ''It can at least be appreciated that Ozawa has tried to meet arequest for creating (two) opposing axes over ideology and policy,''the Asahi said, in reference to Ozawa's claim that the Japanesepolitical system should become one dominated by two major politicalparties.     ''What the Japanese people should welcome is that 'the Ozawamethod' will be easier to be seen on the surface,'' the MainichiShimbun said in reference to Ozawa's behind-the-scene politicalmaneuvering.     ''Mr. Ozawa has never stood in the Diet for questioning as partychief and for questioning before (the House of Representatives)budget committee...Since he became secretary general of Shinshinto,he has noticeably acted in secret as he has often been absent (atparty meetings)...This has provided an excuse for criticism of a dualpower structure (in Shinshinto), but it cannot be tolerated in aparty chief,'' the Mainichi said.     The Yomiuri Shimbun said, ''With the election of Ozawa, said tohave been the party's backstage power broker, we expect Shinshinto's'dual power structure' to end and the transparency in partymanagement to increase.''     ''We also hope he delivers the 'easy-to-understand politics andpowerful execution' that he has been campaigning for.  Many of thosewho voted for him must think the same way,'' the Yomiuri said.     On Wednesday, Ozawa scored an overwhelming victory over hislong-time political ally, former Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata, tobecome the head of Shishinto.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Murayama's new year visit to shrine OK, gov't says+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     The government sees no problem in Prime Minister TomiichiMurayama paying a visit to Ise Shrine in Mie Prefecture in westernJapan on Jan. 4, a top government spokesman said Thursday.     ''There are various arguments against visiting Yasukuni Shrine,but prime ministers' visits to Ise have already become a customaryannual event,'' Chief Cabinet Secretary Koken Nosaka told a pressconference.     Answering questions about whether Murayama's Ise visit does notviolate the constitutional principle of separation of state andreligion, Nosaka said Murayama's Social Democratic Party has alsodiscussed the problem and agreed to sanction the visit.     During the 38-year period to 1993 of single-party rule under theLiberal Democratic Party (LDP), LDP premiers made it a rule to pay aNew Year visit to Ise.     Ise Shrine enshrines the goddess Amaterasu, the legendaryancestor of the imperial family, while Yasukuni Shrine enshrines theJapanese military war dead.     Murayama, who came to power in June last year, did not go to Isein January this year because of a cold.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Takemura predicts general election by next fall+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Finance Minister and New Party Sakigake leader MasayoshiTakemura said Thursday the next general election is likely to takeplace by next fall.     Takemura, appearing on an NHK TV program to be broadcast duringthe New Year holidays, said the House of Representatives would not bedissolved until the end of the Diet's 150-day regular sessionbeginning in late January.     He also hinted that Sakigake, a splinter group of the LiberalDemocratic Party, may join a new party with members of Prime MinisterTomiichi Murayama's Social Democratic Party, depending on itspolicies.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Japan deplores 5th French nuclear test+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Japan expressed strong dissatisfaction Thursday over the fifthnuclear test this year carried out by France in the South Pacific onWednesday.     Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama told reporters that France ''hassaid it will stop nuclear testing upon the conclusion of acomprehensive nuclear test ban treaty, but nuclear testing ismeaningless and France should stop it immediately.''     Chief Cabinet Secretary Koken Nosaka also expressed regret overthe nuclear testing, saying France's nuclear tests run counter tointernational efforts to achieve nuclear disarmament.     ''France said it would conduct one more test, but 'enough' isthe call of the world,'' said Nosaka, the chief government spokesman,in a press conference.     France detonated a nuclear device at Mururoa Atoll in FrenchPolynesia at 12:30 p.m. Wednesday local time, the fifth test since itresumed nuclear tests in the South Pacific in September.     France originally planned to conduct a total of seven or eighttests, but the government said the number would probably be reducedto six and that the current series of tests will be completed by theend of February.     Foreign Minister Yohei Kono summoned Denis Gauer, acting Frenchambassador to Japan, to the ministry to protest the latest nucleardetonation.     Gauer told Kono that the sixth test would be conducted earlierthan the end of February.  Kono told the envoy that he cannot condonefurther testing by France, officials said.     Takashi Hiraoka, the mayor of Hiroshima, sent a letter ofprotest over the nuclear test to French Ambassador to JapanJean-Bernard Ouvrieu on Thursday, urging France to immediately haltits nuclear testing.     Hiraoka said he feels ''strong anger'' that France defied theDec. 12 U.N. resolution calling for an end to nuclear testing.     ''It is an action betraying the trust of the people of theworld, and is French egoism,'' Hiraoka said at a news conference.     Nagasaki Mayor Itcho Ito said he cannot understand why FrenchPresident Jacques Chirac, ''who experienced wars,'' is still unableto search for coexistence of the human race.     Nagasaki Mayor Isamu Takada has also sent a letter of protest toOuvrieu, stating that the test ignores the world community's desirefor the abolition of nuclear weapons.     The statement urged France to immediately cease the tests andwork for the early abolition of nuclear weapons.     About 45 people, members of the Nagasaki Peace Workers' Centerand the Nagasaki chapter of the Japan Congress Against A and H Bombs,staged a one-hour sit-in to protest the test in front of the bronzeStatue of Peace in Nagasaki Peace Park.     About 30 members of the Nagasaki branch of a union ofprefectural workers staged a sit-in outside the prefecturalgovernment headquarters and adopted a resolution urging nuclearpowers to promote nuclear disarmament and accept responsibility forthe continued existence of the earth and humankind.     Finance Minister Masayoshi Takemura released a statement in hiscapacity as leader of New Party Sakigake, saying France's dignity inthe international community ''fell to the ground'' in 1995.     No matter excuses France makes, it conducts nuclear tests justto protect itself and that can never be justified, Takemura said.     Takemura drew international attention when he went to the FrenchPolynesian island of Tahiti in September to join in a rally toprotest against the French nuclear tests.     Murayama's Social Democratic Party also denounced the nucleartest, saying it ''could in no way tolerate'' the repeated testing,urging the government to recall its ambassador to Paris.     The party will appeal directly to the French people for supportto stop the testing through an advertisement it plans to run in aFrench newspaper, party officials said.     Meanwhile, a Hiroshima-based group of pacifist mayors around theworld sent a statement criticizing the test to Chirac and otherFrench leaders.     The statement by the World Conference of Mayors for PeaceThrough Inter-City Solidarity voiced ''strong disappointment'' andlodged ''a strong protest.''     In Tokyo, scores of protesters gathered in front of the FrenchEmbassy in Tokyo, renewing their appeal for an immediate halt tonuclear testing.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 199613 Diet members to leave for Palestine election monitoring+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Thirteen Diet members will make up a bipartisan delegation tovisit Palestinian self-rule areas as election monitors at therequest of Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) Chairman YasserArafat, officials said Thursday.     The delegation, which includes members from both houses of theDiet, will leave Japan on Jan. 16 in time to visit polling stationsduring the Jan. 20 election, the officials said.     The election will establish a Palestinian council to act asparliament under self-rule.     Keizo Obuchi, former vice president of the Liberal DemocraticParty, will lead the delegation, the officials said.     They said the delegation will meet Arafat and Israeli PrimeMinister Shimon Peres before returning to Tokyo on Jan. 23.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996GSDF says 30 garrison towns could be streamlined+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     The Ground Self-Defense Force (GSDF) has drawn up a report,saying about 30 of its 160 garrison towns nationwide could bestreamlined under Japan's new defense program, according to a copyof the report made available Thursday.     The streamlining will be possible because the number of GSDFmembers will be reduced to 1,000 or fewer at some 100 garrison townsunder the proposed new defense program, the report says.     The new defense program outline, which is to replace the currentCold War-era version mapped out in 1976, is expected to set thenumber of GSDF personnel at 145,000, down from the present 180,000.     The new outline calls for cutting the number of GSDF divisionsto nine from the current 13.     The GSDF will decide which garrison towns will be streamlinedwithin five years in the hope that the plan will be carried out in 10years' time after making adjustments with the municipalitiesconcerned.     The government is now working on details of the new defenseprogram outline so as to have it adopted in time for the start offiscal 1996 in April.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Hashimoto says he will push for LDP gov't+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) President Ryutaro Hashimoto saidThursday he would fight the next general election with the aim ofachieving a majority of seats for the LDP.     ''In the next election, we will give it all we've got to win thepeople's support for an LDP government,'' Hashimoto said in aprerecorded New Year program for Japan Broadcasting Corp. (NHK).     Hashimoto, the international trade and industry minister, hasapparently articulated his ambition of winning a monopoly on power inplace of the current ruling coalition with the Social DemocraticParty (SDP) and New Party Sakigake, political analysts said.     But Hashimoto's words are not viewed by LDP watchers assignaling a new party policy of breaking up the tripartite allianceany time soon.     Hashimoto has only paid lip service to some combatant LDPlawmakers who do not relish being in coalition with the socialistsand have made clear their desire for a monopoly on power, they said.     Hashimoto also said in the NHK program that the House ofRepresentatives should not be dissolved for a snap election at leastuntil the budget for the next fiscal year passes the Diet.     He added that a dissolution of the lower house is unlikely tocome until after a Group of Seven summit meeting in France at theend of June.     The LDP leader said Ichiro Ozawa, the newly elected head of themain opposition party Shinshinto (New Frontier Party), harbors someideas that are ''diametrically opposed'' to the LDP's policies.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Kuwaiti-Palestinian gains rare refugee status in Japan+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     A Palestinian whose original application for refugee status inJapan was turned down in 1992 on Thursday became the first and onlyperson among hundreds of such applicants to be granted the status onappeal to the justice minister.     Fawaz Housein El Hanafy, 29, of Ichikawa, Chiba Prefecture,first applied for refugee status after arriving in Japan in November1991.  The application was rejected in November 1992 and he appealed.     Between 1982 and June this year, 357 people have used a systemwhich allows applicants to appeal directly to the minister if theirapplication is turned down.  Fawaz is the first whose appeal has beenaccepted.     Makoto Iwai, manager of the Japanese branch of the human rightsorganization Amnesty International, told a press conference sharedwith Fawaz in Tokyo that the case could signify a change in theappeals system.     ''I would like to see this case serve as the catalyst for achange in the way Japan recognizes refugees,'' Iwai said.     The ministry has not clarified its reasons for granting thestatus to Fawaz.     But supporters of Fawaz said it appeared the ministry had notappreciated the need to grant him refugee status at the time of hisinitial application because an Iranian interpreter used by theministry did not understand his Arabic.     They said another possible reason for the decision to grant himrefugee status was Fawaz's statelessness which meant there would beno diplomatic repercussions.     Fawaz was born stateless in Kuwait to parents who left the GazaStrip after the foundation of Israel in 1948.     After Iraqi troops invaded Kuwait in 1990 and the PalestineLiberation Organization threw its support behind Iraq, feelingagainst Palestinians in Kuwait ran high and Fawaz said he was forcedto flee the country fearing the Kuwaiti government was about toapprehend him.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996U.S. forces to ease 'off-limits' for Okinawa servicemen+NAHA, Japan, Dec. 28 Kyodo     The U.S. military informed the city of Okinawa on Thursday thatit will relax Saturday a ban on its personnel from entering busystreets, a measure taken after the indictment of three of itsservicemen on charges of raping a local schoolgirl.     ''Off-limits'' hours, which stretch from midnight to 6 a.m. atpresent, will be shortened to between 1 a.m. and 5 a.m.     Out of concern over the effect on local restaurants and otherentertainment businesses, however, city authorities are stilldemanding the total lifting of the ban, which the U.S. forces imposedOct. 14     It was the first ''off-limits'' measure taken by the U.S.military in Japan since the southwesternmost Japanese prefecture wasreturned to Tokyo in 1972 after 27 years of U.S. occupation.     The measure was not welcomed by proprietors in the area whosebusinesses depend largely on U.S. service personnel.     Noting that about 10 restaurants and bars have already beenforced to close due to the measure, city officials think it isunlikely that the partial relaxation will dramatically change thesituation.     Japanese prosecutors have indicted three U.S. servicemen oncharges of abducting and raping an Okinawa schoolgirl in earlySeptember.     The case has caused anger among Japanese, especially in OkinawaPrefecture where three quarters of U.S. military facilities in Japanare concentrated in terms of land space.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Ozawa gets 3 ex-premiers to accept party jobs+TOKYO, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Ichiro Ozawa, the newly elected president of the mainopposition party Shinshinto (New Frontier Party), said Thursday hehas secured commitments from three former prime ministers withinShinshinto to accept senior party posts and support the party in thenext election.     After successive talks with Tsutomu Hata, who lost the party'spresidential election to Ozawa, Toshiki Kaifu and Morihiro Hosokawa,Ozawa said, ''I obtained agreements from the three'' to assuming''significant party posts.''     Ozawa, who was formally named president of Shinshinto at ameeting of party Diet members earlier Thursday, underlined hisreadiness to launch an all-out fight against the coalition governmentof Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama.     The hard-line new opposition leader also made no secret of hisintention of resorting to every possible means to force Murayama todissolve the House of Representatives for a snap general election.     The 53-year-old Ozawa, previously the party's secretary general,will serve a two-year term, replacing outgoing Shinshinto PresidentKaifu, who did not seek reelection.     Following the inauguration, Ozawa immediately started formingthe new party leadership, with the primary aim of restoring partyunity ahead of the next election.     Ozawa told a press conference that he plans to create a newadvisory panel for the party chief to incorporate the views of thethree former prime ministers.     Their presence in party machinery will help consolidate a unitedfront, he said.     He also said at the press conference that Shinshinto has animportant ''mission'' in the face of many problems confronting Japanboth at home and abroad.     ''I am not necessarily very confident that I can fulfill thisresponsibility as party head, but I will do my best,'' he said.     He called the Murayama government ''irresponsible'' for adoptinga controversial plan to use 685 billion yen of taxpayers' money toliquidate seven moribund housing loan companies and reiterated hisintention of forcing him into an early election.     Hardly had Ozawa begun attempting to heal the party rift whenrival Hata apparently moved to keep his distance from the chief.     Hata's supporters set up a preparation committee for a newpolicy study group, which a close Hata aide said is aimed at helpingyoung members to win elections but which could become a faction-likegrouping.     The group will seek to make Shinshinto ''a fair and open party''by incorporating opinions from rank-and-file members and discussingOzawa's policy proposals, according to the supporters.     They said the study group will be established before a regularDiet session starts in January.     Meanwhile, Ozawa made the round of greetings with the leaders ofother parties.     At the headquarters of the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), towhich Ozawa once belonged, President Ryutaro Hashimoto, trademinister, greeted Ozawa by saying, ''Welcome back andcongratulations.''     ''It is really a long time (since I left the party),'' Ozawasaid, adding he felt as if he had come home.     When Ozawa asked for Hashimoto's ''guidance,'' the LDP headsaid, ''We both bear responsibility for the Japanese people and forthe world.  Let's put our shoulders to the wheels.''     Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama, who heads the SocialDemocratic Party, congratulated Ozawa on his ''overwhelming victory.''     At the headquarters of New Party Sakigake headed by FinanceMinister Masayoshi Takemura, acting party chief Shusei Tanaka courtedOzawa, saying the two parties may strike an alliance on someimportant issues.     Ozawa responded by saying, ''I have no intention of engaging inmere Diet maneuverings.  We can work together on some high-levelproblems.''Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996U.S. serviceman indicted for possession of rifle+AOMORI, Japan, Dec. 28 Kyodo     A U.S. serviceman from Misawa base in northern Japan wasindicted Thursday for alleged possession of a rifle and bulletswithout a permit.     The serviceman, Airman 2nd Class John Turner, 25, was releasedthe same day on bail of 1 million yen after he was indicted byprosecutors in Hachinohe, Aomori Prefecture.     Prosecutors allege the rifle and 12 bullets were found in a carTurner was driving Dec. 13.  Police arrested him that day.     Police said Turner is also suspected of firing a hunting riflein a park in Misawa on Dec. 10 and that once sufficient evidence iscollected they could send papers to the prosecutors on the case earlynext month alleging he fired the rifle in an area banned to hunting.     They said Turner has already admitted to most of the details inthe prosecution case.     Police said at the time that a park worker heard four gunshotsand immediately saw two foreigners in the park holding a rifle.     The two men then left in a car with a U.S. forces number plate,according to the worker.  Nobody was injured in the incident.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Japan's defense chief may visit Russia next year: Tass+MOSCOW, Dec. 28 Kyodo     Japanese Defense Agency chief Seishiro Eto may visit Moscownext year for talks with Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev forthe first-ever defense summit between the two countries, a seniorRussian official said Thursday.     Russia is fully prepared to maintain contacts with Japan in themilitary sphere at the highest possible level, Deputy ForeignMinister Alexander Panov told Itar-Tass news agency.     While the two countries agreed to make efforts to arrange Eto'svisit to Russia, an accord on the schedule has yet to be reached,according to Japanese diplomatic sources.     Tass quoted Panov as saying there can be no real change for thebetter if there is no dialogue.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Japanese envoy protests at French nuclear test+PARIS, Dec. 28 Kyodo     A senior Japanese diplomat protested Thursday against thelatest French nuclear test conducted in the South Pacific lateWednesday.      Charge d'Affaires to France Yutaka Iimura told a French ForeignMinistry official in charge of Asian affairs that it is extremelyregrettable that France has conducted another nuclear test at MururoaAtoll, the fifth in the recent series, Japanese officials said.     Pointing out that the United Nations passed a resolution in theGeneral Assembly on Dec. 12 calling for the immediate termination ofall nuclear tests, Iimura called on France to stop such tests.     The French official only reiterated that Paris is ready to signa comprehensive test ban treaty soon after the current series oftests is complete, the officials said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996U.S. plans int'l investment forum for ex-communist states+TOKYO, Dec. 29 Kyodo     The United States is likely to propose setting up a forum toallow former Soviet Union and East European governments to exchangeinformation with companies in industrialized nations that areinterested in investing in the region, trade ministry officials saidFriday.     The proposal will be made when trade ministers of the Group ofSeven (G-7) major industrialialized nations meet their counterpartsfrom Russia, Poland and 12 other ex-communist states in Baltimore,Maryland, on Jan. 8-10 to discuss support for their economic reformsefforts.     The U.S. is sounding out other participating nations about theforum, which could be a key issue at the meeting, the officials of theMinistry of International Trade and Industry said.     The East-West trade ministers' conference, which will also beattended by business representatives, started in 1992 and theupcoming session will be the fourth such meeting.     At the meeting, the ministers will gauge achievements under lastyear's Warsaw Declaration which calls for cumulative investment inthe former Soviet and East European states to hit 200 billion dollarsby the turn of the century, the officials said.     The participants, meanwhile, will discuss the target countries'tax systems relative to trade and investment as well as concretesteps to improve business practices in the region, they added.     Also on the agenda will be practical advice on accountingprocedures and market surveys for promoting privatization ofstate-run enterprises and conversion of military contractors intocivilian corporations, according to the officials.     The Japanese mission will consist of MITI Minister RyutaroHashimoto as well as executives from trading houses, banks and otherrelevant companies, the officials said.     After the trade gathering, Hashimoto will go to Washington andstay there until Jan. 13 to meet ranking U.S. government officialsand Congressional leaders.  The trade ministry is also planning toinclude a meeting with President Bill Clinton in his itinerary, theysaid.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Ozawa names Yonezawa, Hata's aides for key party posts+TOKYO, Dec. 29 Kyodo     Ichiro Ozawa, newly-elected president of the main oppositionShinshinto (New Frontier Party), on Friday named Takashi Yonezawa asthe party's secretary general and gave senior party posts to twoaides of his rival Tsutomu Hata, party officials said.     In forming the new party leadership, Ozawa apparently placedpriority on healing the wounds left by the bitter battle with Hata inthe presidential election.     Yonezawa was previously chairman of the now-defunct DemocraticSocialist Party, one of nine parties and groups that merged to formShinshinto in December last year.     Ozawa named Hajime Funada, a close aide to Hata, as actingchairman of the Political Activities Council under Kozo Watanabe, whocontinues to head the key council.     Another Hata follower, Kazuo Aichi, was appointed as chairman ofthe Policy Research Council.     Ozawa was formally named party president Thursday afteroverwhelming his sole rival, former Prime Minister Hata, in the partypresidential race.     The new party executive line-up was announced by the newsecretary general Yonezawa at a press conference in the Diet building.     Shinshinto chief Ozawa also created a ''supreme advisorycouncil'' within the party and appointed to it as members threeformer prime ministers -- Toshiki Kaifu, Morihiro Hosokawa and Hata.     Ozawa himself also took the post of the chairman of the''tomorrow cabinet.''     New Secretary General Yonezawa said at a press conference that a''well-balanced'' executive body has been formed.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MOF vice minister to quit over ministry scandals++TOKYO, Dec. 29 Kyodo     Administrative Vice Finance Minister Kyosuke Shinozawa willresign at the beginning of next year amid a storm of criticism ofthe Ministry of Finance (MOF) following a series of financialscandals, including the involvement of ministry officials inimproper activities.     Finance Minister Masayoshi Takemura on Friday acceptedShinozawa's offer of resignation.     Shinozawa, who took the ministry's top administrative post lastMay, offered to resign after the ministry presented its draft fiscal1996 budget Dec. 20.     Tadashi Ogawa, director general of the National TaxAdministration Agency, will succeed Shinozawa as vice financeminister.     Shinozawa's resignation and the appointment of his successorwill be formally approved at a cabinet meeting Jan. 5.     At a hastily arranged press conference, Takemura said, ''I haveaccepted Shinozawa's resignation to improve the morale of theministry, which is under an oppressive atmosphere following scandalsinvolving ministry officials.''     ''Shinozawa is not quitting to take the blame for any individualincident, such as the failure of two Tokyo credit unions or theministry's decision to use taxpayers' money for the liquidation ofailing housing loan companies,'' he said.     In talks with reporters after the press conference, Shinozawasaid, ''I have decided to step down to let some fresh air into theministry from the start of the New Year.''     Shinozawa said he is not resigning to take responsibility forthe ministry's response to any individual incident.     The ministry has been under fierce criticism at home and abroadfor its lack of transparency in dealing with a series of incidentsthat have hit the financial industry, including the bad loan issue athousing loan companies and a huge loss cover-up at Daiwa Bank's NewYork branch.     Domestic criticism is focused on a series of scandals involvingministry officials.     So far this year, two senior ministry officials, includingYoshio Nakajima, head of the Institute of Fiscal and Monetary Policy,a Finance Ministry affiliate, have quit after they were found to havehad cozy relations with people linked to the two failed Tokyo creditunions involved in illicit loan scandals.     Shinozawa said he had pondered whether he should resign at atime when the ministry was about to proceed with a liquidation schemerecently mapped out for struggling housing loan companies.     But he thought it necessary for him, as the top-rankingbureaucrat, to take action after a year which saw so many incidentstake place, Shinozawa said.     At the news conference, Takemura said he currently has nointention to resign to take the blame for the series of financialscandals.     ''It is my responsibility to flesh out the liquidation schemefor ailing housing loan companies,'' he said.     Since Takemura became finance minister in June 1994, Shinozawais the second vice finance minister to resign before the expiry ofhis term of office.     Shinozawa's predecessor, Jiro Saito, resigned in May understrong pressure from the Liberal Democratic Party, the largest of thethree coalition parties, for his strong ties with key oppositionleader Ichiro Ozawa and their joint campaign to legislate a''national welfare tax'' that he and Ozawa reportedly devised toreplace the 3% comsumption tax.     Takemura told the news conference Friday he has selected Ogawaas Shinozawa's successor and added Ogawa will be replaced at theNational Tax Administration Agency by Sohei Hidaka, director generalof the ministry's Securities Bureau.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN POLICY AND POLITICS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Upper house VP agrees to pay debts with expense money+AOMORI, Japan, Dec. 29 Kyodo     House of Councillors Vice President Kanpei Matsuo has reachedan agreement with a credit union to pay back some 700 million yen inloans using part of his public expense account, informed sourcessaid Friday.     Matsuo has promised the credit union in Aomori Prefecture thathe will use part of the 29 million yen annual expense allotment forthe vice presidential post to pay back loans owed by himself andrelated companies.     Matsuo has been in arrears on the loans, with principal nowtotaling 700 million yen.  Some of the loans date back 20 years.     Matsuo said his own loans amount to only about 40 million yen,adding that the rest is owed by those for whom he has givenguarantees.     ''There is no legal problem to the arrangement,'' he said.Back to Headline List WT03-B09-16IA087-000629-B021-248http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/po02.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035824 text/html 39028HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:56:26 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:15 GMTContent-length: 38841Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/po02.html Sample Issue Copyright THE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNet January 17, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES LOBBYING ORGANIZATIONS PUT UNDER FEBRUARY 14 DEADLINE TO COMPLY WITH NEW REGISTRATION LAW (295 words) AN UNRULY LEGISLATURE CAN MAKE ITS OWN RULES, APPEALS COURT SAYS RHODE ISLAND HOUSE CAN BAN LOBBYISTS (1252 words) COLORADO REPUBLICAN PARTY SPENDING CASE IS NOW GOING TO U.S. SUPREME COURT (521 words) CONGRESS PAVES THE WAY FOR ELECTRONIC FILINGS TO FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION (171 words) MICHIGAN POLITICAL DONORS CAN BE SOLICITED BY OTHER CANDIDATES (199 words) DOLE, CLINTON LEAD PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES IN PRIMARY MATCHING FUND CERTIFICATIONS (306 words) BOND DEALER ASKS U.S. SUPREME COURT TO REVIEW CONSTITUTIONALITY OF RULE G-37 (295 words) REFORMERS CRITICIZE USE OF STATE-OWNED BUILDINGS FOR POLITICAL FUNDRAISING EVENTS (101 words) LOBBY REGISTRATIONS: LAWYERS & CONSULTANTS (645 words) LOBBY REGISTRATIONS: WASHINGTON OFFICES (158 words) BTB: BELOW THE BELTWAY New problem for Mrs. Waldholtz (117 words) Eating words (81 words) Disclosure compliance (70 words) Wooing Catholics (122 words) Spinning out of control (70 words) Letter of the law (137 words) Doctors' bill (110 words) CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996LOBBYING ORGANIZATIONS PUT UNDER FEBRUARY 14DEADLINE TO COMPLY WITH NEW REGISTRATION LAW     Lobbying organizations are under a February 14 deadline toidentify their lobbyists and disclose their legislative orregulatory interests under a new law which took effect January 1.     Also, lobbyists who were active during the fourth quarter of1995 are required to file activity reports, even though the lawrequiring them has been repealed.     The 1946 Federal Regulation of Lobbying Act was repealed onJanuary 1. Thus, its repeal didn't affect the quarterly activityreport for the period that ended on December 31.     In a joint statement published in the December 22 edition ofthe Congressional Record, Secretary of the Senate Kelly D.Johnston and Clerk of the House Robin H. Carle said all lobbyingorganizations must register under the new law.     While individuals and lobbying organizations that wereregistered under the old law must file a final quarterly activityreport, registrations under the old law are no longer valid.That's because the new law's disclosure requirements aredifferent from those contained in the old law. Moreover, the newlaw shifts the registration and reporting requirement to lobbyingfirms and lobbying organizations.     "All lobbyists active after January 1, 1996, must registerunder the new Lobbying Disclosure Act," Johnston and Carle said.The February 14 registration deadline, they added, applies "to alobbyist who has a retainer agreement with a client in effect onJanuary 1, 1996."     A new registration form was to have been released on January12. But, due to the snow blizzards that hit Washington in recentdays, the Government Printing Office was unable to meet thedelivery date. Forms will be made available later this month atthe House Legislative Resource Center, 1036 Longworth HouseOffice Building (202/225-1300), and the Senate Office of PublicRecords, 232 Hart Senate Office Building (202/224-0758).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996AN UNRULY LEGISLATURE CAN MAKE ITS OWN RULES,APPEALS COURT SAYS RHODE ISLAND HOUSE CAN BAN LOBBYISTSBy Edward Zuckerman, Editor & Publisher     Boston--Rhode Island might have an unruly legislature, butit at least has the right to set its rules. So, the U.S. 1stCircuit Court of Appeals held in a recent divided opinion, a 1993rule that banishes lobbyists from their traditional roostingplace around the floor of the Rhode Island House ofRepresentatives is valid, no matter what other constitutionalissues it might provoke.     The 2-1 opinion handed down in late November by athree-judge appeals court panel overturned an earlier decision byU.S. District Judge Raymond J. Pettine. He held the rule had tobe set aside because it didn't apply equally to all lobbyists.While private sector lobbyists were affected, lobbyists from thestate's own agencies retained their access to the House floor.     Instead of relaxing the rule, the Rhode Island Legislaturereacted to Judge Pettine's decision by extending it to the stategovernment's lobbyists, too. The legislature's action served onlyto harden efforts by a coalition of lobbying organizations tohave the rule declared unconstitutional.     Inexplicably, Judge Pettine wasn't asked to consider whetherthe Rhode Island legislature was entitled to immunity fromjudicial intervention. There is a time-honored doctrine, derivedfrom the Constitution's "speech and debate" clause, which allowslegislatures to conduct their affairs without judicial scrutiny.     "Parties must speak clearly in the trial court on pain that,if they forget their lines, they will likely be bound forever tohold their peace," Circuit Judge Bruce M. Selya noted in theopinion he wrote for himself and Circuit Judge Conrad K. Cyr.     But "foolish consistency is reputedly the hobgoblin oflittle minds," Judge Selya continued, drawing upon the widsom ofRalph Waldo Emerson to explain why he and Judge Cyr were makingan exception.     "In our republican system, different institutions ofgovernment occupy different spheres. Within its own domain, thelegislative branch of a state government is entitled to areasonable measure of independence in conducting its internalaffairs," they said.     And they concluded: "As a rule, a legislature's regulationof the atmosphere in which it conducts its core legislativeactivities--debating, voting, passing legislation and thelike--is part and parcel of the legislative process and, hence,not subject to a judicial veto."     Failing to raise a "legislative immunity" defense, the twocircuit judges said, "had the regrettable effect of blindsidingthe district judge and prolonging the litigation."     Circuit Judge Sandra Lynch, the panel's dissenting member,felt the Rhode Island House wasn't entitled to immunity and thatits rule did extinguish a First Amendment right.     "When the government chooses to listen only to its own voicein the political process by excluding the voices of privatecitizens, core First Amendment values are violated.     "The First Amendment does not permit the government to putits thumb on the scale in this way and favor itself in the arenaof political speech," she said.     Connecticut journalist Charles Dudley Warner's century-oldaphorism that "politics makes strange bedfellows" remains true,Judge Selya said of the "improbable alliance" that bandedtogether--social workers, school teachers, gun ownershipadvocates, pro-life and pro-choice activists and the AmericanCivil Liberties Union--to protest the Rhode Island House's rule.     To understand why such a disparate group of organizationsfound fellowship, one merely must know that the Rhode IslandHouse of Representatives is a part-time legislature that meets afew afternoons and evenings. Its members have their own full-timejobs. They have no offices, no staff aides, just a chair and adesk on the House floor. Sometimes, during long legislativesessions, amendments are offered and approved in the same day.     There is a gallery overlooking the floor, but there is alsoan aisle with a few dozen chairs around the floor's perimeterwhich have been occupied for many years by lobbyists. When theHouse convened under new leadership in 1993, a rule was approvedthat unceremoniously dispatched the private sector lobbyists, whomust be registered and wear identifying badges, to the gallery.House Rule 45, besides leaving the state government's lobbyistsunaffected, also allowed floor access to the general public.     House Rule 45 creates a hardship for lobbyists, particularlywhen it prevents them from communicating their views onamendments which are proposed and voted on in the sameproceeding, the trial court acknowledged. Even so, the circuitcourt decided, "we think it is beyond serious dispute thatenforcing a duly enacted legislative rule which prohibitslobbying on the House floor during House sessions is well withinthe legislative sphere."     Judge Lynch, in a dissent which gave First Amendmentconcerns priority over a legislature's immunity to judicial veto,cited several examples where the rule's enforcement gave thestate's lobbyists an unfair advantage.     For example, when the House took up bills relating to publicfunding of abortion, reinstatement of the death penalty and cutsin public welfare spending, lobbyists from the Rhode Island Rightto Life Committee, the American Civil Liberties Union and theNational Association of Social Workers could only "wave from thebalcony" while the governor, attorney general and state welfaredepartment officials promoted their views directly to lawmakers.     "Prison-related bills received the same treatment," JudgeLynch said. "Department of Corrections officials were on thefloor with legislators during debate while ACLU lobbyists whoopposed the Department's position watched ineffectively from thebalcony. There were numerous other instances where the Governor'sOffice, the State Police, the Department of Economic Development,the Banking and Insurance Department, the Fire Marshal, theGeneral Treasurer's Office and the Department of BusinessRegulation lobbyists spoke directly with legislators on the floorregarding pending legislation."     Even if legislative immunity had been raised earlier, JudgeLynch said it wouldn't have foreclosed "a judicial determinationof the constitutionality of the defendant's practices."     "The legislative immunity doctrine is not meant for theprotection of the legislators for their own benefit, 'but tosupport the rights of the people, by enabling theirrepresentatives to execute the functions of their office withoutfear of prosecution, civil or criminal,'" she said, quoting froma 1972 Supreme Court decision in a bribery case that involvedformer Maryland Democratic Sen. Daniel Brewster.     Lobbying is a form of political speech that deserves FirstAmendment protection, Judge Lynch said.     "The dangers...are plain. By simply excluding all voicessave the voices of government lobbyists, the government couldeasily 'suppress support for a minority party or an unpopularcause, or...exclude the expression of certain ideas from themarketplace of ideas.' These effects are 'so plainly illegitimatethat they would immediately invalidate the rule,'" she said,quoting from a 1984 Supreme Court decision.     And, quoting a more recent Supreme Court decision, she saidthe Rhode Island House "has no authority to license one side ofthe debate to fight freestyle, while requiring the others tofollow Marquis of Queensbury Rules."     "The point is that the government has permitted itself tospeak while prohibiting non-government speech. Speech fromnon-government speakers, including lobbyists, is also valuable.Indeed, while lobbying may be subject to registration anddisclosure, no case has ever suggested that lobbying, includingits information-gathering and providing component, could bebanned entirely," Judge Lynch said.     And she added elsewhere in her dissenting opinion:     "There is another danger, and that is that the government'svoice will not truly represent the interests of the public.Government should theoretically represent the people and notrepresent itself. Theory and reality often depart. The governmentis not always a mirror of the people. Government employees todayare recognized as constituting their own interest group," JudgeLynch warned.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996COLORADO REPUBLICAN PARTY SPENDING CASEIS NOW GOING TO U.S. SUPREME COURT     The U.S. Supreme Court said it will review a 10-year-oldlegal dispute involving political expenditures by the ColoradoRepublican party.     The case is being watched closely by Democrats andRepublicans. If a decision reached last summer by the U.S. 10thCircuit Court of Appeals is overturned by the high court, thenthe Federal Election Campaign Act's restrictions on politicalparty expenditures might become unraveled by enabling them tomake unlimited expenditures to elect or defeat federal candidateswithout counting against contribution or expenditure limits whichotherwise apply to them.     At issue in the case is a $15,000 payment by the ColoradoGOP for radio commercials that aired in 1986, fully eight monthsbefore the general election and before the party selected itscandidate to oppose incumbent Sen. Timothy Wirth's (D-Colo.)re-election. It described it as an "operating expense" in itsfinancial disclosure to the Federal Election Commission whichopened an investigation after a formal complaint was filed by theColorado Democratic party.     The FEC filed a civil suit in Denver when the ColoradoRepublican party refused to admit it violated federal law in aconciliation agreement. But the FEC's effort to press the casewas dealt a setback when U.S. District Judge Edward Nottinghamruled the GOP expenditure wasn't subject to government regulationbecause the commercials didn't contain an "express advocacy"message.     Nottingham cited election law cases dating back to the 1976Buckley vs. Valeo decision in which the U.S. Supreme Court hasheld that political expenditures are immune from governmentregulation if they do not convey "express advocacy"--that is,they don't expressly advocate the election or defeat of a federalcandidate with explicit words such as "vote for" or "voteagainst."     Last summer, though, a three-judge appeals court panel inDenver held that the "express advocacy" standard applies toindependent expenditure activities. Because political partiescannot engage in independent expenditure activity, the ColoradoGOP expenditures can only be treated as "coordinatedexpenditures" which are subject to the FECA's requirements ifthey are made "in connection with a federal election."     "Any reasonable reading of the commercial would leave thereader (or listener) with the impression that the Republicanparty sought to 'diminish' public support for Wirth and 'garnersupport' for the unnamed Republican nominee. The commercialunquestionably contained an electioneering message.     "We conclude that the anti-Wirth publicity was an'expenditure in connection with' the 1986 Colorado senatorialelection because it named both a clearly identifiable candidateand contained an electioneering message," the appeals court said.     In its order, the three-judge panel ordered the case back tothe trial court with instructions to enter a finding in the FEC'sfavor.     Instead, the Colorado GOP sought an en banc review by theU.S. 10th Circuit Court of Appeals. When its petition for reviewwas rejected by the appeals court, the state party applied forreview by the U.S. Supreme Court.     In its petition to the high court, the state party arguedthat the election law violates its First Amendment right of freespeech. But the U.S. Justice Department, in an opposition brief,said the appeals court decision complied with Supreme Courtprecedent.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996CONGRESS PAVES THE WAY FOR ELECTRONICFILINGS TO FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION     Congress completed action late last month on legislationthat will speed disclosure and pave the way toward electronicsubmission of campaign finance reports.     Effective immediately, the legislation eliminates the Clerkof the House as the official filing point-of-entry for Housecandidates. Instead, congressional candidates will file theirreports directly to the Federal Election Commission, thuseliminating a two-day period for delivering copies of reports tothe FEC.     The legislation does not affect senatorial candidates whowill continue filing their campaign disclosure reports to theSecretary of the Senate.     Also, beginning next year, the FEC will be allowed to acceptcampaign disclosure reports without requiring a treasurer's legalsignature. By permitting other means for meeting the law'ssignature requirement, the FEC will be enabled to acceptelectronic submissions.     Finally, the new law, when signed by President Clinton, willwaive a provision of present election law which requirescandidates, PACs and political parties to make duplicate filingsof their reports in states where computer terminals provideaccess to the FEC public records.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996MICHIGAN POLITICAL DONORS CAN BESOLICITED BY OTHER CANDIDATES     Lansing, Mich.--Individuals whose gifts to state and localcandidates are publicly disclosed are fair game to othercandidates, Michigan Secretary of State Candice S. Miller said inan interpretive ruling.     The state's election law prohibits the use of contributorinformation for "commercial" solicitation. But, unlike federallaw, the prohibition doesn't specifically cover "political"solicitation.     Miller noted that the U.S. 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals, ina case involving use of federally disclosed contributorinformation, ruled that the publication and sale of contributorinformation by Political Contributions Data Inc. did not byitself constitute a prohibited commercial use.     Thus, Miller said, Aristotle Industries, theWashington-based company which requested the ruling, can compileand sell information about contributors to Michiganofficeseekers.     "The interpretation of the term 'commercial purposes'adopted by the 2nd Circuit espouses a rationale that appliesequally well to that same term, as used in the Michigan CampaignFinance Act. The difference between Michigan's prohibition underthe Michigan Campaign Finance Act and the federal prohibitionunder the Federal Election Campaign Act is that the federalprohibition applies to 'all kinds of solicitations,' whereas theprohibition of the MCFA applies only to commercialsolicitations," Miller said in her ruling.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996DOLE, CLINTON LEAD PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATESIN PRIMARY MATCHING FUND CERTIFICATIONS     While large portions of the federal government remainedclosed, two agencies close to the hearts of most presidentialcandidates--the Federal Election Commission and the U.S. TreasuryDepartment--were open for business.     As the 1995 calendar year came to an end, the FEC certified$37.4 million worth of matching fund payments to 10 eligiblepresidential candidates.     They will receive 60% of the certified amount from Treasury,due to a shortfall in the primary matching fund account, with therest to be paid later in the year when taxpayers begin filingtheir 1995 federal income taxes.     Republican hopeful Sen. Bob Dole (R-Kan.) led all recipientswith a $5.6 million payment from Treasury. President BillClinton, facing no serious opposition for the Democratic partynomination, drew $5.4 million.     Also on the recipients' list were perennial Democraticcandidate Lyndon LaRouche who received $156,740 and Natural LawParty candidate John Hagelin who received $60,000.     Under presidential fund rules, candidates lose theireligibility 30 days after failing to receive at least 10% of thevote in two successive primaries.     Last week, LaRouche appeared to gain a few extra days ofeligibility by becoming the lone Democratic candidate in theFebruary 24 Delaware primary. President Clinton said he wouldn'tenter the Delaware contest after New Hampshire officialscomplained that Delaware scheduled its election only four daysafter their state's first-in-the-nation presidential primary.     Delaware Democrats said last week they would draft85-year-old former Gov. Elbert Carvel as a "favorite son" toprevent LaRouche from gaining delegates to the party'spresidential nominating convention.     Presidential primary election     matching fund certifications:     January, 1996     Republicans          Bob Dole            $9,265,290          Phil Gramm           6,653,918          Patrick Buchanan     3,977,007          Lamar Alexander      3,226,450          Richard Lugar        2,275,051          Pete Wilson          1,591,393          Arlen Specter          988,975     Democrats          Bill Clinton         9,014,644          Lyndon LaRouche        261,235     Natural Law Party          John Hagelin           100,000     Total:                 $ 37,353,967Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996BOND DEALER ASKS U.S. SUPREME COURTTO REVIEW CONSTITUTIONALITY OF RULE G-37     Alabama bond dealer William Blount celebrated the New Yearby asking the U.S. Supreme Court to review lower court decisionsthat have upheld the constitutionality of a government regulationthat restricts political contributions by municipal bond firmsand their employees.     The Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board's Rule G-37"places unprecedented restrictions on the First Amendment rightsof securities professionals and the Tenth Amendment rights of thestates," Blount claimed in a 21-page brief that was filed withthe high court on January 2.     Under Rule G-37, which took effect in 1994 with U.S.Securities and Exchange Commission approval, a bond firm cannotdo business with a state or local bond issuing agency for twoyears after the firm or an employee makes a contribution to thecampaign of a candidate or official who can influence theagency's decisions.     The rule hit particularly hard against Blount because he waschairman of the Alabama Democratic Party when it took effect.Because he was expected to help candidates raise money for theircampaigns, Blount won a temporary order that suspended the rule'sapplication to him.     Rule G-37, Blount charged in his petition, "does violence toconstitutional principles" and usurps the power of states toenact their own campaign finance laws.     Blount went to the Supreme Court after the U.S. CircuitCourt of Appeals for the District of Columbia said it wouldn'treview a three-judge panel's conclusion that the MSRB rule wasconstitutional.     The appeals court upheld the rule, even in the absence ofevidence of so-called "pay-to-play" practices which the MSRB saidits rule was designed to prevent.     "No smoking gun is needed where, as here, the conflict ofinterest is apparent, the likelihood of stealth is great and thelegislative purpose is prophylactic," the appeals court said.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996REFORMERS CRITICIZE USE OF STATE-OWNEDBUILDINGS FOR POLITICAL FUNDRAISING EVENTS     Albany, N.Y.--Reform advocates think its "outrageous" forNew York state lawmakers to hold campaign fundraising events inrestaurants which are located in the state-owned Empire StatePlaza which has underground passageways to the state capitol andits office buildings.     Representatives of four organizations--New York CommonCause, New York Public Interest Research Group, the League ofWomen Voters and United We Stand America--criticized the practiceat a late December press conference.     They said there was nothing illegal about holding campaignfundraising events in the privately-owned, rent-payingbusinesses. But they also said it was unethical to raise campaignfunds on state-owned property.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996LOBBY REGISTRATIONS:LAWYERS & CONSULTANTS     Here are lobby registrations submitted in recent days by lawfirms and consultants which have been hired to lobby on specificlegislative subjects:ANTITRUST POLICY     Wilmer Cutler & Pickering, hired by the Dallas Cowboys,Irving, Tex., to lobby on antitrust legislation.CHILDREN & YOUTH     Burditt & Radzius, hired by Natus Medical Inc., a medicaldevice manufacturer in San Carlos, Calif., to lobby on provisionsof the Health & Human Services appropriations bill for universalscreening of infant children for hearing impairments.CONSUMER PROTECTION     Congressional Consultants, hired by International BillingAssociation, Bethesda, Md., to lobby on legislation to protectthe privacy of medical records.CRIMINAL JUSTICE     Sidley & Austin, hired by the American Petroleum Institute,Washington, D.C., to lobby on legislation that would requirefederal judges to order victim restitution in criminal cases.DEFENSE SPENDING     Kimmitt Coates & McCarthy, hired by Talley Defense SystemsInc., Mesa, Ariz., to lobby on the defense appropriations bill.     Davis O'Connell, hired by Constellation Technology Corp.,St. Petersburg, Fla., and Sanders, a Lockheed Martin Co., Nashua,N.H., to lobby on the defense appropriations bill.     American Defense International, hired by CMS Defense SystemsInc., Winter Park, Fla., to lobby on defense legislation.EDUCATION     Davis O'Connell, hired by Illinois Community College Board,Springfield, Ill., Florida Community College, Jacksonville, Fla.,Indian River Community College, Fort Pierce, Fla., and ValenciaCommunity College, Orlando, Fla., to lobby on appropriationsbills containing funds for education, welfare programs andjob-training assistance.ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION     Baker & Hostetler, hired by the Coalition for ShareholderFairness, Washington, D.C., to lobby on legislation toreauthorize the Comprehensive Environmental Response,Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA).     Sidley & Austin, hired by General Electric Co., Fairfield,Conn., to lobby on legislation that would provide limitedimmunity from prosecution for companies that voluntarily discloseviolations of environmental laws or regulations.FEDERAL TAXATION     Carlyle Consulting, hired by the National Indian GamingAssociation, Washington, D.C., to lobby on federal taxlegislation.     Katten Muchin & Zavis, hired by State Savings Bank,Columbus, Ohio, to lobby on federal tax provisions contained inbudget reconciliation legislation.FOOD & DRUGS     Hogan & Hartson, hired by SmithKline Beecham, Philadelphia,to lobby on legislation affecting the U.S. Department ofAgriculture's pre-emption policy for animal vaccines.HEALTH CARE     McGuiness & Holch, hired by METRA Health, Washington, D.C.,CIGNA Corp., Philadelphia, and Aetna Life & Casualty Co.,Hartford, Conn., to lobby on legislation affecting the healthinsurance industry.INTERNATIONAL TRADE     O'Neill & Athy, hired by the Government of Chile to promotethe South American country's inclusion in the North American FreeTrade Agreement, as well as other measures affecting tradebetween the U.S. and Chile.     Fontheim & Hammonds, hired by The Limited Inc., Columbus,Ohio, to lobby on legislation to implement the Uruguay RoundTrade Agreement.MARITIME & FISHERIES     Lent & Scrivner, hired by Liberty Maritime Corp., LakeSuccess, N.Y., to lobby on cargo preference legislation, as wellas other maritime bills.MEDICARE & SOCIAL SECURITY     Denison Scott Associates, hired by National Association forHome Care, Washington, D.C., to lobby on legislation affectingMedicare reimbursement for home health care services.PRODUCT LIABILITY     Julia J. Norrell & Associates, hired by the American Councilof Life Insurance, Washington, D.C. to lobby on product liabilitylegislation.REGULATORY PROCEDURES     Baker & Hostetler, hired by the National Association ofManufacturers, Washington, D.C., to lobby on regulatory reformlegislation.STOCKS & COMMODITIES     Lent & Scrivner, hired by the Investment Company Institute,Washington, D.C., to lobby on legislation affecting the financialservices industry.TRANSPORTATION     Arter & Hadden, hired by Port of Houston Authority, Houston,Tex., to lobby on transportation legislation affecting the port'soperations; and, by Consolidated Rail Corp., Washington, D.C., tolobby on transportation legislation affecting the railroadindustry.     Ann Eppard Associates, hired by Union Pacific Co.,Bethlehem, Pa., to lobby on transportation legislation.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996LOBBY REGISTRATIONS:WASHINGTON OFFICES     Here are lobby registrations submitted in recent days byindividuals who are employed in the Washington offices of majorlobbying organizations:TRADE ASSOCIATIONS     Mary Kathleen Kenyon for the American Group PracticeAssociation.     Christopher P. Picerno for Building Owners & ManagersAssociation International.     Mary Elizabeth Parker for the American Textile ManufacturersAssociation.     Marc D. Yacker for the Electricity Consumers ResourceCouncil.     Jill Luckett for the National Cable Television Association.     Adam Sharp for the American Farm Bureau Federation.     Robert F. O'Neill for the Shipbuilders Council of America.CORPORATIONS     James M. Burger Sr. for Apple Computer Inc., Cupertino,Calif.     Renee Eastman for the Salt River Project, Phoenix, Ariz.     Richard A. Ferreira for EDS Corp., Dallas.     Kathryne M. Thorpe for Science Applications InternationalCorp., San Diego, Calif.     William A. Syers for Hughes Electronics Corp., Arlington,Va.MISCELLANEOUS INTERESTS     Durinda O'Brien for the Wilderness Society.     Rebecca Isaacs for People for the American Way.     Pamela Goddard for the Sierra Club.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996New problem for Mrs. Waldholtz     Fees paid to a private detective who worked for Rep. EnidGreene Waldholtz's (R-Utah) 1994 campaign do not appear incampaign finance disclosure reports to the Federal ElectionCommission, the Salt Lake Tribune reported.     Malcolm Shannon, a private investigator, told the newspaperhe only provided personal security consulting services to Mrs.Waldholtz. But sources in Waldholtz's campaign claimed Shannonchecked the backgrounds of people who were contributing to thecampaigns of her opponents, Democratic incumbent Karen Shepherdand independent Merrill Cook.     The newspaper said the Utah Democratic Party filed a formalcomplaint to the Federal Election Commission last October,alleging the Waldholtz's campaign violated the federal electionlaw by failing to disclose the fees paid to Shannon.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Eating words     "PACs just try to buy influence and buy incumbents...(Idon't) accept PAC money and I'd like to see an end to this typeof money-funneling." That was Massachusetts Republican Gov.William Weld speaking to the Boston Ad Club a few years ago.     Last month, Weld said he would raise PAC funds for hiscampaign against Sen. John Kerry (D-Mass.).     Kerry doesn't accept PAC contributions but, the Boston Globenoted, Kerry raised PAC funds while he chaired the DemocraticSenatorial Campaign Committee.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Disclosure compliance     Baltimore City Council members Agnes Welch and MartinO'Malley filed tardy campaign finance disclosure reports and paidfines for missing the deadlines just in time for their December 7inaugurations, the Baltimore Sun reported.     Under Maryland law, elected state and local officials cannotbe sworn into office without certification by the StateAdministrative Board of Election Laws that all disclosure reportshave been filed and all fines have been paid.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Wooing Catholics     Christian Coalition, which mixes anti-abortion politics withconservative social and welfare issues, has created a subsidiarycalled the Catholic Alliance to increase its membership inMassachusetts where voters tend to be Catholic, Democratic andliberal.     The Virginia-based political organization claims that250,000 of its 1.7 million members are Catholic, even though thechurch doesn't support its views on such issues as gun control,immigration, welfare reform and budget cuts. Church officialshave remained neutral, allowing the Catholic Alliance to buy afull-page ad in the Boston archdiocese newspaper to promoteattendance at a membership recruitment event.     Catholic Alliance, described as a "wholly-owned subsidiary"by Christian Coalition director Ralph Reed, will lure Catholicsinto membership by focusing entirely on abortion and schoolprayer.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Spinning out of control     "Hopefully, they learned a lesson: not all politicians arebad," State Rep. Alex Diaz de la Portilla said after fined $500by the Florida Elections Commission for filing a false campaignfinance disclosure report.     "We feel totally vindicated. They threw out five charges. Tonot embarrass the elections department, they decided to find himguilty of something," Portilla's brother and lawyer, Miguel Diazde la Portilla, told the Miami Herald.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Letter of the law     Alaska Democratic Gov. Tony Knowles has come under fire forrefusing to disclose an estimated $300,000 worth of contributionscollected by his Governor's Fund at two fundraising events priorto the February 15 disclosure deadline. Besides waiting for thelast minute, the gifts are expected to be treated as AlaskaDemocratic Party receipts.     "The governor's decision to delay disclosure, while withinthe letter of the law, violates the spirit of the law. So doeshis decision to report the fundraiser in the Democratic Party's1995 report, which will not break out the information in aquickly accessible separate report," the Anchorage Daily Newseditorialized.     "State disclosure statutes were designed so Alaskans wouldknow who contributed to elected officials and candidates...(T)helaw says the contributions must be reported by Feb. 15, not onFeb. 15," the newspaper said.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE POLITICAL FINANCE & LOBBY REPORTER via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1996Doctors' bill     The Massachusetts Medical Society was fined $45,000 by thestate's ethics commission for providing at least $15,000 worth ofillegal gratuities to state lawmakers between 1989 and 1993. Aspart of its settlement, the 214-year-old society which represents15,000 physicians and medical students, admitted that itslobbyist, Andrew Hunt, made gifts to lawmakers to ensure friendlytreatment of health-related legislation.     Hunt, according to the Boston Globe, hosted key lawmakers ona 1992 fishing trip to Puerto Rico and a 1993 golf trip toFlorida. Hunt submitted expense accounts to the society whichdescribed the purpose of his expenditures as "medicalmalpractice" or "Medicare" without identifying those who wereentertained.Back to Headline List WT03-B09-17IA087-000629-B021-291http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/pb62.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035923 text/html 102384HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:56:55 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:19 GMTContent-length: 102196Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/pb62.html Sample Issue Copyright ADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNet February 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES UNITED STATES: AT&T, MCI MOVE INTO DBS (665 words) ITALY: STREAM LAUNCHES VOD GUIDE (322 words) GERMANY: BERLIN DIGITAL CABLE TV (529 words) JAPAN: NEW DIGITAL SYSTEM DEVELOPED (450 words) EUROPE: EC AIDS NEW 16:9 BROADCASTERS (360 words) CANADA: SEGA CHANNEL CANADA UP (261 words) UNITED STATES: DIGITAL PIRATES STRIKE DIRECTV (535 words) JAPAN: DMC GETS ITS OWN WAY (474 words) EUROPE: TALISMAN: DIGITAL PROTECTION (472 words) USA: WILL STATIONS GET ATV SPECTRUM? (191 words) FRANCE: FRENCH STATIONS IN DIGITAL LINK (330 words) JAPAN: MARUBENI'S CABLE PC SERVICE (327 words) NEWS BRIEF TOKYO CABLE TO BEGIN LARGE-SCALE TEST OF DIGITAL CABLE SERVICES (96 words) USA/EUROPE: E!, MTV3 ON THE WEB (215 words) MTV3 OPENS WEB SITE (137 words) UNITED STATES: SNET MOVES INTO CATV (611 words) EUROPE: DVB DIGITAL NORM AGREED (207 words) JAPAN: NTT THINKS INTERACTIVE (222 words) GERMANY: UNCERTAINTY OVER CLT PLANS (285 words) USA: ALLIANCES IN SETTOP SECTOR (291 words) JAPAN: NIPPON TV GOES DIGITAL (180 words) FRANCE: REPORT SLAMS FRENCH TELCO (200 words) USA: SI DIAMOND'S LCD ADVANCES (185 words) UK: UK LAUNCH FOR SEGA CHANNEL (256 words) FEATURE CHALLENGES OF SELLING 16/9 SETS (2292 words) NEWS BRIEF MITSUBISHI ELECTRIC CONCLUDES AGREEMENT WITH DIGI-MEDIA VISION (106 words) SCIENTIFIC-ATLANTA LICENSES INTERACTIVE TRANSACTION (78 words) TVA PLACES $15 MILLION ORDER (104 words) TCI CREATES DIGITAL TV BUSINESS (41 words) DIELECTRIC COMMUNICATIONS TO DESIGN HDTV ANTENNAS (64 words) TEXAS INSTRUMENTS DEMONSTRATES TV SYSTEM (109 words) TITV RELEASES SPECIFICATIONS FOR SETTOP BOXES (117 words) NOVELL UK ANNOUNCES PARTNERSHIP WITH STELLAR ONE CORPORATION (111 words) KDD CORP. DEVELOPS VOD SYSTEM (82 words) TIME WARNER REACHES 4,000 USERS (82 words) CITY TV NAKANO TO USE DAVID OPERATING SYSTEM (80 words) MMS TO MERGE SUBSIDIARY MMS ACQUISITIONS (91 words) NTT BREAK UP (133 words) NTL AWARDED CONTRACT (106 words) PC VIDEOPHONE AVAILABLE FOR WINDOWS '95 AND WINDOWS NT (96 words) VLSI TECHNOLOGY INTRODUCES VES1789 AND VES 1790 (102 words) NISSHO IWAI PLACES ORDERS FOR MAGNITUDE MPEG-2 (76 words) SCIENTIFIC-ATLANTA TO SUPPLY POWERVU EQUIPMENT (87 words) BT TO LAUNCH TRIAL OF WIREPLAY (122 words) FRANCE TELECOM TO SET UP SUBSIDIARY (131 words) INFOCITY TRIAL TO CONNECT 10,000 HOUSEHOLDS (87 words) DAVIC VOTES TO APPROVE RELEASE 1.0 (132 words) TV EXTRA TO DISTRIBUTE MPEG-2 EQUIPMENT (54 words) HONG KONG GOVERNMENT TO UNVEIL VIDEO-ON-DEMAND PROPOSALS (93 words) TRANSITION TO DIGITAL TV ESSENTIAL (60 words) BOB DOLE TO BLOCK CONTROVERSIAL MOVE (105 words) US MARKET FOR INTERACTIVE TELEVISION TO EXPLODE (114 words) MITI TO FUND DEVELOPMENT OF HDTV (92 words) DTI PROPOSALS FOR DIGITAL TV (112 words) TIME COMPUTER SYSTEMS WITHDRAWS RANGE (99 words) SALES OF VIDEO-ON-DEMAND SERVERS TO INCREASE (98 words) ESTEE LAUDER TO INVEST IN SATELLITE TELEVISION STATION (108 words) SME AND SPE LAUNCH JOINT VENTURE (133 words) VIDEOTRON AND EUROSPORT REINFORCE PARTNERSHIP (100 words) CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996UNITED STATES:  AT&T, MCI MOVE INTO DBSWith 1996 only a few weeks old and Congress poised to vote on a majortelecom deregulation bill, the two largest US long-distance telephonecompanies have signalled that direct-to-home satellite broadcasts willbe a major strategic focus of their effort to build direct links toAmerican consumers.  Mitch Shapiro reports.The long-distance/DBS alliance-making began on 22 January, when AT&Tannounced an agreement to market and distribute Hughes' DirecTv DBSservice and the associated reception gear.A few days later, MCI Communications, the number-two long distancecompany, submitted the winning bid in a government auction of DBSorbital slots that had been reclaimed from a company the government haddecided had waited too long to launch its DBS service.As part of its deal with Hughes, AT&T is acquiring 2.5 percent ofDirecTv for $137.5 million.  The agreement also gives AT&T options toincrease its stake up to 30% over five years, depending mainly on howmany new DirecTv subscribers it enrolls over specific time periods.AT&T, which is in the process of spinning off its telecom equipment andcomputer divisions, is expected to begin marketing DirecTv service toits long-distance and credit card customers by this summer.  Accordingto Joseph P.  Nacchio, executive vice president of AT&T's consumer andsmall-business division, the DirecTv investment "in one fellswoop,..establishes AT&T with a national presence in entertainment."Though AT&T customers will not get a price break on DBS service, AT&Thopes to lower the upfront DBS cost hurdle by offering financingthrough its AT&T Universal Card.  AT&T customers, which will orderservice and equipment directly from AT&T, will also receive a singlebill that will include both DBS and long-distance phone charges.MCI's winning auction bid of $682.5 million topped competing bids byTele-Communications, Inc., the nation's largest cable TV operator, andEchostar Communications, a smaller company which recently launched itsfirst DBS satellite on a Chinese-built rocket.Not surprisingly, the long-distance company is teaming with RupertMurdoch's News Corp.  in the DBS arena.  It earlier had agreed toinvest $2 billion in News Corp.In the wake of the auction, the two companies announced plans to createa jointly owned company that will offer information and entertainmentservices to both consumers and businesses.The moves into DBS by AT&T and MCI follow several years during whichthe two companies considered possible alliances with cable or localphone companies.  No agreements ever resulted from these discussionsand Sprint, their chief long distance rival, eventually formed a jointventure with three of the nation's largest cable operators, TCI,Comcast and Cox.The AT&T investment in DirecTv was generally welcomed by financialanalysts as a means to gain quick access to an established direct-to-home broadband delivery system.  In contrast, there was considerableskepticism regarding the potential payback on an MCI-backed DBSventure.In addition to the nearly $700 million it spent on spectrum, MCI willneed to spend as much as one billion dollars to build and launch itssatellites.  It will also come late to the market, lagging DirecTv andPrimestar by at least a few years, and Echostar and Alphastar - a soon-to-be launched medium-power DBS service - by more than a year.While some analysts believe the AT&T investment will help DirecTvattract large numbers of cable customers - something that has yet tooccur despite rapid early sales of DBS receivers - others remainskeptical, citing the still-high cost of DBS equipment, especially forhomes that want to receive DBS signals on multiple TV sets.These analysts believe that while DBS may pose a serious threat toweaker cable operators in smaller rural markets that are slow toupgrade their networks, satellite technology is not likely to reachdouble digit penetration levels in large metro markets, where cable andtelephone companies are expected to focus their network upgradeinvestments.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996ITALY:  STREAM LAUNCHES VOD GUIDE"This monthly was conceived for the protagonists of a Great Adventure,that of VideoMagic.  A unique service, a breakthrough in television[...] For the first time in Italy, the television set loses itstraditional function as an electrical household appliance and becomesan interactive tool." These lines introduce what is probably theworld's first VOD programme guide.This slick, 80-page colour magazine is produced by Stream, thesubsidiary of Italian telecommunications operator STET in charge ofdeveloping and distributing VideoMagic, the bouquet of on-demandmultimedia services delivered via the fast-expanding optical fibrebroadband switched network Italy is building.Similar to a regular TV guide, the giornale della TV interattivaintroduces the customer to the various programmes and services.With VideoMagic, Stream enters into the pre-commercial phase of theservice.  The magazine is distributed to the first 1,000 householdsconnected to the VOD service in Milan and Rome who are invited to testthe variety of products on offer, respond to questionnaires and whosenetwork utilisation will be monitored.  "It is the beginning, a dressrehearsal," says Stream.  The information gathered will be used toimprove all aspects of the service, especially the navigation throughthe various rubrics."Presently, the VOD service is structured around a menu composed of fourservice categories: Entertainment (Films, Your Television, Sports,Music & Art); Children (Children's TV, How & Why, Cartoon & Telefilm),Exploring; Shopping (Department Stores, Catalogue & Famous Brands,Bargain Corner, Yellow Pages Rome/Milan) and At Your Service (Health &Leisure, Citizens' Bureau, Kiosk, Financial/ Insurance Services).Each service/title description is followed by a code, the length inminutes and the session price.The VideoMagic programme guide's index includes 65 movies and 70Telefilms and series, out of a total of 230 programme entries(excluding the numerous episodes of many TV series) - altogether 30,000minutes of material.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996GERMANY:  BERLIN DIGITAL CABLE TVThe first large digital cable TV project in Germany will start inApril, according to head of the Berlin media authority MABB, Hans Hege. The real start will not be until this autumn, however, as there willnot be enough digital settop boxes in the market, he revealed.MABB reached a preliminary decision last November to give a digitalcable licence to telecom company Vebacom, together with local partnerEMG.  Vebacom, now a shareholder in the new digital TV alliance MMBG,is talking to content providers, Deutsche Telekom and other cableoperators of the "Netzebene 4" in Berlin.Hege is confident that the partnership of Vebacom and EMG will work."Pay-TV channel Premiere has got a lot of subscribers, for example,while Vebacom has got a lot of know-how in subscriber management andmarketing and the EMG in digital technical operations, so thesecompanies could work together without there being any doubts ofgatekeeping.  Step by step the Berlin project will expand.  At first,only a few Berlin cable households will receive the digital TVprogrammes, but the number of cable households which can see thehyperband-channels will increase in a short time to 10% (110,000)."Fifteen hyperband channels and one normal-band channel will form theheart of the new digital Berlin, while in other parts of Germany onlyfive hyperband channels are ready for digital broadcasting by DeutscheTelekom.  Each of these channels can broadcast between six to ten TVprogrammes.  "We need 35 digital cable channels, but 16 might be a goodstart," Hege stated."We don't think that video-on-demand is possible yet for a mass cableaudience.  The bad experiences in Orlando have underlined this.Bundling of channels, multiplexing and pay-perview are the future.  Wewill establish the first real digital brand in Germany and, I hope,that each of the German states will version our digital TV system ontheir own cable systems."On the technical side, the launch of digital TV in Berlin will be mucheasier than in other states, because Berlin only has one central cable-head station.  "Having only one cable-head station makes the digital TVbusiness in Berlin faster," Hege added.  Manfred Meier, networkdeveloper for many foreign TV stations, also welcomed Hege'sinitiative.  "We are having problems getting our foreign channels on toGerman cable.  Digital TV in Berlin will be the first step in the rightdirection to give more channels a chance to broadcast in Germany."But Hege has not been not greeted with positive response everywhere.The broadcasting organisation VPRT, the private cable operators of ANGAand the biggest telecommunication rival Deutsche Telekom threaten tosue the coming licensing decision of the MABB, if Vebacom gets anexclusive digital cable licence in Berlin.  Said Hege, "It isridiculous that they are threatening to sue against our decision,especially since Vebacom is still a member of two of theseorganisations.  We don't want to create a monopoly, we want competitionin Berlin.  Each content provider can choose to distribute theirchannels for themselves or to work with the service provider."Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996JAPAN:  NEW DIGITAL SYSTEM DEVELOPEDResearchers for Nippon Television Network, Matsushita Electric and sixother Japanese companies have developed a digital transmission systemthat offers high definition resolution and multimedia applications.Called Prog-ressive Digital Broadcasting, or 525P, the new system sendsand receives images via communications satellite at a rate of 60 framesper second, twice the speed of conventional systems.  Like the currentNTSC system, the 525P uses 525 scanning lines, but the fastertransmission rate means that twice as much visual information appearson the screen.  The resulting picture quality is equivalent to thatproduced by NHK's Hi-Vision analogue system.  Also, like Hi-Vision, the525P offers a 16:9 aspect ratio.The partners on the NTV and Matsushita-led development team, whichinclude Texas Instruments, Toshiba, Japan Satellite System, DMC,Hitachi and Sanyo, have successfully tested the system in transmissionsfrom Yokohama to receiving stations in Osaka and Tokyo, via the JCSAT-3digital satellite.  The system was able to send from three to sixdigital video channels using a single transponder.The system's real-time progressive video decoder decodes compressedsignals at 60 frames a second, twice the speed of the MPEG-2's MainProfile, Mail Level (MP@ML).  The system's settop box is installed witha progressive digital decoder that can compress both digital, audio andvideo signals simultaneously and offers a component output function(Y,Pb,Pr) with a vertical scanning frequency of 31.5kHz.  Users of WideClearvision or Hi-Vision sets are able to receive the system's digitalsignals.In addition to home receiving sets that include a parabola antenna anda real-time progressive digital decoder or digital-decoder-installedsettop box, the system can transmit to PC monitors, opening thepossibility of multimedia services that allow users to receive andprocess images and data on their PCs.The 525P system is expected to play an important role in the ongoingbattle over Japan's transition to digital broadcasting.  NHK, whichspent more than two decades developing its Hi-Vision system, has longadvocated its use aboard the next-generation BS-4b broadcastingsatellite, which is scheduled for launch in 1997.  Given the plannedswitch to digital by cable and communications satellite broadcasters,beginning in the fall of this year with the start of DMC 50-channeldigital service, top officials in the Ministry of Posts andTelecommunications have been advocating the rapid introduction of adigital system to BS broadcasting as well.In May an MPT advisory panel will issue a report recommending whetherthe broadcasting system for the BS-4b satellite be analogue or digital. With the announcement of the new NTV digital system (see news story),the balance has been further weighted against NHK's Hi-Vision analoguealternative.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996EUROPE:  EC AIDS NEW 16:9 BROADCASTERSUnder its Action Plan for the Introduction of Advanced TV Services inEurope, the European Commission has granted ECU4.395 million ($5.520million) to seven more television stations in five countries to supporta total of 2,000 hours of wide-screen programme transmissions.The decision will enable Austria's public broadcaster ORF, Denmark'sDanmarks Radio, the Italian regional stations Telenuovo, Synthesia andVideolina as well as Veronica from the Netherlands and Granada in theUK to present wide-screen TV to their viewers for the first time.Moreover, the Danish service will be the first wide-screen service tostart using the digital satellite TV standard developed by the EuropeanDigital Video Broadcasting (DVB) Group."The announcement of a digital wide-screen service by Danmarks Radio isof strategic importance because it shows that 16:9 really has thepotential to become the screen format of the Information Society,"commented Martin Bangemann, European Commissioner in charge ofIndustry, Information Technologies and Telecommunications, "Wide-screenis a bridge between analogue and digital television for the consumer.It works with either technology and therefore futureproofs consumerinvestments in the most expensive part of the TV system, the screenitself."The overall objective of the Action Plan is to accelerate consumeruptake of wide-screen TV by overcoming the "chicken and egg" problem:broadcasters would not transmit 16:9 without TV sets whilemanufacturers would not produce them without broadcasting.Broadcasters in countries with no wide-screen services until nowqualify for funding up to 80% of their expenses, in other countries upto 50% (see table on back page).With the latest additions, it is no less than 41 broadcasters in 13European countries who have received Action Plan support committingthem to transmit true 16:9 pictures - not letterbox.If Danmarks Radio may well become the first broadcaster to offerwidescreen digitally via satellite, it is not the sole operatorinterested in using digital transmission to provide wide-screenprogramming.In the UK, the BBC publicised its plan last April (see ATM May 95) tomake wide-screen television the centerpiece of its digital terrestrialTV strategy.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996CANADA:  SEGA CHANNEL CANADA UPIn late January Shaw Cable, Canada's second largest MSO, launched SegaChannel Canada, a 24-hour interactive game channel on its basic cableservice.  The channel costs C$19.95 a month, almost the cost of thebasic cable service itself.  Shaw launched the service in Victoria, BC,and in Calgary and Edmonton, Alberta.Shaw officials peg the high costs as being the equivalent of purchasingor renting C$3,000 worth of games.  To access the system, Shawsubscribers will need a 16-bit Sega Genesis console.  Shaw will providethe adapter needed to hook up the game gear to the cable system.Sega Channel Canada is a 50/50 joint venture between Rogers and Shaw.Rogers has rolled out the system in Vancouver, BC, and Newmarket, Ont.Sega Channel Canada will start with 50 titles a month, rotating withinthe Sega library of 700 games.  About 70 percent of the games willchange each month.  Successful titles will remain in circulation.The channel will come with a Password for Parents which will allowparents to set a time limit on how long the games can be played andwhich games children can play.  The content of each game has been ratedby the Entertainment Software Rating Board.  Once Password is turned onprohibited games cannot be downloaded.Shaw officials stated that the reason for the limited launch wasbecause of a shortage of adapters and a desire to practise theirmarketing techniques before hitting major eastern markets, slated forEaster.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996UNITED STATES:  DIGITAL PIRATES STRIKE DIRECTVLeading experts believe that American DBS service DirecTv is underattack by digital satellite pirates and that the underground trade inpirate decoders may soon be draining off subscription revenues from oneof every two DBS receiving sets sold.Bob Sherman of Satellite Business News claimed, "Piracy could become ahuge potential problem here.  It could become the biggest problemfacing DBS.  The only reason that it is not widespread is because thereis a worldwide chip shortage right now and I think that is holding downdistribution."Jim Shelton of Shelton and Associates, a San Diego-based consultingfirm agrees with Sherman.  "The only reason that it is not widespreadat this time is probably a shortage of computer chips.  A lot of thesechips require a 26-week lead time." Sherman previously worked atGeneral Instrument's San Diego-based Videocipher division where hehelped end signal piracy on C-Band dishes.  Sherman estimates that itcost $50 million to put an end to big dish piracy.At the moment, experts believe that there are only between 5,000 to10,000 black market DBS decoder cards in operation, but Sheltonbelieves it is only a matter of time before the piracy mushrooms.  "Itcould become rampant.  Once they have plenty of cards, you will seeadvertising break out in flyers and faxes offering the cards.  If itcontinues unchecked, it won't be long before you see them manufacturing100,000 receiving units a month, but only 50,000 are being legallyauthorised."The black market access cards are being sold for between $500-700.DirecTv president Eddy Hartenstein has claimed that he is two stepsahead of the hackers and that he can foil them with electroniccountermeasures or by issuing new decoder cards.  Both Shelton andSherman believe that DirecTv is not doing enough to thwart the digitalsatellite pirates, however.  "Electronic counter-measures are a form ofharassment.  The only way to do it is to do a redesign, find out howthey came in and redesign the locks.  It costs about $25 million."DirecTv refused to comment on the piracy issue, maintaining thatanything it says may betray their intentions to the pirate community.The case came to light when US immigration and custom agents stopped aman crossing the US border from British Columbia.  He was detained on acellular piracy case and found to be carrying 113 DirecTv access cards.Canada is one of the centres for the manufacture of the illegal cardsdue to previously lax piracy laws.  Now that Canada's laws have beentightened up, the pirates are settling in the Cayman Islands.  Calgary,Alberta, however, remains one of the manufacturing centres."Typically there are three stages to piracy," said Shelton.  "The firstis a simple cloning of a card authorising all programming.  The secondis called the `Three Musketeers', which uses one authorised card to getthe monthly keys and updates being broadcast.  The third is the `WizardKey', whereby the key from a working unit is extracted and distributedto pirate boxes.  They are already moving into the third stage, whichis very fast."Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996JAPAN:  DMC GETS ITS OWN WAYAn advisory body of the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications (MPT)has started deliberations on revising the limit on the number ofchannels a single broadcaster can operate from two to 12.  The RadioRegulatory Council is also mulling whether to allow an increase in thenumber of channels to be beamed by digital satellite service providerDMC from 50 to 70 and radio channels from 100 to 200.The current regulations were designed to prevent domination of scarceanalogue channels by a few big media players, but with the launch ofthe JSAT-3 digital satellite in August 1995, the number of potentialchannels will grow enormously, making room for many more channeloperators.  Also, a major drawing card for the new DMC service isexpected to be NVOD and pay-per-view, which require a large number ofchannels per operator to be profitable.Partly motivated by last year's announcement by Hughes Communicationsand four Japanese partners of a plan to launch a 100-channel service in1997, DMC has told the MPT that it wants to expand its channel bouquetfrom 50 to 70, with many of the additional channels to be allocated toNVOD and pay-per-view services.  Among the operators will be Itochu,Mitsui & Co.  and other major trading companies.  DMC will begin testbroadcasts this April and commercial broadcasts this September.DNC won the argument with the cable operators.  Based on thenegotiations of a working group, the board of the Japan Cable TVAssociation (JCTA) has accepted a proposal by digital satellite serviceprovider DMC to have its planned 50-channel service distributed overcable as well.The working group had expressed JCTA's concern that DMC's digitalsatellite bouquet, which is scheduled to start in June and whichclosely resembles current cable offerings, might harm the diffusion ofcable TV.Although many of the JCTA's 300 member stations are now enjoying growthin subscriptions after years of recessionary stagnation, more than halfare still operating in the red and TV households receiving multichannelcable still account for only five percent of the total number ofhouseholds.  Prior to the start of talks with DMC in September, JCTArepresentatives told the media that the cable industry in Japan couldnot easily cope with competition from a digital satellite service.DMC countered with an offer to provide cable operators with antennasand other receiving equipment free of charge so that they could relayDMC broadcasts to their subscribers.  After some hesitation, the JCTAworking group accepted this proposal in November.  Although DMC balkedat a JCTA proposal refraining it from marketing its service in areasalready served by cable, it agreed to negotiate its marketingarrangements with individual cable stations, paving the way for acooperative agreement.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996EUROPE:  TALISMAN: DIGITAL PROTECTIONTwo pan-European research projects -Talisman and Okapi - are to addressthe new challenges presented to creators and rights holders by thewidespread use of digital technologies in the audiovisual industry.This research is being carried out within the framework of the EuropeanUnion's Advanced Communications Technol-ogies and Services (ACTS)project.Talisman (Tracing Authors' rights by Labelling Image Services andMonitoring Access Network) aims to protect EC service providers'digital products against large-scale commercial piracy and illegalcopying with a standard copyright mechanism.  The project focuses onvideo services and will demonstrate the relevance of the mechanismsaround pilot demonstrations covering media like cable and satellitebroadcasting as well as ATM networks for multimedia interactive serviceaccess.Two technologies are being considered for protecting video sequences.The first involved the labelling of a digital product, compatible withthe compression standards JPEG for fixed images and MPEG for movingimages.  The tampering of such a protected product will leave "traces"which invalidate the encrypted label.  The second technology involvedthe application of invisible and indelible "tattoos" on the images,resisting digital compression and decompression and any manipulation.Both techniques can be used simultaneously.  Furthermore the projectincludes the design of monitoring devices connected to networksallowing on-line auditing and accounting.One of the research consortium's key objectives is to submit to DAVICand DVB a standard copyright mechanism for video protection.  "Theavailability of copyright systems managed in a harmonised way will beessential for all the end users in the field: TV broadcasters,producers of movies, cassettes, video CDs and interactive CDs," saysthe project prospectus.The project has been awarded to a consortium of 11 partners led byFrench company Thomson-CSF and including Hispasat (Spain), CSELT(Italy), EPFL (Switzerland), ART3000 (France), Fraunhofer InstitutDarmstadt (Germany), Institut Superior Tecnico (Portugal) and fourBelgian partners, Universite Catholique de Louvain, RTBF/UER,Belgarchive and SACD.Access control to networked multimedia service is specificallyaddressed by the research project Okapi (Open Kernel for Access toProtected Interoperable interactive services).  The objective is forthe Okapi kernel "to ensure interoperability, openness, equity, userprivacy and evolutivity for opening the European multimedia market toevery potential service provider and user," says the project specsheet.  The consortium behind the project will elaborate a standardkernel for access control systems to be submitted to DAVIC, DVB as wellas the EBU.Given the synergy between both research projects, several of the 12Talisman partners are also present in the Okapi consortium.  Itsmembers include University of Thessaloniki (Greece), Deutsche Telekom(Ge-rmany), CSELT (Italy), Philips (Nethe-rlands), CCETT (France), EPFL(Swit-zerland), Fraunhofer Institut Darmstadt (Germany) and fourBelgian entities, RTBF/UER, Pastel (Mons), Universite de Liege and theUniversite Catholique de Louvain, the team leader.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996USA:  WILL STATIONS GET ATV SPECTRUM?Ironically, as the Grand Alliance and Advisory Committee on AdvancedTelevision Service (ACATS) celebrate the US digital broadcast standard,the political process threatens to take from broadcasters the spectrumon which the new standard would be delivered.Senator Bob Dole, the leading Republican presidential candidate, hasemerged as the chief foe of broadcasters' digital aspirations.  Inrecent weeks he has attacked plans to provide broadcasters with asecond advanced TV channel as "corporate welfare" and threatened toblock the pending telecom deregulation bill unless the spectrum isauctioned or broadcasters are otherwise made to pay for it.The White House, meanwhile, has expressed support for a differentapproach, which would auction broadcasters' existing analogue channelsas early as 2002.  Neither approach is considered acceptable by theNational Association of Broadcasters, which has come out in support ofthe telecom bill.In late January there were signs that the House could vote on thetelecom bill in early February and that the spectrum issue might beremoved from the bill, to be considered separately at some later date.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996FRANCE:  FRENCH STATIONS IN DIGITAL LINKTo face Canal Plus, CLT's and AB's digital projects, the French publicbroadcaster France Television and its rival TF1 have surprisinglydecided to join forces by creating a common company to set up and tomarket digital services.  Named STEPS (Societe de Television Europeennede Programmes et de Services), the 50:50 subsidiary will establish acommon subscription system and a compatible settop box.A similar deal was expected between AB and TF1, rather than with FranceTelevision, because the two companies have worked together for manyyears.  The move therefore comes as a surprise at a moment whencompetition between the two companies is fiercer than ever, with TF1losing viewers and France Television's share rising proportionately,recovering to the level achieved ten years ago.  It will be the firsttime since it was privatised in 1987, that the first terrestrialnetwork is working with its former parent company.France Television's chairman Jean-Pierre Elkabbach announced that thelaunch of digital services will be in two stages.  The first will bethe launch, next March, of an experimental MPEG-2 multiplex of existingchannels such as TF1, France 2, France 3, La Cinquieme and the wide-screen station Supervision.  The package will be transmitted in theclear via Eutelsat's Hot Bird.  Elkabbach said that "the choice of thefuture digital decoder will probably be decided during the spring,after we compare the different existing offers."The TF1/FT digital venture is planned for launch before the end of theyear.It is understood that the offer will integrate TF1's `Hyperchaone'concept of digital e la carte TV and the two channels that state-ownedcompanies Arte, France Television and INA are close to launch on cable,La Chaone d'Histoire and France Telefilm.  STEPS will market the wholeoffer but representatives at the new joint-venture declined to commenthow the parent companies will share the subscriptions to their ownservices.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996JAPAN:  MARUBENI'S CABLE PC SERVICEMajor trading company Marubeni is getting ready to launch a new cableTV service that will allow subscribers to use their TV set to accessthe Internet, as well as enjoy conventional cable televisionprogramming via a high-speed cable TV LAN.  Marubeni-owned TownTelevision Kanazawa, which will begin operations in April, will be thefirst to offer the service, starting some time in 1997.  Eventually,Marubeni intends to extend it to the network of 15 to 20 cable stationsthat it plans to build, beginning this year.To design content for the data transmission portion of the service,Marubeni will link with a US partner this March to start a planningcompany.  In April, it will join with another US company to launch aplanning company for supplying contents for the video portion.  Both USpartners are still unnamed.At the end of last year, Marubeni, together with Tokyo Cable Network,IBM Japan, Sumitomo Electric Industrial and other corporate partnersbegan a trial of a cable TV LAN with 100 cable subscribers in Tokyo'sBunkyo Ward.Among the free services on offer during the trial are on-line Englishconversation lessons and Internet connections.  The trial is scheduledto run until the end of the year.  Based on the results, TownTelevision will launch a commercial version of the service in 1997.Using its high-capacity lines, the station will also offer subscribersa wide range of other services, including video, data, telephone andgames.Currently the owner of six cable stations, Marubeni plans to expand itscable network to a total of 15 to 20 stations, primarily in the Tokyoand Osaka metro areas.  One of the country's largest trading companies,Marubeni sees the new service as giving a major boost to cable TVdiffusion in Japan.  In association with supermarket chain Daiei,Marubeni is also selling personal computers installed with Internetsoftware.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TOKYO CABLE TO BEGIN LARGE-SCALE TEST OF DIGITAL CABLE SERVICESLeading Tokyo cable TV operator Tokyu Cable and two other area cable TVstations will begin a large-scale test of digital cable services inMarch.  Using hybrid optical fibre-coaxial lines and with atransmission speed of 1Gbit/s, the three partners will provideInternet, telephone, fax, teleshopping and VOD services.In addition to Tokyo Cable, Nihon Network Service in Chofu City, andYokohama Television in Yokohama will offer these services to 500 oftheir subscribers.  The partners will use MPEG-2 compression and 64-QAMmodulation techniques.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996USA/EUROPE:  E!, MTV3 ON THE WEBUS cable channel E! Entertainment Television and c/net: the computernetwork have joined forces to create a new company, E! Online, whichwill launch a large-scale, advertiser-supported online service devotedentirely to the world of entertainment.The new online service, available free to consumers the second quarterof 1996 on the World Wide Web, will include areas on entertainmentnews, gossip, celebrities, and movies and television.  The service willalso offer interactive content that complements E!'s televisionprogramming and allows viewers to interact with E!'s producers andhosts.c/net will provide E! Online its technology including its exclusiveDREAM (Delivery of Real-time Enhanced Advertising Messages) software,which enables advertisers to deliver custom advertising messages todifferent target audiences.E! Online - owned 50% by E! and 50% by c/net - will be based at E!'sheadquarters in Los Angeles.c/net: the computer network claims to be the world's first on-air andonline source for news, information and resources related to computersand digital technologies.  In addition to its two WWW sites, c/netonline and shareware.com, c/net produces c/net central, a weeklytelevision show seen nationally on USA Network, the Sci-Fi Channel, andKPIX5, the CBS television affiliate in San Francisco.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996MTV3 OPENS WEB SITEFinland's commercial TV station MTV3 opened its Web site -http://www.mtv3.fi - back in November of last year, accessed throughthe data networks operated by Telecom Finland and Funet.  The serviceprovides news (updated several times a day), programme previews, Jyrki,a programme aimed at young people which involves the use of datanetworks, as well as a "soap box" department where users can voicetheir opinion.  The "market-place" department enables advertisers tocustomise their messages.  The computer software necessary to viewprogramme clips with moving pictures, which have been placed in TelecomFinland's media servers, can be downloaded from the addresshttp://www.ml.tele.fi/ via the Internet.  The service, currently free,is run by MTV3 Virtual in cooperation with Telecom Finland, Nokia andCSC Tieteellinen Iaskenta Oy.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996UNITED STATES:  SNET MOVES INTO CATVAs leading US long distance phone companies make investments in DBS(see front page story), local phone companies continue to pursue avariety of strategies in the advanced TV arena.Southern New England Telecom-munications (SNET), for example, recentlyasked the Connecticut Department of Public Utility Control (DPUC) for astatewide cable franchise.The action marks a shift by SNET - which provides phone service to mostof Connecticut - from the video dialtone (VDT) common carrier model toa strategy of becoming a franchised cable operator.  Among otherthings, the latter approach offers more direct control over theprogramming carried on a telco's broadband network.The statewide cable franchise would be operated by a newly formedsubsidiary, SNET Personal Vision.  It would use a hybrid fibre-coax(HFC) architecture that delivers video, voice and data.  It plans tooffer 76 channels of TV programming.SNET is currently running an FCC-approved VDT trial that serves roughly350 homes.In explaining the shift from the VDT to the cable franchise model,Patrice Listfield, president of SNET Personal Vision, said "we thinkthis represents the best business decision for us and for ourcustomers.  We'll provide the benefits of real cable competition soonerthis way.  And we'll be allowed to give our customers a morecompetitive, innovative service on a network with superior technicalquality without some of the encumbrances placed on telephone companiesin the VDT business."In parts of the state where SNET is not the local telephone company, itintends to work with Nynex and Woodbury Telephone Company to "developarrangements that will allow SNET Personal Vision to offer a cablealternative in those areas, too."According to Listfield, the company expects to offer service to 22% ofConnecticut homes and businesses by the end of next year and 36% by1998.  By 2000, service will be offered to 64% of Connecticut and by2003, to 81%.  She said the company expects to reach the entire stateby 2009.In neighboring New Jersey, Bell Atlantic has been busy working on themost extensive VDT deployment to date and, on 29 January, it officiallylaunched the commercial service.  Bell Atlantic will make its VDTsystem offering available to about 1,000 to 1,500 households per monthaccording to the construction schedule, ultimately passing all 38,000homes and businesses in Dover Township.  It is the first commercialdeployment of a VDT service on a fibre-to-the-curb (FTTC) network.In this final phase of testing, participants will begin using basicinteractive functions, such as ordering "recipes-on-request" from theTV Food Network.  The latter is one of a package of channels offered byFutureVision, one of seven video information providers planning todeliver programming on the Dover network.FutureVision, which has reserved the most capacity on the 384-channelFTTC network, will undertake an intensive marketing campaign, includingsubstantial price discounting, with the goal of quickly capturing largenumbers of subscribers from the incumbent cable operators.Meanwhile, on the country's other coast, Pacific Bell began 1996 byhalting construction of an HFC network it had begun deploying in LosAngeles and Orange County.While the company will continue building HFC networks in the Bay Areaand in San Diego, it apparently will rely on MMDS, or wireless cable,for its near-term video strategy in the L.A.  and Orange Countymarkets.  Among the factors driving the decision were problems indealing with local officials and the combination of capital constraintsand intense competitive pressures that demanded accelerated HFCbuildouts in the Bay Area and San Diego markets.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996EUROPE:  DVB DIGITAL NORM AGREEDA high-performance, widescreen standard for digital terrestrialtelevision has been ratified by the DVB.  The specifi-cation combinesinteractivity with digital sound and picture quality.  It also providesbroadcasters with a two-carrier transmission option.Ratification of the terrestrial standard completes the DVB line-up ofdigital standards, which also cover cable and smatv (DVB-C, using QAMmodulation), satellite (DVB-S, using QPSK modulation), and MMDS (DVB-MCfor under 10GHz systems, using QAM modulation; over 10GHz, DVB-MS,based closely on the DVB-S spec using QPSK and potentially receivablevia the same settop box).  The new terrestrial option, DVB-T, retainsCOFDM modulation, but offers broadcasters the flexibility to choosebetween 2k and 8k carriers.  The DVB steering board says the 2k optionwill allow an early start for digital TV services in the UK (1997):broadcasters who begin later (for example, in Spain) will have theoption of using the 8k variant, backwards compatible with the 2ksystem.The decision to adopt COFDM modulation has gone down particularly wellwith manufacturer Pace.  With COFDM incorporated into the standard,Pace is free to develop its common platform settop box which will allowdigital reception of satellite, cable or terrestrial transmissions.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996JAPAN:  NTT THINKS INTERACTIVENippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation (NTT) and TV InteractiveCorporation (TVI), a US-based high-tech venture company, will cooperatein the development and popularization of a service based on TVl's TVIQ,a one-way infrared communications interface technology.TVIQ, which is still under development, allows users to simply touchpictures or drawings in a specially-printed sheet or booklet to viewmotion pictures and other multimedia information stored on CD-ROM or another medium via their TV sets or personal computers.NTT plans to use the TVIQ technology to develop multimedia services"for elderly persons, children, housewives and other people who arerelatively unfamiliar with multimedia."In the case of a mail order system, for example, a user could hold acatalogue linked to a CD-ROM, via infrared signals and, while sittingin front of a TV connected with a game machine, touch pictures in thecatalogue to receive detailed voice and motion-picture informationabout products.  The user would touch a "purchase" button in thecatalogue to place an order using a telephone line.NTT will invite companies from various fields to jointly study how toutilize the new interface technology for commercial services.  NTT willalso develop a variety of applications in collaboration with othercompanies, including NTT affiliates.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996GERMANY:  UNCERTAINTY OVER CLT PLANSSince Leo Kirch gave up his d-Box project to join the MMBG group, MMBGmembers have begun to cancel their original plans.The latest set of cancellations came from Compagnie Luxembourgeoise deTelediffusion (CLT).  Employees have told ATM that their company hasput a stop on nearly all hiring for the new digital project studio andits Cologne marketing arm since last December.The reason for the delays are said to be disagreement between the twomain shareholders Groupe Bruxelles Lambert (GBL) and Havas, and theirheads Albert Frere and Pierre Dauzier and CLT's new manager MichaelDelloye, following Delloye's recommendation that CLT invests a total ofDM1 billion ($695 million) in launching dozens of new digital packageson Astra.  GBL's chairman Albert Frere is said to be ready to enter apartnership with the giant Bertelsmann group.Havas chairman Dauzier was able to get the agreement of the othershareholders to have CLT join the Canal Plus digital venture with a 25%stake in the form of staff, studios and programmes.  Originally, CLTwas to have entered the French market on its own.This still leaves CLT's considerable stake in the German market in astate of uncertainty and initial plans for 1996 appear to have beenshelved.  Roland Steindorf, marketing manager for RTL-Direct - a CLTdigital package marketing project in Cologne, Germany - denied theserumours.  "Nothing has happened to alter our plans to enter the Germanmarket with a digital TV bouquet this year." He also denied that thestop on hiring that his department has implemented since December hasanything to do with these rumours.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996USA:  ALLIANCES IN SETTOP SECTORGeneral Instrument, the leading supplier of cable TV converters, andFORE Systems, a leader in ATM (asynchronous transfer mode) networkingproducts, have formed an alliance to jointly develop a high-speed ATM-based system for use in the hybrid fibre-coax (HFC) networks now beingbuilt by cable operators and some telephone companies.The move was seen as an endorsement by a leading cable equipmentsupplier of the concept of delivering ATM cells all the way to thehome.  The ATM system being developed is designed to link computers atspeeds up to 25 megabits per second, which would enable delivery ofreal-time full motion video to home PCs.  It could also be used todeliver video and multimedia content in ATM format to TV settops.According to Mike Ozburn, vice president and general manager of GI'sTelecommunications Network Systems Division, GI will work with FORE todevelop an end-to-end ATM system.  The development partnership wasapplauded by Craig Mundie, Microsoft senior vice president ConsumerSystems Division.  Noting that "Microsoft has worked closely with FOREon ATM technology and standards..and with GI on settop box technology,"Mundie said the partnership will "help speed Microsoft's efforts tobring new services to PCs and televisions."Scientific Atlanta, GI's chief rival in the analogue cable convertermarket, also announced some new allies in the digital arena.The company said its PowerKEY digital conditional access system - to beused in settop terminals and cable modems - will use software licensedfrom RSA Data Security and Cylink Corporation.RSA's license to S-A is the first to a settop manufacturer of thecompany's patented technique for private messaging and digitalsignature authentification.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996JAPAN:  NIPPON TV GOES DIGITALNippon Television Network, Japan's highest-rated commercial TV network,is mulling the launch of its own digital broadcasting service using theJCSAT-3 satellite.  Initially, NTV would beam the same programming asthe one currently broadcast nationwide on its analogue terrestrialnetwork, but it is also planning tests of data, telephony and othermultimedia services.Although NTV was considering joining the 50 digital channel-bouquet tobe offered this fall by digital satellite service provider DMC, it mayinstead lease its own transponder for a period of three years.  Onereason is that the broadcaster wants to conduct a wide range of digitaltransmission tests.  Another is money: broadcasting via satellite isat, Y300 million ($2.86 million) a year, considerably cheaper thanbuilding masts and ground stations to upgrade its network of localaffiliates.  "We have not made a final decision, but this is an optionwe are seriously considering," an NTV spokesman said.  "We have alsonot yet decided how many channels or what kind of services we willbroadcast."Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996FRANCE:  REPORT SLAMS FRENCH TELCOFrench minister for Posts, Telecom-munications and Space, FrancoisFillon, unveiled at the beginning of January the main points of thereport he ordered last September from Georges Vanderchmitt, a formeradviser of French audit body Cour des Comptes.  Fearing that Francecould miss out in the digital race by having too many digital bouquetprojects, Fillon demanded a clear overview of the country's policy onsatellite telecommunications.The Vanderchmitt report recommends the creation of a "digital superalliance'' between all the major French players, (public and private)with broadcasters' access to the settop boxes ensured "under fair,reasonable and non-discriminatory conditions".  The report insists onthe necessity to guarantee competition among the players inside thealliance while having a strong policy on an external offer.  Thanks todigital technology, the latter should be adapted to the differentgeographical zones it targets.Vanderchmitt foresees that the digital market should be supervisedtogether by the CSA and the Conseil de la Concurrence (competitionbody).Fillon revealed that he has ordered another report from former TDFgeneral director Philippe Levrier on whether or not to develop digitalterrestrial television.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996USA:  SI DIAMOND'S LCD ADVANCESSI Diamond Technology (SIDT), which is developing a flat panel DiamondField Emission Display (DFED), has announced a breakthrough in highintensity lighting that promises improved backlighting for LCDs (liquidcrystal display), which today dominate the flat panel market.Northlight Displays, an SIDT subsidiary, has used diamond-coatedcathodes to produce a high luminance lamp without the use of a heatedfilament.  The result, says the company, is a more efficient, easy-to-manufacture high intensity lighting source.Most high-intensity lights used in specialised applications provideluminance in the 1,000-6,000 footlambert range.  High-luminancebacklights employing heated cathodes can reach about 10,000footlamberts and are currently used for avionic AMLCD (active matrixLCD) applications.  However, these devices are relatively inefficientand have other environmental limitations.According to SIDT, the lamp assembly tested by Northlight exceedsluminance of 20,000 footlamberts.  Howard Schmidt, SIDT chairman andCEO says the company is "currently in the process of developing sealedunits and evaluating our options for commercializing this technology,while at the same time continuing development of the DFED."Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996UK:  UK LAUNCH FOR SEGA CHANNELThe first dedicated end-to-end games delivery system in the UK isexpected to be Telewest Communication's roll out of the Sega GamesChannel in its South East UK franchise area, which had been forecast tolaunch last year.A formal announcement of a new release date is expected imminentlyfollowing renewed negotiations between TCI International (a majorstakeholder in Telewest) and Sega Enterprises over licensing androyalties.Some 25 leading Sega games will be available to subscribers who willsimply plug an adapter into the cartridge slot of the Sega Megadriveconsoles - or a special module into the new General Instruments 2200settop box.  The Sega Channel module would cost around $200.  Thesystem incorporates parental controls and code to block transmission ofunsuitable titles.Because the channel occupies a narrow bandwidth it can be usedalongside existing networked channels featuring a wide tuning range,and narrow band data camers.  Cable companies would transmit the gamesvia their optical fibre cable on an unlimited access basis tosubscribers paying $15 to $18 per month, using a dedicated $22,500headend server.Sega games service set boxes are now available for European MSOs, andthe channels are expected to launch in Europe during Autumn.  Flextech,controlled by TCI, would have the rights to launch Sega games channelsin the UK, Scandinavia, the Netherlands and Denmark, and the move is inline with Flextech's plans to develop new programming for cable andsatellite.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996CHALLENGES OF SELLING 16/9 SETSWidescreen television enthusiasts point to France where the installedbase of 16/9 sets accounts for half of the European total.  Of late,the attraction of the product seems to be under question as fallingsales figures show.  Yves Dupre offers a personal, and candid, view ofthe symptoms and remediesIt was in 1991 that 16/9 television receivers were first introduced onto the French market by Thomson which, at that time, was a pioneeringand risky move.However, at the beginning of the 90s, projects were still being carriedout in Europe on high definition television and this launch was to alarge extent linked to these.16/9 receivers were initially quite expensive, starting at the sameprice as a Fiat Panda car.  This did not stop them capturing the `earlyadopters', customers who were wealthy enough to snap up new ideas, butwho were not representative of the actual buying trends.A lot of water has gone under the bridge since then; high definition isno longer news.  Television is now turning towards digital technology,the "opportunity for the 16/9" (which has failed to touch the public'simagination), as well as multimedia which has literally exploded, butin which the large screen does not occupy a privileged position.  Fortheir part, consumers themselves have changed since the first 16/9 setsappeared on the scene.  This is due to economic problems.  Theirmotivations and habits have been radically changed.  Without highdefinition, and despite these changes, manufacturers have kept theirranges and even extended them.  Large screen TV sets can be found inpractically all retail outlets, and generally a specialist shop orlarge store has several models depending upon size, from three to sixmodels on average.Personally speaking and as a journalist specialising in retailing, Ivisit points of sale practically very day.  Through the confidences ofcontacts and friends throughout the business I began to suspect thatsales of large screen televisions were experiencing a few problems.There are however signs which are not misleading.  For example, Iobserved that a certain number of points of sale, not all of course butenough to set me thinking, are displaying them at the back of thestore.  I am not saying at the front of the display but well to thebottom of the shelf and I know that the items which sell well are notgenerally consigned to the back of the store.At the present time we professionals must not avoid the facts.  Despiteconsiderable efforts on the part of the manufacturers the results forthe sales of 16/9 sets are quite bad.  In France, the first threequarters of 1995 were marked by an appreciable downturn for the 16/9sets of at least 12%, perhaps even more - 15% say certain observers -expressed in terms of the numbers of sets sold.  This information hascome from the best sources.  There is no point in saying that as far asturnover is concerned and with the remorseless price competition, adecline which is even more significant in terms of value has beenascertained.  It is a phenomenon all the more disquieting as it ishappening at the same time as sales of the larger sizes of screen aregrowing (the 27-inch model, for example, increased by more than 20%).I should add that the social problems which are troubling France at thepresent time are in the process of completely ruining the end-of-yearsales figures, at the most important time of the season.In France, we must therefore face the truth that the large screen isnot managing to capture the hearts and minds of the public.Some of you will find these figures amazing because we have heard otherspeeches where larger amounts and considerable increases were announcedby the manufacturers.  The problem is that we must not confuse thequantities being shipped by the manufacturers to the retailers and theproducts being sold to consumers.  The number of models on sale hadwidened to a large extent between autumn `94 and `95, but especiallytowards the end of `94.  At the same time, a large number of points ofsale finally put the 16/9 sets on their shelves, particularly as, atthis time, the prices of the products had fallen significantly.  Fromthe price of a Fiat Panda we had reached that of a modest mountainbike.  In France, there are about 1,000 hypermarkets, 2,000 specialiststores and about 5,000 specialists points of sale.  That makes 7,000 to8000 points of sale currently dealing with TV sets.  By supplying onlyfive display models per shop, throughout the whole of this retailingsector, that makes between 30,000 and 40,000 sets sold to the shops,but not necessarily sold to the consumers.  The manufacturers' figureswere therefore correct or just slightly overestimated.  But sales tothe consumer, that's another story altogether.There is one important calculation to enable us to get a better pictureof what the 16/9 represents for the stockists.  Today, all theobservers acknowledge that the large screens do not exceed 2% of thetotal television market.  If we estimate this market on the high side,say 3.5 million sets, this means a maximum of 70,000 large screens ayear.  But if you divide this quantity by the number of points ofsales, you see that each of them on average only sells 10 sets a yearwhich is not even one a month.A certain degree of caution is called for when examining the course ofaction taken by the European manufacturers against what they say inpublic: if Philips and Thomson are multiplying the initiatives for thesizes already launched, Thomson has finally deferred the launch of its"small" 16/9 whilst Nokia has quite simply temporarily withdrawn fromthe large TV market.  Many eyes are now turned towards Germany as it isexpected that it will be the "trend-setter" with Palplus.But let's forget the figures and look at the noticeable change inconsumers' habits.  We must unfortunately record that thistransformation is not favourable to the way in which 16/9 sets arebeing offered for sale at the moment as economic difficulties andunemployment are on the increase.  By and large, consumers are also notquite as young, already quite well equipped and more mature in theirthinking.  They have become more moderate and attentive when makingtheir purchases.  They only go for sound values, and what is more, atthe best price.  They are well informed and remorselessly rejectproducts which do not bring them concrete and tangible benefits.  Theyhave dreams of the future, but buy in the present.Large screens are present at the points of sale, but salespeopletestify to the fact that customers know little about them.  Often theyrealise that new screens exist when facing the shelves.  And departmentmanagers say that customers who come to buy a good television often goaway with nothing if they only start to hesitate between a widescreenand a normal one.  Perhaps this hesistant customer must replace histelevision which has suddenly broken down.  In this case, instead ofopting for an expensive set, he is happy with a cheap one which is notgood for the sales teams who make their living thanks to a percentageon the sales realised.  In short, if a salesperson does not want tolose a sale it is often better not to talk about the 16/9 set too much.Even if the products are really superb, as far as the layman isconcerned this simple increase in the picture width is only consideredas very modest progress.Consumer electronics equipment available in the shops today offers areal revolution for everyone from the small telephones which can beslipped into your pocket and which enables you to communicatethroughout Europe, right up to the fascinating applications made incomputers and CD-Rom, for example, where sales are exploding.  In thisinstance it is not 10 sales a year, but 10 a day.  Even in the field ofpictures, video projectors and home cinema systems with Dolby sound orTHX, as in large halls, sales are high and are transforming people'sleisure time.There is no point, here, to debate whether widening the TV screen isjustified or not.  Everything revolves round one unique problem: it isthe lack of programmes for the new format.  That is the crux of thematter for the 16/9 format.No programme can be picked up for the time being with just a receiver:one needs at least a satellite or cable system, equipment which is notvery widespread in France.  And since our theme was entitled "whatmarketing strategy for large screens", we should not hesitate to saythat the question boils down to the marketing of 16/9 programmes.Well, then, what are we going to do about large screens? There is muchtalk about modifying the size of films received in letter box, aboutstretching them on to the screen to fill it.I must say somewhat critically that I am very much against this myselfbecause the retail stores tend to use this zooming effect on aconventional 4/3 set to fill in a demonstration 16/9 model.  Even ifcertain manufacturers are tempted to convince us that many programmesare "zoomable", this is incorrect.  Television does not just showfilms.  The bulk of the programming is something other than films.If the 4/3 picture is stretched, the characters appear squashed or theheads and feet of the dancers are cut off.  Customers who wander aroundthe department see these faults.And it is a poor solution: in intellectual terms no-one can say that hecan be satisfied with cocking a snook at logic.  We have not reallycreated such efficient products to resign ourselves to only showingnormal pictures in a deformed version.The example of Japan is often quoted to me.  This formula seems to workthere but in Japan the 16/9 set also benefits from the large screenvideo game market.  And for my part I know that European customers areneither Japanese nor American customers.Europeans are more demanding.  There is plenty of proof of this allaround us.  Our industries have been successful with products which arelargely more sophisticated than in many other parts in the world; ourfast trains, our planes, our numerical cellular telephones and even ouraudovisual are much more efficient.Returning to our theme of marketing for the 16/9, my thoughts suddenlyturn to vehicles which run on liquid petroleum gas, the famous LPGwhich France is going to try to relaunch in 1996.  LPG is economical,non-polluting, does not make the engine noisy, does not make our handsdirty, does not smell bad.  With all these drivers said bravo but addedthat LPG can be found practically nowhere; simply install the pumpsthen we can adopt this mode of transport.  I believe we must similarlyinstall pumps for programmes.To develop the 16/9 format the manufacturers must obviously get heavilyinvolved, as a matter of urgency, in a mass broadcasting of programmesusing the existing channels.  Manufacturers who are proposing largescreen television receivers are not so timid about programmes in manyother areas.Some of them have bought film studios or are amongst the principalphonographic editors in the world.  They have not hesitated to launchprogramme divisions to create software intended for multimedia.They will have to grab the market with both hands and do the same fortelevision as a matter of urgency; become creators and broadcasters oflarge screen programmes (it can even be done profitably).It is also necessary that they think about editing; films on cassettes,when they are in cinemascope which is often the case, will have toreceive systematically a small logo indicating to the consumer "betteron 16/9".  Even a note for the videodisc.  What problem would, say,Philips have in introducing the idea of a 16/9 screen on its CD-i oreven its video CD.It is not providence which is going to enrich the 16/9 world.  Asthings stand at the moment, I am very much afraid that the promoters ofthe large screen will have to invest a lot of money over a long periodof time before they can impose the new form of screen.  And for howlong? It took between 15 to 20 years for colour television to becomecommonplace in France.I suggest that the industrialists and programme professionals gettogether to create a world of pictures which can very quickly, andwithout too much investment, become large enough to motivate thecustomers.This period should be considered as a time for pioneers and we mustlive and act like them.  Don't wait for governments, committees or eventhe Holy Spirit of favourable initiatives.We must roll up our sleeves and I am sure that if things take off wewill be saying in one or two years time that consumers are becomingincreasingly worried about buying something other than a large screen.In a word, television receivers are here to stay.  All it takes is forthe show to start.Yves Dupre is Editor-in-Chief of Vente Electronique Grand Public - amonthly trade magazine for French high-street retailers of consumerelectronics equipment.  This article is a translation of the speechgiven at the Widerview 96 conference in Brussels in December 1995.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996MITSUBISHI ELECTRIC CONCLUDES AGREEMENT WITH DIGI-MEDIA VISIONMitsubishi Electric Corp.  has concluded a technological collaborationagreement with UK-based Digi-Media Vision for the development ofdigital television receivers.  The Japanese company said the agreementwill bring Mitsubishi's expertise in television and semiconductorproduction to digital broadcasting technologies.  The two partners willdevelop satellite TV receivers compatible with the European digital TVstandards, the company said.  Mitsubishi plans to start commercialproduction of newly-developed equipment in 1997 and aims to sell300,000-350,000 digital receivers annually to service providers inBritain.  The sales target will be raised to 500,000 in the future, thecompany said.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996SCIENTIFIC-ATLANTA LICENSES INTERACTIVE TRANSACTIONScientific-Atlanta has licensed interactive transaction encryptiontechnology and algorithms for the PowerKey conditional access system itis developing for its line of digital cable TV equipment.  RSA DataSecurity's public key encryption engine circuitry will be embedded in amicroprocessor to provide security for interactive video applications.Scientific-Atlanta has also licensed the patents from Cylink Corp.which cover the public key encryption practices implemented by RSA'salgorithms.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TVA PLACES $15 MILLION ORDERTelephone Video of America Inc.  (TVA), a major independent videoinformation provider, has placed a $15 million order for media serverhardware from nCUBE Corp.  TVA will offer video a dialtone service onseveral RBOC broadband networks, including networks from Pacific Bell,NYNEX and Bell South.  The Lockheed Martin Media Systems IntegrationDivision will manage both service qualifications and deployments forTVA, which is scheduled for launchmid-1996.  For the past three years,TVA has worked at acquiring the telephone transmission rights to themore than 5,000 hours of video content it will deliver.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TCI CREATES DIGITAL TV BUSINESSTCI has created the Digital TV business unit as part of its TCICommunications Division.  Digital TV is to head the MSO's move intointeractive TV and digital advanced TV.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996DIELECTRIC COMMUNICATIONS TO DESIGN HDTV ANTENNASDielectric Communications will design two HDTV antennas to be locatedatop the World Trade Center in New York City.  The antennas are to beused by nine TV stations: WABC-TV, WCBS-TV, WNBC, WNYW, WNYC-TV, WPIX,WWOR-TV, WNJU, WXTV.  One tower will host an HDTV-only antenna, theother tower will also include NTSC antennas.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TEXAS INSTRUMENTS DEMONSTRATES TV SYSTEMTexas Instruments has demonstrated what it claims is the industry'sfirst end-to-end, digital progressive-scanning TV system, as part of arecent Federal Communications Commission hearing on advanced TV.Others demonstrating digital TV systems were CBS Inc., Hitachi AmericaLtd., Hubbard Broadcasting Inc., Microsoft Corp., NBC, Sony Corp.  ofAmerica and the HDTV Grand Alliance.  TI's demonstration included thecompany's Digital Micromirror Device (DMD) microchip-based 50-inch rear-projection system.  The digital source material shown on TI's digitalprojection system was encoded by a 525-line progressive-scanning real-time MPEG-2 encoder that TI custom-developed for NTV, Japan's leadingprivate TV network.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TITV RELEASES SPECIFICATIONS FOR SETTOP BOXESThe Taiwan interactive TV Consortium (TiTV) last December releasedinitial specifications for a line of commercial settop boxes that willbe based on a PowerPC processor from IBM, which was chosen overcompeting devices from Intel, Motorola, and Texas Instruments.  Severalcompanies in the 22-member TiTV consortium - including local PCheavyweight Acer Inc.  - will make and sell PowerPC-based settop boxesunder their own logos and in OEM arrangements with foreign companiesbeginning next year.  IBM will supply to the TiTV group its PowerPC 403embedded processor.  The TiTV-designed box will eventually be able toprovide several services, including video-on-demand, home shopping, andInternet access.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NOVELL UK ANNOUNCES PARTNERSHIP WITH STELLAR ONE CORPORATIONNovell UK has announced a partnership with Stellar One Corporation inthe US to integrate Novell's Nested NetWare (formerly known as NEST)technology into the Stellar 1000 range of TV settop boxes.  The ideabehind the R&D deal is to allow Nested NetWare to provide networkconnectivity for TV settop boxes and extend the network infrastructurefor interactive TV applications such as high quality digital audio andvideo, online information services, and control of intelligent homeappliances.  Plans call for the Stellar 1000 of Nested NetWare enabledTV set top boxes to be launched towards the end of the year.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996KDD CORP. DEVELOPS VOD SYSTEMKDD Corp.  has developed a video-on-demand (VOD) system that uses CATVlines, and with Tokyu Cable TV is in the midst of full-scale Internetaccess trials.  The new system is actually an improved version of a PCLAN-based VOD system that KDD has been developing for the last twoyears.  The VOD server employs a high-performance PC, into which suchinformation and data images as news, music and video are stored.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TIME WARNER REACHES 4,000 USERSTime Warner Inc.  has reached a long-desired goal of bringing its much-touted interactive, digital cable television network to 4,000 suburbanusers north of Orlando.  Time Warner's interactive network was launchedone year ago, after an embarrassing delay that caused critics toquestion whether the company could deliver on its promise to build theworld's first interactive TV system that would provide users withmovies, video games and sports on demand.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996CITY TV NAKANO TO USE DAVID OPERATING SYSTEMCity TV Nakano, a joint venture between Fujitsu Ltd.  and the suburbanTokyo city of Nakano, will use Microwave System Corp's DAVID operatingsystem in its digital interactive TV deployment.  The project involvessending interactive TV and personal computer services to 300 of City TVNakano's 6,400 cable subscribers, linked over a hybrid fibre-coaxarchitecture.  Microwave did not say which manufacturer's settop boxwill house the DAVID operating system.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996MMS TO MERGE SUBSIDIARY MMS ACQUISITIONSMultimedia Medical Systems (MMS) - created last October to become aleading provider of value-added multimedia applications using advancedinformation technologies for the healthcare industrys - is to merge itssubsidiary MMS Acquisitions Corp with md/tv.  Florida-based md/tv hasbeen a major developer of software for telemedicine applications.  Itstechnology unites the functions of teleconferencing, medical imagemanagement, and computerized patient records into a PC-based solution.The information can be communicated over phone lines through ATM forremote media care.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NTT BREAK UPAn advisory body to Japan's Ministry of Posts and Telecommunicationshas agreed on a plan to break up the nation's largest telecom, NTT,into a long-distance and several regional telephone companies.  Themembers of the MPT's Telecommunications Council believe that such aplan would promote greater competition and more effective management inthe telecommunications industry, which NTT currently dominates.  At theend of February the Telecommuni-cations Council will issue a reportdetailing how the divestiture should be carried out, including thenumber of new regional telecoms.  However, a report by the EconomicPlanning Agency, opposing NTT's divestiture, expressed concern that abreakup of NTT will cause Japan to fall even further behind the US inthe race to build an information superhighway.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NTL AWARDED CONTRACTNTL has been awarded a multi-million pound contract to distributePerfor-mance: The Arts Channel by satellite to cable head-endsthroughout Europe.  The five year agreement commences on 1 March, 1996,and is the second contract for NTL with an Associated Newspapers'channel.  It follows on from last November's contract for nationwidedistribution of Channel One, which was previously only available inLondon.  Both agreements are a result of NTL's recent joint venturewith Orion, which allows the programmes to be broadcast digitally tomajor cable companies via the Orion 1 satellite located at 37.5o W.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996PC VIDEOPHONE AVAILABLE FOR WINDOWS '95 AND WINDOWS NTBT claims its PC Videophone is the first PC-based desktopvideoconferencing system to be available for both Microsoft's Windows`95 and Windows NT.  From end January 1996, the unit will be availablefor all popular desktop operating systems including IBM's OS/2.  Thisannouncement comes on the heels of a special Christmas offer, where BThas cut the price of its PC Videophone equipment by $1,050 per unit.Until 31 December 1995, customers could obtain the unit for just $3,500each for two or more units.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996VLSI TECHNOLOGY INTRODUCES VES1789 AND VES 1790VLSI Technology has introduced the VES1789 and VES1790 chips; two newASSPs (application specific standard products) for the digital videomarket.  The new single-chip channel receivers integrate VLSI's truevariable-rate QPSK demodulation and forward error correction (FEC)functions for existing and future digital video set-top boxapplications.  The VES1789 operates anywhere between 1 and 60 MHz andthe pin-compatible VES1790 version has a broader operational range of 1MHz up to 90 MHz.  These new standard parts from VLSI are fullycompliant with the emerging world Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB)standard.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996NISSHO IWAI PLACES ORDERS FOR MAGNITUDE MPEG-2Compression Labs, Inc has announced that Nissho Iwai, through NisshoElectronics Corporation (NELC0), a Japanese distributor, has placedorders valued at over $1 million for the company's Magnitude MPEG-2encoding systems.  These will be used by a number of system integratorsfor encoding compressed digital broadcast and for designing integratedreceiver decoders for satellite broadcasting for applications ineducation, entertainment, business television and information services.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996SCIENTIFIC-ATLANTA TO SUPPLY POWERVU EQUIPMENTAntena 1, Romania's first private television network, has selectedScientific-Atlanta to supply its PowerVu MPEG-2/DVB-compliant digitalvideo compression equipment to enable the broadcaster to provide morediversified programming and to make it available to more Romanians.Also, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation is currently in theinitial stages of implementing a PowerVu digital video compressionsystem from Scientific-Atlanta that will span the entire three millionsquare miles of the Australian continent for enhanced, expanded newsprogram broadcasting.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996BT TO LAUNCH TRIAL OF WIREPLAYAt the end of January, BT was to launch a six-month trial of Wireplay,its planned nationwide dedicated computer games network.  The trialwill be supported by 1500 customers, recruited from the Live `95consumer electronics show, held in London, November 1995.  To join inthe fun, customers need at least a 386 PC, modem (minimum 9600 baud)and the required Wireplay software, which has been developed by BT.Since August 1995, all BT's multimedia initiatives have been mergedinto a single business unit, Core Multimedia Service Provision (CMSP),which follows on from the ICE programme, led by Rupert Gavin, BT'sdirector of multimedia services.  Gavin has taken charge of CMSP.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996FRANCE TELECOM TO SET UP SUBSIDIARYFrance's state telecommunications operator France Telecom is setting upa subsidiary company to offer online services and access to theInternet.  Gerard Eymery, chairman of France Telecom Multimedia andfuture boss of the new unit - which he hoped could be launched in May -said in an interview he expected online services to generate sales oftwo billion francs ($390 million) in France by the year 2000.  Thecompany is investing FFr300 million ($58 million) over three years inits "platform" of technical facilities and expects to break even infour years.  France Telecom will team up with partners in the Frenchmedia industry such as Havas, Filipacchi, Lyonnaise des Eaux and othersto offer content on the network.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996INFOCITY TRIAL TO CONNECT 10,000 HOUSEHOLDSThe digital multimedia trial Infocity in Northrhine-Westphalia willconnect around 10,000 households and 50 services in the next fewmonths.  The leading cable operator with Deutsche Telekom is Vebakom,which will initially install 2900 kilometres (rising to 3900km) offibre-optic cable to connect the main cities of Dusseldorf, Cologne,Duisburg, Essen, Dortmund, Bochum, Wuppertal, Oberhausen and Bonn withan investment of around DM400 million.  The main services will bebroadcast, multimedia, business operations and university projects.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996DAVIC VOTES TO APPROVE RELEASE 1.0The 205-member DAVIC (Digital Audio-Visual Council) group voted toapprove Release 1.0, its first set of end-to-end ITV protocolrecommendations, at a meeting in Berlin in mid-December with theintention of passing the data along to the International StandardsOrganization for approval as a world standard.  Because of theirgrowing popularity, cable modems were the focus of attention of DAVICas well.  By the next meeting, slated for March in Seoul, South Korea,DAVIC must achieve sufficient consensus on the cable-modem and data-delivery protocols to issue a document for circulation among members.Given the organization's commitment to meeting the needs of multiplenetworks, this means the agreed-upon protocols must work in non-cableenvironments, such as telco's fiber-to-the-curb and ADSL networks.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TV EXTRA TO DISTRIBUTE MPEG-2 EQUIPMENTTV Extra has been appointed by The Sci-Fi Channel to distribute itsMPEG-2 reception equipment.  The Swedish SMS operator will beresponsible for distributing the Philips Cryptoworks decoders to cableoperators across Europe.  The company will then handle theauthorisation, distribution and invoicing.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996HONG KONG GOVERNMENT TO UNVEIL VIDEO-ON-DEMAND PROPOSALSThe Hong Kong government is to unveil its proposals on how to regulatevideo-on-demand (VOD) at the end of this month or early March.  Itwould also reply to the Consumer Council's report, just published.  TheConsumer Council suggested a number of changes including a new policysecretary to handle broadcasting, telecommunications and communicationstechnology.  Officials admitted the distinction between broadcastingand telecommunications was getting blurred but they stressed the twobranches co-operated satisfactorily.  Telecommunications are handled bythe Economic Services Branch.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TRANSITION TO DIGITAL TV ESSENTIALTransition to digital TV is "essential for the preservation of free TV"and Fox will "do everything in our power to make the transition asswift as possible," said Rupert Murdoch, CEO of Fox parent News Corp,speaking at a Fox network affiliates meeting at Natpe in Las Vegas.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996BOB DOLE TO BLOCK CONTROVERSIAL MOVEBob Dole, the Senate majority leader, is fighting to block acontroversial move that would set aside a valuable slice of theairwaves to be used for a new generation of digital services, includingHDTV.  Dole argues that a provision in the new telecommunications bill,backed by the Republicans, is "giant corporate welfare".  In effect,the bill gives broadcasters new digital licences, which he values atbetween $12.5 billion and $70 billion, for free.  The NationalAssociation of Broadcasters is urging President Clinton to overruleDole's demand that they pay for the airwave space.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996US MARKET FOR INTERACTIVE TELEVISION TO EXPLODEThe emergent US market for interactive television equipment andsoftware will explode, growing by more than ten times from $2.3 billionin 1995 to nearly $25 billion by the year 2001, projects a new studyreleased by Frost & Sullivan.  Network equipment will form 52 percentof the massive 2001 market, subscriber equipment 42 percent andsoftware 6 percent, forecasts the report titled; US InteractiveTelevision Equipment and Software Markets: Emerging Market WithUnlimited Growth Potential.  With ATM currently the only switchingplatform usable by the interactive TV industry, the growth of privateATM networks will in turn stimulate demand for interactive TV.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996MITI TO FUND DEVELOPMENT OF HDTVTo promote the diffusion of advanced technologies in provincial areas,Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) will fundthe development of Hi-Vision HDTV and multimedia software in 20municipalities.  MITI will ask 1,200 towns and villages throughout thecountry to submit software development proposals and, from this number,select 20 for funding.  The selected municipality will each receive Y20million ($200,000) for developing and producing interactive Hi-Visionsoftware on such themes as local history, culture, traditional crafts,and tourism.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996DTI PROPOSALS FOR DIGITAL TVThe UK's Department of Trade and Industry has published its proposalsfor the regulation of conditional access systems - scrambling,encryption and subscriber management - for digital television.  Theregulation of conditional access, as required by the EC Directive onTelevision Standards, would be by way of licences issued under theTelecommunications Act and enforced by Oftel, "in close co-operationwith the ITC." The government has refused the ITC's request to regulateconditional access, saying this is because conditional access worksthrough data streams carried over telecoms networks, and that thesenetworks are a key part of the delivery of pay-TV.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996TIME COMPUTER SYSTEMS WITHDRAWS RANGEPCTV equipment sales have been so bad in the UK that Time ComputerSystems has withdrawn its range.  Time - which claims to be the UK'slargest direct supplier of computers - has been selling PCTVs sinceJuly.  Instead, it is now offering multimedia PCs with optional PCTVcards.  John Clare, group chief executive of Dixons Stores Group, hasalso found PCTV sales sluggish, although in line with expectations,with TV cards the preferred option.  "Customers don't see the PC and TVas the same product," he said.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996SALES OF VIDEO-ON-DEMAND SERVERS TO INCREASESales of video-on-demand servers will increase from $131 million in1994 to more than $1.3 billion in the year 2000, according to Video-On-Demand - Technology and Economics, a new report from Hodge ComputerResearch.  The leading forces in these VOD efforts will be telephoneand cable television operators, the report concludes.  Hodge predictsthat VOD server pricing will fall from $1.35 million in 1995 to$797,000 in 2000.  NVOD deliveries are expected to drop from $350,000in 1995 to $206,000 at the end of the decade.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996ESTEE LAUDER TO INVEST IN SATELLITE TELEVISION STATIONUS cosmetics firm Estee Lauder is considering investing $50 million ina planned Taiwanese satellite television station, a spokesman for thestation said.  All People's TV, whose founders hope will becomeTaiwan's first new television station since liberalisation of thebroadcasting industry in 1994, needed paid-in capital of T$3 billion, aspokesman said.  Taiwan already has three satellite TV stations, inwhich the ruling Nationalist Party, the Taiwan Provincial Government,the Education Ministry and the Defence Ministry hold major stakes.Many of the founders the All People's TV are members of the mainopposition Democratic Progressive Party.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996SME AND SPE LAUNCH JOINT VENTURESony Music Entertainment (SME) and Sony Pictures Entertainment (SPE)have launched a joint venture for the production and marketing ofmultimedia software.  Called SME Intermedia, the new company willconsolidate Sony Group's sales departments handling video software, CD-Roms, games and other multimedia-related products with the aim ofexpanding the Group's share of the multimedia market and developing newsales channels in record stores and other retail outlets.  SME issupplying 80 percent and SPE 20 percent of SME Intermedia's Y480million ($4.6 million) in startup capital.  The president is TakashiKitatani, who was in charge of multimedia software sales at SME.Projected sales for the end of the first fiscal year of business, inMarch 1997, are Y13.8 billion ($131.4 million).Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightADVANCED TELEVISION MARKETS via NewsNetFebruary 1, 1996VIDEOTRON AND EUROSPORT REINFORCE PARTNERSHIPLondon cable company Videotron and the pan-European sports channelEurosport have reinforced their established partnership in interactiveprogramming to offer viewers coverage of the 1996 Ford Australian OpenTennis.  Videotron's Videoway service, TV interactive, will featureweekday highlights and live weekend coverage from the first of the 1996Grand Slam events.  From Monday 15 January over 200,000 viewers in theVideotron franchise area will be able to access three additionalinteractive channels by using their cable handsets.  The interactiveservice will be a source of up-to-date information and statistics.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List WT03-B09-18IA087-000629-B021-357http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/pb74.html 205.156.212.5 19970122035958 text/html 128180HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:57:47 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:19 GMTContent-length: 127992Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/pb74.html Sample Issue Copyright ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNet November 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING: CALENDAR OF EVENTS (230 words) TOUGH 1997 AHEAD, SAYS CHUA ROBERT CHUA SHARES HIS UNIQUE PERSPECTIVE ON ASIA WITH NEAL WEINSTOCK (1055 words) MINERVA INTROS DVD ENCODING SOLUTION (325 words) QUESTECH 1012 DECODER NOW WITH SYNCHRONISER (232 words) DPA4060 MINIATURE MIC (143 words) HP TEST SOLUTION FOR DIGITAL SET-TOP BOXES, DEVICES (308 words) NEWSWORKS TURBO NOW WITH BETACAM SP QUALITY (476 words) NEW THOMSON PRODUCTS AT IBC (229 words) SGI DEBUTS MULTI-CHANNEL SERVER (201 words) TEK LIGHTWORKS VIP 4500 AT IBC (229 words) IT'S A KIND OF CONVERGENCE (2134 words) PSN SHINES OVER THE ASIA-PACIFIC PT PASIFIK SATELIT NUSANTARA, ESTABLISHED IN 1991 TO PROVIDE SATELLITE-BASED PRODUCTS AND SERVICES TO THE ASIA-PACIFIC REGION, CONTINUES TO FORGE AHEAD (1518 words) CHARISMATIC DIGITAL VIDEO EDITING: MARTYN GREEN TALKS TO QUESTECH'S GRAEME FENEMORE AND ROBERT BILLING ABOUT THE CHARISMA X DVE (1577 words) THE GREAT OUTDOORS BECKON: UNTIL YOU START BATTLING TO BRING THE STORIES IN, YOU MAY NOT NEED MUCH MORE THAN THIS (1515 words) THE REALITY OF VIRTUAL STUDIOS (1530 words) NONLINEAR ONLINE REACHES PINNACLE: YOUR GUIDE TO IBC NONLINEAR VIDEO EDITORS (1645 words) MAKING CONTACT WITH INDIA (1218 words) COURTING THE ASIAN BROADCASTER (1604 words) MTV ANNOUCES EXPANSION PLANS (318 words) DOORDARSHAN TIGHTENS GRIP ON NDTV AND TV TODAY (197 words) HP SERVER OFFERS MOST CHANNELS (302 words) SOUNDFIELD EXPANDS WORLD DISTRIBUTION NETWORK (85 words) MANILA'S PASI BUYS RUSSIAN SATELLITE (144 words) HUM AAPKE HAIN KAUN IN MASSIVE FESTIVE DEAL WITH STAR TV (223 words) UTV CARVES NICHE IN THAILAND (162 words) ABN ACQUIRES VIRTUAL SCENARIO (113 words) OVERWHELMING DEMAND REPORTED FOR ASTRO SERVICE (211 words) DISCREET LOGIC NAMES RAMSAY AS NEW REGIONAL CHIEF (254 words) ESPN PLAYS BALL WITH STAR SPORTS (237 words) TEK ACQUIRES NEWSTAR (138 words) NEW MALAYSIAN BROADCASTING BILL TABLED (537 words) MALAYSIAN BROADCASTING: WATCH THIS SPACE (220 words) CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING: CALENDAR OF EVENTSfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996November 10 - 13International TV BroadcastShanghai '96(Shanghai)Call Reed Exhibitonsat 86-10 501 3388 orfax 86-10 501 3333November 13 - 15InterBEE '96(Tokyo)Call JESAat 813-3234 1051 orfax 813-3234 0165November 14 - 16International TV Festival & Market of India '96(Bombay)Call Saicom Trade Fairsat 91-22 215 1396 orfax 91-22 215 1269November 18 - 20India TV Summit '96(New York)Call World Research Groupat 1-212-421-9410 orfax 1-212-421 7325e-mail: info@worldrg.comNovember 19 - 22Taipei Broadcast '96(Taipei)Call International Expo Mgmtat 65-339 2633 orfax 65-338 6542November 20 - 22Cable & Satellite Asia '96(Hong Kong)Call Reed Exhibitionsat 65-338 2002 orfax 65-338 2112December 5 - 7MIP Asia (Hong Kong)Call Reed Midemat 33-1-4434 4444 orfax 33-1-4434 4400December 6 - 9Vietnam Broadcasting '96(Ho Chi Minh City)Call Adsale Exhibitionsat 852-2811 8897 orfax 852-2516 5024December 8 - 11Broadcast Cable & SatelliteIndia '96 (New Delhi)Call Exhibitions Indiaat 91-11 462 2710 orfax 91-11 463 3506April 23 - 26Communication technology Indonesia '96 (Jakarta)Call International Expoat 65-339 2633 orfax 65-338 6542Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996TOUGH 1997 AHEAD, SAYS CHUA ROBERT CHUA SHARES HIS UNIQUE PERSPECTIVE ONASIA WITH NEAL WEINSTOCKfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996"It's very tough going now in Asia," says Robert Chua. Chua is thefounder and CEO of the Hong Kong-based, Chinese language, familyentertainment channel, CETV.Though CETV's programming philosophy is, "no sex, no violence, nopolitics", Chua is one of the more refreshingly candid TV industryleaders in the region.A Singaporean who felt he had to move to Hong Kong to work in theindustry, who then had a large part in building TVB's programmingdominance, and who now runs what a recent independent survey callsthe top-rated overseas satellite channel in China, Chua also has auniquely broad perspective on Asian TV.On Western-based programme services in China: "I know that(Disney's) ABC has had a lot of problems." The company's twolocally produced programmes, Panda Club and Dragon Club, "are goingdownhill. Some stations are dropping them. That's going to behappening to all the Western companies in China."The profits aren't what they thought it could be when they wentin."On running an international satellite service: "I want to justconcentrate on mainland China now. To tell the truth, people arenot going to spend one single cent to advertise on us just to reachan audience in Indonesia."Taiwan is weak for us, too they want to see more sex and violence,when we have to focus on being a family channel. Even a familychannel means very different things from country to country, so Idon't think an international channel makes so much sense now."CETV is a fascinating example in how ownership and programminginter-relate, and how they often do not.Chua sold a large minority stake in CETV last year to InternationalFamily Entertainment (IFE), the parent of America's and Europe'sFamily Channels and a large producer of programming. IFE is ownedby US Christian television preacher and conservative activist PatRobertson, who may seem a strange bedfellow for a mainland Chinesechannel.Yet the only cultural conflict in the relationship so far, saysChua, has been the one that would be most obvious to viewers - andleast obvious, perhaps, to international TV executives: "A familychannel in the West has very different values than in Asia.To date we have not taken any of IFE's programmes. There are tworeasons for that. Number one, the family values are different.Number two, what we are prepared to pay. We can only afford lowfees for shows."Nonetheless, CETV carries many imported programmes: NationalGeographic, films from Hallmark and ACI, Venezuelan telenovelasfrom Coral Pictures, many cartoons, and an "edited version" ofNHK's business report."Content-wise, we are very much curtailed," he continues. "We haveto be very, very creative. We have to spend lots of time onprogramming. Otherwise we'd become an educational channel. That's avery close thing to a family channel in China, very different thanthe West."One new example of CETV programming is the two-part documentary,"Hong Kong: Countdown to July 1, 1997." With a plan to focus onvisual changes and residents' feelings, Chua is resolute inmaintaining that this series on a most political event will be"soft news, non-political." That's a hard balancing act to pulloff.More on the Hong Kong changeover: "After '97, we'll consider a moveto mainland China. I want to establish and run a professionaloutfit here (in Hong Kong) first, that can manage a move of part ofthe operation to someplace like Guangzhou later on. We're running160 staff now, you know. That's a very lean operation."On international channels in general, and English-language channelsespecially: "There are so many channels going now to Asia. We areall having very tough going right now. There are too many Englishchannels now, really."Do you know where the market is for all these English-languagechannels? I don't know where there are so many people who speakEnglish. Doing Chinese channels is not easy, though. There's notenough talent. There's no way for new channels to get onto cable;getting penetration is very difficult."On advertising: Chua has a very happy story to tell these days,with the China-based X&L Marketing Service having recently releaseda 14-city study showing CETV to be the highest-rated overseassatellite channel in Chinese cable homes.Still, "The ad market is tough because of ratings in China; thereare no good ratings services yet. We are now putting our acttogether. We've just changed our advertising and sales department;it's 90 per cent changed from a year ago."On why TVB's growth has slowed in recent years: "Maybe losing S.KFung (to NBC) was a big reason."On Singapore's TV business environment: "Singapore's opening up.There are a lot of benefits now for the industry, tax benefits, forexample. But there are not enough people in production. Hong Konghas more than 10,000 local talent in the TV industry; 3,000 at TVBalone, 3,000 in the studios. Well over 10,000. Singapore is stillimporting people. It should have developed local talent a long timeago. Now, there's no reason why it can't get there, but it takestime."Also, Singapore in the past had too much government control. Evennow that TCS is supposed to be privatised, there can't really beenough competition without separating control of channel 5 andchannel 8."There's truly not enough competition. I did ask three years agofor a terrestrial licence there, and we've not yet gotten it. I'dgive them a run for their money."On Asian stations and TV technology: "I don't think our level inAsia is up to the West's. We're a new station and we need to keepspending down, find ways to produce things cheaply. Not everyonehas that need, though. Look at CPN; they spent US$30 million onjust technology for everything digital."It's wonderful to have that, if you have the money. If not, well,we don't do news, so we can get by cheaper. We don't need digital;simple programmes don't require it. Instead, we spend on talent,which is quite limited."  'Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996MINERVA INTROS DVD ENCODING SOLUTIONfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Minerva Systems has introduced the Compressionist 250 for thecreation of digital video disc (DVD) video assets.The DVD format expands the capacity of 5-inch discs to 4.7 Gb - or133 minutes of high-quality MPEG-2 compressed digital video and AC-3 or MPEG-2 surround sound audio with multiple language sub-titleson a single-sided version of the back-to-back bonded disc.The 250, based on C-Cube Microsystems' VLSI processors, offers bothConstant Bit Rate (CBR) and Variable Bit Rate (VBR) MPEG-2 encodingtechnology combined with Minerva's video pre-processing and controlsoftware tools.Minerva's DVD encoding system also supports leading third-party AC-3 and MPEG-2 audio encoders, and DVD authoring and disc formattingtools.When encoding film-originated content for NTSC delivery, the unit'sinverse telecine feature accurately restores the incoming video's24 frames per second during the encoding process.The 250's application control software, Minerva Studio, provides aneasy-to-use interface for both single-pass and multi-pass MPEG-2VBR encoding.In multi-pass mode, the Compressionist 250 first profiles the videosequence by gathering statistics and determines the optimumallocation of the available bits to the compressed sequence.In the second pass, the Minerva encoder performs real-time encodingwhile controlling the bit rate according to the bit allocationstrategy determined in the first pass.Optionally, Minerva Studio control software enables users tooptimize and reencode the video source based on their artisticjudgment.The 250 supports D1, YUV, S-Video and composite video input andvideo resolutions up to the CCIR 601 digital standard for NTSC (720x 240 at 60 fields per second) and PAL (720 x 288 at 50 fields persecond) and variable compressed data rates ranging from 2 to10Mbps.The unit is currently shipping with a base system price ofUS$99,000.Tel: 1-408 970 1780Fax: 1-408 982 9877Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996QUESTECH 1012 DECODER NOW WITH SYNCHRONISERfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996QUESTECH's 1012 composite to serial digital encoder is nowavailable with a plug-in synchroniser option which provides aseparately timed output from the decoder, effectively making it twoproducts in one.As a decoder, the unit provides a quality interface betweencomposite and serial digital component video equipment. It acceptsboth analogue and optionally, digital (D2 or D3 format) inputs andoutputs signals.The 1012 is the first decoder from the manufacturer which handlesall variants of PAL and NTSC signals and complements the company'sexisting range of interface products. The unit digitises incominganalogue signals with 10 bit resolution.  All signals processingand conversions are then performed digitally.A full bandwidth adaptive comb filter decoder separates theluminance and chrominance signals in the digital domain and thesignals are transparently rate converted, interleaved andserialised to form the output signal. EDH coding is incorporated toassist in system evaluation and quality control.The synchroniser is controlled from menu-driven front panelcontrols and can either be used to retime the unit decoder output,or a separate auxiliary output.  It is compatible with 50Hz and60Hz systems and allows freezing on either field.Output timing can be adjusted throughout an entire video frame.Tel: 44-1734 787 209Fax: 44-1734 794 766Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996DPA4060 MINIATURE MICfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996POSSIBLY the smallest product launch of 1996, the newomnidirectional DPA4060 from Danish Pro Audio has been designed foruse with wireless systems in theatres or on television, wherevermicrophones need to be mounted on a performer.It will fit most VHF and UHF systems for professional use, and israther robust.The unit uses a new 5.4mm pre-polarised condenser cartridge with avertical diaphragm. It can handle SPLs to a maximum of 134dB, andhas an on-axis frequency response of 20Hz to 20kHz +/-2dB.It has a dynamic range of 97dBA (THD = 1%) and there is 13dB ofheadroom before clipping occurs.Connection options include factory mounted connectors for the mostpopular systems, or the 'pig tail' (without connectors).Tel: 45-4814-2828Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996HP TEST SOLUTION FOR DIGITAL SET-TOP BOXES, DEVICESfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Hewlett-Packard recently introduced at IBC 96, the industry's firsttest source designed to help equipment manufacturers and cable TVoperators bring new digital-video products and services to marketquickly and efficiently.The test source, the HP E4441A DVB QAM coder, is designed to helpset-top box and device makers develop and produce high-qualityDigital Video Broadcasting-Cable (DVB-C)-compliant equipment.The new coder operates in conjunction with HP's latest family ofESG signal generators to provide a reference radio-frequency (RF)signal. This signal can be modified and impaired in a controlledmanner to test the limits of receiver design and improvemanufacturing process control. The HP E4441A also is designed tohelp cable TV operators optimize network performance and manageinteroperability issues.The manufacturers believe that the HP E4441A DVB QAM coder willbecome an important part of any Bit-Error-Rate (BER) test systembecause it can be configured to perform a variety of tests to giveusers maximum test coverage. Users can easily change symbol rate,constellation size and channel coding at the touch of a button.The unit generates extremely accurate QAM (Quadrature AmplitudeModulation) signals, which can be impaired in a calibrated manner.The amount of noise, added to the signal internally, can becontrolled to characterize receivers and networks. Users also maytest DVB-C network equipment in ideal or non-ideal signalconditions to get "real-world" test data.The new coder is the result of HP's continued work within the DVBProject, an industry consortium organized to set standards fordelivering compressed digital video.The DVB Measurements Group, which develops measurement techniquesand definitions, is an important link for enabling the rapiddeployment of new digital-video services using DVB-C technology.Tel: 852-2599-7978Fax: 852-2506-9285Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996NEWSWORKS TURBO NOW WITH BETACAM SP QUALITYfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Delivering Beta-SP equivalent picture quality to newsroom users,the new Newsworks Turbo editing system was launched recently byTektronix at IBC '96.Fully integrated with the classic 'intuitive' user-interfacefeatured in all Lightworks editing systems, its major applicationsinclude 'direct to air' operations. Immediately available, it istargeted both as low-cost, low maintenance stand-alone replacementfor existing tape-based linear suites and as a key component oflarge-scale automated and networked newsroom systems.The new introduction is offered as a chargeable option for existingNewsworks editing system customers. The system effective doublesthe first version's Hi-Res performance to the near Beta-SP level of5 minutes per Gigabyte  - 10 minutes previously - or equivalent to4:1 compression running at around 24 Mbit/s.This is achievedby stripping alternative fields of videoinformation - and similarly audio channels - over a pair ofmaterial hard drives. For the user, across a single pair, thisprovides for a continuous recording of up to 20 minutes - or up to40 minutes at the 10 minutes per Gigabyte standard.Fully 'backwards' compatible with earlier 10-minutes per Gigabytenon-striped material, Turbo will also support mixed compressionrates within the same project or edit.It employs industry-standard storage options - 9Gb drives in avariety of configurations up to 90 Gb in a standard unit andexpandable externally via SCSI driver cards to 180 Gb.Central to the system's ability to deliver the full value of non-linear editing to the newsroom and achieve significant gains inoperational speed, is the 'Edit-to-It' feature.This allows direct editing of late arriving tapes with select, trimand preview on tape under console control. Once selected, material- with handles - is digitised via a simple commit command and isavailable for immediate or future changes.'Edit-to-It' will also now control a channel of Tek's ProfileProfessional Disk Recorder (PDR). This allows Profile PDR-storedmaterial to be accessed directly and employed in an editimmediately.Other key benefits include further operational acceleration withdirect 'voice-over record'.This allows recording of a single audio channel while playing otherpicture and sound channels at an edit station simultaneously (orrecording a picture while sound is playing); direct 'Play-to-Air'either under manual, newsroom computer or external control from anautomation system via RS422 emulating a BVW75 VTR. New as well is'StripView', a visual timeline representing both pictures and soundin the cut and allowing individual shot identification and dynamictrims and changes.In addition, the Turbo is supplied as standard with eight realinternal digital audio channels - expandable externally via one ortwo Pro Sound boxes.The Newsworks Turbo systems are immediately available world-wide.Tel: 65-351-9298Fax: 65-356-4483Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996NEW THOMSON PRODUCTS AT IBCfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996TWO of several new products that Thomson Broadcast Systemsintroduced at IBC were the Microcam split head compact camera and4005 dockable Betacam SX recorder.The Microcam, for ENG or EFP applications, is based on the 1657camera, with the CCD block used remotely to provide a small andvery manoeuverable camera. The CCD block can be re-mounted on thecamera body for conventional use.The Microcam is useful in many shooting situations, in particularwhen the cameraman is in an awkward position, such as on amotorcycle or concert platform, yet still wants to be creative withshooting angles.Its small size makes it suited to remotely controlled or roboticapplications such as parliamentary broadcasting, where it isdiscreet in operation, as well as to crane and jib use.The Microcam is the only compact camera on the market that isavailable in 16/9 format today.The new 4005 Dockable Betacam SX recorder is connected to the 1657camera in the same way as the 3505 Betacam SP recorder, withdigital recording to maintain the quality of the picture producedby the 1657.Recording is 4:2:2 digital component at 8 bit resolution, using theMPEG-2 4:2:2 Studio Profile level compression algorithm.Tel: 65-359-8245Fax: 65-359-8206Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996SGI DEBUTS MULTI-CHANNEL SERVERfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Silicon Graphics has announced that it will debut its Multi-ChannelPlayback (MCP). The MCP Server enables the management, schedulingand playout of multiple-channels of stored MPEG-2 compresseddigital video, audio and data.The MCP Server is designed to meet the needs of multi-channelservice providers such as broadcast, satellite and cable TVnetworks and operators.In addition to the expansion of the traditional broadcast market,multi-channel playout is key to the growth of the emerging NearVideo on Demand (NVOD) market, which offers viewers closelystaggered start times of movies as well as special pay-per-viewevents.The enabling technology of the MCP Server is Silicon Graphicsmulti-channel playback software. The software's open, object-oriented architecture is completely scaleable, allowing from 10 toover 300 output streams and more than 1,000 hours of compressedvideo storage.The MCP software is network-independent, supporting any networktopology. Networks supported include satellite and terrestrialservices such as Multichannel Multipoint Distribution Services andHybrid-Fibre Coax .The MCP Server will be generally available in January 1997.Tel: 44-1734 257 500Fax: 44-1734 257 569Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996TEK LIGHTWORKS VIP 4500 AT IBCfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Designed to bring the benefits of the nonlinear revolution to theowners and users of online suites, the Lightworks VIP 4500 editingsystem - the first of a new generation of online broadcast editingsolutions from Tektronix - was launched at IBC '96.Aimed at replacing conventional multiple-VTR online tape-basedediting systems in broadcast television and facilities companiesthe Lightworks VIP 4500 system offers a smooth and cost-effectivemigration path to the non-linear world.The new system has full capabilities to control external devices -such as DVEs, vision mixers (switchers) and character generators -as well as offering its own complementary on-board titling andeffects. The system complements Tektronix' existing range ofoffline and news editing systems (Lightworks Turbo, Heavyworks andNewsworks systems - and the new Newsworks Turbo, simultaneouslylaunched at IBC '96. (See page 40)Targeted initially at online finishing of broadcast televisionprojects, it features recording and playout configurable viamultiple fully-assignable broadcast-quality video channels. Thesystem also combines comprehensive offline and online facilitiessuitable for all forms of editing. Priced at US$149,950 for itscore four channel configuration, key launch customers includeSweden's TV4 and the UK's Central Television.First shipments began after IBC, with world-wide availability byend-1996.Tel: 65-351-9298Fax: 65-356-4483Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996IT'S A KIND OF CONVERGENCEfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996by Neal WeinstockNetwork computers" that incorporate digital video decoders. Full-motion video on Internet sites. TV tuner cards and MPEG decodercards for home PCs. Video capture programmes that allow typicalhome users to grab frames, customise still images, and build theirown digital photo libraries.Consumer nonlinear editing systems from Avid Technology, Radius,Fast Electronic, and many others. The PC and the TV are cross-breeding in consumers' homes, mutating into multiple new forms, andthe TV industry may never be the same again.Or, some of the new creations may not work at all in themarketplace.The Network ComputerLook at the new concept of the network computer (NC). It wasinvented by Oracle chief Larry Ellison in a speech in 1994 - inwhat he has said was a spur-of-the-moment inspiration - thoughnaysayers insist the concept of underpowered PCs relying onmainframes to supply data has been around as long as the usedcomputer market.Ellison challenged the hardware industry with the goal of buildinga device with nothing more than a keyboard, lots of RAM, some ROMchips to hold the small client side of a big client/serveroperating system, and a very fast processor.The unit would rely on a network for storage of all programmes andon a TV screen as monitor, and could therefore sell for US$500, hesaid.The NC was embraced by IBM soon after Ellison's speech. After all,it is essentially a re-awakening of the mainframe/dumb terminalmodel that prevailed when Big Blue ran the computer industry.From Receivers to ComputersIt was also embraced by consumer electronics companies such as Sonyand Philips as a bridge from their stagnant TV receiver trade intothe home computer business. Sony and Philips became earlymanufacturers of terminals for the start-up WebTV (which also sellsterminals under its own name).For US$3300 to US$350, the three companies have just introducedWebTV terminals that include V.34 modems, software for easyInternet access (for a monthly fee of US$20), and the ability toconnect numerous add-ons such as a wireless keyboard, hard disk andCD-ROM.Ellison's call was echoed from a distance by the drive towardsdigital TV decoders. As the needs of the rival systems aimed atEurope and the North American hybrid digital/analogue standardbecame clear, these decoders also were seen to require ROM loadedwith the client side of a network operating system and a very fastprocessor. But they don't need much, or any, RAM, and they needonly a keypad, rather than a keyboard. They certainly use the TV asmonitor, though.Linking Up With DecodersSo some of the companies that took Ellison up on his challenge,including Sun Microsystems and Sony, began to confer with or evenjoin forces with the decoder makers, such as Thomson and Irdeto."We might combine the digital TV decoder and the network computer,"says a Sun insider, "or we might just design them together and usethe efficiencies to drive down costs."Sun has been drawn into these opportunities by its Java and HotJava software; that hot Internet stuff suddenly seems to make atleast as much sense for digital TV as similar software aimed at ourindustry in recent years by the likes of Apple and IBM's nowdefunct Kaleida co-venture, Microware's David, Irdeto, Philips, andNews Datacom.But if digital TV decoders are to be like Internet terminals, theyalso can be Internet terminals. And, as the bandwidth of theInternet expands, as "applet" software such as Java improves, andas streaming servers improve, TV programmes will increasingly bedelivered over the Internet.TV Over the InternetThey already are, in low quality and quantity. As reported hererecently, such streamer software companies as Vosaic (incombination with Microsoft and its Java-competitor Active X), XingTechnology, VDOnet, and Vivo Software are already sending MPEG-quality video at up to 15fps to ISDN connections anywhere on theglobe.A network computer that is combined in one module with a digital TVdecoder could let viewers switch channels from broadcast to anInternet video stream.Some broadcasters are getting ready for this eventuality."Right now, a Web site is an ancillary service," says Steven Heyer,president/CEO of Turner Advertising Sales and chief of Turner'sinternational networks. "People can find out TV schedules, moreabout news stories or spots. At some point, the Web site becomesthe entertainment or the product, and the TV network is equallyancillary."Opening Up the MarketsBecause of the Internet's global reach, wherever on earth widebandInternet to the home happens, it's simultaneously an opportunityfor broadcasters anywhere and a threat to broadcasters in thatlocality.For example, hundreds of thousands of homes throughout California'sSilicon Valley and San Francisco Bay area now have Internetconnections at least over 128 kbps ISDN.Millions more are wired at 28.8 kbps or lower. According to mediabuyers in the area, up to 20 per cent of the prime time TV audiencein the area - probably the most extensively computer-literateregion on earth - is lost to computer network usage on any givennight. Local TV advertising consequences are inevitable, even assuch new networking concerns as WebTV, C/net and @home base theirbusiness plans on supplying Internet services with increasingamounts of video to the "lost" TV audience.Yet there are naysayers to the combined digital TV decoder/networkcomputer. Divicom, the MPEG specialist that is a subsidiary ofleading MPEG and JPEG chip-maker C-Cube Microsystems, has justsigned a contract to supply technology for Zenith Electronics' US$1billion contract to supply digital set-tops to the Ameritechconsortium of US telephone companies.The new decoders are to work on several digital video standards soconsumers can switch from the hybrid fibre coax (HFC) standard usedby American cable operators to the switched digital video (SDV)used by telcos, to MMDS or DTH standards, too.No Reasonable PriceThere will not be room left in such a box to provide the Ethernetnode used for high-speed modems and the network computer, too - atleast not at a reasonable price."Advanced digital video delivery systems and services are difficultto build and implement," says Divicom president/CEO Nolan Daines.He emphasises a need to, "Minimise the complexity and reduce thecosts associated with implementing such systems, . . . and bring acomplete solution to the market in a fraction of the time."Meanwhile, Microsoft's Bill Gates lambastes the idea of the networkcomputer. "If people really want underpowered PC's without harddrives, why can't you even give away most used computers? It's afallacy," he said in a recent speech.Yet Microsoft, too, has embraced the NC, especially for the home TVmonitor as display. It is backing the Florida start-up, Citrix, indeveloping software for "thin client" client/server systemscompatible with Active X (formerly known as OLE).This is to be the fulfilment of the model Microsoft bruited aboutthe cable industry a couple of years ago for interactive TV, thencalled "Tiger." It is also meant to support home office workers onNCs. The concept has been embraced, too, by several market-shareleaders in PCs, including the top company, Compaq.By coincidence, however, this journalist just purchased his firstnew desktop computer in five years, a Compaq, and was pleased toobtain, for some US$500 less than his last Compaq four years ago,not only a hugely faster processor but 80 times as much hard drive,four times as much RAM, MPEG video, TV tuner, 8x CD-ROM drive, some600Mb of software and all other usual bells and whistles.A journalist does not need all of this stuff for work, but it doesallow a journalist to access all manner of graphical Internetsites, and allow a journalist's family to learn from hybrid CD-ROMscombining with Internet sites to supply video-like services withinteractivity.The fat client competes with TV rather than augments it, and isoften preferable for those who can afford it (while becoming evereasier to afford): my son has not watched television since the newcomputer was delivered.Merging Industries?Clearly, Compaq places its bets on this kind of product as well asNCs. So is Sony, which not only has just introduced its WebTV NC,but also, just a few weeks before, its re-entry into thetraditional PC business.Peter Dare, technology VP for Sony Business & ProfessionalProducts, says, "When the PCs in Sony's booth at NAB outnumber theVTRs, you know we should be selling PCs. These industries aremerging."There's going to be a continuum from PCs running home multimediato professional production systems on PCs, and we should be on bothsides of that."In other words, just as Sony used its strength in home VCRs to helpit conquer professional recording.Networked "Fat" ClientsThe fully loaded PC (or "fat client,") poses other challenges andopportunities for broadcasters. The challenges are mostly the sameas those offered by thin clients. But the fat client market seemspretty clearly defined as likely to encompass just the top third ofmost societies' demographic audiences (A and B demos, as TVprogrammers put it), while home NCs, or thin clients, threatenviewership at all but the least lucrative demos.Fat clients may seem, on quick examination, to offer feweropportunities for broadcasters and more for equipment vendors. Notmany PC owners are likely to view TV entertainment at theirdesktops; my son's TV-like usage of CD-ROM and Internet is notbenefiting any broadcaster.But he is likely to graduate from his current diet of learn-to-readgames fairly quickly to learn- to-make-your-own-video devices;Avid, Sony, Eastman Kodak, and others are now vying to supply himwith those devices.The growth of the fat client business around the world will helpturn the home multimedia industry to the benefit of these TVequipment makers, whose high-end nonlinear edit, digital recording,and graphics creation software of just a few years ago now runs onhardware within consumer budgets.Even more than the large companies mentioned above, Radius, FastElectronic, DPS, Matrox, Autodesk, Adobe, and other smaller boardor software makers have predicated their business plans on bringingbroadcast post- production tools to home users.What's Coming?This strategy melds with a professional equipment strategy, too.Says Pete Mountanos, marketing VP of Fast, "You don't know what'scoming in a year or two, but you know it's going to make your$50,000 or $100,000 systems obsolete. So just buy a $1,000 boardfrom us and throw it out once you find something better."One large software company is playing something of this strategy,too. Microsoft has priced Softimage software at a third or lessthan its 1995 levels, and expects to drive prices still lower, wellbelow its current US$10,000 to $20,000 level.Softimage availability over Windows NT is a major factor in thetremendous growth of Pentium Pro-based systems on the hardwareside. Dell Computer has just introduced a US$2,500 Pentium Prosystem running Windows NT, and capable of running Softimage. Thismay be a very thin client compared to the Silicon Graphics systemsit may be used to emulate, but only a moderately fat client for theaverage home PC buyer.Buying Into BroadcastingCombine it with a video camera and a very few thousand dollarsworth of Internet site creation and streaming software, and thehome PC becomes a small broadcasting station.Surely it is significant that Microsoft has bought intobroadcasting, too, as half owner of MSNBC, a supplier ofprogramming to NBC's Asian networks and a 24-hour broadcaster inthe US.The company wants its Microsoft Network online service and Internetconnection to mix and match ancillary and complementary programmingwith MSNBC, and it is not shy about defining its programming as anenabler for consumers' own programmes as well as for its own whollyoriginated feeds.For the traditional broadcasters, this is a new model which wouldbear watching.Of more long-term competitive effect for broadcasters, whenconsumers get used to producing their own good-quality video, andthen distributing it on Internet sites as well as viewing video onother 'net sites, they are likely to insist on demanding somethingmore from TV broadcasters than now available. What more? Only timewill tell.  'Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996PSN SHINES OVER THE ASIA-PACIFIC PT PASIFIK SATELIT NUSANTARA, ESTABLISHEDIN 1991 TO PROVIDE SATELLITE-BASED PRODUCTS AND SERVICES TO THEASIA-PACIFIC REGION, CONTINUES TO FORGE AHEADfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996by Thomas KingEver since all systems were declared "go" and Palapa A1 wasrocketed into orbit in July 1976 Indonesia has become a leader insatellite telecoms.With that giant leap forward 20 years ago the nation joined anexclusive high technology 'club' as one of the first Third Worldcountries to use space technology.The plan then was to effectively and efficiently link all parts ofthe lengthy Indonesian archipelago with a modern telecommunicationsnetwork.Not only would the network have to support telex, radio, televisionand data transmissions and serve the nation's burgeoning number oftelephone users, it would also have to rely upon the thenrevolutionary idea of using a tiny satellite in stationary orbitsome 36,000km above Indonesia.The sparkle of the 250kg Palapa A1 was superseded in the mid 1980swith the shimmer of the B2 series of spacecraft which became thesecond generation platforms for a highly sophisticatedtelecommunications network.Several 550kg B2 satellites were progressively launched intodifferent orbits and after extensive testing proved their value asdistant repeater stations equipped with enhanced capabilities andagendas.With the introduction of the more sophisticated Palapa B series itwas decided that its various footprints should be intended for endusers in the vast ASEAN region, in addition to its prime servicemarket of Indonesia.The Palapa B series launched reliable satellite communications tohundreds of millions of people living in the then six membercountries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations(ASEAN):Indonesia, Brunei, the Philippines, Singapore, Malaysia andThailand. (Vietnam has since joined the organisation, whichregularly meets to discuss regional matters, including telecomsissues.1991: Forging AheadUntil 1991 Indonesia had but one private satellite serviceprovider, the company now known as Satelindo. PT Pasifik SatelitNusantara (PSN) was established in June 1991 with a mandate toprovide satellite-based products and services to the Asia-Pacificregion.The five-year old publicly-owned company not only compliments thesatellite-based portfolio of Indonesian sister company, PTSatelindo, but has successfully forged ahead with interests in anumber of telecoms enterprises.For instance, just one year after its establishment PSN acquiredthe 'retired' inclined orbit B1 satellite at 134 degrees E, renamedit Palapa Pacific 1, and began operating services with an expandedcoverage over Asia from India in the West to Guam in the East.The second satellite in the B2 series, the inclined orbit B2P cameunder PSN management in early 1996. Renamed Palapa Pacific 2 andrelocated to 144 degrees E, PSN's ten standard C-band transponderson this orbiting relay station are predominately leased by theMabuhay Philippines Satellite Corporation for telecommunicationsand broadcast purposes.Third Generation SatellitesPSN is also actively involved in Indonesia's third generation ofsatellites, Palapa C1 and C2, which were launched in January andMay 1996, respectively.A number of innovations and advances were incorporated into thehigh power C series which, like the B series, was built by theHughes Space and Communications Company of California.For instance, each 1740kg, 21m long Palapa C has more powerfultransmitters and highly refined antennas. Satellite life for the Cseries is estimated at 14 years, virtually double that of the Bseries."Through a joint purchase agreement with PT Satelindo, PSN owns andoperates 12 extended C-band transponders, six on each of two HughesHS601 Palapa C series satellites," said Ron Pirolo, Manager-Sales &CS, Pasifik Satelit Nusantara.Palapa C2: More TV TrafficThe C1, at 150.5 degrees E, is primarily used to carry ruraltelephony on PSN's burgeoning VSAT service. Positioned at 113degrees E, C2 is dedicated to broadcasting needs. Pirolo estimatesthat up to two million parabolic dish antennas are currentlypointed at this satellite, which is claimed to carry more TVtraffic - 30 major broadcasters - than any other satellite in theregion.PSN's Palapa C customers include broadcasters such as NBC Asia,Star TV, TVB Hong Kong and RCTI, the dominant broadcaster inIndonesia.Footprint flexibility is an advantage for users of PSNtransponders, noted Pirolo, as they can opt for either of Palapa Ccoverage patterns, the Asean beam or the Asia beam. In combinationthese span the distance from East Africa in the West to New Zealandin the East.More Transponders SoonIn a few months PSN will be able to offer additional transpondersto users on yet another satellite, the soon-to-be-launched Mabuhay1, the first-ever Philippine satellite.One of eight partners that make up the Mabuhay PhilippinesSatellite Corporation, PSN currently owns two transponders with anoption to acquire an additional six.Developed and built by Space Systems/Loral (SS/L) of  the US,Mahubay 1 is scheduled for launch this December. It is expected tobecome operational from 144 degrees E orbital position during thefirst quarter of 1997. (This position will put Mabuhay 1 in a co-location with PSN's Palapa Pacific 2 until the end of service lifefor the Indonesian satellite.Designed for a 12 year operational life, Mahubay 1, the largestspace craft in SS/L's FS1300 series, is equipped with 54 activetransponders in the C- and Ku-bands.A total of 30 high power standard and extended C-band transpondersand orthogonally polarised antennas will provide coverage to thePhilippines, Eastern China, Indonesia, Malaysia, Indo-China, Japan,Korea, India, Bangladesh and Hawaii.On the Ku-band, Mabuhay 1 will operate with 24 medium power/12 highpower transponders to cover the Philippines, coastal China, Taiwanand northern Vietnam.While PSN executives are actively involved in this pioneeringproject others are deployed elsewhere to direct additional companyinterests.There are currently three other components in PSN's evolvingportfolio of satellite-related services: teleport services,satellite network services and planned mobile satellite services.Uplinking in BatamIn early 1994 and within three months after being awarded its firstsatellite uplink contract, PSN technicians had designed, installedand commissioned an uplink facility on Batam Island, nearSingapore. This signalled the start of the first commercial,digitally compressed TV service in Asia.The Batam Teleport was expanded in late 1995 to accommodateadditional operational requirements for the Palapa C satellites.The facility now provides satellite monitoring, uplink and downlinkservices, digital compression and editing services as well aslimited studio capabilities.PSN's Teleport customers include clients such as NBC Asia whichuses the Batam complex for the downlinking of its broadcast serviceoff PAS-2, processing and uplinking to C2.In the satellite network services arena PSN has teamed with TitanInformation Services to offer a "very cost effective, satellite-based communications network".Incorporating DAMALink software and hardware which actively assignsfrequencies to maximise satellite bandwidth efficiency, the Xpressconnection system is said to reduce costs by enabling more users tobe simultaneously served by a narrower bandwidth segment.Voice, data and facsimile transmissions can be processed by thissystem, which uses extended C-band frequencies and 1.2m earth-basedVSAT terminals.AceS by 1998While Batam Teleport and Xpress Connection are fully operational,PSN's Asia Cellular Satellite (AceS) System will only come on-linein 1998.Conceived as a satellite-based, mobile communication systemproviding fully digital voice, data, fax, alerting and pagingservices to hand-held telephones anywhere in Asia, the system willbe seamlessly integrated with cellular networks and public switchednetworks.Apart from supplying cellular-like mobile services, ACeS will havethe ability to deliver telecommunications services to theinnumerable underserved and unserved rural locations throughoutAsia. Ericsson will develop and manufacture the satellite/ cellularswitched phones.The workhorses of the orbiting system, currently under constructionby  Lockheed Martin, are the 2600kg A2100 AX spacecraft buses, saidto be the most powerful commercial communications satellites everbuilt.Dubbed 'Garuda' and sporting 12m long antennas and on-board digitalsignal processing both of the 12 year service life satellites inthe ACeS system will have 140 spot beams focussed in Asia. Thefootprints will cover in excess of 25 countries where a totalpopulation of approximately three billion people live.Each of the L-band satellites is designed to provide 11,000simultaneous telephone channels and be capable of supporting up totwo million subscribers.The Satellite Control Facility on Batam will contain the hardwareincluding a 15.5m tracking antenna, software and support facilitiesnecessary to manage and monitor the two massive Garuda satellitesof the heart of this revolutionary mobile communications system.Towards 1999In mid-October PSN announced plans to operate a multimediasatellite by 1999.Currently under constructionby the Lorel Corporation, the four-tonne US$300 million satellite, to be called Palapa Pacific 3 andpositioned at 134 degrees E, "will not have any transponders,although its capacity will be equivalent to that of a satellitewith 84 transponders.The satellite is expected to be sent aloft in late 1998 or early1999.  'Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996CHARISMATIC DIGITAL VIDEO EDITING: MARTYN GREEN TALKS TO QUESTECH'S GRAEMEFENEMORE AND ROBERT BILLING ABOUT THE CHARISMA X DVEfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Situated in Wokingham, Berks, the heart of Britain's SiliconValley, Questech are the makers of such AV products as rateconverters, high quality decoders, and frame store synchronisers,along with a solid-state video RAM recorder, and a solid-stateaudio recorder.But perhaps more than anything, it is known for its flagshipproduct, the Charisma X (Ten), a dual-standard and dual-aspectratio digital video effects device which they claim, "has thehighest frame-based interpolation in the industry, renderingdigital video effects images in real time".According to Questech's sales support manager, Graeme Fenemore, theCharisma X has been Questech's main product for the past year - andby now Questech has sold, "a fair number" of them.The basic model comes with an input and output mixer and a linearDVE with three axis rotations. The input mixer comes as standard,along with RGB colour correction, de-focus, luminance-chrominance,and key.Prices start off at about 37,000 (US$55,500) for the basic model,up to 56,000  (US$84,000) for a single-channel device, although upto three channels can be controlled from the same system.Having three channels allows a display of three different videosources on screen. "If you look at the news on TV," he explains"sometimes they have two presenters, in different locations, indifferent boxes on-screen - and that is two channels of DVE."We offer a third one also - all mixed over a background which canbe live."The basic, linear model, has infinite expansion, and to this wrapand warp effects can be added to do page turns and page rolls, oroil drop ripple effects. "But it is all a 2-D image," explainsFenemore."It appears as 3-D with the picture flat to the screen, but if yourotate the picture around in 3-D space, it will appear as a flatimage."That also allows infinite expansion, because it is just anadditional board that is added to the system."If you want 3-D effects, where you have page turns, you can rotatethe image around in space and it will remain three-dimensional."An extra board can be fitted to the entry-level CLEO, to allowexpansion on a flat picture up to eight times and three times onCLEO effects."CLEO stands for the Curved Line Effects option - the 3-D stuff,"explains Fenemore. There is a 5,000 pound add-on card that can beadded to the system to make it a super-CLEO.This allows expansion of shapes up to eight times. "It also allowsyou to fragment the picture, roll it into a cylinder or a cone,"says Fenemore, adding "all real-time manipulation, as there is norendering involved with the Charisma system."Saving Time In RenderingHe points out, "Unless you spend half a million pounds, with a lotof the computer-based systems, you tend to find you have to set onekey frame, generate another key frame, and then let the systemrender, going from one to the other on a frame-by-frame basis,which does take time."But with the Charisma X, for instance you can set a key frame,turn it into a sphere, and then rotate it around in 3-D space andit remains 3-D."Or you can position it somewhere else, set a second key frame, andwhen you run it, it will evolve from one shape to the other.Normally on a computer-based system, you find it has to renderframe by frame."A lot of this stuff is done in hardware - it is not fromprogrammes that have been written to generate them, althoughobviously there is software that is written to control thehardware."Operating Live-On-AirComputer-based systems do work out cheaper, Fenemore admits, as alot of them come with other packages, like graphics and charactergenerators, all packaged with digital video effects."So you can have a complete editing system in a box, whereas theCharisma X has to link up with other manufacturer's devices likemixers, edit controllers and character generators."However, he points out, "Where you wouldn't want to use a computer-based system is when you are operating live on-air. If you want tofire off an effect, like moving a picture away into the background,then you'd obviously want to use a dedicated piece of hardware forthat."With the computer-based systems, you can't separate the DVE - itis all in a box. You wouldn't use a computer-based system tomanipulate a picture on the TV screen on a live broadcast."Computer-based systems are used in post-production houses, wherespeed of operation is not the most important thing, althoughobviously a customer is paying by the hour for the use of theproduct."Disk vs RAMThe advantage of computer-based systems though, he agrees, are thatone can add graphics to the video. "But a computer-based systemuses disk drives, whereas our system has no disks - all the imagesare stored in RAM memory."You are manipulating one frame of information, that's all. Thereis one frame, or a field, delay, because you may have a pixel inthe top left which has to appear on the bottom right. It is frame-based processing, which means that when you expand the image, youdon't have the slight flicker you get with field-based processing."The Charisma Ten system comes as an input-output mixer, with theDVE inside. "To that you can add the wrap or warp type effectswhich are 2-D in plane effects, or you can have the CLEO and have3-D effects, where you can manipulate the picture - like doingpage-turns, making into a sphere or cylinder etc., and it remainsthree-dimensional."Available OptionsOptions that can be added to the system include the ability to dropimages into a target frame store - what Questech call multi-freeze.Says Fenemore, "You can build up montages by dropping ininformation. Or you can generate a drop shadow effect, and de-focusit. You can leave trails, much like you see on some computercursors, and you can decay the trail away or leave it on thescreen."You can also add a chroma-key, and chroma-key the DVE onto anotherinput source, and manipulate the combined images on-screen."The Charisma has been around as a digital box since 1985. AndFenemore claims that companies who bought one then, are still usingthem nowadays. The earlier model to the Charisma X was an eight-bit, field-based device, while the Charisma X is ten-bit frame-based.The internal architecture of the DV goes up to 24 bits and isdigitally transparent, "- so that with a full-sized centre, you canfreeze the video, and actually feed its output back into its input,unfreeze it, and the picture will remain on screen."What is new with the Charisma Ten is the input mixer, along withthe chroma- key option and the wrap or warp effects. "And with thewrap system, you can get real-time morphing," enthuses Fenemore,"so you can distort a picture in real time.""You can do a two-channel morph, from one shape to another and youcan see it happening in front of you by moving a grid around, tochange it on the output screen, and then instantly run it, with norendering involved."Unfortunately, he says, users cannot have both the CLEO and thewrap systems in the same unit, as they are totally differentaddress architecture. "But you can combine channels so you have onechannel with the CLEO, and another with the wrap, because you canhave up to three channels."Asked what sort of customers go for each type of system, he says,"You tend to find that the morphing effects being used by postproduction houses, whereas the wrap and CLEO effects can be used ineither environment.""The multi-channel combining, and Z-axis information which allowsyou to manipulate one channel behind another, without having to doa priority select, or intersect other channels, has been aroundsince the launch of the first Charisma in 1985."And he maintains that whereas Quantel were the first to generate athree-axis rotate system, which Ampex followed with a three-axisvideo manipulator, there was still no ability to do three-axisrotations, and Questech is still "really the only manufacturer thatmakes a DVE that can do all of these sort things in 3-D, in realtime."Switching Between EventsRobert Billing, senior design engineer at Questech, feels theCharisma X is useful, "for any sort of programme where you needtransitions."With sports programmes, for instance, the Charisma X can be usedmost effectively to switch between all the different events duringthe day. And we are now able to do 525/60 NTSC as well as 625/50PAL, so we are getting into the American-dominated section of themarket."Billings continues, " I don't think it would be easy for anyone totry to copy us. We have extensive patent protection . . . "Questech thus believes it has the market virtually cornered. And,currently at least, it is sitting pretty on it.  'Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996THE GREAT OUTDOORS BECKON: UNTIL YOU START BATTLING TO BRING THE STORIESIN, YOU MAY NOT NEED MUCH MORE THAN THISfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996by Neal WeinstockMobile facilities are starting to move across Asia, as audienceratings begin to give a tangible edge to the immediacy of locationshooting. Advertisers are taking notice, too, which leadsbroadcasters to add yet more outdoor broadcast (OB) vans to theirtechnology resources.In cold countries, this is called a snowball effect; but the OB vantrend is rolling and gathering size largely in places that neversee snow. What's a mobile facility? At its least, it's simply a van- even a car -  used to hold portable production equipment."Until you get into a situation where you're battling competitorsto bring stories in," says Rob Braun of Phoenix ENG, a small US OBvan specialist, "You don't need much more than that for news."Sport, however, is a different arena. Yet another is fictionproduction. Broadcasters with rights to sporting events in morethan one or two venues in a typical year, and producers ofentertainment programmes that might experience a ratings boost froma bit of outside-the-studio scenery, have differing and immediateneeds in OB vans.That is why mobile facilities are best designed to order andcrafted for each special need. That is why, as much as large systemintegrating vendors such as Sony, BTS, and Harris seem to dominatethe business, well over 50 per cent of the world's mobilefacilities are built by small local vendors.There tends to be as much individuality among properly designed OBvans as between in-house studio facilities. The differences are notmerely a matter of budget.Do you need (and can you get government permission for) a microwavelink to the studio? Are you rolling the OB van into or just outsideof large arenas, concert halls, or night clubs? Or are you using itto navigate narrow streets, pedestrian districts, off-roadcountryside?Depending on what programme is being shot, the same location mayrequire a different sort of vehicle.In this author's photogenic and news-generating neighbourhood, weare continually visited by every sort of mobile production. Thedifferences and similarities are highly instructive.Frequent fiction film crews bring a dozen or more caravans (forpeople only) and lorries (for equipment only), and no on-boardcontrol room; all is set out in the open on the street.The shoot costs millions, costs all of us locals our parking spotsand makes us occasionally wait to get in or out of our houses whilewe gawk at actors, but the vans cost little; they are unimprovedtrucks and mobile homes.There are always local TV news vans around, their corkscrew-shapedmicrowave antennae raised up to 30m to transmit video from thesquares in front of courthouses and government offices (orsometimes from a waterside location for a weather report) tostudios.Usually these are vans about four or five metres long, with roominside for an AB roll editing system, driver, cameraman, editor,and journalist, a portable light kit, a couple of camcorders, tapeand accessories, and a football field's length of cables.Added on to the cost of a normal delivery van are an improvedelectrical system, built-in microwave, countertops and cabinets,and endless coffee spills.Foreign TV correspondents based here are frequently out shootingvideo in the neighbourhood, too. Typically, they stand in front ofa vista that tells the world where they are and deliver monologuesthat may have been written without ever coming here.Or they stand on the street interviewing celebrities from theirhomeland who now live here, inadvertently demonstrating that no onein my neighbourhood recognises them. For these applications,unobtrusive politeness is needed in any OB van; usually, they usestation wagons well stuffed with camera, tripod, mini-lighting kit,VTR, tape and accessories.Lately, we are seeing more sport-utility vehicles used; they moreeasily handle a bounce over a curb in the wilds of ourneighbourhood's pedestrian walkways, especially when heavilyloaded.We have seen NHK crews with a hand-held microwave link stuffed intothe wagon, too; they can use it only in locations with a clear shotat a receiver mounted high on an office building.The inexperienced try to get away with packing only cameraman andjournalist in with all this; older hands include a driver, usefulmostly to guard against thieves and tow trucks.TV commercials, fashion videos, and music videos are anothermenagerie. Typically, all three travel in a four- or five-metre OBvan for video gear and online control, a caravan or two for talent,and a big truck full of lights and often audio.We know as soon as the truck doors open if the shoot is on film orvideo: film shoots fill trucks with so many lights and generatorsand reflectors and scrims and big gel filters that little else isapparent, and they need no other van for video control. Video set-ups can be pretty similar to TV news crews', with the addition ofroughly the same lighting gear as a film crew's. And no microwave,of course.For fashion and music video shoots, too, there's usually a fullcomplement of hi-fi audio gear; less often, performance soundreinforcement gear. Though performers in music videos usually lip-sync sound tracks in the studio to mimed singing on location, theyneed loud enough audio to dance to.Models in fashion shoots, likewise, need loud enough audio to walkto. Actors in commercials may need this, too. Or they may need nomore audio than a wireless body microphone.Given the diversity of needs and the relative infrequency of workfor all participants (compared, say, to TV news), theseapplications almost always are serviced by rented vehicles; anextra reason to keep the OB video control van separate from thelighting equipment truck.Crews that tend to be unfamiliar with equipment resources needmore, and more clearly defined, space to work with.Location Shoots For ConcertsThen there are the location shoots for music concerts. MTV had anall-star concert in the park where I like to run a few weeks ago.Small crews from a non-profit channel sometimes come to shootchamber music concerts in a little hall just next to that park.The two shoots' OB van needs could hardly be more different and yetalike in concept. Both require trucks holding fully equippedcontrol rooms for multicamera shoots. The trucks must be parkedsome distance from the stage, in both cases, so that the directorsees talent only over video.In the case of the chamber music hall, a five-metre OB van sits ina nearby parking lot and runs cables to a three-camera set-up inthe hall. Within the single OB van are stored precisely all thelights, camera, and other portable gear needed for the shoot.Since the crew comes here with some frequency, they know just whatthey need and are able to transport most of it in a van that alsoholds the three-camera control set-up, switcher, VTR, et al. Someadditional gear they are able to store in a closet in the littlehall.In the case of the rock concert, two huge tractor-trailers,accompanied by several vehicles for performers' dressing rooms,filled a cobbled no- parking zone.As many as a dozen cameras were used, necessitating a huge controlroom that filled one of the trailers, taking up more space thanmost control rooms in permanent, indoor facilities.Of course, the trailer is a permanent facility, too, used forsporting events if not rock concerts, and costing many millions ofdollars. The second huge trailer, filled with generators forlights, stood farther from the stage to minimise the generators'noise.Other lorries that had brought other gear probably were parked faraway during the show. For days before and after, running throughthe park was a challenging obstacle course. If most of these OB vanapplications have not been seen in your neighbourhood, rest assuredthat many soon will be."Anybody would rather watch anything that comes from outside thestudio," says Moses Znaimer, founder and chairman of Toronto's CityTV. "There's always the slightest possibility for surprise, forsome kind of life sneaking into the bleak, pre- programmed deadzone of television."City TV was a little independent upstart broadcaster a decade ago;it made its mark against the established stations (and saved vastcosts) by not having any studios at all. Everything it did waslocation work, even within its own offices.The company now sells its expertise to other broadcasters, to helpothers work the same formula. But nugget of City TV's strategy isnot patentable and inescapable: many viewers would rather see OBvideo than studio video. As more and more competition comes toAsian TV, the great outdoors beckon.  'Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996THE REALITY OF VIRTUAL STUDIOSfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Virtual Set technology at IBC 96 did not have quite the 'must see'quality it certainly had when the first blue screen sets startledvisitors back in 1994 - but there have certainly been some advancesthis year which go some way to solving some of the complextechnical problems of virtual production.There are buyers around - and at least one manufacturer confidentlyclaims 1997 will be the year of the virtual set - but didn'tsomeone say that about 1996?There also has not been quite the shake-out of virtual setcompanies yet, although Electrogig has vanished from the pantheonof names, Its Reality Tracking technology has been acquired byTriavest, a new company set up by former Electrogig chief executiveMike Dilworth, and largely staffed by ex-Electrogig virtual setspecialists.Triavest plans to spend far more time building the specificrequirements of its customers into the virtual set systems itdelivers - more of a custom-made approach. It was acknowledged lastyear that there were too many companies chasing a fairly smallmarket - since that market was limited by the high cost of entry.Now the market is being segmented into high and lower cost systems;broadly the split between a 2D virtual studio without a trackingcamera, with pre-rendered sets manipulated by a high resolutionDVE; and the full 3D real time rendered virtual set, which in mostcases still requires a Silicon Graphics Onyx supercomputer - nowavailable with the Infinite Reality graphics engine which is someten times faster than SGI's previous model, the Reality Engine 2.It was notable that Discreet Logic did not have a virtual setdisplay at IBC. It made great play of its Vapour, Frost and Glassproduct lines at NAB this year, but following DL's re-structuring,the IBC focus was on editing with Fire, and mid-price effects andcompositing with the Flint RT (for real time), helped by DL's firsthardware product, the Pebbles fast video i/o device.However, Discreet says the absence of a Vapour demo does not implyany less commitment towards virtual sets. It's still an importantpart of its strategy for broadcast products, according toDiscreet's director of product marketing Marc Nadeau."Vapour and Frost are a key part of our development into productionfor broadcast and we're currently transitioning the technologyresearch from Innsbruck to Montreal as part of the re-structuring."We just didn't have enough time to organise a blue screendemonstration at IBC, but we showed the software and renderingenvironment - and this year we've had 1500 hours on air generatedby Vapour, including the Eurovision Song Contest and 22 hours a dayfrom the Olympics for Canal Plus."RT-SET has just signed a deal with SZM Sendezentrum Munchen forthree licences for its top end virtual studio system Larus, whichmakes SZM the biggest user of virtual set technology yet, accordingto RT-SET president and CEO Shalom Nachshon.SZM acts as a production centre for four TV stations in Germany -Pro7, the DSF sports channel, Home Order Television and the Kabel 1movies and entertainment channel. SZM will be using three studiocameras and a crane camera in its virtual studio facility."We've turned concepts into real production tools this year, andproved it with productions like CBS TV's Tales of the Crypt, wherewe did 26 episodes of the show in eight days," he says.This involved RT-SET virtual sets mixed in with live action andainimation for a part of this children's show from the SamuelGoldwyn Company called Secrets of the Cryptkeeper's Haunted House."We've completed the development of centralising the entirefunction of virtual set control room into one point - the virtualstudio operator - so the switching of cameras, controlling VTRs,lighting, sound are all controlled by one guy who controls theshow," says Nachshon.RT-SET has also completed development of software to generateshadows from the talent and cast them not only on the floor, but onvirtual objects too, according to Nachshon."We don't have to use any blue boxes for this, and the cameras canmove too," he says. RT-SET has also devised a 3D prompter asguidance for the talent, so they can watch where they are supposedto move without the use of a monitor.Orad Hi-Tec Systems has continued to export its technology to othervirtual set companies. Several now offer Orad's pattern recognitionsystem as an alternative to using memory head sensors in derivingthe co-ordinates to generate the right perspectives for thecomputer graphics backgrounds.Accom, Digimedia and Discreet Logic have all agreed with Orad tointerface its camera tracking system with their virtual setsystems. Orad now has a range of its Cyberset virtual set systemsat different price points, some entirely in-house systems, somewith partners like FOR-A, Vinten and Evans and Sutherland, whichoffers a Windows NT based system."When we started developing a virtual studio system, we began usinga sensor-based system, but got so frustrated with it, we looked atother methods and developed pattern recognition, where the cameraparameters are extracted from the video itself, not from anyassociated mechanical devices."It means you can use ordinary studio cameras, you can dolly themfreely and even use shoulder mounted cameras or a Steadicam. Andsince our video processor is located downstream of the switcher,one system can service any number of cameras and there are nocalibration procedures required for them," says Orad's technicaldirector Dr Miky Tamir.At IBC, Orad showed the use of virtual actors, integrating virtualcharacters animated with motion capture in real time, which wasintegrated into the virtual set system using the same Onyx CPU thatperforms the set rendering.The company also showed virtual presence, which means a personrecorded in a remote location can be immersed into the virtual setas a 3D object.Orad has also developed a feedback mechanism for the talent, whichrenders the virtual world from above, calculating the footprint ofall virtual objects in real time and projecting them, tying them inwith the script and projecting them on to the studio floor.Tracking the CameraOne of the drawbacks of virtual set technology is the high cost ofreal time rendered 3-D systems, but the 2-D systems are attractingsome interest, including the BBC-developed DVE at the heart of theVirtual Scenario system which is sold by Radamec.Radamec showed the system at IBC with two Scenario units controlledfrom a single camera channel, which adds flexibility to the systemenabling both inlays with virtual sets as well as animated graphicswhich can interact with the presenter.Radamec has sold the Scenaria system to ITN and BBC TV Centre. ITNwill be using it for a special project for the General Election,while BBC TV has begun using the Scenaria on its first mainstreamprogramme to use a virtual set - Football Focus -  on Saturdays.The main difference in use of the 2-D system as opposed to 3-Dsystems is it cannot handle tracking of the camera, although itdoes allow the camera to be panned, tilted, zoomed and focussed onany virtual background.The system can also be used as a direct replacement for backprojection and video wall systems. Asia Business News has alsobought a Scenaria system, which will be installed in December withadvanced robotic control and a touch control panel.There are now other systems on the market which do not need asupercomputer. FOR-A showed its digiWarp system at IBC, whichcombines its own MF 3300 DVE with a video processor it hasdeveloped, called a dimensioning processor which gives 2k x 2kresolution in the DVE.This works with the Orad Cyberset video processor to offer a systemusing pattern recognition that can offer another two levels of liveimages as well as the chroma key signals, and it will handle amoving camera.Photron showed its Pseudio virtual studio system, which is basedaround the Primatte Pro 100 chromakeying device Photron developedfrom technology used by its parent company, the Japanese postproduction house Imagica.Pseudio uses pre-modelling and pre rendering of virtualbackgrounds, which are stored in a disk array. The prerecorded D1quality images are played back in real time, reflecting the cameramoves fed in by a camera head and tripod system that reads theinformation on pan,titl and zoom positions of the foreground imageshot by the video camera.The Primatte chromakeyer is used to composite foreground andbackground images. There are four basic configurations of thePseudio system, from a 2D system with single camera configurationusing just a frame buffer, to one with the disk array and versionsusing a single camera on rail and dolly, which feeds into two diskarrays, and a system that combines all the options.  'Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996NONLINEAR ONLINE REACHES PINNACLE: YOUR GUIDE TO IBC NONLINEAR VIDEOEDITORSfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996by David FoxThere are now at least 77 manufacturers offering nonlinear editingsystems, according to Pinnacle's vice president for Europe, BrianConner, who claims 74 of them use Pinnacle DVEs within theirpackages.In reality, there are five key nonlinear manufacturers: Avid, D-Vision, Media 100, Scitex and Lightworks. Quantel's Editbox is alsoa serious player, but for high-end use (as is Discreet Logic'sFire), while most of the traditional edit controller manufacturershave gone for hybrid (tape and disk) systems, to protect their (andtheir customers') investment in existing kit.It does, however, mean broadcasters have a lot of choice. There isa system to suit all needs and all price brackets, whether you wantto upgrade in one fell swoop, or merely add nonlinear capabilitiesto your existing suites.With the price of storage dropping so quickly, and its speedincreasing, online nonlinear editing is attainable for all but thevery lowest budgets.There are still doubts about compatibility of formats andcompression systems, but even here the move towards more opensystems and standard compression formats means that your investmentshould be a lot safer.Scitex claims to offer the broadest range of nonlinear editingsystems on the market (although Avid, Media 100 and D-Vision mightdisagree). Every function operates under the "real time, all thetime" banner. The whole Sphere range, launched in PAL at IBC,offers Dveous effects and mixing technology based on the Abekas8150 switcher, including keying, wipe generation, and colourcorrection.All effects are key-frameable. The compression rates are betterthan 3:1, with variable image resolution, using Apple's Quicktimefile format.The Sphere line has moved to using Motion JPEG, from the Cube'swavelet compression.Avid, which has sold 5,100 editing systems in Europe, showedversion 6.5 of the Media Composer at IBC.It introduces a new picture resolution (AVR 77) at 2:1 compression.It also allows live voice over recording, the linking of script topictures, eight channel audio, real-time effects, serial digitali/o and various open system enhancements.Newscutter's image quality is claimed to have been improved by 60per cent. It can now also access the AvidNews database, so thatoperators can look at scripts or playlists. Other features include:drag and drop clip management, multiple levels of undo/redo andtitle tool templates.But probably the most impressive debut was MCXpress 1.5 (for Macand Windows NT). It is aimed at industrial and corporate use, butis certainly powerful enough for many broadcast users.It can create real-time wipes, dissolves and effects at 3:1compression (the machine can go as low as 2:1) and Pinnacle'sGeniefusion card can be added for real-time 3D effects. It has afully integrated film matchback option for negative cut listgeneration and the user interface has been simplified.Vincent and TheoMedia 100 has a new logo and a lot of new, improved editingproducts. Its base system, the 100qx, runs under the Adobe Premierepackage. Next up is the new 100le, which delivers real-time videoand audio editing and effects for about 7,500(US$11510).At the top of the range, the 100xs has been brought in to aim forhigh-end production, above the 100 2.6. Gaudi, an optimised versionof Pinnacle's 3D DVE, has also been introduced.Further developments include the introduction of the Vincent 601Digital Video Engine and the Theo Superprocessor 'brotherboard',which it claims make up the first PC-based digital video systemfully compliant with CCIR 601. Features include two video streamsand a real-time alpha channel. They will boost the speed of editingand effects under Media 100 software.Media 100 is committed to using Quicktime as its core technologyfor all its products for both the Mac and Windows, and is nowworking with Apple, Macromedia and Truevision to develop Quicktimefor Windows 95 and NT.Since Tektronix bought Lightworks, it was expected it wouldintegrate its disk recorders and Grass Valley effects with theediting system. Now it has. The Lightworks VIP 4500 is based on theProfile hard disk recorder and offers four independent videochannels, and Grass Valley DVE technology, for under US$150,000. Itfeatures variable 3:1 compression, 16 channels of audio, between 32and 96Gb storage (80 to 240 minutes), and Pal/NTSC switchablesoftware, both of which can be used in 24-frame film mode.It has a built-in real-time mix/effects board, external devicecontrol, multi-camera editing capability (as on Heavyworks) and candigitise direct to edit without pre-digitising (as Newsworks).Newsworks Turbo editing system was also launched at IBC, boastingBeta SP picture quality at 4:1 compression. It is targeted as alower-cost stand-alone replacement for existing tape-based linearsuites and as part of a large-scale automated and networkednewsroom system.It supports mixed compression rates within the same project oredit, and can access up to 90Gb in a standard unit, expandableexternally to 180Gb, and eight digital audio channels, alsoexpandable. It can also control a channel of Profile.Adcom's Night Suite is a nonlinear D1 and offline editor runningunder Windows 95, with up to 2:1 compression, although the dualchannel effects have to be rendered at 4:1 or better. It comes witha 27Gb drive which gives up to 15 minutes at 2:1 or 2.5 hours at5:1.Its audio features are a strong point as an eight channel, 16-bit,Sadie audio editor is built-in, and its control panel has motorisedfaders. Its basic effects include more than 200 wipes, chroma,alpha and luma keyers.The Inscriber character generator is included, along with a 2-D DVEand an optional integrated Aladdin 3-D DVE. The graphical interfaceseems nicely designed and clearly laid out and the most usedfunctions are one button push away on the control panel, as are 24user definable softkeys.It has a "soft delete" feature which will remove a shot, or shots,from playback, but leave them in the timeline, which is useful fortrying different options. It costs about US$58,000, plus optionswhich include more storage and serial digital i/o.Waving, Not DrowningThe Philips BTS Newswave has a dedicated control console for highspeed news cutting. Based on Media Pool, it can be uncompressed orcompressed, has a single video channel, and four independent audiotracks, and a picture-based timeline.It can be stand alone or networked, with up to 16 workstationsworking on the same material at one time, and should be availablenext year for about US$20,000 for a server and workstation, plusMedia Pool.Newswave is cuts only as Media Pool cannot yet handle effects,although that facility will be added. There is also Wavelite forloading and logging material, although both applications can run onthe same machine.Adobe's editing package is Premiere (for the Mac and PC), which canedit up to 99 video and 99 audio tracks, at a cost of about400(US$614), for the software only. It is claimed to be highlycustomisable, with a wide range of transition effects (wipes,etc.).It can also create titles, with crawls and other motion controls(or import titles from Adobe Illustrator). Its audio effects aremore basic (although still include limited time stretching), butall the Adobe products benefit from being able to work with plug-insoftware modules, which add audio filters or visual effects.Depending on the hardware it is run on, it can be used as an on-line editor, or will generate various EDL formats for use off-line.For more high-end applications, Adobe also has After Effects, aresolution independent effects package for the Mac, and coming forWindows NT. Indeed, after years of supporting the Mac platform,with some products also running on SGI, Adobe has embraced theWindows PC, thanks to the arrival of Windows NT, which has addedperformance and stability to the PC's normal main attraction of lowprice.Quantel's Editbox '96, launched at IBC, is a range of four systems,costing from about 120,000 (US$184,200), for short or long-formediting for top-end broadcast and commercials production.Improvements include faster keying, moves and colour correction.More editing and paint facilities are built in, and Quantel's OpenPlatform Exchange Network (OPEN) is supported, allowing editorsaccess material on other Quantel systems and from other platforms.Existing Editboxes, of which more than 250 have been sold, can beupgraded to Editbox '96.The New EntrantsPixel Power's Collage EDit is a non-compressed nonlinear editorwhich integrates with existing Collage CG systems (which can beupgraded for about 45,000, or US$69,100). A complete package,including CG, costs about 70,000(US$107,450).Basic storage is 35 minutes, which can be expanded for about500(US$767) per minute, and compression can be added if userswant. The interface is less graphical than some rivals, but isreasonably simple.Clips have to be pre-digitised before editing, but Pixel Power maybring out a lower cost digitising workstation. The machine was acrowd-puller at its IBC launch IBC, and picked up eight orders inthe first two days. Deliveries start in December.ASC's VR NLE is being updated to run under Window's NT. The companyadmits its existing DOS version (costing from US$25,000) has nottaken off, partly because of the lack of real-time effects.The new version, will rectify that and add keying, titlingcharacter generation and Pinnacle Aladdin 3D effects. It will bebased on ASC's VR 300 high quality disk recorder.As the company has a lot of video servers installed, it willprobably also bring out a news editing system to run on them.  'Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996MAKING CONTACT WITH INDIAfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996The world's second largest (behind China) and least tapped middleclass. India's increasingly affluent middle-income group currentlynumbers nearly 250 million people, many of them with at least twosources of disposable household income, and all looking for abetter quality of life.The booming economy and the fast pace of development, combined witha thirst for modernisation and technological expertise, have openedup India's broadcasting and telecommunications markets as neverbefore.Latest estimates show that radio reaches as much as 94 per cent ofthe 950 million strong population, the bulk of it living in ruralareas which would be difficult for any other medium to reach.Television now reaches as much as 84 per cent of the population.It is axiomatic that, with the kind of headstart that the state-runterrestrial broadcaster Doordarshan (DD) had, and the effectivemonopoly it enjoyed until the start of the 1990s, its nationalnetwork and Metro channels (which reach the four metropolitancentres) should have the maximum reach.However, Zee TV, which is uplinked via satellite from Hong Kong, isfast catching up; and there is vigorous competition from a host ofother channels. In comparison with 42 million homes that have DD,there are 13 million homes today that boast cable and satellite;and it is this latter segment which is showing signs of growing ata much faster rate than the former. Official estimates place thenumber of cable and satellite homes at 53 million by the year 2005.TV stations cannot run without adequate software back-up; andhundreds of companies that offer programming, production and post-production services have mushroomed in the country over the lastfive years, all on the lookout for new technology, both at theproduction and post-production stages.325 Companies ExpectedLittle wonder, then that some 325 companies are expected toparticipate in Broadcast, Cable and Satellite India '96 (BCSI),India's largest annual broadcast exhibition, which will runconcurrently with Communications India '96 at the Pragati Maidan,New Delhi, from December 8 to 11."We had wonderful response last year for BCSI '95, with ourexhibition and conference providing an ideal forum for theconvergence of broadcasting, cable, satellite, communications andmultimedia packages," enthuses Prem Behl, president of ExhibitionsIndia, organisers of the event."That exhibition, which was the third in the series, paved the wayfor several new joint ventures in these sectors, and provided theideal opportunity for Indian professionals to discern technologicaladvancements and gauge the latest market trends."The majority of the 121 exhibitors we had were pleased with theoutcome of business at the event, and 62 per cent confirmed theirparticipation in the following year's event, on the spot!"Founded in 1987 to promote and organise international trade shows,exhibitions and conferences, the organisers do much homework beforeeach event. Adds Behl, "We are not involved in trade, and thereforehave no conflict of interest with our exhibitors."In fact, we are a catalyst within the industry that we service,bringing buyers and sellers together . . . we supplement ourexhibitors in the market by arranging and making it possible forthem to meet qualified, targeted buyers in a cost-effective way."Catalyst to ContactsThe organisers remain in contact with leading internationalassociations, standards organisations, legislators, exhibitors,manufacturers and service organisations worldwide, to facilitatetheir participation at forthcoming events.BCSI '96 is seen as India's official annual broadcast show, sinceit is co-sponsored by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,and has the official approval of the India Trade PromotionOrganisation and the ministries of Home Affairs and ExternalAffairs.Whereas BCSI '95 ran in October (attracting 121 exhibitors from 14countries, and 14,203 visitors), and Communications India '95 washeld in December (133 exhibitors from 17 countries, and 16,677visitors), the two shows have been combined this year to giveexhibitors and visitors the opportunity of witnessing complementaryadvances in both fields.Also running between December 8 and 11 at the same venue will bePro-Audio India '96, Lighting India '96, TV India '96, NetworksIndia '96 and Wireless India '96.The stalls will be spread over a massive area of 7,000 sq. m onPragati Maidan, and are expected to attract 325 exhibitors and morethan 27,000 trade visitors from 30 countries.In the broadcasting arena, professional camera, lighting, sound,movie and video production and post-production products, cable andsatellite broadcast systems will all be on display.Telecommunications product manufacturers will show off both voiceand data communications equipment and value-added services; local,medium and wide area networks, and mobile systems includingcellular phones and pagers."Last year, a little over 50 per cent of the exhibitors were fromoverseas," claims Behl. "This year, the ratio of overseas todomestic exhibitors should be even higher. In addition, we expectmore than 2,000 attendees at the high-profile internationalconferences covering all broadcast sectors and communicationstechnology and practices."Conference: Digital FocusThe conference will focus on one of the industry's most challengingissues - the transition to digital technology. It will focus on thefuture of cable and telecom networks in India over the next fewyears, and the expansion of production and post-productionfacilities in the country.Previous conferences have had delegates from India, the SAARCcountries, Africa, Australia, Europe and the US.Says Behl, "While each exhibition makes headlines because of itsscope and focus, the conference components are just as important."It establishes the environment in which the industry will operate,from both a technical and regulatory point of view, and defines theintellectual grounds in which new applications, services or trendsare being utilised."Visitor ProfilesThe visitor profile is expected to include people from seniorlevels of central and state governments, and from public andprivate sector trade and industry. "We expect a cross-section ofpeople from all sectors - the government and administration, publicservice organisations, the financial sector and managementexecutives," says Behl."In 1995, when we did an analysis of the visitor/buyer attendees,we found that over 77 per cent visitors were the decision-makers oftheir companies, who were involved in purchasing or recommendingthe purchase of equipment or services."Among the confirmed exhibitors at BCSI '96 are Panamsat, Intelsat,PPC, Scientific Atlanta, General Instruments, Harmonic Lightwaves,Dielectric Communications and Zenith Electronics (all US); TransElectric (Taiwan); Turner International, and Tektronix  (HongKong), Technosat (Dubai); Federation of the Electronics Industry(U.K), Belden International (Singapore); California Amplifier(Thailand), EVS Broadcast Equipment (Belgium) and DeviserElectronics (China).Some of the prominent exhibitors from the host nation are C-NetCommunications, Prince Electronics, Miraj Marketing, BhansaliUdyog, Network Limited and Real Image (who will demonstrate thelatest Avid media composer systems, audio-visual systems, airplaysystems, QFX sound effects organisers, media fusion systems,digidesign session and proloops systems, etc)."It is the ideal time of year to hold such an important exhibition,since New Delhi will be cool and pleasant," asserts Behl."We are confident that it will be India's biggest show ever."  'Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996COURTING THE ASIAN BROADCASTERfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996The Asia-Pacific region now represents a key market for UKmanufacturers looking for untapped areas of growth. But what's init for the customers? Simon Croft reportsWhile the European hifi market is dominated by major Eastern brandssuch as Sony and Pioneer, the Asian broadcast market frequentlyadopts equipment made in the UK for audio production.UK-based pro audio manufacturers including SSL and AMS Neveincreasingly regard the Asia-Pacific region as an important andfertile area for new sales.The evidence for this can be seen in the growing number of UKmanufacturers providing direct sales and support in Asiancountries.New Sales OpportunitiesThe attraction for manufacturers is easy to understand. Majorbrands which have achieved a large market share in North Americaand Europe find it difficult to perpetually sustain the growth theyonce enjoyed in these territories.By contrast, the Asia Pacific broadcasting sector is undergoingmassive growth and continues to present new sales opportunities.UK manufacturers can see that broadcasters in the Asia Pacific arenot only buying more equipment: they are also increasinglydemanding state-of-the-art systems to help them achieve acompetitive edge.But it is by no means a one-sided situation. The UK has a very wellrespected pro-audio manufacturing industry and Asian broadcasterswhich invest in UK-built products today can be certain that thesolutions they buy into have been refined by a steady stream ofuser feedback in the past.SSL's ExperienceSolid State Logic has been notably successful in the region andrecently opened an office in Singapore, which handles sales for anumber of countries as well as technical support for Asianterritories excluding Japan.The manufacturer has for some years maintained an office in Japanitself.In addition, distributors in countries including Korea have beengaining new contracts. Korean distributor Daiyoung Industrialrecently sold two SSL integrated digital multitrack recording,editing and mixing systems. Facility Lead Sound opted for anOmniMix for film and television post production, while HSTV, theHome Shopping channel chose a Scenaria for its requirements.Shanghai Radio, A-String in Taiwan and Avon in Hong Kong have alltaken analogue SL9000 series mixing systems. There have also beenrecent sales to Synchrosound in Malaysia and Platinum Studios inTaiwanMarket "Technique-driven"SSL's Alan MacLeod believes that one of reasons top-end UKmanufacturers are successful in Asia is that the market is'technique-driven'.He explains, "When SSL brought out the B series consoles iteffectively enabled new ways of working."Hand in hand with the new capabilities of the system cametechniques that were not possible before. There is now globalacceptance of those techniques."MacLeod also points out that while Asian manufacturers are ideallygeared up to mass production for the consumer market, "more than 90per cent of the systems we produce are customised in some respect".According to MacLeod, another factor driving sales of hi-end audioequipment is a growing awareness that saleable programmes must havehigh quality sound tracks."Programme makers are selling to broadcasters who may already betransmitting in surround. As the uptake of domestic decodersincreases, high production values are increasingly essential," hesuggests.While broadcasters look to overseas sales to maximise profits, andindependent programme-makers constantly seek to attract new buyers,post-production facilities are constantly looking for a competitiveedge.Performance: A Crucial Issue"They want to offer good rates, the ability to meet deadlinesreliably and provide as much creative flexibility as possible,"MacLeod notes.He likens the situation to a race track: almost any car wouldenable you to complete successive laps but if you want to win,performance becomes a crucial issue.KBS - Korea's largest radio and television broadcaster - recentlybought four new mixing consoles from AMS Neve. Two were high-endCapricorn digital systems, while the other two desks were from thewell established and relatively inexpensive analogue 55 Series.The KBS satellite television network covers South and North Korea,Japan and the northern part of China. Two channels offer a range ofprogramming including sport, drama, documentaries and music.David Lee of Korean distributor Seoul Sound Technology Group says,"These sales are very significant for us. KBS is the mainbroadcaster in the region and its purchasing decisions willinevitable influence those of other facilities in Korea."The two Capricorn consoles, which are being installed this month,are to be used primarily for live broadcasting and musicproduction. They are going into KBS' Seoul-based satellitetelevision station, which was itself only launched in July thisyear. Both are 48 fader systems.The 32 fader 55 series consoles will be delivered in January nextyear. They will be installed at KBS' radio station for use in livemusic and talk shows.Earlier this year, Measat Broadcast Services in Malaysia orderedseven AMS Neve digital consoles for audio post production andbroadcasting.Phase one of the broadcaster's plan saw the introduction of a 48channel Capricorn digital desk for light entertainment production.Also specified were four Logic 3 digital mixers with eight outputAudiofiles, all fitted with removable drives. Two of these were fordubbing and the two for ADR.Two Logic 2 digital mixing desks with eight output AudiofileSpectras with removable drives are being commissioned for livesound production. One stand-alone eight output Audiofile Spectra isbeing used as well. All are fitted with 24-bit systems runningversion 12 software.AMS Neve has also received a repeat order from broadcaster NHK inTokyo. Its second large format Logic 2 digital mixing desk is beingused for audio posting in HDTV format programmes.Like SSL, AMS Neve has a strong foothold in the music recordingsector. Recording studio Asahi Sound in Japan recently ordered itsthird AMS Neve V series analogue console. The 60 channel VR Legendhas been installed in Studio 401.In the case of large-scale consoles suitable for music recording,the UK has undoubtedly been aided by its historical dominance ofthe pop world and the product development that this has financed.But by no means all UK manufacturers have a connection with the popmusic industry. Audio workstation manufacturer Digital AudioResearch is another UK company enjoying growing success in theAsia-Pacific.Towards the end of last year, the manufacturer supplied Malaysianfacilities house Addaudio Post Productions with a Soundstation Goldintegrated system. This gave Addaudio three DAR rooms in total.At the time, studio manager Daniel Tang noted, "We have been usingDAR Soundstations since 1991 and are very happy with the overallsystem approach, particularly in terms of Soundstation'scomprehensive editing facilities and ease of use."Back For MoreNow Addaudio is back for more, as DAR regional sales manager AlanCampbell explains. "Addaudio have upgraded their two older systemsto Gold specification and have ordered two DAR Sabres this month."Now a five DAR system facility, AddAudio will be using one of themouse-driven Sabres to create a lower cost post room and the otheras an eight track transfer room prior to projects entering one ofthe fully equipped dubbing suites.Elsewhere in Asia, DAR's Japanese distributor has sold systems tobroadcasters including JIC Satellite which opted for a Sabre Plus,while major broadcasters including TBS have upgraded their existingsystems. Other users include national broadcaster NHK. "We havedone well in most of the major Asian countries, such as Korea,Taiwan and Malaysia to a degree," says Campbell. "Japan and to alesser degree China have been successful for us. We see potentialin Indonesia."We are trying to boost the established markets and at the sametime keep up with the emergent markets such as Vietnam andCambodia, where they are starting to show real interest."Working Developing MarketsIn terms of developing markets, some products are easier tointroduce than others. Audio Processing Technology is a developerof compression technologies, a major use for which is in thedistribution of audio via digital ISDN lines.Although the company's main centres of operation are in the UK andUS, APT sales manager Asia Patrick Cullen is now permanently basedin Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia."Europe and America are our primary markets but Asia will becomeincreasingly important over the medium to long term, Cullenpredicts. "The technology we are offering, in terms of ISDNsolutions is still quite new."Hong Kong, Singapore and Japan are the more advanced countries butelsewhere there is less knowledge of ISDN and there is a lot ofgroundwork to do."In some senses we are having to sell the technology in advance ofthe actual products."Although Cullen estimates that around 95 per cent of broadcastersin Japan using codecs are using APT technology, in other Asiancountries, there is still not the communications infrastructure tosupport the digital technology APT offers."We have had our first sales in Taiwan and Korea and we areinvolved in quite large projects in Thailand and Malaysia," Cullenreports. "We are hoping that over the next two to three years wecan replicate the success we have had in Japan."It is important to break into new markets because broadcasterslike to know who else is using the equipment. They are reticentabout being the first."  'Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996MTV ANNOUCES EXPANSION PLANSfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996MTV Networks Asia President Peter Jamieson today announced the nextphase in MTV's development in Asia, which are expected to takeplace this year.By the end of October, India will begin receiving its own MTV, athird service seen only in the Indian subcontinent, while MTVMandarin moves its production base to Taipei.To address MTV's growth in Southeast Asia, staff strength will beincreased with new hires, and all three channels will see theaddition of new programmes that reflect the social, cultural andmusical tastes of each region.Singapore will remain the regional headquarters for MTV NetworksAsia. All channels will be post-produced and uplinked fromSingapore. The three channels will be referred to as MTV Asia, MTVIndia and MTV Mandarin.Apart from enjoying a new service specifically for them, Indianviewers can look forward to new shows that will be produced inIndia and Singapore, as well as a higher rotation of Indian musicvideos, interviews and new features.MTV India will be delivered to the Indian subcontinent on Panamsat4, which up till the end of October delivers the MTV Asia feedcontaining four hours of India-specific programming.MTV Mandarin will move its production base from Singapore toTaipei. The move beefs up the Taipei office with hiring new localstaff, and several of the channel's staff from Singapore, includingon-air personalities, will also be relocated to Taipei. The channelwill announce a roster of new shows in due course.MTV Asia forges ahead with new programmes designed from SoutheastAsia, including new shows specific to Asean countries, plusincreased rotation of music videos from the region.Recently, MTV Asia launched a new live music series called Live &Loud, showcasing some of the best in upcoming Asian artists.Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996DOORDARSHAN TIGHTENS GRIP ON NDTV AND TV TODAYfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Doordarshan (DD) has issued notices to the owners of TV Today (partof the India Today group) and New Delhi Television (NDTV),informing them both that their current affairs programmes - Aaj Tak(Until tonight) and News Tonight -  would not be televised on thenational network at prime time any longer.Sources in the ministry for Information and Broadcasting (I&B) saythat, in all probability, News Tonight would be dropped altogether,since the firm has entered into a tie-up with the Hong Kong basedStar TV network owned by Rupert Murdoch, to make similarprogrammes.The new schedule, which comes into effect on any day betweenNovember 4 and 6, places both the current affairs programmes halfan hour later than their current slots. DD has also quadrupled thetelecast fees for both programmes, asking for payment much higherthan is being charged for tele-serials.Both the private producers used to pay a fee of Rs35,000(US$1,000), but this has now been increased sharply to Rs150,000(US$4,225). And even this fee will suffer a review after sixmonths.Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996HP SERVER OFFERS MOST CHANNELSfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Hewlett-Packard recently announced its support for clusterednetworking of its broadcast servers, allowing up to 24 on-airchannels, the largest number of channels available in the broadcastindustry to date.With the HP MediaStream Server - Broadcast Series as the corebuilding block, broadcasters can create truly scaleable systems -from two to 24 channels - opening up new application areas fordigital server technology.The HP MediaStream Server - Broadcast Series is the low-costbuilding block of a multichannel system. It provides advancedserver capabilities - networking, a proven "bulletproof"architecture, industry-standard MPEG-2 video compression and anopen platform for applications development - at prices starting atUS$100,000.Because a single HP broadcast server offers up to six channels, itis the ideal starting point for a multi-channel system.With standard features such as RAID (redundant array of inexpensivedisks), redundant components and a multi-threaded operating system,the HP clustered-server complex can offer complete redundancywithout the total mirroring of servers of the server complexitself.HP's use of MPEG compression also adds to the cost-effectiveness ofthis multichannel solution. Because MPEG uses one-third less diskspace than Motion JPEG, storage costs are dramatically reduced.This cost can be significant when considering the massive storageneeds of a multichannel facility or of a pay-per-view or NVODsystem. A key component of server clusters is the underlyingnetwork used to connect multiple servers into a server complex.HP has incorporated Fibre Channel networking into its servers for abroadcast-studio environment. Fibre Channel is a very-high-speedlink capable of faster-than-real-time transfers.It can be implemented in cost-effective "loop" configurations thatdo not require the use of an expensive network switch.Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996SOUNDFIELD EXPANDS WORLD DISTRIBUTION NETWORKfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Soundfield has recently expanded its world distributor network bymaking appointments in Australia, Russia and Korea.Studio Connections, whose headquarters are housed in Melbourne,will now distribute SoundField products in Australia; the Seoul-based company Young Nak So Ri Sa will cover the territory of Korea;while MS-MAS will represent SoundField in Russia from their Moscowoffices.These new appointments join over 30 distributors of SoundFieldproducts worldwide.Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996MANILA'S PASI BUYS RUSSIAN SATELLITEfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Philippine Agila Satellite, a government-backed consortium,recently bought for US$9.5 million the country's first commercialsatellite from Russian space agency Intersputnik.The satellite, Agila 1, is due to be operational by Nov 10, in timefor the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum meeting, which isbeing hosted by the Philippines.The purchase of the Russian satellite is an interim measure,pending completion in early 1998 of two other broadcast andtelecoms satellites, being built by Aerospatiale of France.PASI's interim satellite has already been in orbit for three yearsand the company has effectively bough the last two years of itsoperational life, Mr Panizales said.PASI was hard-pressed to come up with a satellitetelecommunications service for the APEC ministers meeting, whichstarts Nov 24.Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996HUM AAPKE HAIN KAUN IN MASSIVE FESTIVE DEAL WITH STAR TVfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996The Hindi feature film, Hum Aapke Hain Kaun? (What is myrelationship with you?) is to be shown on November 10, the main dayof the Hindu festival Deepavali, on Star TV.The premiere on the small screen will net the movie's producers,the Barjatya family of Rajshree Films, a record Rs50 million(US$1.4 million).The film, which is basically a family entertainer, holds the recordfor the highest box-office collections, having grossed more thanRs2.25 billion (US$64 million) during the three years that it hasrun at various cinema houses in the country.It stars current matinee idol Madhuri Dixit and Salman Khan in whatreviewers call a 'squeaky-clean' film. It is understood that StarTV has forked over is Rs10 million, more than what Godrej Soaps hadto pay for sponsoring the Miss World beauty pageant in Bangalore inNovember.The deal, considered a major coup in the Hindi film industry, willeclipse the trend set by another great Indian film Sholay (Embers),which was recently screened by Doordarshan on a national holiday.The screening, done through G. P Sippy Films, helped DD to pocketaround Rs25 million in ad revenues through the selling of 83 timeslots to various advertisers.Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996UTV CARVES NICHE IN THAILANDfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996While Thai Sky and IBC Cable TV are busy scrambling their signalsto prevent illegal reception, newcomer UTV Cable Network is busycarving out its own market niche.The company's goal is to link over one million households per monthwith optic fibre cables.UTV president Sompan Charumilinda said the company will launch acommercial titled UTV The  Always New TV.At present, the market is controlled by Thai Sky and IBC withsubscription bases of about 50,000 and 150,000 respectively. UTV ishoping for 100,000 subscribers by the year-end.Sompan said from now until the end of the year, the firm isoffering subscribers a basic package of nine Pay TV channels atBt800(US$32) per month. The specialty channels include Channel VThailand, CMT (American Country Music), ABN and CNBC (WorldFinance, Economics and Stock Market Report), CCTV and BBC NewsWorld.Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996ABN ACQUIRES VIRTUAL SCENARIOfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Asia Business News (ABN) recently purchased Radamec BroadcastSystem's Virtual Scenario Studio System, becoming the first newsbroadcaster in the Asia Pacific to use the virtual studio on afull-time basis.Virtual Scenario allows the camera to be panned, titled, zoomed andfocused on any virtual background, providing an alternative tocostly back-projection and video wall systems.ABN's acquisition of the Virtual Scenario comes in the heels ofABN's winning the Singapore National IT Award for Innovative ITProduct/ Service for its 3-D graphics.The Virtual Studio expected to be fully operational by early 1997.Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996OVERWHELMING DEMAND REPORTED FOR ASTRO SERVICEfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Most of Astro's first batch of 7,000 Digital Satellite Receivers(DSRs) have been sold even before they reached the authorisedPhilips dealers.According to Paul Edwards, Astro's Chief Operating Officer, thedemand prior to the soft launch of Malaysia's new digital satellitetelevision and radio station on October 1, was overwhelming."We took nearly 3,000 calls last Thursday alone from interestedsubscribers, and this is even before our advertising campaignstarts on October 12," he said.The first subscribers are expected to have their sets installedstarting next week. Edwards said Astro will not be chargingsubscribers during the month of October."October is a settling in period, and there will be some tuning ofthe service. More shipments of the DSRs are on the way, but weadvise potential subscribers to reserve their DSRs now," he added.Astro's Director of Information Systems, Andrew Lee, reported some11,000 "hits" per day on the Astro Internet website. These includedboth Malaysian and international users. The website can be accessedat http:// www.astro.com.my."If there is any indication of interest, Astro has certainly caughtthe imagination of the Malaysian public," said Lee.Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996DISCREET LOGIC NAMES RAMSAY AS NEW REGIONAL CHIEFfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Discreet Logic has announced the appointment of Peter Ramsay asGeneral Manager, Asia-Pacific.Ramsay will be responsible for Discreet Logic operations in theregion including offices in Singapore, Hong Kong, India and Japan.He joins the Discreet Logic Asia-Pacific team effective November 1,1996 and will be based in Singapore.Ramsay has worked in the broadcasting and video industry since 1981and brings a wealth of management and technical experience fromcompanies including Tekniche, Dynatech and Chyron.The post production market is maturing very quickly in Asia," saidRamsay. "More and more customers are demanding the very highestlevel of performance from both equipment and operators."New Bombay OfficeDiscreet Logic recently extended its presence in the Asia-Pacificregion with a new office in Bombay that exclusively serves India.This office will provide enhanced local support and training to theincreasing number of Discreet Logic clients in India.Paresh Khara has been named Business Manager for the region, andwill manage a team of sales, systems integrators, demo artists andsupport personnel, as well as close liaison with the regionaldistributors.Indian Market "Growing""The market in India has grown from a handful of PC-based posthouses primarily producing commercials and television programming,to around 50 high-end facilities that are making major in-roadsinto the film and music video industry," commented senior vicepresident sales and marketing Graham Sharp.Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996ESPN PLAYS BALL WITH STAR SPORTSfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Sports satellite channel giants and arch-rivals ESPN and StarSports have turned into somewhat uncomfortable bed-fellows, in aneffort to trim losses and beat the enormous pressure created byintense competition and lack of sufficient revenues in the Asianmarket.The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the two rivalchannels, which was signed in early-October, clarifies that thetie-up is only for Asia. It envisages the setting up of a new jointventure company by ESPN and Star, to be headed by Sandy Brown ofESPN.The Delhi-based Modi Entertainment Network (MEN), which manages theprogramming for ESPN, will continue in the same capacity for thenew network. MEN has a three-year contract with ESPN, of which justone year has elapsed.The main reason for the synergies between the two groups is thatthe bidding route for sports programmes had become so high thateven advertising revenues have failed to cover the costs.By joining hands, the two groups can try and ensure that theprogrammes on the sale block remain between them, and that thebidding price is not pushed too high.In another related development, Star TV announced the joining offormer Doordarshan director-general R. Basu as managing director ofits India operations. Basu will head News Television International,Murdoch's holding company in India.Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996TEK ACQUIRES NEWSTARfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Tektronix recently announced the signing of a definitive agreementto acquire the business assets of Dynatech NewStar, a wholly-ownedsubsidiary of Dynatech Corporation.NewStar produces newsroom computer systems for the broadcastmarket. The company's software-based systems automate the creationand production of news programmes enabling producers, editors andjournalists to contribute simultaneously to the creation andbroadcast of a news story."This acquisition furthers our strategy of offering an open andintegrated system solution to the news marketplace," said LucieFjeldstad, president of Tektronix' Video and Networking Division."NewStar and EditStar, combined with the Tektronix' Profileprofessional disk recorder and Lightworks editing systems, willprovide a framework for journalists to handle information and videoin ways they never could before."Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996NEW MALAYSIAN BROADCASTING BILL TABLEDfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996MALAYSIAN Information Minister Datuk Mohamed Rahmat recently tableda Bill calling for a jail term of up to three years for anyonefailing to obtain a licence for receiving foreign broadcasts.He said that the change to the current provisions were necessary tokeep ahead with technology."These changes should not be left to occur with no specificdirection, but be directed towards the benefit of the people andthe country," he said when tabling the Bill to amend theBroadcasting Act 1988 in the Lower House of Parliament.He added that the amendments will enable the licencing and controlof new broadcasting services, following advances in satellitetechnology.Under the amended act, a licence will be required from theInformation Ministry in order to receive any foreign broadcast ortelecast directly, and to make any transmission from Malaysia.Offenders could face a fine of up to M$100,000 (US$39,280), or ajail term of up to three years, or both.Under the bill, the Information Minister will have the right todetermine the size and form of transmission receivers, control thetype and supply of broadcast materials to places such as hotels,and to give exemptions for such licences in the broadcast ofofficial functions or other non-profit oriented public services.The bill also states that prior approval will be needed from theInformation Minister before the screening of any advertisement, andfailure to do so will constitute an offence. Those convicted couldbe fined up to M$10,000 (US$3930), jailed for a year, or both.The Bill also incorporates additional areas such as ships andaircraft, which were previously outside the ambit of theBroadcasting Act's provisions.The Minister added that that Malaysians could now watch programmesfrom private TV stations and that subscribed television serviceshad been introduced last November.He added that the launch (last January) of Measat 1, Malaysia'sfirst satellite, was a milestone in the development of broadcastingand telecoms technology in the country."With wise management, satellite TV can help us in our effort tocreate an informed society," he said.Nonetheless, the government has the responsibility to ensure thatthe technology will not be misused to jeopardise the nationalinterest socially, economically or politically, he continued.The amendments will place the administration and licensing of radioand television receivers under the direct supervision of theInformation Ministry.In another report, the Minister for Energy, Telecoms and Posts,Datuk Leo Moggie was quoted as saying that the development of themulti-media super corridor and the growth in the number oftelevision users in the country would help boost the market forsatellite related service, and that Malaysia has surpassed theaverage television and personal computers penetration levels fordeveloping countries.He said that the telecommunications market in the Asia-Pacificregion had experienced tremendous growth over the past 15 years,and that the demand for satellite capacity was expected to growfrom some 850 transponders in 1993 to about 1,300 in 1997, and tomore than 2,100 transponders eventually by the year 2000.Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List CopyrightASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING via NewsNetNovember 1, 1996MALAYSIAN BROADCASTING: WATCH THIS SPACEfrom ASIA PACIFIC BROADCASTING, November 1, 1996Malaysia certainly looks set to position itself to attract themajor broadcasting companies in its bid to become the region'sbroadcasting hub, if the events over the last few months are anyindication.The evidence is overwhelming: the recent launch of the country'sfirst national satellite television and radio project, MeasatBroadcast Networks Systems; an initial investment of an estimatedUS$2 to $10 billion to realise plans to create a multimedia supercorridor via a new hi-tech city close to Putrajaya, the newadministrative capital; fresh incentives for foreign broadcastcompanies to start up in the country, such as preferentialtreatment for infrastructural contracts and corporate taxexemptions; a proposed Bill of Guarantees to regulate intellectualproperty legislation to protect investor interests; new amendmentsto the Broadcasting Act to legalize parabolic dishes, antennaedecoders and radars; a third Measat satellite by the end of thedecade, amongst many other projects and plans all clearly signalthe country's intent to lead the region in broadcasting andcommunications.The signals say: "yes, we're serious and we want to lead. And don'ttake our word for it. Our efforts will speak for themselves." Suchvigour is optimistic, refreshing, and will be exciting to watch.GH  'Copyright 1996 Asia Pacific BroadcastingBack to Headline List WT03-B09-19IA087-000629-B022-21http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/pb19.html 205.156.212.5 19970122040015 text/html 26960HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:58:19 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:26 GMTContent-length: 26773Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/pb19.html Sample Issue Copyright BOOK PUBLISHING REPORT via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Encyclopaedia Britannica Sets Big Plans Following Sale (487 words) Morrow Brings Rob Weisbach On Board, Forms New Imprint (149 words) Microsoft Press To Double Sales In Fiscal 1996, Says Welke (275 words) Banta To Buy Manufacturing Unit From Times Mirror Education Group (242 words) Warner Bros. Worldwide Licenses Characters To Seven Publishers (351 words) Time Warner AudioBooks Reorganizes, Moves To New York (130 words) House Votes To Allow Lawmakers Book Royalties, But No Advances (304 words) Steck-Vaughn Acquires Summit Learning In $4 Million Deal (151 words) Legal Publishers See Growth Via Electronic Products (699 words) In The Loop. . . (434 words) People In The News. . . (357 words) CopyrightBOOK PUBLISHING REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Encyclopaedia Britannica Sets Big Plans Following SaleExpanded programs, richer content and enhanced new media products are amongEncyclopaedia Britannica's future plans under the new ownership of aninvestment group led by Swiss investor Jacob Safra."The new owner expressed interest in investing in content and technology,"Joseph Esposito, Encyclopaedia Britannica president and chief executiveofficer, told BPR.  He said the sale of the company will not spur any majorchanges for the 2,400 Encyclopaedia Britannica employees worldwide."The sale has given us the capital to go forward...to enable us to compete andmaintain our name as the number one reference publisher in theEnglish-speaking world," said Esposito, who was promoted from president ofEncyclopaedia Britannica North America to his current position on July 1,1995.  He succeeded Peter Norton, who retired June 30.Though terms of the sale to Safra's group were not disclosed, analystsestimated the property could fetch as much as $500 million.  When plans for asale were hinted at in the spring, speculation about possible buyers rangedfrom Simon & Schuster to Microsoft.Encyclopaedia Britannica released a statement in April saying it was seekingcash to develop new products and sales channels, and that a new owner was oneof three options (BPR, May 22, 1995).  The other two options were a jointventure partner and an outside investor.At the time, Encyclopaedia Britannica denied it was leaning toward a sale,saying it was "considering all alternatives equally."  EncyclopaediaBritannica was owned by William Benton Foundation, an Illinois not-for-profitorganization whose sole beneficiary is the University of Chicago.A Happy Ending For The Financial Story?Encyclopaedia Britannica sales, like those of competitor World Book, have beenlagging in recent years.  Between 1990 and 1993, the number of book-sets soldfell more than 50% from 117,000 to 51,000.  The company posted a slightrevenue decline in 1994, when it generated sales of $454 million.According to Esposito, the financial backing from the new owner may allowEncyclopaedia Britannica to get back on track with new products.  "We'llexpand our program and the content we create," Esposito told BPR.Encyclopaedia Britannica also plans to further its position on the World WideWeb.Sale Comes During Company OverhaulIn August, Encyclopaedia Britannica began to restructure its North Americandirect sales forces that is intended to more effectively target leadgeneration and sales efforts, as well as reduce administrative costs.Under the new organization, Encyclopaedia Britannica reduced its number ofsales offices from 91 to 20, and offered sales reps the opportunity to switchfrom independent contractor to employee status.  With the shift, the companyhas focused its efforts on the 4,800 zip codes from which 70% of its sales arealready generated.Encyclopaedia Britannica's remaining sales offices are in Maryland, New York,Massachusetts, Illinois, Ohio, Colorado, Texas, California, Florida, NewJersey, Puerto Rico, North Carolina, Minnesota and Canada.Back to Headline List CopyrightBOOK PUBLISHING REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Morrow Brings Rob Weisbach On Board, Forms New Imprint William Morrow & Co.  last month lured former Bantam Books senior editor RobWeisbach on board as vice president and publisher of his own imprint.Rob Weisbach Books will launch Jan.  8 and "will play a significant part inthe continued growth and innovation at William Morrow," according to WilliamWright, president and CEO of the Hearst Book Group.  The new imprint willfocus on high profile commercial non-fiction as well as fiction, and willproduce 10 to 12 titles a year.  Weisbach will hire a senior editor and anassistant editor to staff the imprint.While at Bantam, Weisbach published several New York Times bestsellers,including titles by popular TV personalities Jerry Seinfeld, Paul Reiser andEllen DeGeneres.  At Morrow, Weisbach said he intends to build "a list thatwill be funny, inspiring and original...and will aim to satisfy a broad rangeof readers."Back to Headline List CopyrightBOOK PUBLISHING REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Microsoft Press To Double Sales In Fiscal 1996, Says WelkeMicrosoft Press (Redmond, WA), the computer book publishing arm of softwaregiant Microsoft Corp., expects to nearly double its revenues to more than $80million in fiscal 1996, ended June 30, general manager Elton Welke told BPR.The increase will come largely as a result of sales of Windows 95-specificbooks, Welke said.  "We're having an astonishing year on top of a very goodyear in fiscal 1995," he added.Despite the fact that the release of the Windows 95 operating system slippedout of fiscal 1995--where Microsoft Press budgeted for the windfall of Windows95 revenues to hit--"we made our numbers without it."  and finished fiscal1995 with $42 million in revenues, Welke said.  "Our fiscal 1996 numbers willbe extraordinary as a result" of the unbudgeted sales of Windows 95-specificbooks, he told BPR.Although Windows 95 has contributed significantly to Microsoft Press's recentrevenue growth, it's not the only topic that's hot.  Internet and professionaltraining books are doing very well too, Welke said.  In addition, MicrosoftPress will publish two interactive multimedia books on CD ROM this fiscalyear, and intends to release "considerably more" CD ROM titles in fiscal 1997,according to Welke.The publisher's most recent run-away bestseller is Windows 95 Resource Kit,which has more than 1 million copies in print and 600,000 sold to date."Our international business is growing at a good clip, Windows 95 books areselling well, we're continuing our basic line of applications and tutorialbooks, we've increased our high-end technical books and we're entering intointeractive multimedia," Welke said.  "Right now, all cylinders are firing."Back to Headline List CopyrightBOOK PUBLISHING REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Banta To Buy Manufacturing Unit From Times Mirror Education GroupBanta Corp.  has agreed to acquire Times Mirror Higher Education Group'smanufacturing division.  Terms of the transaction, which is slated to close inthe first quarter of 1996, were not disclosed.The acquisition will include the Dubuque, IA-based printing and binderyoperations that primarily serve the three educational publishing companies ofTimes Mirror's Higher Education Group.  The Dubuque operation will become partof the Banta Book Group, which has plants in Menasha, WI and Harrisonburg, VA,and will remain fully intact with its 230 existing employees, a Times MirrorHigher Education Group spokesperson told BPR.The Times Mirror Higher Education Group includes Wm.  C.  Brown Publishers,Brown & Benchmark Publishers and Richard D.  Irwin, and was the fourth-largesthigher education publisher in the U.S.  in 1994 with an estimated $230 millionin revenues (BPR, Aug.  21, 1995).  Banta will continue supplying theeducation group with printing and graphic services after the sale goesthrough.G.  Franklin Lewis, chairman and CEO of the Times Mirror Higher EducationGroup, said the company had "conducted a long and diligent search" for a buyerthat "could be a cultural match with the Times Mirror High Education Group;would pursue the course of providing low-cost printing solutions to ourprinting needs; and be a technology partner as we explore new and effectiveways of providing print product as well as increasing access to electronicproduct...We believe we have that in Banta Corp."Back to Headline List CopyrightBOOK PUBLISHING REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Warner Bros.  Worldwide Licenses Characters To Seven PublishersWarner Bros.  Worldwide Publishing (Burbank, CA) licensed its popular contentand cartoon characters to seven publishers who will produce roughly 90 booksbased on the material.  The licenses are part of an ambitious effort on thepart of Warner Bros.  Worldwide Publishing that will result in the release ofmore than 200 books based on its properties in 1996.The seven publishers who licensed the material are Landoll Publishing, WalterFoster Publishing, Publications International, Penguin USA, Warner Books,Scholastic Inc.  and DC Comics.Of the group, Landoll Publishing (Ashland, OH) will release the first titleswith a 42-book mass market line of color and activity books, paint with waterbooks, sticker, marker and paint pop-up books and story books.  All titleswill feature Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck and other Warner Bros.  characters.  Theline will launch Jan.  15.  Landoll's deal calls for at least 24 additionaltitles to be released next summer featuring the Animaniacs, Pinky & The Brain,Slappy Squirrel and Goodfeathers characters.Beginning in April, Publications International (Lincolnwood, IL) expects torelease a line of electronic chip "Play-a-Sound" books, each with four, five,seven or 16 sound buttons.  DC Comics licensed Pinky and The Brain for a lineof 12 comic books to be released in May in the U.S.  and Canada.Walter Foster Publishing will release two how-to-draw books in June as part ofits agreement.  Later in the summer, two graphic novels based on theAnimaniacs characters will be published by Scholastic Inc.Though Warner Bros.  Worldwide Publishing operates separately from Time Inc.and its imprints, sister company Warner Books (New York) was cut a piece ofthe deal through an agreement to publish four adult pop-up books featuring theLooney Tunes characters.Finally, next holiday season, Penguin USA (New York) will release a line ofchildren's titles, including plush books, electronic chip books and paintbooks based on Warner Bros.  characters.Warner Bros.  Worldwide Publishing was launched in 1994 by Warner Bros.Consumer Products, which handles licenses for Warner Bros.  content andcharacters (BPR, March 28, 1994).Back to Headline List CopyrightBOOK PUBLISHING REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Time Warner AudioBooks Reorganizes, Moves To New YorkTime Warner AudioBooks today moves from Los Angeles to New York and makesWarner Books its sole distributor.With the shift, former vice president of operations Judith McGuinn was namedvice president and director of Time Warner AudioBooks.  McGuinn will beresponsible for day-to-day operations and strategic planning, and reports toMaureen Mahon Egen, senior vice president and publisher of Warner Books.Egen said the relocation will provide better opportunities for cross-promotionof audiobooks through the sales and marketing operations already in place forbooks.The company will have a west coast production office in Century City whereMaja Thomas, director of production, and John Whitman, executive editor, willbe based.  All other departments will be housed in the Time Life building inNew York.Back to Headline List CopyrightBOOK PUBLISHING REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996House Votes To Allow Lawmakers Book Royalties, But No AdvancesIn a vote sparked by the year-old ruckus surrounding House Speaker NewtGingrich's controversial multi-million dollar book deal with HarperCollins,the House approved a proposal allowing lawmakers to receive unlimited bookroyalties--as long as they have their contracts cleared by the ethicscommittee and do not accept advances from publishers.The House voted 259 to 128 to adopt the rule proposed by Rep.  Gerald Solomon(R-NY).  The vote flew in the face of a 10-0 ethics committee recommendationon Dec.  6 to curb royalty income starting Jan.  1, 1996 by including themonies in the $20,040 cap on outside earned income for lawmakers.Failure to pass the proposal could have cost Gingrich millions in royalties hewill collect from sales of the HarperCollins title released in 1995, To RenewAmerica.Gingrich drew fire when it first became public that he was in line to collecta $4.5 million advance for a two-book deal he struck with HarperCollins, adivision of media conglomerate News Corp.  The deal was labeled unethicalbecause News Corp.'s Fox Television Network was embroiled in a battle with theFederal Communications Commission over foreign ownership of TV stations.Public outcry forced Gingrich to give up the advance, but not the royaltiesthe two books will generate.According to House Democratic Whip David Bonior (D-MI), last week's actionmarked the first time a recommendation from the ethics committee was weakenedin a House vote.In a report on its findings on ethics charges against Gingrich, the ethicscommittee last week stated, "The committee strongly questions theappropriateness of what some could describe as an attempt by Rep.  Gingrich tocapitalize on his office...The committee believes that the existing House rulemust be changed to clearly restrict the income a member may derive fromwriting books."Back to Headline List CopyrightBOOK PUBLISHING REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Steck-Vaughn Acquires Summit Learning In $4 Million DealEducational publisher Steck-Vaughn last month acquired Ft.  Collins, CO-basedSummit Learning from American Educational Products for approximately $4million.Steck-Vaughn was the fifth-largest U.S.  publisher of supplementaryeducational materials in 1994 with revenues of $53.6 million, according toBPR's sister publication, Educational Marketer.  AEP, which also ownsScott/Hubbard and Churchill Films, was the tenth-largest U.S.  publisher ofsupplementary educational materials in 1994, with estimated revenues of $21.1million.The acquisition will allow Steck-Vaughn to broaden its marketing channels toreach school decision makers at all levels through Summit's established directresponse marketing presence among both classroom teachers and consumers.Steck-Vaughn said it expected Summit's 1995 revenues to top $10 million.Steck-Vaughn will use Summit as a launchpad for a new line of proprietaryproducts for the parent and teacher store market.  Until now, Summit hasfocused primarily on mathematics curriculum, with a growing presence inscience.Back to Headline List CopyrightBOOK PUBLISHING REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Legal Publishers See Growth Via Electronic ProductsEditor's note:  This is the first in a two-part series on the legal bookpublishing market.According to the Book Industry Study Group's Book Industry Trends 1995, thelegal publishing market accounted for $1.3 billion dollars in 1994, up 10.3%over 1993.  Although law publishers have experienced the same acquisitionfrenzy found in other areas of the publishing industry, new owners have tendedto keep their subsidiaries separate, using them to establish or maintainniches in the marketplace.A recent informal BPR survey of key legal publishers found that despite theacquisitions, a fairly level playing field has been maintained.  In addition,advances in electronic media have revolutionized the way legal information ispublished."The industry is not necessarily getting consolidated, but there are more bigplayers," said Paul Wojcik, president & chief operating officer of The Bureauof National Affairs Inc.  "We might be the largest independent legalpublishing company left."The Bureau, which reported a 7.3% increase in 1994 operating revenues to$215.5 million, is entirely employee owned.  Of BNA's 1,800 employees, 1,500are based in Washington, DC with the rest scattered as correspondents in statecapitals.  Publishing more than 200 print and electronic products of nationalscope per year (including four daily publications and a number ofnewsletters), the company divides its books into three categories:Environmental Safety & Health, Human Resources & Labor Management, and Law,Business and International.  In 1994, the book division reported revenues of$4.7 million, a company record.BNA counts among its key titles Media Law by Rex S.  Heinke (1994), thethree-volume Copyright Law and Practice by William Patry (1994), and Mentaland Emotional Injuries in Employment Litigation by James J.  McDonald, Jr.and Francine B.  Kulick (1994).The company has discontinued the 28 looseleaf binder version of BNA'sEnvironment Library and now offers the product exclusively on CD ROM.Products on CD ROM now account for more than half of BNA's subscription sales."The electronic information piece is booming," Wojcik noted.  "It's also themost confusing part of the business."  A particular benefit of the CD ROMformat, according to Wojcik, is the ability to add large amounts of publicdomain information to existing texts.Thomson Legal Publishing, a division of The Thomson Corp.  (Toronto), madeseveral key acquisitions in the past year.  The most recent buy included thetopical product business and other non-citation legal information productsfrom Shepard's McGraw-Hill in November.  The company will integrate Shepard'sproducts into its existing U.S.  legal publishing operations, which has 3,000employees and annual revenues of $400 million.In other acquisitions, however, Thomson Legal Publishing has maintained theseparate identities of its companies, which include Bancroft-Whitney of SanFrancisco, Lawyer's Cooperative Publishing of Rochester, NY and Clark BoardmanCallaghan of New York.Bancroft-Whitney, for example, is devoted to publishing materials for theCalifornia law market.  When Thomson acquired San Francisco-based Barclay'sLaw Publishers in February 1995, its California unit was transferred toBancroft-Whitney, with the remainder of the company left to function as adivision of Lawyer's Cooperative Publishing.  In November, Bancroft-Whitneyacquired Legal Solutions Inc., a producer of legal forms for Californiaattorneys.  LSI maintains separate headquarters in Corona, CA.With approximately 160 employees, Bancroft-Whitney published four print andsix electronic titles in 1995.  Among its major titles are the Witkin libraryof four California legal treatises, (which is handled by a separate 15-persondepartment), Deering's California Codes (186 hardbound volumes, updatedannually) and Barclay's Official California Code of Regulations.  All areavailable in CD ROM format as well as print.Barclay's employs 30 people in south San Francisco.  According to publisherLaurie Carron, the company's charter as part of Thomson is to "sell to thenon-legal market."  This is achieved by "slicing and dicing" state codes forbusinesses into industry-specific products.  "Businesses that are regulated,not just the lawyers, need these codes," she said.  Barclay's currentlypublishes official codes in four states.  "We try to add new states all thetime," Carron said.The second part of this series will feature Matthew Bender, John Wiley & Sons,West Publishing, Wolters Kluwer and Reed Elsevier.Back to Headline List CopyrightBOOK PUBLISHING REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996In The Loop. . .Dove flies to larger coop...Beverly Hills, CA-based Dove Audio Inc.  lastmonth completed a $5.8 million equity offering that will allow it to move tolarger quarters in West Hollywood in February.  Dove used the offeringproceeds to buy the two-story, 22,000 square-foot building that formerlyhoused the Writer's Guild of America.  The new facilities will include twostate-of-the-art, fully-digital recording studios, editorial suites, a storagearea with a computerized catalog system to archive all Dove masters, and willbe equipped to do audio and video post-production work.  The building willalso include retail space.  Dove president Michael Viner said the move wasnecessary because staff size has doubled over the past year, and noted thepurchase of the building fits with future expansion plans for Dove Audio.New book finds bumps in 'The Road Ahead'...  A little more than a month afterPenguin USA's release of The Road Ahead by Microsoft chairman Bill Gates,naysayer Anthony "Andy" Martin has entered the fray with a book of his own:Bill Gates:  The Robber Baron of Cyberspace.  In announcing the release of hisbook, Martin, executive director of a Washington, DC-based organization called"the Committee to Fight Microsoft Corp.," claims to answer the "direforecasts" put forth by Gates in his book.  Martin says his title is based on"original research, 'inside' Microsoft sources and a searching review ofavailable public records and documents."  Bill Gates:  The Robber Baron ofCyberspace is available through its Palm Beach, FL-based publisher, OrangeState Press, for $19.95.  Meanwhile, The Road Ahead ranked as as one of thetop-selling books of the 1995 holiday buying season.Waterstone's to hit 'The Wall'?...Rumor on the street has it that U.K.-basedparent company W.H.  Smith this month will merge the management of itsrespective U.S.  bookstore and music store chains, Waterstone's and The Wall.A source within the company told BPR it was unclear whether the merger wouldextend to the primarily mall-based stores themselves.'Free Press' coming this month...In an effort to speed Free Press hardcovertitles to press in paperback format, Simon & Schuster will launch a newpaperback imprint this month--Free Press Paperbacks.  The imprint is expectedto release one to two dozen titles a year, the first of which will be The BellCurve by Charles Murray and Richard Herrnstein.  Simon & Schuster folded TheFree Press hardcover imprint into its trade books division in June 1995 (BPR,June 28, 1995).  Free Press publishes about 100 titles a year on a variety oftopics, including business, social issues, politics, history and behavioralscience.Back to Headline List CopyrightBOOK PUBLISHING REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996People In The News.  .  .Crown Books parent Dart Group last week lost its knight in shining armor whenRobert Marmon resigned because he and Dart Group could not agree upon anongoing compensation package.  Marmon, who has served as Dart's chieffinancial officer since October 1994 and was instrumental in putting in placea plan to restore stability to the company following the raging battles of theHaft family, will remain at Dart through February to help recruit hissuccessor.Separately, Crown Books named John Sutton, Cynthia Holland and Ellen Marshallas divisional merchandising managers.  Sutton will handle the buying of alltrade fiction, non-fiction and mass market books.  Holland will oversee thebuying of all other merchandise, and Marshall will be responsible formerchandising operations.  Sutton and Marshall are veteran Crown employees,while Holland moved to Crown from Waldenbooks in the summer of 1994.HarperCollins named Matthew Goldberg vice president, director of product andmarket development for its Adult Trade Publishing Group.  Goldberg wasformerly director of national accounts at HarperCollins.  In addition, thepublisher named Linda Stormes vice president, director of national accounts.Stormes moved to HarperCollins from Random House, where she had been nationalaccount manager.  HarperCollins also named Jeff Rogart to the newly combinedposition of director of sales/advanced media and merchandise accounts.  Inaddition to his current responsibilities for selling HarperCollins' advancedmedia products to all channels, Rogart will assume direct sellingresponsibilities to Price Costco, Sam's Club and BJ's, as well as thedistributors that serve that marketplace.Recent appointments at Avon Books included naming Jennifer Hershey asexecutive editor and Jennifer Brehl as senior editor.  Hershey joined Avonfrom Bantam Books, while Brehl, who will oversee Avon's science fiction andfantasy list, was previously at Bantam Doubleday Dell.  The appointmentsfollow those of Debby Tobias to vice president, director of sales, and TrishLande Grader to executive editor (BPR, Nov.  20, 1995)Des Moines, IA-based Meredith Corp.  named Barb Preuss advertising andmerchandising manager for retail book marketing at its publishing group.Preuss was previously direct mail copywriter at Kirke-Van Orsdel Inc., a WestDes Moines insurance company.Back to Headline List WT03-B09-20IA087-000629-B022-55http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/pb03.html 205.156.212.5 19970122040048 text/html 60940HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:58:47 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:30 GMTContent-length: 60753Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/pb03.html Sample Issue Copyright BROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet January 15, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Is DirecTv phenomenon destined for Europe? (678 words) Rewe joins Pro 7 to crank up German TV money machine (1060 words) Dutch print moves to buy up channels (98 words) ExpressVu and Power/DirecTv have received licenses to broadcast digital (237 words) Report round-up (134 words) After two years of delays, revisions and in-fighting, the Spanish cable (226 words) AB launches dawn raid on French digital (123 words) Murdoch bids for Olympic European TV rights (151 words) News in brief Advertising (1609 words) Corporate shuffle (166 words) Company profile: Video Cable Comunicacion One partner away from dual service dexterity, Argentine MSO goes fiber (1197 words) Facts on VCC (19 words) Contacts (77 words) Chronology (81 words) Country profile: South Africa Regulators seek to please all sides in Africa's new Rainbow Nation (2663 words) Facts on South Africa (106 words) Program quotas (186 words) CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996Is DirecTv phenomenon destined for Europe?The sense of anticipation is palpable. With only weeks to go until two ofEurope's TV giants - CLT and Canal+ - take the bull by the horns and launchdigital services, 1996 could be the year digital TV at last becomes areality in Europe.In the last six months, digital has shifted from being a theoretical,almost futuristic concept, to a viable business opportunity - maybe even anecessity. The model in all this is the U.S., where DirecTv and Primestarhave triumphed beyond all expectations, to the extent that digitalsatellite television (DST) in the U.S. is now seen as the first genuinethreat to cable's multichannel dominance.This lesson was rammed home in a fiercely bullish report from SBC Warburgin December which argued that the success of DirecTv in particular hadtransformed the business case for digital satellite. Two examples standout: DirecTv's success in pay-per-view, and the potential forsatellite-delivered online services.DirecTv has resuscitated the comatose PPV market in the U.S., thanks tomore channels (70+), impulse ordering and user-friendly onscreen guides. At3.78 per month, buy rates are five to six times those achieved by cableMSOs. The average monthly spend by subscribers on PPV is $17.44 (Primestar,with more big ticket events and higher prices, generates $32.73 a month).In Warburg's words, that potentially makes PPV a "really significantgenerator of business for BSkyB and Canal+." Warburg's BSkyB valuationmodel projects PPV revenues in 2002 of #100 million ($155 million), but itsanalysts now reckon this could be too low "by a factor of five times."Equally significant is the potential appeal of interactive services offsatellite. Using a telephone line as the upstream, digital satellites coulddeliver Internet access at more than 30 times the speed of a fullphone-line service. Hughes, the owner of DirecTv, already offers a similarservice in the U.S., DirecPC. In Europe, Kinnevik plans to deliversatellite online services in Scandinavia this year.The message is clear. Digital satellite, for so long a mysterious,uncertain business case for analog pay TV operators terrified of destroyingtheir existing businesses, in fact holds huge potential. Cable operatorsmay have to face up to the fact that digital satellite can do almost asmuch as their expensive fiber-based wired systems can.1996: Europe's digital year?Players in terrestrial TV, cable, satellite, publishing and film allharbor digital TV aspirations. But in Europe, labyrinthine cross-holdingsand non-competition clauses muddy the waters. Some companies have strucktechnological and corporate alliances that tidy up the sector inpreparation for the shift to digital - but many more are needed.For instance, Germany's Kirch Group has abandoned its unilateral digitaldecoder system, the "D-box", and joined the list of companies signing upfor MediaGuard, the digital decoder developed by Bertelsmann and Canal+.From the moment Deutsche Telekom, which controls 90% of German cablesubscribers, chose MediaGuard, Kirch's surrender became inevitable.A similar kind of inevitability hangs over the future of CLT's digitalplans, particularly in France. Bertelsmann, News Corp., Havas and WaltDisney were reported as likely buyers, or at least partners, of theLuxembourg broadcasting giant, which has plans for digital services inFrance and Germany.The reason for those rumors is simple. In France, a CLT digital packagewould compete with a similar planned package from Canal+. The two companiesshare a common shareholder, Havas, that is unlikely to fund competingdigital services, nor see Canal+ damaged by a rival service.Most likely, CLT will either join up with Canal+, or Havas will sell itsstake in CLT to another buyer. In this context, the business logic behindthe rumors about CLT's future is compelling. When added to thenear-certainty that BSkyB has European ambitions, and the best way tofulfill these ambitions will be in digital satellite, a News Corp. link-uplooks convincing. But Bertelsmann is not likely to countenance aninfringement on its own territory - hence its connection with CLT. tvBack to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996Rewe joins Pro 7 to crank up German TV money machineOn the back of unprecedented commercial broadcasting growth, Germanyushered in the new year with a brand new TV player. Rewe AG, the country'slargest supermarket and discount retail group, took a 40% stake infifth-ranked German network Pro Sieben (Pro 7).Rewe's entry into the TV market may be only the first maneuver in aprocess of financial retrenchment and, possibly, consolidation in Europe'slargest TV market. Germany is preparing to quadruple the size of thatmarket for the second time in 10 years, with the advent of digital TV. It'salso dealing with probable regulatory change and a likely medium-termslowdown in an advertising market that has been up, up, up for the bestpart of a decade.Cologne-based Rewe's investment in Pro 7 takes some of the heat off LeoKirch and his son Thomas - for years they have been accused of playing hardand fast with ownership ceilings thanks to Kirch pere's numerousinvestments.Pro 7's new alliance, and a planned public stock offering, should dispelaccusations that the broadcaster is unofficially controlled by Leo throughThomas. Rewe spokesman Wolfram Schumck says the new partner has no concreteplans with Pro 7 just yet: "We have to get to know each other first."Rewe massive revenues (DM46 billion ($32 billion) in 1994) will add strongbacking to Pro 7's mission to compete with the other four "major" Germannetworks - state networks ARD and ZDF and commercial giants RTL and SAT 1 -in a world of digital channels and fragmentation.For Rewe, diversifying into commercial TV is in line with board chairmanHans Reischl's strategy of "investing in promising future markets." Pro 7anticipates revenues of DM1.45 billion in 1995, with pre-tax profits ofabout DM200 million, making it the most profitable network in Germany, withoperating margins in excess of 17%. According to Pro 7 spokesman TorstenRossmann, Rewe won't participate directly in financing acquisition ofrights and production costs, "but as a strong shareholder, [it] willfacilitate obtaining bank credits."The Rewe announcement came soon after Pro Sieben Television's officialconversion into an AG (joint stock company) in anticipation of a summer1996 public flotation of 35% of the company. The conversion reduces ThomasKirch's stake to 24.5% and liquidates the 49.5% stake held by GerhardAckermans.Pro 7's initial public offering will be a German TV first, offering adesirable investment vehicle. Pro 7 expects the listing to raise DM300million. Analysts at London brokerage SBC Warburg have initially valued thefree float in the range of DM700-DM900 million. Prior to the listing, twobusinesses may be divested: the film and TV production arm (to be takenover by Thomas Kirch and Pro 7 MD Georg Kofler) and home shopping channelH.O.T.Rewe sources say the price for its stake is well in excess of DM60million. Assuming Pro 7 maintains annual revenue growth of 8-10% over thenext two years, SBC Warburg's preliminary valuation is in line withmultiples at similar European TV companies such as France's M6 and TF1 andthe UK's HTV and Scottish TV.Market prospectsWith almost 30 terrestrial and cable services available, the German TVmarket is the most developed in Europe, even though TV's share of theadvertising market (at $4 billion gross, 20% of the total) still has roomto grow.German TV's share of total spend is only half the level of that in Spain.Germany boasts 32.4 million TV homes, 15.6 million of them connected tocable - a primary reception vehicle for many commercial channels. Since1990, the number of channels has grown from four to 15.A concerted effort on the part of most commercial channels to attractmiddle market and youth viewers has driven up program costs, both for localfare and imports. Rights values skyrocketed in 1995, spurred by commercialTV leader RTL, which forked out $250 million to snatch a Warner Bros.package from under the nose of the Kirch Group. The deal included TV rightsto 44 prime feature films.In November, Kirch fought back and stumped up $30 million for German TVrights to a Steven Spielberg package that included mega-hits Jurassic Parkand E.T. The bid broke all previous payment levels for single film titles.Public broadcaster ARD separately bought TV options on all properties fromnew Spielberg vehicle DreamWorks through the end of the decade.Whether the channels can sustain such prices is unclear. Efforts to boostin-house production have brought mixed results at RTL. Pro 7 has stepped upto the domestic production plate, spending DM400 million in 1995 on its ownTV films and enhanced news coverage. Pro 7's total program budget for 1996stands at DM1 billion.Short-term growth in the German TV ad market is likely to sustain theexisting setup, with regulators rather than cash-strapped advertisersdriving investments. In spite of a sluggish 1995 economy, TV advertisingwas buoyant last year, with growth estimated at 11% (having jumped nearly16% in 1994). Zenith Media reckons 1996 will be equally healthy, with TVforecast to generate over DM6.9 billion.But not all broadcasters are sanguine about the medium-term: "Theadvertising boom is over," says Rossmann. "Growth will be less andcompetition harder."One factor is a growing stable of niche channels fighting over this TV adpie. On top of that, the role of the regulator remains unclear. Germany'slaw-makers have played kingmaker in the last 10 years, in the face of avirtual TV "triopoly" - Bertelsmann, Kirch and CLT.In October 1995, federal regulators drafted rules on channel ownership,whereby one company will be allowed to control up to 30% of total viewing,regardless of the number of channels owned. Kirch already takes 29.5% ofthe audience; Bertelsmann controls just under 20% and CLT, 22.7%. Inanticipation of the 1997 enforcement of the new rules, 1996 could see thefirst phase of channel ownership consolidation.Digital, however, could significantly alter the competitive balance,putting Pro 7 and the other "second division" channels in a position tolaunch their own stables of channels. Pro 7 has five transponders booked onAstra's digital satellites 1F and 1G, and should be well-positioned toexpand into pay offerings. tvBack to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996Dutch print moves to buy up channelsTwo Dutch publishers are buying into TV channels. Dutch bank Mees Piersonis handling "serious" negotiations between Scandinavian BroadcastingSystem's SBS6 and Dutch daily paper De Telegraaf. The newspaper wants a 35%stake in SBS6 as a springboard for future projects like online services;SBS6 wants a Dutch backer to solidify its local image. SBS6 wants to buyHMG's channel RTL-5, but is reportedly offering well below the asking price.Dutch regional publisher Wegener is close to gaining 100% control ofArcade Entertainment's three TV channels, radio, music, video and filmretail operation, worth $500 million a year.Back to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996ExpressVu and Power/DirecTv have received licenses to broadcast digitalExpressVu and Power/DirecTv have received licenses to broadcast digitalDTH services into Canada, offering distinct competition to the country'scable sector for the first time. At the same time, Canadian MSOs - led byShaw Communications - were refused a license for their own DTH service,Homestar.ExpressVu is owned by BCE Inc. (the parent company of telco Bell Canada)and broadcaster Western International Communications, among others.Power/DirecTv is 80%-owned by Canada's Power Corp. and 20% byDirecTv/Hughes Electronics Corp. The new DTH services will provide as manyas 70 channels of pay-per-view programming, in addition to traditionalservices; both services will launch in 1996.Five new DTH PPV programming services were also licensed, including a newsports/special events service backed by the CTV Television Network, andseparate movies/special events services from Power/DirecTv itself, Viewer'sChoice/Home Theater and Canal Premiere.Because there will be competition between the two services, regulatorybody the CRTC will not regulate their rates. Like cable, the new DTHservices will be subject to certain requirements in terms of basic service,maintenance of Canadian services and open access for all programmingservices. They must contribute 5% of their annual gross revenues to fundsthat support Canadian program production.In a nod to increased competition, the CRTC will consider applications forfuture DTH services six months after the two new services are launched,offering a possible second chance to Homestar.Back to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996Report round-upInteractive cable TV will reach only reach 4.6 million Asia Pacific homesby 2005, according to a report from UK consultants Ovum. In InteractiveTelevision: The Market Opportunity, Ovum forecasts that 26.4 millionhouseholds in the U.S. and 23.1 million in Europe will have cable access tointeractive TV in 10 years.Cash flow will still be negative in Asia Pacific in 2005 as a result ofthe low penetration, but will be positive in Europe by 2002. Interactive TVwill generate $4.31 billion in advertising revenues in Europe and $782million in Asia Pacific in 2005: both are swamped by the U.S. figure of$9.03 billion.Interactive Television: The Market OpportunityPrice: $2,775Ovum Ltd.1 Mortimer St.LondonW1N 7RHUKphone (44) 171 255 2670fax (44) 171 255 1995Back to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996After two years of delays, revisions and in-fighting, the Spanish cableAfter two years of delays, revisions and in-fighting, the Spanish cablelaw was finally passed in the New Year. In the end, it included most of theamendments demanded by the opposition Partido Popular. Despite that, theopposition voted against. If the PP wins the election in March, the partyhas vowed to change the law.PP amendments in the bill include minimum and maximum franchise areas of50,000 and 1.5 million people and a proposal that the second of the twolicenses to be awarded in each area will be decided by a commissioncomprising central, regional and local government - a seeming recipe forbureaucratic disaster.Perhaps the most contentious part of the law - the automatic awarding ofthe first license in each area to telco Telefonica - remains Telefonica hasalready launched cable service via Cablevision, its joint venture withPrisa, cabling 2,600 homes in Barcelona and starting operations in 16cities. It offers a 40-channel package, including film channels TNT,Cinemania, and Cine Clasico, and sports channels Teledeporte, Eurosport andEsportmania (from Prisa).The potential glitch for Cablevision is the clause in the new law thatforbids Telefonica from launching cable operations until nine months afterthe second, commercial license is opened for bidding. Prisa maintains thisdoes not apply to cities where it has already started operations.Back to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996AB launches dawn raid on French digitalFrench TV production house AB Productions, owned by Claude Berda andJean-Luc Azoulay with annual revenues of FFr1 billion ($204.5 million), hasjumped the digital Gallic gun by launching its analog AB1 channel January 1on Eutelsat II F1. AB also announced plans for a 30-channel digital,encrypted bouquet with nine channels to be running by February.AB hopes to sign up at least one cable operator by the end of January at aprice of around FFr2.50 per subscriber per month.A French government-commissioned report on the future of satellite TV,published January 4, suggests it is time state-owned France Telecomacknowledges it cannot compete with Astra and Eutelsat in the DTH marketand abandons its third generation of satellites.Back to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996Murdoch bids for Olympic European TV rightsRupert Murdoch's latest raid on sports rights is aimed at the most sacredprize of all - the Olympics. The International Olympic Committee says aconsortium led by News Corp. has submitted a "serious bid" for European TVrights to all Olympic events between 2000 and 2008. Reportedly, the bid isworth more than $2 billion.News Corp. has been a mammoth sports rights buyer in the UK, the U.S.,Asia and Australia. For the past 12 months, the company has been developingits international sports assets, with News Corp. subsidiary Fox and cablegiant TCI merging their sports channel interests.News Corp.'s main competitor for the Olympics will be the EuropeanBroadcasting Union, which represents many of Europe's TV networks. Snappingup long-term Olympic rights is becoming fashionable - U.S. network NBCpractically locked up U.S. broadcast and cable rights to the Olympics until2008, for $2.3 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996AdvertisingTV2 monopoly brokenThe Norwegian parliament has ended the advertising monopoly held bynational commercial channel TV2. The government had previously outlawed theuse of programming from SBS-owned satellite channel TV Norge by regionalterrestrial broadcasters, since it put TV Norge in direct competition foradvertising with TV2. The government has now allowed the redistribution ofTV Norge's programming. TV2 plans to sue the government for $100 million indamages from lost ad revenues .UK cable ads upUK cable and satellite TV ad revenues are predicted to jump 25% in 1996,according to a report from merchant bank Goldman Sachs. The sectors arepredicted to increase ad revenues to #171 million ($265.5 million), up from#137 million in 1995. The total TV ad pie for 1996 is estimated at #2.39billion.CableUK plans viewing surveyField work has begun for the UK cable TV industry's first dedicated surveyof audience viewing habits. The Cable Research Firm, representing UK MSOs,has commissioned the survey, which is due for release in April.l Brazilian MSO Net Brasil posted a 25% growth in subscribers, to 617,671,in the three months to November 1995. Subscriber revenues were $23 millionfor November, compared to $18 million in August. Net Brasil launched twocable systems in southern Brazil in November.l Nynex CableComms, the UK's second-largest cable MSO, announced it wasshedding staff by 10% amid a company restructuring. The move is being madeto cut costs.Mexico opens telco bidsMexico's Communications Secretariat has invited telephony licenseapplications from CATV operators. Operators satisfying the prerequisites(published January 5) will receive approval within 120 days. Mexico's telcomarket becomes fully deregulated from January 1, 1997.ProgrammingCanada's Paragon dealParagon Entertainment Corporation has licensed its Handmade Films library,including Withnail and I, Nuns on the Run and Time Bandits, to Europeanbroadcaster CLT for French- and German-speaking Europe.Bible big in ItalyThe latest installment of the international co-production The Bible,Moses, scored a massive 10 million-plus audience in Italy on its premiere.GLA unveils channelsFollowing the launch of its Galaxy III-R satellite December 14, HughesCommunications-led Galaxy Latin America unveiled 12 channels that will beexclusive to the service when it launches later in 1996. Of Hughes' threeLatin equity partners, Venevision has pledged two channels; Brazil's TVA,four; and Mexico's Multivision six. GLA will deliver a total of 192channels.l Mexico's TV Azteca and Venezuela's RCTV have agreed to co-produce atelenovela early this year. Azteca is also negotiating to co-produce withU.S. Latino web Telemundo.RegulationFoxtel finding delayedA reported flood of information to Australia's competition watchdog, theAustralian Competition and Consumer Association, has delayed a decision onthe proposed merger between pay TV groups Australis Media and Foxtel -although the merger is still thought to be going through.l Iranian police raided 110 houses in Tehran, seizing banned satellite TVequipment used to watch "corrupting" Western programs, according to localpapers. There are an estimated 250,000 satellite dishes in Iran, despite a1995 edict ordering the dismantling of all-such equipment.l In order to satisfy the European Commission's anti-cartel regulations,Dutch producer Endemol Entertainment could pull out of HMG, the holdingcompany that owns RTL-4, Veronica and RTL-5, rather than reduce its stakefrom 24% to 7.5% (the maximum allowed by European regulations). HMG backersCLT, VNU and Veronica would each retain a one-third stake.l The Brazilian Congress will formalize the guidelines for commercializingthe country's telecoms sector early in 1996. Regulations go before aspecial congress in late-January (TVI, Dec. 11, 1995).SatellitePanAmSat's movesArianespace will launch PanAmSat's PAS-7 Indian Ocean Region satellite onan Arianne-5 rocket in late 1997. The PAS-7 satellite will have 24 C-bandand 24 Ku-band transponders. PanAmSat expects to launch five additionalsatellites by the end of 1997. PAS-3, the delayed Latin American bird, wasto launch January 12, while the PAS-6 Atlantic Ocean Region satellite isearmarked for launch later in 1996.l PanAmSat and British Telecom have united under a marketing umbrella toboost combined business via the PAS-4 satellite, which provides coverage ofAfrica, Asia, Europe, the Indian subcontinent and the Middle East. BT willmarket PanAmSat capacity to users.FinanceVideotron UK resultsCable television revenues for Videotron Holdings, the UK MSO owned byVideotron and Bell Cablemedia, increased #1.6 million (30%) to #7 million($10.9 million) for the first quarter of fiscal 1995, ending November 30,1995, over the same period last year. Total revenues were #17.5 million,with residential telephony revenues increasing 40% and business telephony53%. CATV subscribers reached 114,000.l UK broadcasting and media group Carlton Communications reported 12%growth in annual revenues, to $2.43 billion, for the year to September1995. The company's broadcasting business - which includes Carlton TV andCentral TV - accounted for $1.03 billion.AfricaZimbabwe opens upThe Zimbabwe government has agreed to allow private competition to itsZimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation. An amended Broadcasting Act will bepublished in 1996.l New U.S. cable channel "BET on Jazz: The Cable Jazz Channel" will launchon MultiChoice's digital African satellite service April 1.EU helps NamibiaThe European Union has pledged Ecu5 million ($6.6 million) to aid thedevelopment of the Namibian Broadcasting Corporation. The EU money will beused to expand NBC's transmission network and production facilities foreducational broadcasting.AsiaChannel [V] in ThailandChannel [V], the music channel owned by News Corp.'s Star TV announced theestablishment of a 24-hour music cable channel in Thailand. The channelwill be a premium, non-advertising service offered by wired cable MSO UTVin cooperation with broadcaster BNT.Sofres plans for ChinaFrench ratings and research group Sofres is discussing a joint venture toestablish a Chinese TV audience measurement system with China's CentralViewers Survey & Consulting Center. Sofres hopes to have peoplemetersinstalled by 1997.l Singapore-based Channel KTV will launch a 24-hour karaoke channel viaPanAmSat's PAS-2 satellite in late February. The channel will carryprograms in Cantonese and Mandarin.UKGranada's man joins BSkyBStuart Prebble, currently controller of factual programming for ITVNetwork Center, has been named chief executive of Granada Sky Broadcasting,a joint venture with BSkyB that plans to launch eight satellite channels inthe UK in 1996, including archive channel Granada Gold Plus. BSkyB isitself planning new channels in 1996, including an arts, an education, acomputer and a games channel - even before the company's planned digitallaunch.CanadaTax credit tightenedCanada's film tax-shelter system has been replaced by a new tax creditprogram with more stringent rules. Under the new program, onlyCanadian-controlled companies can benefit from the credit.CanWest bid blockedA court ruling has stymied CanWest Global's takeover bid for TV and mediagroup Western International Communications. A Supreme Court judge inBritish Columbia quashed an attempt to convert non-voting B shares intovoting A shares. Vancouver's Griffiths family own 62% of WIC's votingshares. and is against CanWest's C$636 million ($466.3 million) bid.CanWest says it will allow its current bid to expire.Latin AmericaQuantum's Latin dealsQuantum International has signed programming agreements in Argentina,Venezuela and Costa Rica. The deals bring Quantum's home-shopping to 6million new TV homes.l Argentina's president Carlos Menem has signed a decree giving theofficial nod for the privatization of the country's state-run televisionbroadcaster, ATC. No date has been set for the process.DTH delays in Mexico?The U.S. and Mexico must sign an agreement governing DTH broadcasts beforeU.S.-based companies can operate DTH services in Mexico, according toofficials from both governments. On a December 20 visit to Mexico, FCCchairman Reed Hundt said such an accord would take 6-12 months.ScandinaviaTV violence watershedThe Swedish government aims to clamp down on TV violence by issuing a21:00 watershed. Criticism of TV violence reached fever pitch in Sweden in1995, after the death of a 5-year-old girl in Norway was loosely linked toSaban Entertainment's Mighty Morphin Power Rangers.l The Finnish government has invited bidders for a proposed secondnational commercial TV network. Applicants need only be "partly"Finnish-owned.l The Norwegian parliament has given final approval to public broadcasterNRK for the spring 1996 launch of a youth-targeted channel on the plannedNSD satellite system.Swedish youth serviceThe executive board of Swedish commercial broadcaster TV4 has greenlightedplans to launch the channel's first youth-targeted satellite spin-off.SpainAntena 3 channelsSpanish commercial broadcaster Antena 3 has launched a package of fivedigitally-compressed satellite channels off Hispasat, under the nameCableantena. The five channels are Telenoticias (news), The DiscoveryChannel, Cine de Siempre (classic Spanish films), Cine Color (current U.S.and European films) and Canal Fiesta (series and musicals.l The Spanish government passed rules to regulate the country's 520terrestrial local TV stations.Central EuropeCME scores 50%PRO TV, the Romanian network launched by Central European MediaEnterprises (CME) and local investors on December 1, 1995, has achieved aninitial 50% audience share in those parts of the country which can receiveit.l Czech insurance company Ceska Pojistovna is on the brink of buying a 30%stake in Czech commercial regional network Premiera, from Investicni aPostovni Banka. IPB will sell its remaining 15% to Stratton Investments,owned by U.S. investor Michael Dingman.Back to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996Corporate shuffleFormer London Weekend Television head James Bland will be the new chairmanof the BBC's board of governors when Marmaduke Hussey retires at the end ofMarch.In March 1996, Greg Dyke, chief executive of Pearson Television, will jointhe Pearson board as executive director. David Bell, chief executive ofPearson subsidiary the Financial Times Group, will fill a second executivedirectorship. Frank Barlow will continue as Pearson managing director untilthe company's annual general meeting in May 1997, at which time hissuccessor is likely to be announced.ACI president Jamie Bennett has been appointed head of worldwidedistribution for Pearson Television, which acquired ACI last year.Tele-Communications Inc. has named Camille Jayne senior vice president ofthe group's recently formed Digital TV unit.Former NBC Sports and ABC Sports executive Geoffrey Mason has beenappointed executive producer of ESPN International, effective immediately.Diana Rivera has been promoted to senior vice president, internationaloperations, for Buena Vista Home Entertainment International.Back to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996One partner away from dual service dexterity, Argentine MSO goes fiber"Wanted: investors with cash and experience in telecommunicationsservices: foreigners welcome." This may as well be the sign outside thedoor at Argentine cable operator Video Cable Comunicacion this year. Telcoinvestment scouts looking south of the border for a well-placed growthvehicle need look no further than Argentina's largest MSO.VCC is Latin America's biggest MSO, closing 1995 with 623,400 subscribers,about 12% of all Argentine subscribers.VCC was the first Argentine MSO to close a deal with a foreign partner.Continental Cablevision bought a 50% stake in late 1994 for $150 million -yet VCC founder-owner Samuel Liberman retained control, which is why thereare no Continental executives stationed in Buenos Aires.VCC's greatest asset is the geographic spread of its systems - mostlyacquired during a 1993-94 spree - that line a 400-mile industrial corridorfrom Buenos Aires via Rosario to Cordoba.The affluent business corridor generates about 75% of Argentina's GDP, andif business telephony/data transmission fulfills its promise as the hotgrowth center over the next 10 years, VCC is well-placed to take advantage(rival MSO Multicanal is more widespread outside Buenos Aires, but haslower penetration in the biggest provincial cities).But much depends on how alliances shape up. VCC's assistant CEO CarlosPratola says that securing another partner - probably foreign - will be apriority this year, to help develop its telephony business. The companyalso aims to build up its Buenos Aires penetration from 50% to 60%.Regulation remains the key variable. Argentina's telco duopoly, Telefonicaand Telecom, has the option of sacrificing state protection in November1997 in exchange for permission to enter video services. But the MSOs areseeking protection from the telcos through a new broadcast bill, soon to bedebated in congress. Argentina's cable operators are asking for a window ofseveral years to develop telephone services before the telcos muscle in ontheir turf.Despite being one of the most mature Latin cable markets, Argentina'smultichannel market continues to evolve. In 1993, massive consolidationamong the nation's 1,200 cable operators produced four dominant MSOs. Inlate 1994, big investments by Continental Cablevision and TCI confirmedthat Argentina's $1.5 billion-a-year industry had enough growth potentialto lure the biggest players.In 1995, as MSOs focused on standardizing operations among the systemsacquired in 1993-94, the first accord between a telco and an MSO hinted atthe shape of things to come: a converged landscape with a few multi-serviceproviders dominating the information industry.By 2000 there may be just three road hogs jostling on Argentina'sinfo-highway. One certain competitor to VCC is Multicanal, a subsidiary ofArgentina's largest media/entertainment group, Clarin (TVI, Feb. 13, 1995).Multicanal has an agreement with Spain's aggressive TelefonicaInternacional (TISA), a controlling shareholder in Telefonica de Argentina;TISA plans to buy 25% of Multicanal.Four players - Telecom, CableVision (owned by TCI Intl.), Fincable/Cabteland VCC - are expected to play major roles in the combined services market,but mat well pair off. If Telecom teams up with one of the three MSOs, VCC,by virtue of size, would seem the most likely candidate; talks are said tobe underway.But Telecom, with a less-focused expansion strategy than Telefonica's, maytake a while to select its partner. Continental and VCC may decide they canhappily focus on finding a U.S. long-distance carrier to pair with.VCC could also join forces with Fincable/Cabtel, two independent MSOsadministered as one by broadcaster Telefe (TVI, Jul. 31, 1995). There'salready a precedent: VCC considered buying into the Telefe MSOs a year ago,but Continental balked at spending further dollars in a slowing economy.Telefe's systems pepper B.A.'s satellite towns and could complement VCC'spresence.Of more immediate concern to VCC than telephony is tight competition inthe overbuilt sections of greater Buenos Aires. VCC, Multicanal andCableVision all overlap in the metropolis, along with several smalleroperators.As a result, the MSOs are racing to upgrade plant, converting 550 MHzheadends to 750 MHz and installing fiber optic lines "to the node." The 750MHz set-up allows VCC to increase from 50 to 78 video channels (withoutdigital compression), plus spare capacity for interactive services andtelephony. Internet connectivity should come on line this year.Such enterprises require capital. Continental's buy-in was a privatetransaction with Liberman, so none of the $150 million funded upgrade. Butwith the help of Continental's relationship with U.S. banks, VCC secured a$140 million syndicated loan from Citibank in November 1995.VCC expects to secure a further $40 million loan in first quarter 1996,from U.S. semi-governmental bank OPIC, together with the Export-ImportBank. The loan will finance the purchase of U.S.-made hardware VCC requiresto continue its upgrade.Though it's debatable whether continuing to add channels makes sense, thebig MSOs are under pressure to offer equal levels of program choices. As aresult, VCC and Multicanal have been playing catch up with CableVision(TVI, Oct. 30, 1995), which has offered 65 channels since early 1994.Pratola says that 100,000 VCC subscribers now get 70 channels - the rest 40or 50 - and all B.A. subscribers should get the full range by second-half1996.During 1995 VCC began to distinguish its lineup by grouping channels bygenre. Hence Music 21, MTV Latino and MuchMusic are found on consecutivechannels.Like its rivals, VCC has its own programming wing, Gala Producciones,which generates 14 channels. Four of these are marketed outside the MSO,earning an extra $22 million last year (nearly twice 1994); more channelsare planned. The company's most popular network is kids service Cablin,ranked within the top 15 B.A. cable channels.Like all Argentine MSOs, VCC must address the matter of tiering itsservice - 70 channels in a single $33 package doesn't make financial sense.Tiering, the gateway to pay TV, already exists in some provincial systemswhere there is little or no competition. But VCC learned in 1992 not to actalone in B.A.: when it tried to switch HBO Ole to premium status, requiringan analog decoder, many subscribers switched to competing systems thatstill offered the movie channel as a basic service. VCC abandoned theexperiment.VCC, CableVision and Multicanal will have to agree to introduce tiering atthe same time. An accord may be struck this year due to two precipitatingfactors.First, soccer monopoly Torneos y Competencias (TyC) introduced a premiumSunday soccer match for suburban B.A. and provincial subscribers last year.TyC's premium service is available with the installation of an inexpensive"trap" - a simple decoder on the outside of a house - rather than an analogbox, but many subscribers opt for the latter, which also decodes eroticchannels (scrambled by law). About 10% of VCC subscribers have these $180analog decoders.A second factor is the imminent arrival of DTH services which will offerup a broad range of near video-on-demand and premium program options notyet available on Argentine CATV. tvBack to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996Facts on VCCSubscribers (end '95)   623,400Homes passed    1,282,000Channels offered        50 (70 in some areas)Monthly subscription    $33Source: VCCBack to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996ContactsVCCCuba 2370(1428) Buenos AiresArgentinaphone (541) 788-1377/1455/1533fax (541) 788-1194/1345Samuel Liberman: CEOCarlos A. Pratola: assistant CEOAdela Katz: presidentLiliana Liberman: director, Gala ProduccionesArmando Di Guglielmo: technical directorCarlos Claiman: programming managerMartin Kaindl: chief of institutional relationsGuillermo Liberman: directorContinental CablevisionThe Pilot HouseLewis WharfBoston, MA 02110& 1 (617) 742 9500fax 1 (617) 742 0612Jeffrey T. DeLorme: exec VPRob Stoddard: public relationsBack to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996Chronology1981 Samuel Liberman founds VCCDec. 1982 VCC starts transmission in Martinez, Gran Buenos Aires1987 VCC launches Argentina's first private satellite channel: La Senal.1992 VCC makes vain attempt to market HBO Ole as a premium service1994 VCC more than doubles its subscriber countNov. 1994 Liberman sells 50% of his stake in Fintelco to ContinentalCablevision for $150 million1995 VCC begins upgrade to 750 MHz systemNov. 1995 VCC secures $140 million syndicated loan to fund upgradeBack to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996Regulators seek to please all sides in Africa's new Rainbow NationIt would be an enormous understatement to say that - like everything elsein the country - South Africa's broadcasting environment is changing. Thesector is being reworked from top to bottom, and market forces are vyingwith political pressures for regulation in the national interest.The forces driving change include the new African National Congress-ledgovernment, business interests representing the white and blackcommunities, and foreign investors cautiously circling over what could bethe gateway to a resurgent Africa.But there are several vexing issues to be resolved. At a very basic level,ad agencies and census takers are scrambling to figure out just how manynewly-enfranchised citizens exist in the townships and cities, and whetherand when they will emerge as bona fide consumers. At the political level,the monolithic South African Broadcasting Corporation represents a mammothregulatory chore; already a dispute is brewing between the SABC and theIndependent Broadcasting Authority (IBA) over what the new SABC should looklike.The IBA's recommendations for the SABC go to the heart of the new SouthAfrica's putative broadcasting infrastructure. In late 1995, the IBArecommended that SABC's channels be cut to two, licensing the network'sthird channel as the country's first national, commercial, terrestrialnetwork.The SABC's response was to re-launch all three channels, going directlyagainst the regulatory grain. The issue still has not been resolved.Legislation along the lines of some of the IBA's recommendations isexpected in 1996, after a parliamentary committee considers its findings.The SABC's only national rival is pay service M-Net, owned by a consortiumof South African publishers and banks, with 20% held by international payoperator NetHold. Thanks to its NetHold affiliation, M-Net is nowspearheading DTH developments in South Africa and the entire continent. TheSABC also announced at end-1995 its plans for a satellite service.At the beginning of January, the IBA said it would begin licensingsatellite services in the second half of 1996, amid uncertainty aboutwhether its powers actually extended to this activity. NetHold/MultiChoicehave already launched a digital satellite package on the understanding thatno licensing was required, beaming off PanAmSat 4.The final sector to be affected by the wholesale changes will be SouthAfrica's still tiny independent TV production industry, now readying itselffor increased demand from both domestic and new, imported services.Socio-economic changesAlongside black economic empowerment, the biggest boost to televisionviewing will come as a result of the giant housing and electrificationprogram. In the townships and shanty towns, the new black consumers arebuying - along with cookers and refrigerators - television sets.In the still desperately-poor shanty town areas around Johannesburg, 42%of dwellings have TV sets. Significantly, this is almost identical to thepercentage of dwellings with electricity. The scope for growth is enormous- nationwide, over half of SA homes are still without electricity.The number of TV homes is estimated at 4.4 million, and the national TV adspend is worth $50-$60 per home. Total ad spend is moving from print andradio to TV, and from whites to blacks. In 1993, pay service M-Net receivedaround a quarter of all TV ad expenditure. The SABC's main service, TV1,took 50%, while its more black-skewed service, CCV, took the remaining 25%.But according to the SABC, in the year to March 1995, advertising revenuesfor CCV grew 25.4%, while those for TV1 (whites) grew by only 14.7%.The SABC's advertising revenues are around R900 million ($246.9 million)per year. M-Net gets R300 million, putting total TV ad expenditure ataround $329.2 million. The SABC estimates that new commercial competitors(in both radio and TV) will take R260-R380 million each year from itsannual revenues.The SABC is also financed by a license fee, which is collected from 2.4million TV homes, only 54% of estimated TV homes. This system is bound tobe changed. Innovative ideas, such as a tax on electricity consumption,have been considered.The SABC's three TV channels have enjoyed, M-Net aside, a monopoly onfree-to-air terrestrial broadcasting. TV1 has a largely white audience andCCV (Common Cultural Values) a mainly black audience, while NNTV (NationalNetwork TV) reaches fewer homes, catering to a mainly black viewership. Thetwo main channels carry nearly all the advertising, while NNTV brings in asmall amount of sponsorship revenues. TV1, CCV and NNTV reach 76%, 72% and56% of the country respectively.TV1 broadcasts overwhelmingly in English and Afrikaans, and despite 90%geographical coverage of the population, only reaches 5.4 million adults.The TV1 signal is also distributed by Intelsat 604 on a frequency coveringmost of Africa, but requires a large, expensive dish. The programming mixis broad-based, and TV1 operates as a mass-audience generalist service.The CCV transmitter network covers only 20-25% of the country, but reaches72.5% of the population. Around 80% of its prime time broadcasts are inAfrican languages and around 75% of its viewers are black.NNTV, the newest of the three SABC channels, was launched in 1990 to tryto provide for as many of South Africa's 11 official languages as possible.English takes up 44% of the airtime, with the remainder in Afrikaans (21%);the Nguni languages, primarily Zulu and Xhosa (21%); and SeSotho (17%).NNTV is only received in the major metropolitan areas. It also broadcastsweekly programs in Portuguese and German for those respective communities.NNTV carries no advertising, but does have sponsorship income.In addition to the services operated by the SABC, four othergovernment-owned broadcasting services were established in the formerhomelands. The largest is the Bophuthatswana Broadcasting Corporation witha free-to-air service restricted to the area of the former Bophuthatswanaand the Witwatersrand. Unlike the SABC, the former homeland broadcastershave been funded directly by the government.The proposed environmentThe IBA's proposals for a new broadcasting infrastructure to represent thenew country - and the developing market economy - cover a lot of ground:the financial viability of the SABC, competition and the development of anindependent production industry. It has much less to say on satellitebroadcasting, though it is proposing future regulation in this area. Cabledoes not feature in the IBA's report.The key IBA recommendation is that the SABC reduce its channels from threeto two by the end of 1997, though it recognizes the corporation may needanother year to downsize and rationalize.The IBA suggests that some of the programming on NNTV be absorbed into theother two channels and that NNTV be repositioned as a satellite service.The former homeland services will be merged with the SABC's two channels.In January 1998, the IBA will issue a license for a new privateterrestrial network with heavy public service language and local contentobligations. But there is political and commercial pressure for this dateto be brought forward.There are already a number of contenders for the new service, includingSouthern Media, a consortium that includes the UK's Channel 4, blackdevelopment group KTI and others. Its rivals include: Free-to-Air, a groupheaded by TV1 head Quentin Green; a joint venture including MoriboInvestments, part of the black empowerment group Thebe, and Interleisure;and MTV South Africa, including Primedia Broadcasting and musician JohnnyClegg. Others may join the lists.The IBA favors a regional third TV network because of the centralizednature of present broadcasting. It also proposes that the SABC haveregional windows in its schedule. The new SA has nine provinces, of whichGauteng (around Johannesburg) and the Western Cape are the mosteconomically advanced and have the most extensive production facilities.There will also be minimum requirements for specific program categories,which may include minimum hourly requirements across the schedule andwithin prime time. Both the SABC and the new private licensee will haveAfrican language conditions imposed.Foreign investment in SA television is currently limited to 20%, thoughthis is essentially theoretical, since M-Net has provided the onlyinvestment vehicle to date. The IBA will maintain this limit and willintroduce cross-media ownership limits. No group or person with control ofa newspaper with more than 15% of circulation in the relevant area may havefinancial control (a 15% stake) in a radio or TV license.The IBA proposals are controversial, not least in the way that the SABCmay be carved up. The network's response has been to announce plans torelaunch its three channels in 1996 as SABC 1, SABC 2 and SABC 3. It saysEnglish-language broadcasts will constitute 65% of its airtime, withAfrikaans only taking up 3.8%. SABC 1 will use the current CCV signal andwill broadcast in the Nguni languages in prime time. SABC 2 will replaceTV1 and will broadcast in Afrikaans and SeSotho during prime time. SABC 3will take the NNTV slot, broadcasting in English during prime time.The announcement has infuriated Afrikaners; the former ruling NationalParty has even threatened to block the SABC's attempt to get a R500 milliongrant ($136 million) from the government.This raises the issue of public broadcasting funding. The IBA is proposingthat these services be funded through a mix of advertising and sponsorship,license fees, government grants and other income such as merchandising.This would be reviewed after three years. Parliament should also providefunding on a triennial basis toward increasing African language and localcontent programming on the SABC, says the IBA.The SABC is now mainly funded through ad revenues. In the 1993/1994financial year, 74% of its income was from advertising revenues, licensefees made up 20%, and other income contributed 6%. There was no directstate funding or grant, and the corporation achieved a surplus of R106.2million and generated a cash flow surplus of R77.8 million for the year.But new programming regulations could cripple the SABC, and statesubventions for increased African language and local broadcasts areconsidered essential. The SBAC has already said it cannot meet these localcontent requirements (see column, p.5) and stay within budget. It wants theIBA to reduce "performance periods" for measuring local content to amaximum of 10-12 hours from 18 hours.According to the SABC, providing 30 minutes of local news a day in each ofthe nine provinces would cost an extra R153.1 million in 1996/1997, R168.4million in 1997/1998 and R185.2 million in 1998/1999. Local contentregulations (including the upgrading African language provision) will costR70.8 million in 1996/1997, R155.8 million in 1997/1998 and R31 million in1998/1999.The cost of implementing another report, this time on educationalbroadcasting, is estimated at R160.3 million in 1996/7. From January 1 theSABC replaced Sky News with BBC Worldwide as its main foreign newsprovider, and the deal may be extended to include an education package.Worldwide last September created a new Worldwide Learning Division.On the positive side of the balance sheet, the state will benefit from theintegration of former homeland broadcasters, saving approximately R120million per annum. The SABC's Sentech signal generator, which controls itsnetwork of transmitters, will be converted to a public company, with theshares transferred from the SABC to the state.ProductionThough the SABC figures are vague, independent production currentlyconstitutes roughly 12.4% of its total broadcast time. The IBA's proposedregulations in this area are ambitious to say the least: it wantsbroadcasters to ensure that, in the future, 40% of their local content iscommissioned from independent production companies controlled by blackSouth Africans or women and are based in a range of different provinces andnon-metropolitan areas and represent new talent.The IBA is also determined to break the old boys' club of white maleproducers at the SABC. The Film and Television Federation, the BlackProducers Association and the SABC have now joined forces to jointlydevelop new commissioning procedures and terms of trade.Pay TVUntil 1995, there was only one pay TV player in South Africa. M-Net, has 1million subscribers and is reckoned to be at saturation level, though itdid add around 100,000 subs in 1995. M-Net takes 27% of TV advertisingrevenues and is now looking for opportunities elsewhere in Africa.In October 1993, M-Net sold its subscriber management services andtechnology (ComTech) divisions, as well as its investments outside SouthAfrica, to a new company, MultiChoice, which manages a package of satellitechannels that includes M-Net, as well as handling M-Net's terrestrialsubscriber management.M-Net had an "open time" arrangement with the SABC for an unencryptedperiod in the early evening, but the initial agreement has expired and isnow under negotiation. By a reciprocal arrangement, also likely to berenegotiated, the SABC's TV1 has been available to MultiChoice viewers inAfrica, while MultiChoice also rebroadcasts TV1 to Namibia.With M-Net's terrestrial service now mature and the SABC under pressure torelinquish terrestrial frequencies, the satellite sector offers the mostaction. MultiChoice dominates the market, by virtue of having been the onlyplayer for so long, but the SABC has already leaped in to challengeMultiChoice's dominant position.M-Net currently beams its programs off Intelsat VI, as well asbroadcasting terrestrially. Intelsat 704, launched in February 1995, has aKu-Band spot beam that includes South Africa, as does the recently launchedPanAmSat 4. The SABC and MultiChoice have both leased transponder capacityon PAS-4.From July, the SABC started analog transmissions of its terrestrialservices on Ku-band. In October 1995, the SABC's board endorsed plans toimplement SABC-owned DTH television and radio services. The plananticipates the introduction of eight digital pay channels to launch byJuly 1996 and 14-16 channels by the end of the year.The SABC says this distribution mechanism will make the "bestinternational programming available in South Africa." It is already lookingfor international players in a package that will include locally-producedand multilingual programming as well as more recognizable services.SABC has also talked of launching one free-to-air analog signal aimed atrural areas and based on education and development-type programming,another free analog channel carrying local and international product, andeventually the digital services, mostly sourced from overseas.In a carbon copy of the situation in Europe, the SABC is complaining tothe IBA that the incumbent DTH operator, MultiChoice, has a dominantposition because of its control of decoder technology. The SABC would likethe IBA to regulate against what it believes is a restraint on competition.Local analysts doubt this will happen and see MultiChoice retaining its topspot.M-Net/MultiChoice is currently offering South Africans 16 digital TVchannels, three radio channels and 40 music channels commercially viaPAS-4, having launched the service on November 1, 1995. The channelsinclude Supersport, Movie Magic and children's channel K-TV. Soon therewill also be Hallmark, SelecTV, TNT, ESPN Africa, VH-1, TV5 Afrique, andreligious channel Trinity.Another group, African Satellite Entertainment Corporation (ASEC), iscurrently tranmitting two channels off Intelsat 704, beaming into SouthAfrica from neighboring Swaziland, and claims to have 35,00 subscribers.But in December, the Swazi communications ministry threatened to withdrawits license because of non-payment of fees to Swaziland Post andTelecommunications Corporation.Estimates of the potential DTH market vary. Estimated dish sales in 1996vary between 180,000 and 250,000, with around one-fifth digital. Theequipment supplier Aerial Empire estimates the figure in year one ofsatellite DTH will be 100,000 systems sold. The saturation point could beas low as 300,000 digital subscribers.Digital dish installation is R4,500 and Multichoice costs R175 a month.Analog costs R1,500 and a four channel subscription will cost R80 fromASEC. tvBack to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996Facts on South AfricaTotal population        42.5m   Total employed '93      4.9 mil.TV homes        4.4m    Pay TV homes    1,000,000TV ad expenditure (1995)        R1,500 mil.     GDP     $94 bil.GDP real growth (1995)  3.5%    Inflation (1995)        11%Exchange rate   $1=R3.65PROGRAMMING QUOTAS      : Television broadcasters must meet an overalllocal television content quota as well as quotas within prescribed specificprogram categories and in prescribed viewing times. Public broadcastersmust show 50% local programming overall, private 30% (see column for moredetails).ADVERTISING LIMITS: 8% (4.8 minutes per hour) (PBS)OWNERSHIP RESTRICTIONS  : 20% foreign investment in TV companies. Domesticcross media restrictions.Sources: DBSA; SABC; SA Central Statistical Service; StanbicBack to Headline List CopyrightBROADCASTING & CABLE'S TV INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetJanuary 15, 1996Program quotasLocal television contentFree-to-air terrestrial televisionBroadcasters have overall quotas for local content and also genre-specificquotas.The SABC must ensure that, within three years of adopting local contentregulations, 50% of its programming during the South African television"performance" period (18 hours a day) and at prime time meets the followingquotas for specific program categories:Drama   20%Current Affairs 80%Documentary and informal knowledge building     50%Educational     60%Children        50%.Private terrestrial free-to-air television stations must achieve a localcontent quota of 30% within the South African television performance periodand meet the following quotas:Drama   15%Current Affairs 70%; Documentary and informal knowledge building40%; Children    30%.Non-terrestrial subscription broadcasters: local television contentrequirements will be set in the form of an airtime or a financialobligation.Terrestrial subscription broadcasters (currently M-Net) should have morelocal television content - in each year at least 5% of its programmingshould be local; or it should spend a specified sum of money per year onlocal product. The broadcaster will have to comply with a 30% air timeobligation during unencoded (open) time.Back to Headline List WT03-B09-21IA087-000629-B022-87http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/pb25.html 205.156.212.5 19970122040124 text/html 58938HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:59:08 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:25 GMTContent-length: 58751Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/pb25.html Sample Issue Copyright BUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ** FROM THE ALERT ** ISSUE HIGHLIGHTS (256 words) ** LEAD ARTICLE ** Risk or Reward: Setting Your Organization's Internet Policy by Cynthia Shockley (1406 words) ** NEWS AND TRENDS ** Items on Knight-Ridder, IAC Newswires Codes, Dow Jones Offerings, Lexis- Nexis Software, M.A.I.D. Web Site, Avenue Technologies Home Page, B & I on CD-ROM, ISI Current Awareness (1422 words) ** NEW PUBLICATIONS ** Publishers' addresses and telephone numbers are listed in the "PUBLISHERS" department. (27 words) COMPANY INFORMATION-- Hoover's Guide to Computer Companies (288 words) ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT-- Vitality and Renewal: A Manager's Guide for the 21st Century (515 words) INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY-- Business & Industry (463 words) INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY-- Internet Connection: Your Guide to Government Resources (434 words) INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY-- Internet Tools of the Profession: A Guide for Special Librarians (405 words) INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS-- Doing Business in the New Vietnam (903 words) INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS-- JADE: Japanese Accounts and Data on Enterprise (469 words) REFERENCE-- The Directory of Business Information Resources (694 words) ** CALENDAR ** Seminar and show dates for law librarians. (539 words) ** PUBLISHERS ** The following is the contact information for the items reviewed in this issue. Please mention the ALERT when inquiring about them. (127 words) CopyrightBUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ISSUE HIGHLIGHTSHappy New Year to all! When the clock changes, we check our smokedetectors; when the year changes, we check our BUSINESS INFORMATION ALERTmailing labels! If yours indicates a January expiration date, renew now!Call, write, e-mail, or fax us with your renewal. We have some great plansfor 1996--you won't want to miss out.The ALERT staff spent many hours during 1995 redesigning BUSINESSINFORMATION ALERT. We hope the changes you see will permit easier readingand access. Besides our new format, you'll notice that Marydee Ojala'sregular two columns are now one: "News and Trends." This change allows herthe flexibility to address those issues of most importance each month. Inaddition to our regular articles and columns, we plan to bring you library,publisher, and vendor profiles. If you work in or know of a library thatfunctions in an atypical manner, and would like to share your experienceswith our readers, please contact us. If there is a vendor or publisher youwant to know more about, let us know--maybe others are curious.This month's feature article by Cynthia Shockley came about from adiscussion on the BUSLIB listserv. Cynthia had posted a question asking howlibrarians are getting involved in setting Internet policy. For thisarticle she compiled some of the responses and expanded them into apractical discussion of how we can organize our involvement in Internetuse, policy, and training. I'm sure you'll use this article--if not now,then very soon.--Vera Emmons,Associate EditorBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Risk or Reward: Setting Your Organization's Internet Policyby Cynthia ShockleyLast year Internet use doubled, as it has every year since 1988. At thesame time, use of the Internet's graphical interface, the World Wide Web,grew almost twenty-fold. No one knows exactly how many people are out therecreating, maintaining, and using Internet sites, but an October 1994estimate by Internet analyst John Quartermain puts the number at 13.5million.One of the leading search sites, Lycos, ran 30 million searches in October1995. Estimates are that this number will grow to 100 million searches permonth by June 1996. Lycos has cataloged more than 9.3 million Internet siteaddresses, called URLs. Given this experience, Lycos began a televisioncampaign in November 1995 advertising itself as "The Catalog of theInternet."Internet content--everything from the text of classical literature tounderground music--is exploding even more spectacularly. Without anyprospect of profit, thousands of individuals have put millions of pagesonline--everything from complete libraries of technical information to day-by-day personal diaries.How does this dynamic growth impact the library community?Have you been asked by your organization to develop Internet policies andprocedures? Are you doing the training for your organization? Are you aWebmaster or on the Webmaster's team?When such a question was posed on the BUSLIB listserv, some interestingdialog took place. "You really hit a hot button with that question" replieda student enrolled in an MLS program. "The one thing that the faculty hasattempted to drill into our heads is that librarians cannot sit and waitfor someone to ask their opinions! We have to get in there and form policyand procedures or someday we will wake up and our jobs will be gone! TheMIS department (as well as others) will be all too happy to take over if wedon't insist that we be included right from the beginning!"As Barbara Beverly, Director of Library Services for the New York StateDepartment of Economic Development, observed "I intend to promote libraryaccess as much as possible since we are being seen as the place to go . . .however, MIS and other departments don't want to provide much Internetaccess because they see it as a big time waster (which it can be). But howelse can people learn?"How can librarians step into the breach?How aggressive should librarians be in claiming the Internet as theirdomain? The Internet is an information utility and, as such, it is bestunderstood by us. If we don't participate, others--those less trained inthe art of cataloging, searching, and retrieval who are delving into theworld of electronic resources--will take the job. In that case, librarianswill run the risk of losing more of their organization's info-businessmarket share (and, eventually their jobs).=======================================Step 1: Develop Internet Use GuidelinesYour organization should have an Internet policy and procedures for its useso that your fellow employees will know what the boundaries are as they usethe Internet. One major U.S. corporation published its Internet useguidelines on its Web site for its employees. The topics covered arespecific and follow common sense. For example:* behavior resulting in disciplinary action (e.g., sending threateningmessages);* behavior considered prudent and good manners (e.g., include a signaturewith an e-mail message reply);* behavior as a participant on listservs and newsgroups (e.g., activelydisclaim that you are speaking for the company and obey copyright laws);and* behavior for using file transfer protocols (e.g., don't ftp during primebusiness hours).As noted in the third item, obeying copyright laws is a very critical rulethat should have clear direction from you as a librarian. The librarycommunity is actively working on how the letter and spirit of the copyrightlaw translate into applications in an electronic, networked environment. Weshould be there to guide our organizations in developing their policystatements with respect to copyright laws. Your fellow employees shouldknow that their seemingly innocent acts of copying downloaded material areoften serious violations of copyright laws.You also may want to develop guidelines for patrons using the Internetwhile in the library. Glen Whitmill of the New Castle-Henry County PublicLibrary System posted an e-mail message on a library listserv encouraginglibrarians to comment and provide input on his library's "Computer UsagePolicy" draft. (The URL is http://www.nchcpl.lib.in.us/Library/LibraryInfo/InternetPolicy.html.) This policy covers use by both staff and patrons ofthe Internet. Guidelines are straightforward and practical and require thata patron sign a limitation of liability statement to help protect thelibrary.====================================================Step 2: Volunteer to Train Employees on Internet UseWe librarians are guides to information. The more information there is, themore your organization needs a guide. As described above, the material thatresides on the Internet is growing at a phenomenal rate.For example, one librarian responding to the listserv query reported that"we started out providing access to the Internet in our nonprofitorganization by providing individuals with dial-access accounts . . . laterwe installed our headquarters node and made it an item in the library'sbudget. Computer Services did not want to do it, so we did. ComputerServices did participate in selecting a provider and oversaw all the workof installing the hardware and software. We agreed between us that thelibrary would be responsible for training users."We are comfortable instructing individuals on how to identify, search, andaccess information resources and should continue that role. Anotherlibrarian serving a scientific community observed "one thing was readilyapparent and that was 'Internetting' was not going to be intuitive . . . itwas felt that since the Internet was going to be difficult to navigate, itwould be good if we could do something to smooth the way for ourclientele."================================================Step 3: Develop Internet Construction GuidelinesAs librarians, you also should participate in developing policy andstandards for the material that is to be posted as part of yourorganization's Internet presence. As the number of people engaged inplacing information on the Internet increases, so does the variety of adhoc organization, presentation, and style. Typically, MIS staff--oftenassigned to take the lead role in preparing an organization's Internetpresence--are not aware of the commitment that the organization is makingby placing electronic documents and information on the corporation'sInternet site. They haven't thought about the value of the information overtime; retention and updating requirements; how to migrate the material tothe coming generation of electronic storage systems; or how to cite andclassify the material to facilitate users in finding it.Managing information is what we do by trade. Here are some possibilitiesfor contributing to the development of your organization's Internetpresence:* Work on document construction guidelines that use hypertext markuplanguage (HTML) standards.* Establish required content guidelines for each page: e.g., name of groupresponsible for data, number and size of graphics, contact information, anddate last information was revised.* Establish a process to continually acquire, revise, and update linkedresources on the Internet including how links will be identified,established, and checked.* Articulate and publicize the criteria for documents published by theorganization destined only for the Internet so that the material can besearched as a hypertext linked document since often users no longer readserially.* Assist in identifying materials placed on the Internet that havepermanent value and should be considered candidates for organizationalarchives.* Evaluate various search and retrieval engines: e.g., Lycos, WebCrawler,Yahoo, World Wide Web Worm, InfoSeek Search, and Open Text Web Index.* Develop compatible cataloging (i.e., field names and record structures),indexing, and keyword schema to support the selected search engine.* Determine which parts of the organization's Internet site have data thatis not to be shared with all user communities and therefore should havelimited access.In sum, if we as librarians are willing to take some risks in stepping upto our organization's needs, we can help our fellow employees smoothlyaccelerate and merge onto the Internet infobahn.--Cynthia Shockley has a Masters in Library Scienceand is president of IR-IS, Inc., a library consulting firmin the National Capital Region.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Items on Knight-Ridder, IAC Newswires Codes, Dow Jones Offerings, Lexis-Nexis Software, M.A.I.D. Web Site, Avenue Technologies Home Page, B & I onCD-ROM, ISI Current Awarenessby Marydee OjalaNew Year's parties are over; the champagne's all gone; and it's now time tofocus on 1996 as a business year. As you can see, BUSINESS INFORMATIONALERT has changed its look somewhat. I can tell you that it was quiteexciting to exchange ideas about the new look via e-mail and fax. It wasless time consuming than formal meetings and, in the end, we probablyreached better conclusions about design and content than if we had beensequestered in a conference room somewhere. We weren't distracted by theperipheral discussions that always seem to impinge on the main topic--evenin the best run meetings.For the past several years, I have been writing two columns: one fordatabase current awareness and one called "For Your Information."Increasingly, I was finding it more and more difficult to decide what itemsto put in which column. The dividing lines between databases, searchservices, CD-ROMs, books, consumer hosts, and the Internet were (and are)becoming more fluid. The simple fact is that business informationspecialists must keep up with sources in a wide variety of media. Ratherthan waste time trying to categorize and classify current awareness bydatabase or general knowledge, we threw out the whole idea. As of thisissue, the "News and Trends" column will confront any media, so long as itis worthy of the attention of business information specialists, AKA you,our readers.=========================Knight-Ridder's New LooksFollowing in our footsteps of redesign (well, probably not, but I'd like tothink so), Knight-Ridder Information has consolidated the customermagazines of Dialog (Chronolog) and DataStar (Knight-Ridder InformationNews). The new publication will be called Chronolog, and there will be botha U.S. and a European edition.If the first issue is any indication, the U.S. version will be slightlylarger (16 versus 12 pages for the December 1995 issue) due to additionalinformation and search tips about Dialog databases. Articles are shorterand more to the point than in the previous Chronolog, but not as brief asthose in the former Knight-Ridder Information News. Hopefully the stylechanges will translate into more customers reading the newsletter. Dialog'sChronolog grew to the point of being almost unreadable. Plus, I found toomany recycled press releases and articles I'd already read in producernewsletters.Let's hope Knight-Ridder's new newsletter will truly do what they say itwill: Give us solutions to our information problems and maximize our time.Serials librarians will be distressed to note that the change occurs withthe last issue of the 1995 volume year, rather than the first issue of the1996 volume year. For more information, contact Knight-Ridder at 800-334-2564 or 415-254-8800.==================================Information Access Codes NewswiresWell known to business searchers are the Predicasts product codes, mostfrequently associated with the PROMT database. One of the big questionswhen IAC bought Predicasts was, "Why don't you apply the Predicasts productcodes to your other business files?" Usually what searchers had in mind wasTrade & Industry.IAC took care of that in early 1994 with some 75 percent of Trade &Industry records from that time forward being coded with the Predicastsproduct codes. Now the Predicasts codes are being added to another IACdatabase. This time it's Newswire ASAP. The enhancement comes inconjunction with a reload on Dialog to take advantage of the standardizedfield structure tagging. As part of the reload, Newswire ASAP can now beaccessed from outside North America. For more information, contactInformation Access Company at 800-227-8431 or 415-378-5269.================================Dow Jones Expands Text OfferingsDow Jones News/Retrieval's Text Library has expanded by 67.5 percent. Agreat deal of this is due to the addition of IAC databases PROMT, Trade &Industry, and Industry Express. Interestingly, IAC has relinquished thedatabase brand names when articles from these three files are added to DowJones.When you retrieve an article from any of the thousands of sourcesrepresented by the IAC databases, they will be labeled as coming fromInformation Access Company, not from an individual database. Other sourcescontributing to Dow Jones' growth include the Federal Document ClearingHouse (FDCH), which provides complete coverage of developments in thefederal government. That includes news conferences, congressional hearings,White House meetings, speeches, and briefings.On the international side--but only searchable in North America--are the FTMcCarthy press clippings. A subsidiary company of the Financial Times(London), FT McCarthy provides company, industry, and market news clippedfrom major European newspapers and business magazines. For moreinformation, contact Dow Jones News/Retrieval at 609-452-1511.=========================================Macintoshed Lexis-Nexis Research SoftwareAn updated version of the Lexis-Nexis research software for the Macintosh(version 2.9) can be downloaded directly from the Lexis-Nexis CommunicationCenter on the World Wide Web (http://www.lexis-nexis.com/). Improvementsinclude a text input window that expands to meet your search strategyrequirements, a scrollable research session history window so you canrepeat a search without re-keying it, improved document formatting, dualcolumn printing, Internet access, and point-and-click hypertext links toother related documents.You need at least a Macintosh computer (68030 or higher), System 7.0 orhigher, 4 MB RAM, one 800K or 1.4 MB disk drive, and a modem. For moreinformation, contact Lexis-Nexis at 800-227-4908 or michael.galamb@lexis-nexis.com.=============================Profound Chooses the InternetIn one of his typical profound quotes, M.A.I.D plc CEO Dan Wagner, declaredrecently: "Online is the Internet and the Internet is online." That was topreface his announcement that the Profound Business Intelligence OnlineService will use the Internet as its main delivery mechanism.Essentially, M.A.I.D has transformed its VAX cluster of computers into agigantic Web site--rather than use client/server technology--and will useNetscape as its browser. If the final product is like the prototype, youwill be able to search the various Profound databases, including Textline,five IAC files, market research reports, company data, and wire servicesusing M.A.I.D.'s InfoSort indexing.The Internet service will run in parallel with Corporate Profound,Profound, and Profound Business Facts on the Microsoft Network. For moreinformation, contact Profound at 212-750-6900 or connect to the home pageat http://www.profound.com.==============================Avenue Technologies on the NetCompany profiles, some 25,000 of them, can be found at Avenue TechnologiesHome Page (http://www.avetech. com/avenue/). A subsidiary of DataTimes,Avenue Technologies compiles company information from a number of differentsources, among them the DataTimes newspapers and numerous other financialsources. The companies are both publicly and privately held.This home page is not flashy, and there are customer endorsements--completewith the customer's photograph--that can easily be skipped by professionalbusiness researchers. If you want to shortcut the research process oncompany background, this is one way to go. Reports cost $40 and includegraphs and charts. Delivery is to e-mail boxes. For more information,contact Avenue Technologies at 415-705-6971 or rick@avetech.com.==========================Business & Industry CD-ROMThe new Business & Industry database (File 9 on Dialog, BIDB on DataStar)will join the Knight-Ridder OnDisc family of CD-ROM databases. As withother KR OnDisc products, searchers can choose between full-blown Dialogsearch software or the simplified Easy Menu approach.With its emphasis on facts and numeric data, Business & Industry is a goodchoice for end user searching by both students and business people. Theannual cost for Business & Industry Database OnDisc is $3,995 for companiesand $2,400 for academic and public libraries. For more information, contactResponsive Database Services, Inc. at 216-292 9620 or 800-313-2212 or by e-mail at rdsmail@ix.netcom.com.============================ISI Delivers on the InternetThe newest information product for the business world is current awareness.Funny, since it is far from a new and revolutionary concept. The latest tojoin the rush to alerting services is the Institute for ScientificInformation (ISI). Delivered over the Internet, ISI's Research Alert Directbrings its Current Contents and citation index databases into competitionwith such other current awareness products as Individual Inc.'s NewsPage.Bibliographic information from ISI will be delivered directly tosubscribers' e-mailboxes. Full text can be supplied through ISI's TheGenuine Article document delivery service. ISI's new home page can be foundat http:// www.isinet.com. For more information, contact ISI at 800-336-4474, 215-386-0100, or e-mail to isisales@isinet.com.=====================Contact the ColumnistIf you have questions or comments about this column, please e-mail MarydeeOjala at 71571.43@compuserve.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Publishers' addresses and telephone numbers are listed in the "PUBLISHERS"department.Prices given are U.S. list prices, exclusive of postage, handling, and shippingcharges.All subscription prices are annual, unless otherwise noted.Available discounts also are not listed.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996COMPANY INFORMATION--Hoover's Guide to Computer CompaniesLawrence Hagemann & Eric Nee, eds. 1995. The Reference Press, Inc.Softcover & disk versions. 667p. ISBN: 1-878753-79-7. $34.95This is a new title in Hoover's stable of excellent and inexpensivebusiness directories. This particular title was published in conjunctionwith Upside Publishing Company, a respected publisher of material onemerging technology trends and their impact on the computing industry.Upside editors contributed a brief overview article of the computerindustry and a 12-page list of who's who in the industry that includesbrief biographical information. The list-lover's compendium is expanded andincludes lists of the top companies and retailers from various sources inaddition to the Hoover's list of rankings.The main sections contain the traditional two-page profiles, including 10years of financial data (where available) of 77 "industry leaders" and one-page profiles (with six years of financial data) of another 173 "selectedindustry players." Another section includes a bare-bones description of 885companies, providing only their addresses, top officers, 1994 sales, andnumber of employees. There are two indexes, one of companies byheadquarters location and the other by brands, companies, and people. Anextra added attraction is an electronic version of the text on disk using aWindows program, which will permit you to export data to other programs andcreate mailing lists.In this rapidly changing industry this is a good, inexpensive source forall types of libraries. Other people interested in the computer industrywill find it an excellent initial source to consult. For the latestinformation you will need to consult either specific-industry periodicalsor online databases. Hoover's Guide to Computer Companies is definitely arecommended acquisition.--Judith Field, Library and Information Science,Wayne State University, DetroitBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT--Vitality and Renewal: A Manager's Guide for the 21st CenturyColin Hutchinson. 1995. Praeger Publishers.344p. Hardcover, ISBN: 0-275-95233-9, $69.50;softcover, ISBN: 0-275-95234-7, $24.95Written from a British perspective, but applicable to the U.S., this bookcalls on business leaders to take a proactive role in moving us away fromour current wasteful use of resources to a sustainable economy in whichconservation and recycling are the norm. Author Colin Hutchinson quotes GroHarlem Brundtland, "Sustainable development . . . meets the needs of thepresent without compromising the ability of future generations to meettheir own needs," and predicts we have 40 years at most to meet ourenvironmental challenges.Hutchinson's nonjudgemental and holistic approach distinguishes this bookfrom other more polarized environmental calls to action. He provides middleand upper management with a framework to create environmental solutions. Healso introduces the skills needed to lead a partnership of ecologicalorganizations, government agencies, and business to a sustainable society.Recognizing that the ability to bring about changes in organizationalcultures will be fundamental to achieving the goal of a sustainableeconomy, Hutchinson predicts change management skills will be the keybusiness tool for the 21st century.Practical techniques to bring about and manage change in an organizationare provided. Specific examples are given of corporations that haveassigned priority to ecological concerns and that have made significantprogress in controlling their effect on the environment. For instance, from1985 to 1991, Dow Chemical cut its air emissions in half in the U.S.Hutchinson also advocates a redefinition of economic metrics. For example,our current measures of economic success, such as the Gross NationalProduct, are correlated with factors such as pollution emissions and linearconsumption of resources. In support of Hutchinson's recommendation, atabout the same time this book was published, the World Bank announced a newsystem for calculating a country's net worth by assigning values to itsnatural resources, capital investments, and worker productivity. Using thisnew scale, Australia and Canada were rated by the World Bank as the globe'stwo richest nations. The U.S. came in at 12th place.Appendixes contain environmental checklists, and a list that identifiesmajor corporations with formally defended environmental policies. There isan annotated bibliography to some 100 publications and an extensive rosterof organizations available as resources for further information or data.Readers may initially question Hutchinson's premise that an individual, oreven a single firm, can realistically make a dent in the complex globalenvironmental problems facing us today. But the increasing number ofarticles in the popular press about participatory management, the growingempowerment of the individual, and the voluntary downshifting to simpler,but higher-quality lifestyles supports Hutchinson's thesis.Hutchinson concludes by challenging business readers to make a differencein their organizations and communities. By taking charge of environmentalimpacts, first on an individual level, then on the corporate, and finallyon the community level, Hutchinson believes business leaders have theopportunity and the responsibility to move us to a sustainable economy.--Adrienne A. Bendel, Section/Assembly/Society Services Director,Medical Group Management Association, Englewood, Colo.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY--Business & Industry1995. Responsive Database Services, Inc.Dialog databaseBusiness & Industry(tm) (B&I) looks as if it is another "must" in thegrowing list of databases essential for thorough online research. TheOctober debut of B&I on Dialog and Data-Star has tongues wagging in onlinecircles.B&I is produced by Responsive Database Services, Inc. (RDS), a new venturefounded by Dick Harris, formerly president of Predicasts. Early on, RDSscored big points with its exceptional marketing push to get searchmaterials out to registered Dialog and Data-Star users several weeks priorto the generous trial period. This is a wakeup call to producers who can'tseem to get materials out the door.B&I is not duplicating the efforts of other international businessdatabases, e.g., Promt or F&S Index. A comparison of B&I's sourcepublication list to Fulltext Sources Online and Books & Periodicals Onlineconfirms that a majority of the publications available on B&I are alsoavailable elsewhere but not necessarily from Knight-Ridder. Suchpublications as Wirtschaftswoche, once available only through Genois, willnow reach a wider audience. B&I has limited date coverage beginning in July1994 and plans to update daily. B&I editors exclude stories from wireservices, market research, and analyst's reports. Searchers who have wadedthrough similar data in Promt will applaud this decision since separatesearches are often required in unique databases.Although the manual claims B&I's index system is "user-friendly, . . . easyto remember and easy to apply," don't toss the documentation just yet.B&I's indexing system consists of concept and marketing terms, product andgeographic codes, industry and company names, and document types.Additional indexes include trade names, spokespersons, and slogans.Here are two important points for experienced searchers: PC codes areautomatically truncated, and the concept term for market share (ct=marketshare) may be a popular change from such keystroke gyrations asmarket?(5n)share?. The marketing terms are especially welcome and reflectthe best of Marketing and Advertising Reference Service (MARS). The Dialogsearch examples provided in the documentation are straight forward, andstandard display formats apply. Format 8 gives title, word count, andindexing. Format 8 also indicates if an article is available in full-text.(Searchers may also limit the search to this format by entering /FULLTEXT.)Unfortunately, the enhanced title feature B&I has touted is not availablewith a format 8, KWIC, or title display. RDS has made sure it gets a fewcents for this great feature.Finally, a remark about the "indicative statement" that RDS provides at theend of abstract records. If the statement begins "article contains littlefurther information. . . ": beware! That precious "little" may be themissing information you've spent time and money to find.--Loretta Spurling, Economists Incorporated,Washington, D.C.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY--Internet Connection: Your Guide to Government ResourcesJeff Steinman, ed. 1995. Bernan Press.Newsletter, 10 issues. $69Since the early 1990s, government agencies and departments have beenexponentially increasing electronic publication of government documents andrecords. Accessing these databases is sometimes only slightly less dauntingthan finding those databases on the Internet. Good Web browsers, gopherindexes, and other electronic Internet site locators are increasinglyavailable for those savvy information providers who regularly navigate theNet. The Internet Connection: Your Guide to Government Resources is a printresource intended to keep you informed about government sites on the Net.It does just that.This newsletter is not intended to teach readers about the Internet.Consequently, a lot of space is not wasted defining terms. It is especiallyuseful for corporate information professionals or sophisticated academiclibrarians who assist users in research or are responsible for theirinstitution's Web Site. Its drawback is that when you find a goodgovernment reference, you cannot just electronically "forward" theinformation to someone else.On average, five government resources are brought to your attention perissue. An example of one resource is the editor's article, "Tax Forms forFedWorld." In this article (typical of what you will find), the Internetaddress is provided. Step-by-step instructions for logging on andmaneuvering through FedWorld to get to the subject of the report areprovided. Helpful hints and good explanations for downloading the tax formsare used. In this article little explanation is required for what a taxform is but other articles do explain the scope of the government resource.What I liked most about the newsletter was its back-page diagram outlininggovernment resources at a glance. The diagram summarizes what has been inthe previous seven pages and is a precursor to an annual index. Otherserials taking this same approach include Internet World, which placesresources by subject on its back page. Information professionals shouldfind a use for those back pages because when the amount of space requiredfor the at-a-glance summary, the table of contents, and white space isdeducted, there is little more than five pages of new and usableinformation.Bernan Press is a reputable government book wholesaler, and its reputationlends credence to this guide. What I found most helpful informationally,were the opinions and valuative comments about the particular governmentresources it is guiding you to. Information about the quality of access,currency, maneuverability, and scope are the valuing tools informationprofessionals need to know before recommending. Those professionalguideposts would be worth the subscription.--Melody M. Hainsworth, Vice-President,Naples Free-Net, Naples, Fla.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY--Internet Tools of the Profession: A Guide for Special LibrariansHope Tillman, ed. 1995. Special Libraries Association.Softcover. 250p. ISBN: 0-87111-430-5. $37.50This reference book is a combination dictionary/teaching tool onresearching on the Internet. It is also a guide to sample locations ofinformation, arranged in some cases by subject and in others by uniqueSpecial Libraries Association (SLA) interests. As it is an in-housepublication intended for SLA members, part of its layout follows thedivision/geographic organization of SLA. Internet resources therefore aredivided into the 28 SLA subject divisions. Seven, including business andfinance, chemistry, education, food/agriculture/nutrition, informationtechnology/networking, nuclear science, and pharmaceutical provideevaluative resource lists. The other divisions have a hit-or-miss listwithout evaluations. The editor tells us that this is because manydivisions were not able or willing to participate. Therefore, the list ofsubjects is not in itself a ranking of importance as an arbitrary andrandom self-selection.Authors of the evaluative lists follow the same editorial outline,including detailing the purpose and value of that particular title. Theselection criteria for putting a title on the lists is, however, solely theauthor's. For example the 19 resources cited under InformationTechnology/Networking were selected because they may be used for keepingcurrent and are helpful for librarians who train others in accessing theInternet. On the other hand, the 19 resources selected under Education werechosen for their representation of the diverse interests of the division'smembership. Food/Agriculture and Nutrition titles were selected because oftheir proven usefulness in that type of library.The publication's value to information professionals lies less in the smallhighly selective subject lists, than in the evaluative information providedwith some references. When used in conjunction with the index, the listsmay prove helpful. Its other great value to the SLA member is the 34addresses where SLA discussion groups can be found. Enough information isprovided to be able to either find a forum or subscribe to the lists. Theeditor is correct that there is a need for updates to these lists. Samplescreens were found helpful.This publication is not a must for libraries. Comprehensive subject guidesexist in print and on the Net. It is however a helpful resource for thepersonal professional growth of information professionals. It willcertainly aid new SLA members who join a division and wonders what coreInternet resources are peer-recommended.--Melody M. Hainsworth, Vice-President,Naples Free-Net, Naples, Fla.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS--Doing Business in the New VietnamChristopher Engholm. 1995. Prentice Hall Publishers, Inc.Hardcover. 256p. ISBN: 0-13-325853-X. $24.95This reference book contains guide information about doing business inVietnam today. The comprehensive volume accommodates information aboutVietnam on a range of business topics including country profile, sellingto, investing in, and working with the Vietnamese. Additionally, it affordsup-to-date information including useful business addresses, trade contacts,sample contractual agreements, and visitor information.Many informed business leaders and scholars see Vietnam as the hottest newbusiness frontier in the Pacific Rim. In spite of its stigma as a"communist country," Vietnam is experiencing booming growth with negligibleinflation, a standardized currency, low labor rates, and a population of70-plus million with a work-hard philosophical background. Today, withrecent (and continuing) government and market reforms, business andcommerce in Vietnam operates as a near "free market economy" system. Allthis rapid economic expansion offers opportunities for exporters,investors, entrepreneurs, and business executives.To write this book, Engholm draws on his experience, which includesfounding The Engholm Group--which specializes in public relations andcompany representation in Asia and Latin America--international businessconsulting, presenting seminars, and writing this book. In this practicalguidebook, he provides dozens of useful tips and effective strategies fordeveloping profitable relationships with Vietnamese businesses and theVietnamese people. Engholm's previous books are Doing Business in Asia'sBooming "China Triangle" (1994) and When Business East Meets Business West:A Guide to Practice and Protocol in the Pacific Rim, the Asia and JapanBusiness Information Sourcebook (1991).The book opens with a preface, short introduction, and brief glossary ofkey terms and acronyms. Its four parts contain four chapters each. Part 1contributes a profile of the people, the economy, the politics, and thebusiness scene. Demographic and economic facts, the official governmentstructure, a chronology of Vietnam-U.S. relations, and the climate forbusiness are analyzed. Historical background, the Chinese influence, andthe Vietnamese people and their work ethic also are addressed.Part 2, "Selling to Vietnam," confronts the primary marketing topics.Chapter 5, "What Vietnam Wants to Buy," points out many facts that gobeyond what standard summary statistics would indicate. Even though Vietnamis statistically one of the poorest countries in the world with a GNP percapita of only $200, disposable income by consumers varies greatly. Amongthe 72 percent of the populations still working in agriculture, many cannoteven afford a bicycle and earn barely $50 per year. On the other hand,about 49 percent of the urban households have at least one motorcycle (withnew Hondas selling for $1,700). Details about entering the market(import/export regulations, setting up a sales representative's office,rent, registration, and bank accounts); channels of distribution(wholesaling, retailing, channels, shipping, customs/clearance, andwarehousing); and advertising and promotion (trade shows, billboards,regulation, cost/rates,) are presented."Investing in Vietnam" is the topic of Part 3. Issues such as why and withwhom to invest, types of foreign venture allowed, foreign investmentregulation, favorable regions (provinces) for investment, regulations andlicense requirements, finding local investment partners, the rapidlyemerging private sector, project approval and start-up, working withVietnamese labor, finding skilled workers and recruiting managers,unionization and strikes, and wage administration are discussed. Chapter 11looks at the in's and out's of "Transferring Technology" and presentsVietnam's attitude toward Western technology. The part's final chapterdeals with financing, taxes, and commercial disputes. The banking sectorand capital markets also are explained.The fourth and final part, "Working with the Vietnamese," centers onbusiness culture (differences with other Asian countries, trust-basedrelationships, gifts and bribes, and managing and motivating workers);communicating and negotiating (use of an interpreter, meeting approachesand tactics); essential etiquette and protocol (business cards, namesusage, dining and drinking, gifts, holidays, and "lucky and unlucky" days);traveling (hotels, air/road/train, health and safety risks, money matters,working hours, entertainment and shopping, recreation, what to bring); andliving in Vietnam (paperwork required, renting a house, community support,and life quality). The work's appendixes provide useful business and tradecontacts with addresses and phone numbers, sample contractual agreements,and visitor information (addresses and phone numbers of airlines, hotels,museums, restaurants, and nightclubs/discotheques).This well-written guide equips readers with an array of good advice. Forexample, knowing how to avoid costly mistakes when dealing with thegovernment and how to conduct yourself through the intricacies ofsocializing could make the difference between success and failure in abusiness venture. One of the strengths of this book versus other recentbooks on the same topic (Doing Business in Vietnam, 1995 by James W.Robinson; Vietnam: Business Opportunities and Risks, 1995 by Joseph P.Quinian; Vietnam: A Business Handbook, 1994 by Neil Ashwood) is that itcovers the topics by asking and answering practical yet probing questionssuch as, "What is the Vietnamese attitude toward American business and viceversa?" and "Should a firm begin promotion of its products and services ata trade show in Vietnam?". Additionally, the book is enhanced with about 25pages of photographs and numerous graphs, tables, and charts to add to andclarify the volume's content.Doing Business in the New Vietnam is recommended for practicing managers,consultants, government officials, academics and advanced students, andothers interested in pursing import/export trade, investment, or additionalcommerce-driven interaction with the economically-emerging new Vietnam.--Joseph W. Leonard, School of Business Administration,Miami University, Miami, OhioBack to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS--JADE: Japanese Accounts and Data on Enterprise1994. Bureau van Dijk Electronic Publishing Inc.CD-ROM database. $12,000This intriguing product will be useful to anyone working with the Japanesemarket. Teikoku Databank has long been know as a leading supplier ofcorporate credit information from Japan. Its two English language onlinedatabases--one of profile data and one of full financials--have made itmuch easier for researchers to find information on Japanese companies.JADE takes the information from the Teikoku Full Financial database, addsseveral useful data items, and tops it with a powerful package of financialanalysis software. The database covers some 10,000 Japanese companies,providing a full range of profile information (name, address, telephone,year of incorporation, number of employees, credit rating, trading banks,CEO background, to name a few); financial data (balance sheet and profit &loss account in a standardized format); and 22 ratios calculated from thebalance sheet. A welcome addition to Teikoku Databank's standardinformation is U.S. Standard Industrial Classification (SIC), UK SIC, andNACE codes. These do not translate perfectly to Teikoku Databank's ownIndustrial Classification, but Western searchers will find them much morefamiliar.Searching is straight-forward and fast. In addition to the profileinformation, it is possible to search by the 22 ratios, 12 financials, orthe year-on-year trends of those financials. Once a company or companiesare found, there is a wide variety of reports that can be produced,including those in user-defined formats. The financial analysis softwareallows users to get a detailed analysis of an individual company'sfinances. In addition, it permits analysis of a group of companies, or ofone company relative to its peer group. The results of the analysis can bein report format or a selection of effective graphic formats. It is alsopossible to download data for use in other software packages. Severalcustom export formats such as dBase, Lotus, Excel, are included, as isASCII and DIF.In general, the interface is very clean and easy to use. As a sampleapplication, it was quite simple to select manufacturers of cameras,identify the most profitable firm in terms of Return on Investment, displayits cost structure, and compare several of its performance ratios to theindustry norm over time.The one caveat has to do with the nature of Japanese financial reports.Financial reporting standards in Japan are significantly more lax thanthose in the U.S. Also, there are several differences in practice, such asreporting stocks at book value, that can lead to different results thanwould be expected under Western standards. All this should be kept in mindwhen interpreting one's findings.The database is updated quarterly. It is available for DOS and Windows andcan be included on local and wide area networks.--Glenn Hoetker, Dewey Ballantine,Washington, D.C.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996REFERENCE--The Directory of Business Information ResourcesEd note: Although this publication is a third edition, we included it dueto its relevance.3d ed. 1995. Grey House Publishing.Softcover. 1,197p. ISBN: 0-939300-60-5. $155This third edition of The Directory of Business Information Resources is ahefty softcover with 1,197 pages of information on 90 different industrygroups, form accounting to wholesalers. When evaluating this book, one'simmediate reaction is to compare it to its venerable predecessor, Gale'sEncyclopedia of Business Sources (EBIS), now in its 10th edition in twohardcover volumes. The younger directory comes off fairly well incomparison, though it's a bit like comparing apples and oranges. Here'swhy.According to the numbered entries, The Directory of Business InformationResources contains 13,489 brief paragraphs that describe the associations,newsletters, magazines, trade shows, directories, and databases in eachindustry. Each entry is listed only once, unlike EBIS where the sameinformation can be listed numerous times under different categories. TheDirectory is much more straightforward in its arrangement, which makes iteasier to use but also much less sophisticated for subject searching. Forexample, in EBIS, the accounting section contains numerous "see references"and divides the industry into subgroups such as cost accounting, governmentaccounting, and accounting research. This means the reader has to guesswhich section to look under and also creates entry duplication. TheDirectory, on the other hand, has a 14-page section on accounting with no"see references" and all entries placed together according to type. It isone-stop shopping at its best.Typical directory entries contain brief, basic information: name, address,phone, and fax number, one contact person, and either a description thatcan be as brief as one line or no description at all. There are noelectronic addresses, and information such as association membershipnumbers or publication print schedule is often missing. This fact makes forvery uneven value among entries.EBIS tends to treat the "whole industry" as it were, with sections thatinclude statistics sources, financial ratios, and price sources in additionto the basic section echoed in The Directory. EBIS also treats the businessworld in general in much more detail, by including discrete sections onsuch topics as employee motivation, acid rain, and AIDS policy.The Directory of Business Information Resources has some curious omissions.For example, the Computers & Data Processing Industry section makes nomention of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) nor the Institutefor Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), two of the largestorganizations in the field. Nor does it include such widely circulatedpublications as Infoworld, PC Magazine, or PC Week, though it does haveComputerworld, PC Computing, and BYTE. These important omissions in anindustry with which I am familiar lead me to suspect there may be similarones in other industries. Some of the more obscure entries for thisindustry, such as NEWMEDIA and Proclaimer, listed in the "Magazines &Journals" section, contain no descriptive information and therefore are ofvery limited utility.Another glaring omission is in the health care of medical industry, whichis of great current importance, but is all but ignored except for themention of a few publications scattered throughout the book. However, thisindustry is very well treated in EBIS. Yet The Directory includes sucheclectic groups as the "gifts" industry and the "motorcycles" industry.One definite plus for The Directory is its entry index, sorely lacking inEBIS. The Directory's other index is a publisher index. Since referenceworks of this type are generally used to find information on a topicunknown to the researcher, a subject index also would be helpful toindicate to users the editorial decisions on entry placement. Also, TheDirectory does seem to have a great many small, regional organizations andpublications.If it is important for your library to have the most comprehensivecollection of this type of information in print, then this volume is anecessary addition to your collection. If you have a limited budget and canonly purchase one title, I'd have to stick with the Gale publication.--Susan Fingerman, SMF Information Services,Ellicott City, Md.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Seminar and show dates for law librarians.JANUARY 28-30, 1996SLA Winter Education Conference: Technology and Tools in the InformationAge. Cleveland. Contact Tracy Lofty, SLA Professional Development, 202-234-4700 x649.FEBRUARY 1, 1996Mastering Competitive Intelligence Research: Sources, Tools, and Techniquesseminar. New York. Contact Washington Researchers, 202-333-3499, fax 202-626-0656.FEBRUARY 2, 1996Interpreting & Refining Competitive Intelligence: A Tool Kit for Analystsand Managers seminar. New York. Contact Washington Researchers, 202-333-3499, fax 202-626-0656.FEBRUARY 8, 1996Mastering Competitive Intelligence Research: Sources, Tools, and Techniquesseminar. Chicago. Contact Washington Researchers, 202-333-3499, fax 202-626-0656. Call for additional dates and locations.FEBRUARY 9, 1996Interpreting & Refining Competitive Intelligence: A Tool Kit for Analystsand Managers seminar. Chicago. Contact Washington Researchers, 202-333-3499, fax 202-626-0656. Call for additional dates and locations.FEBRUARY 15-17, 1996Coming Full Circle: Sixth Annual Transborder Library Forum (VI FORO).Holiday Inn City Center, Tucson. Contact Elissa Cochran, University ofArizona, 520-621-4869, fax 520-621-9733, e-mail ecochran@ccit.arizona.edu.FEBRUARY 26-MARCH 1, 199611th Annual Computers in Libraries '96: North America's Largest TechnologyConference and Exhibition for Librarians and Information Managers. HyattRegency Crystal City, Arlington, VA. Contact Information Today, 609-654-6266, fax 609-654-4309.MARCH 27-29, 1996European Business Information 6th International Conference. Excelsior HotelGallia, Milan, Italy. Contact TFPL Inc., 202-296-6009, fax 202-296-6343, e-mail 74044.3166@compuserve.com.MARCH 27-30, 1996SCIP '96 Conference. Washington, DC. Contact the Society of CompetitiveIntelligence Professionals, 703-739-0696.APRIL 1-2, 1996Using the Internet for Business seminar. Washington, DC. Contact AmericanManagement Association 800-262-9699, fax 518-891-0368.APRIL 18-21, 1996Association of Independent Information Professionals Conference.Albuquerque, NM. Contact AIIP, 212-779-1855.MAY 6-7, 1996Using the Internet for Business seminar. Chicago. Contact AmericanManagement Association 800-262-9699, fax 518-891-0368.MAY 14-16, 199617th National Online Meeting: Online Retrieval in Transition. New YorkHilton. Contact Information Today, Inc., 609-654-6266, fax 609-654-4309.JUNE 8-13, 1996Special Libraries Association: 87th Annual Conference. Boston. Contact SLA,202-234-4700.JUNE 10-11, 1996Using the Internet for Business seminar. Atlanta. Contact AmericanManagement Association 800-262-9699, fax 518-891-0368.OCTOBER 28-30, 1996Online '96. Washington, DC. Contact Online Inc. 800-248-8466, fax 203-761-1466.======================Seminars Also of Note:The Information Broker's Seminar: How to Make Money as an InformationBroker. One-day seminar held across the U.S. Sue Rugge, instructor. ContactInformation Professionals Institute, 713-537-8344, fax 713-537-8332, e-mail75120.50@compuserve.com.Comparative Online Searching: Searching Smart! One-day seminar held acrossthe U.S. Helen Burwell, instructor. Contact Information ProfessionalsInstitute, 713-537-8344, fax 713-537-8332, e-mail 75120.50@compuserve.com.Business Connection (Company and Industry Information). Half-day workshopheld across the U.S. Contact Chris Smith, Nexis Information ProfessionalSupport Group, 800-426-7675m fax 513-865-1511.Finding Information on Obscure Companies. Half-day seminar held across theU.S. Contact Chris Smith, Nexis Information Professional Support Group,800-426-7675m fax 513-865-1511.Accessing the Internet: A Practical Guide to Connecting to the Internet andUsing Information Resources. Two-day seminar held across the U.S. ContactData-Tech Institute, 201-478-5400, fax 201-478-4418, e-mailwww.datatech.com.Finding It on the Internet. One-day seminar held across the U.S. ContactSkillPath, 800-873-7545, fax 913-362-4241, e-mail skillpath@mcimail.com.Corporate and Business Information on Westlaw. One-day seminar held at WestPublishing's Information Centers across the U.S. Contact the Westlaw officenear you.Back to Headline List CopyrightBUSINESS INFORMATION ALERT via NewsNetJANUARY 1996The following is the contact information for the items reviewed in this issue.Please mention the ALERT when inquiring about them.BERNAN PRESS4611-F Assembly Dr.Lanham, MD 20706-4391800-274-4447301-459-7666BUREAU VAN DIJK ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING INC.90 Park Ave., Ste. 1600New York, NY 10016212-984-0728Fax: 212-984-0604GREY HOUSE PUBLISHINGPocket Knife Sq.Lakeville, CT 06039800-562-2139Fax: 203-435-0867PRAEGER PUBLISHERS88 Post Rd. WestP.O. Box 5007Westport, CT 06881203-226-3571Fax: 203-222-1502PRENTICE HALL PUBLISHERS, INC.200 Old Tappan Rd.Old Tappan, NJ 07675800-922-0579Fax: 800-445-6991THE REFERENCE PRESS, INC.6448 Hwy. 290 E., Ste. E-104Austin, TX 78723800-486-8666Fax: 512-454-9401E-mail: refpress6@aol.comRESPONSIVE DATABASE SERVICES, INC.23611 Chagrin Blvd., Ste. 320Beachwood, OH 44122800-313-2212Fax: 216-292-9621E-mail: rdsmail@ix.netcom.comSPECIAL LIBRARIES ASSOCIATION1700 Eighteenth St. NWWashington, DC 20009-2508202-234-4700Fax: 202-265-9317E-mail: sla1@capcon.netBack to Headline List WT03-B09-22IA087-000629-B022-113http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/pb45.html 205.156.212.5 19970122040146 text/html 33416HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:59:50 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:23 GMTContent-length: 33229Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/pb45.html Sample Issue Copyright THE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNet December 15, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES ***NEW PUBLICATIONS*** WARNER PUBLISHING SERVICES INTROS NEWSLETTER (131 words) IDG COMMUNCIATIONS TO ENTER ROMANIAN MARKET (247 words) BNA BEGINS PUBLICATION OF PUBS FOR PHARMACEUTICAL AND ENVIRONMENT MARKETS (318 words) A/S/M COMMUNICATIONS TO LAUNCH "MEDIA WEEK" ON JANUARY 14 (253 words) GRO COM GROUP TO LAUNCH "DELI-BAKE ADVOCATE" IN JUNE (240 words) "MACPREPRESS" FAX NEWSLETTER FROM PREPRESS INFO SERVICE (170 words) GRALLA PUBLICATIONS LAUNCHES "CORPORATE TRAVEL'S STRATEGIC MEETINGS" (272 words) NEWSLETTTER FOR WINDOWS 3.0 INDUSTRY (41 words) NEW TRADE MAGAZINE FOR STRIP CLUBS AND AGENCIES (43 words) LEGAL NEWSLETTER AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION (40 words) NEW PUB FOR GREEN BUSINESS STRATEGIES (63 words) EXECUTIVE FAX LETTER FROM KINGSWOOD COMMUNICATIONS (40 words) ***ACQUISITIONS OF PUBLICATIONS, PUBLISHING AND INFORMATION EDGELL FINDS BUYERS FOR SIX OF SEVEN PUBLICATIONS (311 words) K-III CONFIRMS REPORTS OF INTEREST IN FIELD PUBLICATIONS (153 words) ELSEVIER SELLS STAKE IN WOLTERS KLUWER TO GOLDMAN SACHS (48 words) DUN & BRADSTREET DECIDES NOT TO SELL TWO UNITS (55 words) BUYER SOUGHT FOR "WASHINGTON CEO" MAGAZINE (54 words) ALEXANDER RESEARCH & COMMUNICATIONS BUYS NL (19 words) ***BUSINESS AND TRADE PUBLISHING NEWS*** ACT III PUBLISHING CEASES PUBLICATION OF "CHANNELS" MAGAZINE (278 words) WEST PUBLISHING INSTITUTES DIRECT ACCESS TO DIALOG DATABASES (202 words) AMERICAN BUSINESS PRESS TO HOLD SPRING MEETING (25 words) "TELEPROFESSIONAL" INCREASES FREQUENCY (18 words) REED INTERNATIONAL REPORTS SIX MONTH FIGURES (49 words) MILLER FREEMAN CANCELS COMPUTING CONFERENCE (44 words) "NIKKEI BUSINESS" TO INCREASE FREQUENCY (66 words) LOTUS AND SIMON & SCHUSTER ENTER INTO PUBLISHING DEAL (65 words) ***THIRD QUARTER 1990 ACQUISITION CHART*** MAJOR TRADE MAGAZINE AND BUSINESS PUBLISHING ACQUISITIONS, THIRD QUARTER, 1990 (318 words) CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990WARNER PUBLISHING SERVICES INTROS NEWSLETTERWarner Publishing Services (New York), a magazinedistributor, has begun the publication of "CounterIntelligence" newsletter, the company's first publication.The new quarterly has an initial controlled circulation of2000. The company said that the newsletter will also becirculated at magazine distribution industry trade shows.Warner Publishing said that the new publication is beingtargeted to magazine publishers, retailers and wholesalersand WPS employees. The company said that the newsletter'seditorial contains information on retailing and wholesalingprograms and strategies, industry trends and developments,and promotional materials for use by WPS and non-WPSemployees.A WPS spokesman said that the newsletter was a good way tohighlight both the company's clients and the industry as awhole. WPS director of advertising and promotion MarcRichards is editor.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990IDG COMMUNCIATIONS TO ENTER ROMANIAN MARKETInternational Data Group (Boston, MA) has established thefirst computer publication in Romania. The company saidthat "InfoClub" magazine will be published six times a yearand will have an initial circulation of 60,000. IDG saidthat it will publish the magazine in association withStiinta si Technica Publishing Company (Bucharest), thelargest technical publishing company in Romania.IDG chairman patrick McGovern, who recently returned fromRomania after negotiating with Stiinta si Technica, saidthat Romanians spent over $105 million in 1990 to acquirecomputer hardware, software and services and that "in 1991,we expect the (Romanian) market to increase 35% to over$140 million." He said that the "vast majority of thisamount will be for imported equipment, providing anattractive market for the world computer industry.""InfoClub" chief editor Ioan Albescu said that Romania hadabout 60,000 computers presently installed and that heexpected that amount to increase substantially. He saidthat the country needs both computers and communicationstechnology to provide for its economic development underthe new economic and political systems.According to Albescu, half of the editorial content of thestart-up will be devoted to IBM-compatible personalcomputers, with the remainder covering the technology andapplications of other computer companies. Because it willbe the only computer publication in the country, he saidthat editorial dealing with mainframes and minicomputerswill also be included.IDG also publishes computer magazines in Hungary, Poland,Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990BNA BEGINS PUBLICATION OF PUBS FOR PHARMACEUTICAL ANDENVIRONMENT MARKETSThe Bureau of National Affairs (Washington, D.C.) and itssubsidiary, BNA International (London) have each launched anew publication.The Bureau of National Affairs has begun the publication of"BNA California-Environment Reporter" (Sacramento, CA)newsletter with an issue on Nov. 12. It will be published24 times a year. The company said the publication isdesigned to meet the growing demand for in-depth coverageand analysis of environmental issues confronting the stateof California.BNA said that the publication is being targeted tocorporate environmental affairs directors, compliancemanagers, corporate counsel, government regulators, stateand local administrators, attorneys, consultants, publicinterest advocates, lobbyists, researchers and librarians.Editorial for the newsletter includes coverage of local,state and regional environmental developments as well asperspective and analysis of the range of environmentalissues facing the state of California. In addition, theletter will analyze trends in legislative and regulatorydevelopments, publica nd private initiatives, enforcementactions and legal activities and their potentialimplications for other parts of the country.BNA International has begun the publication of "WorldPharmaceutical Standards Review". The monthly newsletter isdesigned to "fill the increasing need for in-depth analysisof the worldwide regulatory, legal and technicaldevelopments affecting" the pharmaceutical industry. It isbeing marketed to those in government, internationalorganizations, industry and business, research groups, lawfirms and libraries.BNA said that editorial for the letter will includeinformation on health and safety standards, testing andcertification, product authorization, research, patents,biotechnology, packaging, labeling, marketing, liability,import/export issues and national and internationalgovernment actions. It will include coverage of countrieswithin the European Community, particularly in light of theeconomic integration sought by 1992, the U.S., Japan andelsewhere.BNA ceo William Beltz said that research revealed that "aneed exists for a publication that analyzes trends and tiestogether seemingly unconnected developments affecting thepharmaceutical industry worldwide."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990A/S/M COMMUNICATIONS TO LAUNCH "MEDIA WEEK" ON JANUARY 14A/S/M Communications (New York) will begin the publicationof "Media Week" magazine with an issue on Jan. 14. InOCTOBEr, A/S/M, a subsidiary of Billboard Publications Inc.(New York), acquired the monthly "Marketing & MediaDecisions" from Act III Publishing (New York) and decidedto change title and frequency.A/S/M said that the new weekly will cover media news andtrends. A/S/M chairman John Thomas, Jr. said that "we willnow publish three different weeklies ("Adweek," "Adweek'sMarketing Week" and "Media Week"), each one tailored forits audience." He said that the three publications givereaders the magazines they need. "We'll be offeringadvertisers the best general coverage among agencies andclients, plus highly targeted coverage at the mediadepartments of every top agency."Newly appointed publisher Lawrence Oliver said that "neverbefore have people had to keep up with so many aspects ofthe media business as they do today." The new launch "willbe able to keep on top of the latest developments. The newsvalue of the publication is going to hinge on timeliness.The big change in the marketplace today is the number ofalternative types of media that can be bought. It's a lotto keep up on."Oliver said that the publication will be targeted to mediaexecutives at all levels at ad agencies.A/S/M became a subsidiary of BPI Communications in July ofthis year. BPI also publishes a number of media properties,including "Billboard," "Back Stage" and "American Film"magazines.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990GRO COM GROUP TO LAUNCH "DELI-BAKE ADVOCATE" IN JUNEGro Com Group (Clearwater, FL) will begin the publicationof "Deli-Bake Advocate" with an issue in June. The newmagazine will be published six times a year and will havean initial controlled circulation of 15,000. The firstissue will debut at the International Dairy-DeliAssociation in Anaheim (CA).According to co-publisher Mark Weeks, the publication willlink buyers and sellers "in an effective and affordablemanner." He said that the magazine will serve as animportant forum for companies who are "serious aboutprofiting from the rapidly growing deli-bake industry."The company said the publication will be targeted as aninformational and marketing tool to deli-bake managers,distributors and brokers. Weeks said that the circulationlist has been drawn from such sources as the InternationalDairy-Deli Association, the Retail Bakers ofAmerica/International Deli-Bake Association and verifiedand qualified yellow page directories.Weeks said he hoped that circulation will grow each year toaccomodate the demands of the industry. He said thecirculation is ultimately expected to reach between 30,000and 40,000.Editorial for the publication will cover ideas formerchandising and promotion, industry trends, categoryupdates from industry experts, legal issues involved inimporting and exporting meats and cheeses, safety,strategies and new products.The company had originally planned to launch thepublication in January. The delay till June is due to"advertising softness," Weeks said. Gro Com also publishes"Food Distribution Magazine."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990"MACPREPRESS" FAX NEWSLETTER FROM PREPRESS INFO SERVICEPrepress Information Service (Westport, CT) has begun thepublication of "MacPrePress" newsletter. Published 48 timesa year, a subscription delivered by facsimile machine costs$295. The letter is sent every Monday morning tosubscribers via fax.The publication is targeted mainly to service bureaus,vendors, printers and graphic designers. The company saidthat editorial contains "all the news that matters onMac-based off-the- shelf prepress technology" and isespecially concerned with Mac-based PostScript pagepreparation and imagesetters. Coverage of graphic software,digital type libraries and high- resolution output devices,bug lists for new and updated programs and reports fromusers are also included.The four-page publication "doesn't cover everything thatcomes down the pike," co-publisher Kathleen Tinkel said,only those items deemed sufficiently relevent.The company said that it wanted to see that the legitimatecomplaints of users were documented without appearing to beengaged in "vendor bashing." The purpose of the publicationis to correct mistakes and to show what is successful, thecompany said.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990GRALLA PUBLICATIONS LAUNCHES "CORPORATE TRAVEL'S STRATEGICMEETINGS"Gralla Publications (New York), a subsidiary of UnitedNewspapers (London), has begun the publication of"Strategic Meetings" as a supplement to the company's"Corporate Travel" magazine."Corporate Travel" is a monthly with a controlledcirculation of 46,000. Gralla said that the new supplementwill fill the gap between the meeting planning andmanagement training markets. The company said thateditorial for the publication focuses on the results ofcorporate meetings and how those results could have beendifferent. Gralla said that special attention is being paidto elements of group interaction within the meetings. Thepublication will have "more of a management focus" thanother publications in the field, Gralla said.The publication is being targeted to ceo's, presidents,vice presidents and other corporate executives involved inthe meetings process. The publication will analyze factorsinvolved in a "good" meeting, including objectives, advancepreparation, agendas and results. Saying that most meetingsmagazines talk about the logistics of meetings, Gralla saidthat the new supplement will present information thatnon-meeting executives can understand and act on.Gralla said that it hoped to spin-off the publicationwithin the next year.The supplement continues Gralla's recent expansionactivities. In April of this year, the company began thepublication of "V.I.P." magazine. In May, Gralla purchased"Action Sports Retailer," "Outdoor Retailer" and two tradeshows from Pacifica Publishing. In August, the companyacquired "Wall Street Computer Review," "Insurance SoftwareReview," "Computer's in Banking" and "Communications inFinance" from Investment Dealers' Digest. Also, Gralla willbegin the publication of "Gifts & Stationary Business" inMarch 1991 and Sports Vision in January.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990NEWSLETTTER FOR WINDOWS 3.0 INDUSTRYCompuThink Inc. (Bellevue, WA) has begun the publication of"The Windows Watcher" newsletter with an issue this month.The new monthly will follow technical developments withinthe Windows 3.0 industry. It will also include user tips. Asubscription costs $39.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990NEW TRADE MAGAZINE FOR STRIP CLUBS AND AGENCIESStripper Publications (New York) has begun the publicationof "U.S. Stripper" magazine with an issue this month.Published six times a year, the new magazine has acontrolled circulation of 10,000 and is targeted to stripclubs and agencies throughout the U.S.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990LEGAL NEWSLETTER AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATIONThe American Bar Association (Chicago) has begun thepublication of "Leadership & Management Directions"newsletter. The new monthly focuses on trends, principles,and practices in the law practice management field.Editorial includes analyses, briefs, reviews and eventschedules.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990NEW PUB FOR GREEN BUSINESS STRATEGIESCarl Frankel and Molly Barnes, in affiliation with FIND/SVP(New York) has begun the publication of "Green MarketAlert" newsletter. The publication includes marketing,research and other resource information "for companiesseeking to learn more about green consumerism or toimplement green business strategies." The NL is anoutgrowth of FIND/SVP's "The Green Consumer" report,released last spring. A subscription costs $395.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990EXECUTIVE FAX LETTER FROM KINGSWOOD COMMUNICATIONSKingswood Communciations (Lynden, WA) has begun thepublication of "The Ogden Fax Letter," a weekly two-pagefax targeted to "top executives" and corporate planners.Editorial includes the latest developments in business,communications, technolgy and social change "around theworld."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990EDGELL FINDS BUYERS FOR SIX OF SEVEN PUBLICATIONSEdgell Communications (Cleveland, OH) has found buyers forsix of the seven publications that it had put up for salein October. Because most of the deals have not yet beenclosed, Edgell would identify only one of those buyers. Inaddition, the company said that it was ceasing publicationof "Housewares" magazine after its December 15 issue.The seven publications put up for sale include "Aqua,""Bicycle Dealer Showcase," "Petroleum EngineerInternational," "Pipeline & Gas Journal," "WorldCogeneration," "Corporate Meetings & Incentives" and"Communciations News."Edgell spokesperson Mary Abood said that the company hadfound buyers for all of the publications except "WorldCogeneration." She said that because most of deals wouldnot be finalized until after the new year, she could onlyidentify one buyer. Abood said The Laux Company (Maynard,MA) had reached an agreement in principle to acquire"Corporate Meetings & Incentives." Terms of the deal werenot revealed, but "TBP" estimates that the sale price wasabout $1.7 million.The Laux Company president Dean Laux said the purchaseallows "us to offer the largest circulation in existenceamong meetings and travel executives. We see (the magazine)becoming the flagship of our...group of publications forthe meetings and travel industry." The Laux Company alsopublishes "Medical Meetings," "Insurance ConferencePlanner," "Association Meetings" and "Religious ConferenceManager." "Corporate Meetings & Incentives" had estimated1989 advertising revenues of $2 million, an increase of 5%over the $1.9 million recorded in 1988.Laux said that he plans no changes in staffing or location(New York) for the magazine. The monthly has a controlledcirculation of 40,000."Housewares" was published 22 times a year and was targetedto housewares merchandise managers, buyers and chain storemanagement personnel. Most of the editorial coveredmerchandising ideas and retail strategies. It had acontrolled circulation of 13,000.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990K-III CONFIRMS REPORTS OF INTEREST IN FIELD PUBLICATIONSK-III Holdings (New York) has confirmed that it is innegotiations for the acquisition of Field Publications(Chicago, IL).The proposed sale includes Field's book clubs, "WeeklyReader" and other classroom periodicals and its Funk &Wagnalls reference book unit. The "Weekly Reader" has acirculation of about 10 million. The companies involved hadcombined sales of about $300 million last year. It isestimated that the purchase price will be around $250million.A major part of Field's business comes from licensing dealswith Walt Disney Co. However, Disney has announced that itwill soon organize its own children's book publishingoperation as soon as the current licensing Field hasterminated.K-III currently owns some specialty book clubs and businessand professional magazines. The company acquired Reader'sGarden, Inc. last August. It added that property to itsNewbridge Communications division and made known its desirefor further acquisitions.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990ELSEVIER SELLS STAKE IN WOLTERS KLUWER TO GOLDMAN SACHSElsevier (Amsterdam, Neth.) has sold its 33% stake inWolters Kluwer (Deventer, Neth.) to Goldman, Sachs & Co.(New York). Goldman, Sachs said that it has arranged tosell half of that investment to individual investors. Thestock involved in the deal is worth about $520 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990DUN & BRADSTREET DECIDES NOT TO SELL TWO UNITSDun & Bradstreet (New York) said that it has decided not tosell either its Datastream International (London) orInteractive Data (Lexington, MA) subsidiaries. The twocompanies had combined 1989 revenues of $155 million. Thecompany said that it had decided not to sell the two unitsbecause of poor conditions in financial markets.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990BUYER SOUGHT FOR "WASHINGTON CEO" MAGAZINEWTD, Inc. (Portland, OR) is seeking a buyer for "WashingtonCEO" magazine (Seattle, WA). The monthly began publicationlast December and is targeted to corporate executives inthe state of Washington. The company said that thepublication has a controlled circulation of 20,000 and thatit grossed $700,000 during its first 12 months.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990ALEXANDER RESEARCH & COMMUNICATIONS BUYS NLAlexander Research & Communication (New York) has purchased"Distribution Center Management" newsletter from MarketingPublishing (Silver Spring, MD).Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990ACT III PUBLISHING CEASES PUBLICATION OF "CHANNELS"MAGAZINEAct III Publishing (New York), a subsidiary of Act IIICommunications (Los Angeles), has ceased the publication of"Channels" magazine. The company said that a suitable buyerfor the magazine could not be found.The publication had a mostly-controlled circulation of26,000. In an attempt to increase circulation earlier thisyear, frequency for the publication was increased from 12times to 24 times a year.Taglined "the business of communication," the 10-year-oldmagazine was targeted to television professionals as wellas lawyers, financial experts and advertisers. Editorialprovided business coverage of the electronic media,television, cable, syndication and finance, in addition toanalyses, news of industry trends and profiles.For the first six months of 1990, "Channels" had estimatedadvertising revenues of $1.4 million, an increase of about40% over the $1 million recorded during the first sixmonths of 1989. Estimated advertising pages for the periodincreased 16%, going from 259 pages in 1989 to 301 pagesfor 1990.The magazine was purchased by C.C. Publishing, Act III'spercursor, in 1985 from Media Commentary Council (NewYork). At that time it was a non-profit publication.The demise of Channels continues Act III's decision todivest itself of its business and professional magazineproperties. In September of this year, Act III ceased thepublication of both "BME's Television Engineering" and"Corporate Video Decisions" and sold their circulationlists to PSN Publications (New York). In October, thecompany sold "Marketing & Media Decisions" to BPICommunications (New York) and also ceased publication ofthe six-month-old "The Marketer."Act III also publishes "Mix" and "Electronic Musician"magazines as well as "Biz News" newsletter.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990WEST PUBLISHING INSTITUTES DIRECT ACCESS TO DIALOGDATABASESWest Publishing Co. (St. Paul, MN) said that, beginning inearly 1991, a new interface will enable Westlaw legalinformation service subscribers to access Dialog (PaloAlto, CA) databases via the Westlaw directory and usingWestlaw commands. Dialog is a unit of Knight-Ridder.The new arrangemenet supercedes, but does not replace, agateway previously established between the two companiesthat required users to enter and use Dialog commands. Thenew arrangement will provide Westlaw subscribers access to140 Dialog databases, about one-third of Dialog's total.The companies said that additional Dialog databases will beadded every month until all 380 are available, probably bethe end of 1991.West president Dwight Opperman said that the dealw asimportant because "law firms, coroporate legal departments,and other users of computer- assisted legal research havefound it increasingly important to access news, business,technical, and other information in addition to traditionallegal research." Access to Dialog "will enable legalprofessionals to increase their efficiency."The new gateway works only one way. Subscribers to Dialogwill not be able to access West databases. The companiessaid that if a need for a two-way gateway is identified,they will consider its implementation.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990AMERICAN BUSINESS PRESS TO HOLD SPRING MEETINGThe American Business Press (New York) will hold its annualSpring meeting at the Ritz-Carlton hotel (Naples, FL) fromApril 28 to May 1.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990"TELEPROFESSIONAL" INCREASES FREQUENCY"Teleprofessional" (Waterloo, IA) magazine is increasingfrequency to 12 times a year from six times a year.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990REED INTERNATIONAL REPORTS SIX MONTH FIGURESReed International (London) reports that sales for the sixmonth period ending September 30 increased 5.8% to L764.1million. Operating profit for the period increased 7.3%,going to L119.7 million. Sales in the U.S. rose 8% to L155million while operating profit decreased 3% to L27 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990MILLER FREEMAN CANCELS COMPUTING CONFERENCEMiller Freeman Expositions (Boston, MA) has canceled theSupercomputing World 1991 conference originally scheduledfor June 18-20 in San Diego. The company said that the"expectation of leaner economic times for vendors, and a'wait-and-see' attitude among users" were factors in thedecision.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990"NIKKEI BUSINESS" TO INCREASE FREQUENCYJapan's largest professional publication, "NikkeiBusiness," published by Nikkei Business Publications(Tokyo) will increase frequency to weekly from 24 times ayear. The company said that the change was necessary tomeet the "rapid changes on the international businessenvironment as represented by the unification of Germanyand the invasion of Kuwait" and to adapt to the newJapanese business practice of adopting five-day workweeks.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990LOTUS AND SIMON & SCHUSTER ENTER INTO PUBLISHING DEALLotus Publishing Corp. (Cambridge, MA) and Brady Books, aunit of Simon & Schuster Professional Information Group(New York), have entered into a book publishing agreement.Under the deal, Brady will produce and market Lotus Books,including four series: "Start Here" for first-time Lotussoftware users, "Concise Guides" for experienced users,"Business Solutions" for managers, and "TechnicalReference" for corporate and commercial developers.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE BUSINESS PUBLISHER via NewsNetDecember 15, 1990MAJOR TRADE MAGAZINE AND BUSINESS PUBLISHING ACQUISITIONS,THIRD QUARTER, 1990PUBLICATION/COMPANY      BUYER               SELLER              PRICE (EST.)Financial Services Week  Dealers Digest      Cap Cities/ABC      ($  3.0 mil.)ITL/CME                  Excerpta Medica     managamentNatural Gas Marketer     Pasha Publications  Atlantic Info. Offshore Gas Report NLDataline Inc.            Mead Data           Star Data Systems    $ 13.0 mil.Unwin Hyman Ltd.         HarperCollins       management          ($ 16.0 mil.)Nat'l Radio Publicity    Morgan-Rand Publ.   Resource Media TV & Cable Publicity Feature News PublicityCircuit Design           Miller Freeman      PMSI Communications ($  8.0 mil.) Printed Circuit Fabrication Printed Circuit AssemblyElectronics Test         Cahners Publishing  Miller Freeman      ($  2.0 mil.)Microcornucopia          Miller Freeman      managament          ($  0.8 mil.)Travel Agent             partnership         Cap Cities/ABC      ($ 15.0 mil.)The Concrete Trader      Aberdeen Group      management          ($  2.5 mil.)Electronic Publishing &  Pacific Mag. Group  Maclean Hunter      ($  3.0 mil.)          PrintingEstates Gazette          Reed International  management           $110.0 mil.Atwood Convention Publ.  T/SF Communications management          ($  8.0 mil.)Life Insurance Selling   management team     Commerce Publishing ($ 14.0 mil.) American Agent & Broker Accessory MerchandisingHome Video Publisher NL  Phillips Publishing Knowledge IndustryComputers in Banking     Gralla Publications Dealers Digest Wall Street Computer Review Insurance Software Review Communications in FinanaceNeodata Services         Hicks, Muse & Co.   Dow Jones            $ 85.0 mil.Zytron                   First Financial     Dow Jones            $ 82.5 mil.Harwal Publishing        Waverly, Inc.       John Wiley & SonsPrivitization Report NL  Gov't Info. Serv.   Alexander ResearchAccess Reports NL        Harry Hammitt       Monitor PublishingCorp. Video Decisions    PSN Publications    Act III Publishing BME's Television EngineeringRotor & Wing             Phillips Publishing PJS Publications    ($  2.3 mil.)Eclipse Publications     management team     Wolters KluwerAuto. Aftermarket News   Chilton Company     Stanley Publishing  ($  2.5 mil.) Auto. Body Repair News trade show dailiesAirline Financial News   Phillips Publishing Airline Media Asso. Commuter/Regional Airline News Commuter/Regional Airline News InternationalMacIntosh Buyers Guide   Macworld Comm.      Redgate Comm. Corp. ($  1.0 mil.) Apple IIGS Buyers GuideSatellite Insider NL     Phillips Publishing Scientific InroadsAir Safety Week NL       Phillips Publishing PaceCom, Inc.Gourmet Today            United Publications Cummins PublishingBack to Headline List WT03-B09-23IA087-000629-B022-172http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/pb64.html 205.156.212.5 19970122040218 text/html 127150HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:00:08 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:19 GMTContent-length: 126962Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/pb64.html Sample Issue Copyright CABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNet September 1, 1995 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES THE SCIENCE OF ALLIANCE (333 words) NEWS BRIEF HBO ASIA SIGNS TWO MORE DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENTS (83 words) SIX MONTH INVESTIGATION INTO FAILURE OF APSTAR 2 (91 words) NBC ASIA AND NBC SUPER CHANNEL ASIA DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENT (159 words) PAS-4 LAUNCHED SUCCESSFULLY (101 words) TURNER INTERNATIONAL AND THAISKY TV DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENT (60 words) QUANTUM AND MITSUI TO FORM QUANTUM ASIA (36 words) KOREASAT 1 LAUNCHED (138 words) PAY-TV LICENSING CHANGES (87 words) IBC PAY NETWORKS (92 words) SONY ENTERTAINMENT TELEVISION SERVICE (112 words) ZEETV TO BROADCAST CHANNEL IN THE U.S. (57 words) ABN TO SET UP INDIAN VERSION (57 words) SCV ADDS CTN'S ZHONG TIAN CHANNEL TO LINE UP (36 words) DISCOVERY CHANNEL SIGNS EXCLUSIVE DEAL WITH XYZ (47 words) OPTUS VISION TO BEGIN ITS PAY-TV SERVICE (89 words) AUSTRALIS MEDIA ANTICIPATES LOSS (79 words) FAIRFAX GROUP BUYS STAKE IN ARTISTS SERVICES (55 words) MURDOCH TO BUILD STUDIO COMPLEX IN SYDNEY (88 words) NEWS CORP TAKES FULL CONTROL OF STAR TV (55 words) TVBI PURCHASES STAKE IN TCC (81 words) MARIETTA TO BUILD SATELLITE FOR CHINA ORIENT TELECOM SATELLITE (68 words) JCSAT-3 LAUNCHED (77 words) CONSORTIUM TO START TRIALS FOR INTERACTIVE CABLE TV (128 words) PLAYBOY ENTERPRISES TO LAUNCH CABLE CHANNEL FOR JAPANESE MARKET (77 words) TVBI TO LAUNCH FOURTH CABLE CHANNEL IN TAIWAN (139 words) STAR TV AUDIENCE IN TAIWAN (94 words) NEW ZEALAND TELECOM TO ACQUIRE STAKE IN SKY NETWORK TELEVISION (54 words) WORLD SATELLITE SERVICING BOOK (75 words) VIDEOLAND ACQUIRES RIGHTS TO BASEBALL GAMES (78 words) STAR TV CO-PRODUCES FIRST DRAMA SERIES (37 words) TURNER INTERACTIVE LAUNCHES CD-ROM VERSION OF THE PAGEMASTER IN TAIWAN (39 words) STAR TV HAS THREE NEW STAFF MEMBERS (50 words) COOPER JOINS ABN (34 words) TURNER APPOINTS TWO NEW DIRECTORS IN ASIA (35 words) FEATURE PASSAGE TO INDIA (873 words) MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN (1966 words) LAWS UNTO THEMSELVES (2096 words) BIG MONEY, BIG PLANS (1552 words) MEGA TV: NO SECOND BEST (466 words) A CRISIS OF IDENTITY (1375 words) LEADER OF THE PACK (360 words) ASIAN AESTHETICS (1718 words) FOR THE PEOPLE, BY THE PEOPLE (659 words) MONEY BY NUMBERS (789 words) ASIAN CHANNEL GUIDE (1827 words) ASIA SATELLITES TRANSPONDER WATCH (545 words) CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995THE SCIENCE OF ALLIANCENowhere are partnerships more important in the broadcasting industrythan in Asia. And within Asia no market is considered to be hotterproperty for cable and satellite right now than India and theSubcontinent.A population of 900 million that supports a middle class of 250million, coupled with 14,000 cabled homes and rising, are figures notto be sniffed at by western broadcasters looking to extend their brandsinto the Far East.But in a pioneer market, no amount of high production values or honedchannel images and marketing campaigns will ensure that signals reachcable operators, that cable operators relay them to households andthat, in the case of the pay-TV channels at least, subscriptionrevenues find their way back into the right pockets. India is noexception.Although of all the channels targeting that region, ESPN and Disneyhave arguably the sort of programming that will pretty much translateanywhere, their respective alliances with the Modi Group is a smartone. A diversified conglomerate, Modi's foray into entertainment -although still fledgling - is comprehensive. Offering its partnerseverything from production possibilities, distribution networks,subscriber management and revenue collection, Modi is a one-stop shopand a grass-roots partnership. In return, the Indian company can expectto receive the Western broadcasting know-how it presently lacks. Butwith a collective turnover of $2 billion plus a year, knowledge is allthe Modis are likely to require and that may only be in the short term.Its high-profile alliance with Disney may also put it out of reach ofothers: zealously protective of its brand, Disney is likely to beprecious as to who else it allows to join its Indian stable.The Modi-Disney-ESPN hook up is only one of several big Asian dealsthat have been cemented over recent months. Partnerships and globalalliances are increasingly become the way forward in Asia. Butremaining available opportunities will, and are narrowing.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995HBO ASIA SIGNS TWO MORE DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENTSHBO Asia has signed two more distribution agreements. It is nowavailable as part of Singapore Cablevision's (SCV) 25 channel package.Broadcasting two identical channels - one with Mandarin subtitles, HBOAsia will be carried in the premium tier. The cost to the subscriberwill be S$12 per channel on top of the basic tier fee of S$29.95 permonth. HBO Asia has also signed an agreement for carriage on Malaysia'sMMDS service Mega TV.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995SIX MONTH INVESTIGATION INTO FAILURE OF APSTAR 2China Great Wall Industry Corp. and Hughes Space and Communicationshave concluded their six month investigation into the failure of Apstar2, which exploded in January,  seconds after take off via a Long Marchrocket. The failure has been put down to wind shear which damagedeither the satellite or the rocket. As yet there is no set date for thelaunch of Asiasat 2, which is also set to go up via a Long March rocketbefore the end of the year.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995NBC ASIA AND NBC SUPER CHANNEL ASIA DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENTBoth NBC Asia and NBC Super Channel Asia are to be distributed inIndonesia as part of Star TV's multi channel pay-TV package designedspecifically for the Indonesian market. Broadcasting off Asiasat 2, theservice will be available in early 1996 and will be distributed by theIndovision Group, the only company licensed to collect pay-TV revenuein the archipelago. The U.S. network has also announced distribution intwo other countries. Following an agreement signed with distributorCable Boss, NBC Asia will be available to cable TV subscribers in thePhilippines. While in Taiwan, the news and current affairs channel willwork together with Liann Yee Production Co who will not only handle thedistribution for NBC Asia but will also work to adapt some of itsprogramming specifically for the Taiwan market. The agreement in Taiwanalso applies to NBC Super Channel Asia when it launches, probably inearly 1996.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995PAS-4 LAUNCHED SUCCESSFULLYPanamsat's Pas-4 launched successfully via an Ariane 4 rocket from theFrench company's launch site in Kourou, French Guyana. Built by Hughes,the satellite carries 16 C-band and 24 KU-band transponders. Located at68.5 degrees east it will commence its service in September. With afootprint that also covers parts of Africa, Europe and the Middle East,Pas-4 is expected to be the `hot bird' for Asia and in particular theIndian subcontinent. The satellite already has 14 customers includingChina Central Television, Disney, ESPN, HBO Asia, Sony, TurnerBroadcasting and Viacom International.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995TURNER INTERNATIONAL AND THAISKY TV DISTRIBUTION AGREEMENTTurner International (TI) and Thai pay-TV operator ThaiSky TV havesigned a distribution agreement for CNNI and TNT/Cartoon Network. TIhas also renewed its distribution for CNNI with Filipino operator SkyCable. The news service will be distributed to over 60,000 householdsthroughout the archipelago. Sky Cable is the country's largestoperator.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995QUANTUM AND MITSUI TO FORM QUANTUM ASIAHome Shopping outfit Quantum International, a subsidiary of NationalMedia Corporation, has signed a MoU with Mitsui & Co to form a jointlyowned company called Quantum Asia.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995KOREASAT 1 LAUNCHEDSouth Korea's first domestic satellite, Koreasat 1, launched in Augustfrom the Kennedy Space Centre in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on board aMcDonnell Douglas Delta 2 rocket. However, a low performance by therocket in its first stage left the satellite in a lower than desiredorbit. Koreasat 1 which was supposed to have been placed into an ovalorbit with a high point 22,200 miles above the earth, missed its markby about 3,800 miles. According to McDonnell Douglas, the satellitewill be able to use its onboard thrusters to correct the altitudedeficit, but will have to sacrifice some of its expected 10 year life.The satellite's 12 KU-band transponders had been earmarked for thedelivery of direct broadcasting, fixed telecommunications andelectronic data throughout the Korean Peninsula.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995PAY-TV LICENSING CHANGESThai broadcasting authority the Public Relations Department (PRD) isexpected to make changes to its system for pay-TV licensing. Currentlythe PRD simply charges Baht 25,000 ($1,000) for a licence, howeverdirector general Arun Ngamdee admitted the rules need to be adjusted.It is possible they will be changed to mirror the Mass CommunicationOrganisation of Thailand (MCOT)'s licensing policy. MCOT, the onlyother Thai body authorised to give out pay-TV licences, takes an equitystake in each incumbent.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995IBC PAY NETWORKSAfter conceding a 36% stake to Grammy Entertainment and BBTVSatelvision (the operator of leading terrestrial broadcaster ChannelSeven), pay-TV service IBC has announced that Channel Seven willconcentrate on improving the network's local programming while Grammywill steer the marketing. In addition, Channel Seven and Grammy bothintend to launch their own pay networks but say IBC will takeprecedence, at least initially.Bangkok Entertainment Co., operator of terrestrial broadcaster ChannelThree, expects to begin broadcasting its pay-TV channel in early 1996.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995SONY ENTERTAINMENT TELEVISION SERVICESony Pictures Entertainment, in conjunction with Singapore-basedproduction company Argos Communications Enterprises (ACE), is to launcha 24-hour Hindi-language satellite service primarily targeting India inthe fourth quarter of this year. Broadcasting via a C-band transponderoff Pas-4, the new channel will be called Sony Entertainment Television(SET) and will be aimed at the country's burgeoning cable market, whichto date is accessed by 14 million of the country's 45 million TV homes.The service will be advertiser supported with revenues expected to comefrom both local and international companies. $70 million has beenallocated for original Hindi production over the next five years.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995ZEETV TO BROADCAST CHANNEL IN THE U.S.ZeeTV has tied up with U.S.-based cable operator TCI/Encore tobroadcast a channel in the U.S., targeted at the Indian populationthere. Zee is slated to invest about $3 million in the venture inreturn for a 60% stake. Programming will be provided by the Bombay-headquartered Zee Telefilms.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995ABN TO SET UP INDIAN VERSIONAsia Business News (ABN) is to set up an Indian version of its networklater this year in conjunction with an as yet unspecified localpartner. Targeting the sub-continent via Pas-4, the service willinclude separate programming and advertising. Projected costs forsetting up the network are $5 million.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995SCV ADDS CTN'S ZHONG TIAN CHANNEL TO LINE UPSingapore CableVision (SCV) has added the Chinese Television Network's(CTN) Mandarin-language Zhong Tian Channel to it's line up. It will beincluded as part of the basic tier.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995DISCOVERY CHANNEL SIGNS EXCLUSIVE DEAL WITH XYZThe Discovery Channel has signed an exclusive deal with XYZEntertainment which supplies four channels to the Galaxy MMDSsubscription service. XYZ, which is 50% owned by Foxtel, will also seeits channels delivered via the Foxtel cable network.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995OPTUS VISION TO BEGIN ITS PAY-TV SERVICECable operator Optus Vision is to begin broadcasting its pay-TV servicethis month (September), just a few weeks before competing operatorFoxtel's October launch date. With capacity for 64 channels plus localtelephony, Optus Vison will launch with about 12, including two ESPNchannels, CNNI and TNT/Cartoon Network. $3 billion is being spent onthe construction of the network which hopes to have passed 100,000homes by the end of 1995. Shareholders include Continental Cablevision,Optus Communications and the Seven Network.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995AUSTRALIS MEDIA ANTICIPATES LOSSMMDS-delivered pay-TV operator Australis Media is anticipating its netloss for the year to June 1995 to reach A$122.05, up from A$19.06 forthe previous year. Australis says it is planning to extend distributionof its service, called Galaxy, to also include DTH delivery in thecoming weeks, which is hopes will attract some 50,000 additionalsubscribers currently out of the MMDS reach. Galaxy says its subscribercount is over 31,000.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995FAIRFAX GROUP BUYS STAKE IN ARTISTS SERVICESThe Fairfax newspaper group, controlled by Canadian press baron ConradBlack, has purchased a 50% stake in Australian production companyArtists Services. Under the banner Australian Information Media (AIM),Fairfax has a stake in two pay-TV channels along with CoxCommunications and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC).Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995MURDOCH TO BUILD STUDIO COMPLEX IN SYDNEYRupert Murdoch held a three day meeting for 340 senior staff and guestsin July on the Great Barrier Reef's Hayman Island which is half ownedby News Corp. After the meeting he signed an `in principle' agreementto build a studio complex with six sound stages in Sydney. Dubbed`Hollywood By The Harbour', the complex will be used to produce featurefilms and TV programs for Fox, Star TV, Foxtel and other arms of NewsCorp's worldwide distribution network.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995NEWS CORP TAKES FULL CONTROL OF STAR TVRupert Murdoch's New Corp has taken full control of Star TV byacquiring the remaining 36.4% stake from Hutchinson Whampoa and RichardLi's Genza Investments at a cost of $299 million. News Corp. bought itsinitial 63.6% stake in Star TV for $525 million in July 1993.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995TVBI PURCHASES STAKE IN TCCTVBI has purchased a 52% stake in The Chinese Channel (TCC) from UK-based Pacific Media Plc who will retain 28%. The remaining 20% is heldby Shaw Media, a vehicle of Sir Run Run Shaw's grand nephews. TCCbroadcasts Chinese-language programming to the Chinese communitiesthroughout Europe via cable and DTH delivery. It has exclusive Europeanrights to TVB's Chinese language programmes. The deal is likely to costTVB about #5 million.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995MARIETTA TO BUILD SATELLITE FOR CHINA ORIENT TELECOM SATELLITELockheed Martin's Martin Marietta Corp has been contracted to build acommunications satellite for China Orient Telecom Satellite Co. at acost of over $100 million. The planned satellite, an A2100 model, is tobe called ChinaStar 1 and will provide voice, data and televisionservices throughout China. The launch, via a Long March rocket, isscheduled for late 1997.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995JCSAT-3 LAUNCHEDJapan Satellite Systems JCSat-3, launched in August via a LockheedMartin Atlas IIAS platform. Owned jointly by traders Itochu Corp,Mitsui and Co. Ltd., Sumitomo Corp and Nissho Iwai Corp, the powerfulsatellite, carrying 12 C-band transponders and 28 KU band transponders,will relay telephony, data and video signals to Japan, with additioncoverage as far west as India, south to Australia and New Zealand andeast to Hawaii.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995CONSORTIUM TO START TRIALS FOR INTERACTIVE CABLE TVA consortium of Japanese firms is planning to start trials for aninteractive cable TV operation in Musashino and Mitaka, West Tokyo byJuly 1996. Led by securities venture Secom, the other companiesinvolved are trading companies Tomen Corp and Mitsui and Co. andelectronics giants Fujitsu and IBM. The network will eventually offermore than 30 channels broadcasting among others, films, regionalinformation, video-on-demand services, video games and home shopping.The actual trials will also incorporate interactive education, housingsecurity and medical services. Established in June this year theoperation was initially capitalised at Y132.5 million but this isexpected to be raised to Y3 billion by next spring, with Japan Radioand Yokogawa Electric Corp also becoming shareholders.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995PLAYBOY ENTERPRISES TO LAUNCH CABLE CHANNEL FOR JAPANESE MARKETPlayboy Enterprises is to launch a 24 hour subscription cable channelfor the Japanese market, beginning October 1.Twenty per cent of the channel will be owned by Playboy with thebalance held by Tokyo-based Tohokushinsha Film Corp. Playboy willsupply the channel with 700 hours of programming over the first fiveyears. Japan has about 40 million TV households of which about 1.2million subscribe to cable.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995TVBI TO LAUNCH FOURTH CABLE CHANNEL IN TAIWANTVBI is to launch a fourth cable channel in Taiwan at the end ofSeptember. The new channel, which as yet does not have a name, will bea 24-hour local news service and will join TVBI's existing package ofgeneral entertainment channel TVB Superstation, drama and varietychannel TVB Golden, and a sports channel TVIS, all of whom aredistributed by Liann Yee Production Co., a joint venture between TVBIand Taiwanese company Era (in which TVBI also owns a stake). In orderto service the local market properly, TVBI has bought 10 SNG trucksfrom the U.S. and will have four outside broadcast units, in additionto two uplinking sites. The aim of the new service will be to providethe quickest and most up to date local news.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995STAR TV AUDIENCE IN TAIWANStar TV claims its audience in Taiwan has risen 51% compared with thesame period last year. In the first seven days of the August ratingsperiod, the pan-Asian broadcaster says it's channels achieved acombined 12.3% share of non-terrestrial viewing in Taiwan cable homes,according to data provided by Survey Research Taiwan (SRT)'s`peoplmeter' audience measurement system. Star says a combination ofStar Chinese Channel, Star Movies, Star Plus, Channel [V] and PrimeSports achieved a cumulative reach of eight million viewers across theweek.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995NEW ZEALAND TELECOM TO ACQUIRE STAKE IN SKY NETWORK TELEVISIONNew Zealand Telecom has received the tentative go-ahead to acquire a25% stake in the country's five channel UHF-delivered pay-TV operatorSky Network Television from shareholders Ameritech Corp. and BellAtlantic. Telecom will replace the U.S companies as a major investor,alongside Time Warner and TCI.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995WORLD SATELLITE SERVICING BOOKFor companies looking to upgrade their equipment and infrastructures,the latest volume of publisher U-View's World Satellite Servicing bookpresents full circuit diagrams for 316 satellite receivers, decoders,positioners and related equipment on the market in 1993-94. The 400page book gives full technical specifications. Contact: U-ViewTechnical Publishers, 4 South Parade, Bawtry, Doncaster, SouthYorkshire DN10 6JH, UK. Tel: 44 130 2719997 Fax: 44 1302 719995.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995VIDEOLAND ACQUIRES RIGHTS TO BASEBALL GAMESTaiwanese cable channel provider and distributor Videoland has acquiredthe broadcasting rights to the island'sprofessional baseball games from 1997 through to 1999 for a whopping,eyebrow-raising $55 million. Current rights holder, TVBI sports channelTVSI paid $3.3 million for a three year deal that finishes at the endof 1996. Videoland who beat both Star TV and ESPN for the contractintends to launch a baseball-oriented sports channel.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995STAR TV CO-PRODUCES FIRST DRAMA SERIESStar TV has co-produced its first drama series, Fist Of Fury, with HongKong based terrestrial broadcaster ATV. The series is airing inMandarin on the Star Chinese Channel.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995TURNER INTERACTIVE LAUNCHES CD-ROM VERSION OF THE PAGEMASTER IN TAIWANTurner Interactive has launched a CD-Rom version of The Pagemaster inTaiwan. Based on the motion picture of the same name, it will bedistributed by Taiwanese distributor Media Master International.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995STAR TV HAS THREE NEW STAFF MEMBERSStar TV has added three new staff members - Ann Cafferty, Daniel Ongand Sharon Teo - to its Singapore office. They will be responsible forincreasing channel sponsorship and spot advertising revenue for Star TVin Singapore, Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995COOPER JOINS ABNMichael Cooper has joined ABN as executive director, sales andmarketing, based in Singapore. Previously he was regional managingdirector, north Asia for Saatchi & Saatchi.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995TURNER APPOINTS TWO NEW DIRECTORS IN ASIATurner  has appointed two new directors in Asia. Alexander Yee has beennamed director, syndication sales  while Justine Miller has beenappointed director of marketing, syndication sales.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995PASSAGE TO INDIAThe Modi Group dominates India's broadcasting industry. Anil Wanvariprofiles the diversified company, which, through a combination ofmarket-savvy and strategic alliances, has left its competitors standingIt all started as a twinkle in a little boy's eye. Lalit Modi, a scionof the multi-billion dollar Indian Modi group, was bowled over by thedelights of Disney comics and movies. As he grew into college and wentto the U.S. to study management, the twinkle turned into admiration forthe company responsible for pioneering the animated feature film. Thenadmiration turned to ambition, he too would set up an entertainmentempire... in India.Today Lalit Modi, 32, is well on the way to achieving that ambition. Aspresident and managing director of the Modi Entertainment Group (MEG),he is piecing together an outfit that may well become the mostintegrated entertainment business in India and has made several matcheswith global entertainment leaders, including Disney, ESPN, U.S producer-distributors New World Entertainment and Multimedia Entertainment, andtheatrical conglomerate United Artists, to distribute and market theirproduct in Asia's most dynamic broadcasting market. Other high-calibredeals incorporating programme production, channel distribution and evenpublishing are sitting on the table.Being part of a large Marwari - a community known for its financialacumen and entrepreneuralism - probably made things easier for Modi ashe didn't have to scout around for start-up capital.Started by his grandfather, Gujar Mal Modi in 1933, the Modi group istoday involved in a whole series of activities from manufacturingthrough service industries like telecommunications and oil and gasexploration. It boasts a collective turnover of $2 billion-plus. Infact, the Modis even have a township named after them - Modinagar.However, the group is not exactly a cohesive whole as it has split intofactions, each represented by one of Gujar Mal Modi's sons. Thesplinter that has spawned the entertainment arm is the $300 milliondiversified Krishan Kumar Modi company, run by Lalit's father, KK Modi.With fingers in numerous pies from the manufacturing of cosmetics forEstee Lauder and cigarettes in partnership with Philip Morris, to tearetailing via theTea City outlet, KK Modi's flagship companies include Godfrey Philips(cigarettes and the tea), Indofil Chemicals, (fertilisers topolyester), Modern Home Care (household products) and, of course, theentertainment concerns, which are just taking shape."The reasons for getting into entertainment were clear," says LalitModi. "No large company has looked at it as a serious business [inIndia] and hence there was an opportunity to corporatise it. It [themarket] consisted of mom and pop-type operators with thousands ofplayers, all of them small. The reasons for our entering TV were that aboom was inevitable. There was just a single channel but restrictionswere being lifted which would change this. Entertainment is thebackbone of Indians. We had the infrastructure, marketing and brand-building savvy and were ideally positioned to make a go of it."What makes the Modis different from other Indian groups looking atentering the entertainment industry is the group's broad perspectiveand ambition. Lalit Modi believes in using a network of companies tostraddle every segment of the entertainment business."I want the Modi Entertainment Group to be in every aspect ofentertainment. I want to attack on all fronts - production,distribution and cinema exhibition, accompanied by merchandising. In TVI want the integration [created by] having a satellite channel,software production [facilities], distribution and marketing," Modiexplains. "An entertainment product should be bought for every possiblewindow - pay-TV, free-TV, cable, you name it. I expect the linkagesthat I am now forging between the various elements of entertainment togenerate 40% to 50% savings."Indeed, neither the Hindujas, Zee TV or Business India TV can boastportfolios as large as the Modi Group, as all three focus on one, two,or at the most three different facets of the entertainment business.Zee is involved in software production, runs three satellite channels,operates an amusement park and produces films and music. The Hindujasare at present only involved in cable TV but have intentions to expandinto publishing, satellite TV, movie production, multiplexes andentertainment parks.As yet the Modi Entertainment Group has not diversified into amusementparks, the music business or radio, but no one would be surprised if itdidn't make a foray into each of these in the future. "Let the policiesbecome clearer," says executive director Rajiv Sahai.Lalit Modi believes life in the entertainment lane is just starting."By the time this article comes out I'll have struck a few more deals,"he says. "Currently I am looking at direct-to-home in a big way, but soare several others like [PanAmSat via] PAS-4, Hughes, and RupertMurdoch. For all you know, I may tie up with one of them at some stage.I have allocated $200 to $300 million to be invested in entertainmentover the next three years. I'd like the group to be a major force inthe Indian marketplace. So far we have delivered. Time will tellwhether we'll succeed."Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVENThe Modi Group's market knowledge and financial acumen has attractedthe attention of the world's leading entertainment companies, writesAnil WanvariThe essence of the Modi Entertainment Group lies in the number ofglobal alliances CEO Lalit Modi has created. However, this is in-keeping with the company's overall philosophy. Founder Gujar Mal Modionce said when you don't have certain know-how you should take it froma foreign company. And grandson Lalit is certainly following thatadvice."We have 42 joint ventures in the Modi group as a whole. As far asentertainment goes we knew we wanted to get in but we didn't understandit. It was a new business for India and we didn't have the technology,whereas the foreign partner did," he explains.So far Modi has surrendered a majority (51%) stake in the Disney jointventure, which has already spawned two subsidiaries, and has given away50% in three of its other six entertainment companies."Thanks to these partnerships we've got faster to market and in turnhave given them our understanding of the Indian market andinfrastructure," he says.Modi's first chance at an entertainment partnership came in 1993 whenthe conglomerate inked a deal with Walt Disney to set-up Walt Disney(India). "Disney had just completed a licence agreement with a smallIndian company and approached us, among several other companies, for atie-up," recalls Lalit Modi. "We pursued them with great motivation, wewere prepared to take on losses for some time and put in a great dealof effort behind building up the business. All this is probably whatdrove us together."Formed to act as a vehicle for further Disney investments in India, thejoint venture soon spawned its first wholly-owned subsidiary: WaltDisney Consumer Products (India) to look after the merchandising andlicensing of Disney products.So far Walt Disney Consumer Products (India) has finalised licensingdeals with about 42 Indian companies.Walt Disney (India's) second venture, Buena Visa Television (India),was set-up to take responsibility for programme distribution andmarketing, with access to the huge library of series, animation shorts,educational software and films from the animated giant and otheraffiliated studios such as Hollywood Pictures, Touchstone, Caravan andMiramax."Their professionalism and their commitment to quality encouraged us totake them on as partners," says Disney's Hong Kong-based marketing andcommunications manager, Rose Leng. "We saw eye-to-eye. They also enjoya unique relationship with Doordarshan."Modi's relationship with the state-owned broadcaster has not onlyhelped Doordarshan fight the onslaught of foreign satellite channelslike Star TV, but has succeeded in reaping rewards all round: TodayDisney shows are broadcast on both DDI and DDII and, for Buena Vista TVitself, such deals have contributed towards revenues which reached Rs52million ($14 million) in 1994, of which Rs14.8 million was profit.Close on the heels of the Buena Vista TV formation, Modi also signeddeals for the rights to distribute Disney films to India, Sri Lanka,Nepal and Bangladesh under the guise of Modi Films, another 100% Modi-owned company.And, although movie-going in India has been on the wane, ModiEntertainment is trying to change that. Via a 50/50 joint venture withUnited Artists Theatre Circuit, the company is looking at setting upmultiplex theatre chains in all the major metros, at a cost of Rs150 toRs200 per site.Another 100%-owned venture, Home Communications, has also been activelyacquiring the rights to TV software, including 300 Hindi film titlesand a few overseas English productions. Home Communications is alsolooking at co-producing programming for television, the fruits of whichwill be sold to broadcasters including Modi's joint venture DisneyChannel.For Modi, software opportunities lead naturally to channelopportunities and greater returns. But only if the right revenuestreams are tapped. "Advertising in India is not growing fast enough tosustain the explosion in free-to-air channels," says Lalit Modi. "So Iwas convinced the key to the Indian TV market would be distribution,and via the pay-TV route."And that is where his next venture, Modi Entertainment Network (MEN),comes in. Headed by marketing veteran Tony D'Siliva, MEN is relying onModi's existing network of 2000 salesmen and 50 national distributorsto get into the cable TV distribution and subscriber managementbusinesses, albeit in a rather unique way.Says Lalit Modi: "Most of the distributors have children who have comeof age and are looking for new businesses to enter. They are respectedin their towns and have influence. I'm offering the children the optionto manage collections for pay-TV from operators and service them anddistribute decoders."The distributors are expected to set-up separate outfits with theirservicing field force and will work in conjunction with a dedicated MENstaff of 150 to collect subscriptions revenue. Modi group salesmen willconduct household audits to confirm whether the satellite feed isactually being retransmitted by the cable operator. D'Silva expects MENto be involved in 100 cities by the end of Year One.Such efforts seem to be already bearing fruit: in December 1994sportscaster ESPN signed MEN to be its exclusive Indian distributor."There are few companies in India that know as much about the mediabusiness as these guys," says ESPN Asia managing director Sandy Brown.Brown says Modi will be involved in all facets of the channel'sdistribution and operation from the distribution of decoders to thesubscriber management and revenue collection. And although ESPN iscurrently doing all the customisation of the channel itself - it isproviding between eight to 12 hours of dubbed Hindi-languageprogramming a day, in addition to producing local wrap-arounds - Brownsays he isn't ruling out Modi getting involved in the productionprocess itself.ESPN is keen to test the market for pay-TV in India. Set to launch inmid-October, the ESPN India channel will be one of only two pay-TVservices targeting the Subcontinent, the first being Star Movies.However, at the time of writing, the two companies have had to changetack, having made the decision to offer the service free-to-air for ashort while as a promotional ploy.Lalit Modi says this is a deliberate strategy: "I'd like cableoperators and viewers to get a taste of the quality of programming ESPNcan provide," he says. "Once they become aware, I'm sure they'll bewilling to pay for it."But observers say the company hasn't managed to get its pay-TVmanagement act together and has failed to get enough cable operators onits side, in addition to falling short with the required number ofdecoders. The truth may lie somewhere in between. Indian cableoperators are averse to coughing up cash for decoders and don't like toreveal their true subscriber bases due to heavy government levies.ESPN's Brown is not unrealistic about the task ahead. "Collecting therevenue is not going to be an easy task, the operators are not used topaying for services and their sheer number and distance apart will makethings difficult. But if anyone has got the distribution network topull it off it is the Modis."Lalit Modi is also unperturbed: "The decoders are not the problem. Wehave everything in place, but we will only go ahead when the timing isright," adding that MEN is pursuing further deals with otherbroadcasters for pay-TV distribution.The efforts may well be worth while as indications point to bigreturns. If MEN can persuade even five million of India's 15 millioncable homes to pay Rs5 a month, the numbers will work out at Rs300million a year. And that's just for starters, reckons Modi.What may be some time off, however, is the widely-speculated Modi-Disney pay-TV movie channel, to be delivered via PAS-4. According toDisney's Rose Leng, the entertainment conglomerate has no immediateplans for India. "India is just one of several Asian markets we areexamining. We have to find the right programming format and partners,"she says. "We'll just leave the transponder that we have booked there;we are not going to rush in."The explanation from the Modi side is that the satellite channel hasbeen delayed because the group is still doing research into the Indianmarket. "We are reviewing the possibilities together, we can't affordto make mistakes," says Lalit Modi. "The viewer gives you only onechance in the TV business."Modi's ability and willingness to carefully research its market is anattribute that attracted the attention of New World Entertainment, oneof two U.S companies with which Modi has set-up shared equity ventures,the other being Multimedia Enterprises."Research into the TV viewer has been spotty in India in terms of bothquantitative and qualitative research," says New World's John Cuddihy."But the Modis have gone out on their own and produced some excellent-quality research we have access to."The purpose of New World Modi (India) is to create opportunities in theTV business on a number of fronts in which distribution of the existingcatalogue, original production and channel development are all beingevaluated. However, Cuddihy says that of them all, channel developmentis probably of least interest. "Although we wouldn't necessarily turnour backs on a situation that included hardware, our mandate in Indiaat the moment is to work on the software," he says. Currently, Modi-NewWorld India has taken slots on DDII for the long-running soap Valley ofThe Dolls, which is being stripped five times a week.According to Ethan Podell, executive vice-president of MultimediaEnterprises, his company approached Modi for a partnership: "The groupis a sophisticated business entity. They have a good grasp of the mediabusiness."Podell envisages the venture producing U.S-style talk shows for theIndian market, albeit with a local focus. Work on one daytime show hasalready started and should be ready in the next six months."We don't know how long it's going to take to make money in the Indianmarket but all our markets are revenue-driven," says Podell. "We areoptimistic."And that's exactly what has made Modi Entertainment Group the darlingof the western media world. Says Lalit Modi: "When we were discussingwith Disney, we were willing to work their way and we were motivatedand persevering. For every venture we had to approach them afresh. Insome of the ventures I'm aware we will take four years to break even;in some we are already making profits. I have a vision: that the ModiEntertainment Group is to emerge as a major player in the Indianmarket."Modi Entertainment VenturesModi Films International:   distributes feature films to India and                            the Subcontinent.Ownership:                  Modi (100%)Modi Entertainment Network: distributes cable TV channels and                            operates subscriber management systems.Ownership:                  Modi (100%)Home Communications:        produces and distributes programming for                            television.Ownership:                  Modi (100%)Walt Disney (India):        masterminds all Disney ventures in                            India.Ownership:                  Disney (51%) Modi (49%)Buena Vista Television      distributes programming and markets(India):                    airtime mainly to Doordarshan and                            regional-language channels.Ownership:                  Walt Disney (India) (100%)Walt Disney ConsumerProducts (India):           licenses products and characters.Ownership:                  Walt Disney (India) (100%)Modi New World (India):     distributes New World programming in                            India and is considering the production                            of original programming.Ownership:                  Modi (50%), New World (50%)Modi Multimedia:            produces talkshows and distributes                            Multimedia's existing catalogue in                            India.Ownership:                  Modi (50%) Multimedia (50%)Modi United Artists:        constructs cineplexes for film                            exhibition.Ownership:                  Modi (50%) United Artists (50%)Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995LAWS UNTO THEMSELVESThe second part of Cable & Satellite Asia's A-Z guide to regulation. ByJanine SteinKoreaRegulatory bodies and laws: Since December 1994, the licensingauthority has been the Ministry of Information and Communications(MOIC). The previous authority, theMinistry of Information (MOI), now makes recommendations to the MOIC.All cable companies are required to join the Korean Cable TelevisionAssociation (KCTA). Programming standards and practices are set by theKorean Cable Communications Commission (KCCC). Laws governingtelevision include the Telecommunications Business Law, the Cable TVLaw, the Satellite Communications Law (draft) and the SatelliteBroadcasting Law (draft). Satellite laws are being drafted to deal withthe use of satellites after the launch of KoreaSat.Uplink/downlink: No company is allowed to establish uplink or downlinkfacilities except for Korea Telecom (KT) and DACOM. Uplink/downlinkagreements between cable network service-providers and foreignsatellite operators have to be rubber-stamped by the Ministry ofInformation and Communication.Foriegn ownership/cross media ownership: The government has adopted atripartite framework for cable TV. This consists of system operators(defined geographically), programmers (defined by genre) and signaltransporting providers (network operators). Cross-ownership among thethree is prohibited by the Cable TV Law. Foreign companies and largedomestic business conglomerates, such as Hyundai, Samsung and Daewoo,are supposedly prohibited from participating in system operating andsignal transporting, although they are heavily involved indirectly.Foreign investment is limited to 15% in the TV programmers category.Intellectual property and copyright protection: The Copyright Lawprotects foreign broadcasts and cable retransmissions.Advertising on cable and satellite: Advertising time can be no longerthan 10 minutes per hour, with a maximum of six minutes per hour on thechildren's channel. Programmes cannot be interrupted by advertisingmore than four times in two hours, and ad breaks, depending where theyfall in the schedule, are regulated in terms of length and content.Reception and distribution rules: Private satellite TV reception isofficially banned. This will change with the launch of KoreaSat though.Programming rules and content restrictions: Cable TV channels havestrict foreign content restrictions, varying from 10% for arts andculture, and 20% for educational programming, to 50% for science andtechnology and documentaries. Movies, foreign programming, cartoons andcommercials have to adhere to certain content standards.Contact: Ministry of Information and Communications, Tel: 82 2 7204929; Korean Cable TV Association, Tel: 82 2 735 6511, Fax: 82 2 735-6514MalaysiaRegulatory bodies and laws: Ministry of Energy, Telecoms and Posts,Ministry of Information. The power to grant broadcasting licences lieswith the Ministry of Information. Regulations regarding satelliteservices are contained in the Telecommunications Act of 1950 and theBroadcasting Act of 1988. Malaysia's legislation is being amended inresponse to new technological advancements such as uplinking servicesand public reception of satellite broadcast signals.Uplink/downlink: Uplinking is possible through the TelecommunicationsDepartment. This restriction will be revised under the new regulations.Foreign ownership/cross media ownership: The 1974 guidelines requireforeign individuals acquiring 15% or more of voting powers, or groupsacquiring 30% or more, to apply for permission from the ForeignInvestment Committee (FIC). Alternatively, if the acquisition byforeign interests in a Malaysian company is worth more than $M5 million($2 million), irrespective of percentage, companies will require theapproval of the FIC. There is no separate defined policy for thetelecommunications sector, although there are expectations that thedevelopment of cable and satellite networks by foreign companies willrequire joint ventures with local companies. There are currently nospecific rules on cross-media ownership.Intellectual property and copyright protection: Broadcasts are governedby the Copyright Act of 1987. The material must be original, firstpublished in Malaysia, or broadcast from Malaysia. With someexceptions, broadcasts from outside Malaysia are not entitled toprotection.Advertising on cable and satellite: Details of requirements on cableare not yet confirmed. There are severe restrictions on the content andproduction of advertisements.Reception and distribution rules: Dishes were banned in 1992 to preventMalaysia receiving unsuitable foreign channels. This ruling is expectedto be overturned when amendments to the broadcasting andtelecommunications acts are tabled before Parliament this year.Programming rules and content restrictions: The Malaysian government issoftening its hard-line attitude towards foreign programming. TheMinistry Of Information is conducting a study to determine the kind ofprogrammes suitable for television, video-tapes and cinemas. It willalso look into a rating system and a broadcasting code of ethics.Contact: Ministry of Information. Tel: 60 3 757 8988; Rashid & LeeLawyers, Tel: 60 3 293 8155PhilippinesRegulatory bodies and laws: The regulatory bodies are the Department ofTransport and Communications, the National TelecommunicationsCommission (NTC), and the Kapisnan ng mga Brodkaster (KBP). Cableregulations are works-in-progress at the moment. Main industry body,the Philippine Cable Television Association, is expected to shortlysubmit its recommendations to the government.Uplink/downlink: Licences to establish uplinking facilities are issuedby the NTC. Various construction and equipment permits are alsorequired. However companies have to prove the current facilitiesprovided by the satellite communications service-providers do not notmeet their requirements. Foreign broadcasters do not require permits todownlink to cable operators, providing the signals do not originate inthe Philippines.Foreign ownership/cross media ownership: Under current regulations,foreign investment in the cable industry - classified as broadcastmedia - is not allowed. Reclassification is expected to take place thisyear. If reclassified as telecommunications, the foreign investmentceiling will be 40%. There is a possibility cable may be classified andregulated separately with a 30% ceiling on foreign investment. Thereare foreign ownership restrictions on the ownership of uplinkfacilities too.Intellectual property and copyright protection: Piracy is a problem,although efforts are being made to encourage cable operators to adhereto rules. But fines for offenders are low. Many cable systems are video-driven, using unlicensed tapes and unauthorised retransmission of tapedsatellite programmes.Advertising on cable and satellite: Except for institutionaladvertising, cable TV is not officially allowed to carry advertising.In reality, cable operators are carrying up to four minutes of ads perhour. In return for carrying institutional ads, cable operators areawarded tax credits.Reception and distribution rules: NoneProgramming rules and content restrictions: The Philippines has norestrictions on foreign programming content. Cable operators rely onacquired programming because they aren't supposed to produce their own.Cable operators are obliged to carry the terrestrial broadcasters.Contact: National Telecommunications Commission, Tel: 63 2 924 3744.Fax: 63 2 921 7128.SingaporeRegulatory bodies and laws: The Singapore Broadcasting Authority (SBA)is a statutory authority under the Ministry of Information and theArts, which regulates and licenses the broadcasting industry inSingapore. Broadcasting services are governed by the SingaporeBroadcasting Act 1994. Video-on-demand is classified as a broadcastingservice and is subject to SBA licensing requirements. The SBA isresponsible for regulating broadcasting services content. TheTelecommunications Authority Of Singapore (TAS) is responsible forregulating broadcasting delivery systems.Uplink/downlink: To uplink satellite signals from Singapore,broadcasters need a satellite broadcasting licence issued by the SBA.Broadcasters who want to operate their own uplink facilities need alicence issued by the TAS. To be granted a satellite broadcastinglicence, broadcasters have to ensure their service is acceptable andcomplies with local laws in recipient countries. Once satisfied, theSBA will give its approval in principle within two weeks. The actuallicence takes a month to issue. There are several incentive schemes,such as the Pioneer Status scheme, granted to broadcasters who chooseSingapore as their base. These are incentive tax packages based on thetype of activity and amount of investment made. Satellite broadcasterscan uplink their services through a common carrier like SingaporeTelecom, SIMCOM, or ST Teleport. They can also operate their own uplinkfacilities either individually or in joint-ownership with otherbroadcasters.Foreign/cross media ownership restrictions: NoneIntellectual property and copyright protection: A number of lawsprotect intellectual property. These include the Copyright Act, theTrademarks Act and the Patent Act. Cable operators have to obtaincopyright authorisation for programming.Advertising on cable and satellite: Cable advertising is restricted to14 minutes per hour. There are no restrictions on satelliteadvertising.Reception and distribution rules: Private dish installation and usageis banned. Businesses can apply to the SBA to receive DTH services.Programming rules and content restrictions: There are no language orforeign programme restrictions on cable or satellite TV. The cable TVsystem is required to carry the local terrestrial channels on itsnetwork.Contact: Singapore Broadcasting Authority, Directorate of Policy andPlanning, Tel: 65 373 0803 Fax: 65 278 6009TaiwanRegulatory bodies and laws: Regulatory bodies are the Ministry ofTransportation and Communications and the Government Information Office(GIO). Revisions to the Broadcasting and Television Law are pending.Taiwan's first Cable TV Law was passed in 1993.Uplink/downlink: Foreign broadcasters are not allowed to uplink fromTaiwan. This could change under the new legislation.Foreign ownership/cross media ownership: Draft regulations may allow49% foreign investment in satellite companies. Foreign investment incable has to be indirect.Intellectual property and copyright protection: A new copyright law hasbeen drafted to bring Taiwan into line with GATT standards. The draftlaw clarifies the definition of broadcast but does not specificallyaddress the protection of unencrypted signals. At the moment,protection is offered to works by nationals of the U.S., Hong Kong,Switzerland, the UK and, in certain cases, Korea and Spain.Advertising on cable and satellite: Ads are allowed to occupy 10% ofbroadcasting time on cable. There are no restrictions on satellite.Reception and distribution rules: Broadcasts are mostly unregulated.Programming rules and content restrictions: Content guidelines are verygeneral, mainly for the protection of children. There are no languagerestrictions. 20% of the cable programming mix has to be locally-produced. The GIO is planning a Satellite Broadcast Law which will giveit authority to control content. At the moment, the GIO uses theBroadcasting and Television Law's provisions on programme productionand distribution. As most foreign suppliers of satellite programmesfall beyond the reach of local authorities, there are indications thatthe local authorities will attempt to control foreign programmingthrough cable operators carrying the programmes.Contact: Government Information Office, Tel: 886 2 357 0020 Fax: 886 2357-0016.ThailandRegulatory bodies and laws: The Broadcasting Law covers allbroadcasting in Thailand, with separate regulations for cable.Satellite TV has no regulations of its own. The Public RelationsDepartment (PRD) is the broadcasting regulatory body.Uplink/downlink: Uplink facilities require a licence under the amendedRadio and Television Act, which covers the provision of radio ortelevision services for the public. The licences are issued by theDepartment of Posts and Telecommunications. A company establishinguplink or downlink facilities has to be majority Thai-owned. The AlienBusiness Law restricts foreign involvement in certain activities;including operating uplinking facilities.Foreign ownership/cross media ownership: Broadcasting licenceapplications have to be submitted by Thai nationals with offices inThailand. In ordinary registered partnerships, partners must be Thainationals. In limited partnerships, the partner with unlimitedliability must hold Thai nationality and not less than 50% of thecompany's capital must be held by Thai nationals.Intellectual property and copyright protection: Perhaps surprisingly,given the proliferation of pirated  goods in Thailand, foreignbroadcasts and cable retransmission of foreign broadcasts are protectedunder the Thai copyright law.Advertising on cable and satellite: Thailand's pay-TV services are notallowed to carry advertising. Content is dictated by the PRD.Reception and distribution rules: Private ownership of satellite dishesis allowed. Pay-TV companies have to obtain a licence from either theMass Communications Organisation of Thailand (MCOT) or the PRD.Programming rules and content restrictions: There are no foreignprogramme quotas. Programmes cannot be insulting to anyone, especiallyThai Royalty, heads of state or government officials. Religion has tobe respected, as does the public order, national unity andinternational relationships. Obscene and cruel footage is banned.Foreign television production crews have to obtain official permissionto shoot in Thailand.Contact: The Mass Communication Organisation of Thailand, Tel: 66 2 245-1646, Fax: 66 2 245-1644;  Public Relations Department, Tel: 66 2 248-8223Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995BIG MONEY, BIG PLANSMalaysia's foray into cable and satellite has begun with two consortiacompeting for market share. Sarah Walker reports"We are about to make a quantum leap," said Malaysia's minister ofinformation about the imminent arrival to his country of pay-TV, whichwill enable the 22 million-strong population to tune into around 25channels of TV, compared to the current choice of just four. But itwill be a controlled leap. Far from heralding the beginning of an open-skies policy, there is every sign Prime Minister Mohammed Mahathir -concerned about the effect uncensored western satellite channels couldhave on Malaysia's national culture and identity - will presidecarefully over the emergence of cable and DTH.So far two companies have been given licences to develop a secondarytelevision market in Malaysia. One, Cableview Services Sdn Bhd, hasalready soft-launched part of its five-channel MMDS service called MegaTV (see box). The other, Measat Broadcast Network Services (MBNS), willlaunch its 20-channel DTH service mid-1996, utilising Ku-band capacityon the country's first domestic satellite, Measat One.Although Cableview Services has cash-rich shareholders, its level ofinvestment in pay-TV comes nowhere near that being earmarked by itssatellite-delivered competitor. However, both Measat and MBNS are partof a much wider effort to construct a modern technologicalinfrastructure in Malaysia. Measat is owned and operated by BinariangSdn Bhd, a private telecommunications company in turn owned 20% by theU.S. Baby Bell US West and 80% by Malaysian shareholders, including theinfluential business tycoon Ananda Krishnan. The Malaysian shareholdersin turn wholly own MBNS, giving it sister company status to Binariang.Binariang itself, far from just being a satellite operator, has acomplete range of authorisations from the Malaysian government toestablish a fully-integrated, multimedia network operating under thecorporate identity name of Maxis. This includes the setting up of acellular phone system, the construction of fixed broadband networksand, of course, the launching and operation of Measat.So far two Measats have been planned and will be co-located at 91.5degrees, although eight orbital slots have been filed in total. MeasatOne will launch in December 1995, while Measat Two is tentativelyscheduled for October 1996. Both will be put into orbit by the Frenchlauncher Arianespace.Measat One's payload will be comprised of 12 36MHz transponders at C-Band and five, 54MHz transponders at Ku-Band. The C-Band footprint willcover the whole of the Asia Pacific, as far west as the east coast ofIndia as far south as northern Australia, north to Mongolia and east asfar as Guam. Ku-Band capacity, meanwhile, will provide spot beamcoverage over Malaysia, the Philippines and India.Although the same model as the first craft, Measat Two is likely to beconfigured differently with three 76MHz C-Bands transponders, inaddition to 12 at Ku-Band. Measat Two's Ku capacity will also beextended to provide coverage of Java, Queensland and Vietnam."The satellite payload is quite flexible, we can switch transpondersbetween the different beams," says Maxis's Steven Corda. "We arelooking at targeting emerging countries, to be there when they requirea service," he continues. "For instance, we have one transponder thatcan be switched to Vietnam, providing five to 10 channels ofprogramming."Although the satellite operator and the programming arm operate asseparate entities, the commonality of ownership ensures that synergiesexist. While C-Band capacity on both satellites is available for hire,all the Ku capacity has been leased exclusively to MBNS so that it canprovide DTH services initially to Malaysia, but potentially to all thedifferent regions covered by the spot beams.For Malaysia itself, MBNS has initially been licensed to provide a 20-channel DTH package receivable with 50cm dishes. According to PaulEdwards, MBNS's chief operating officer, channels in the package willbe a combination of international and locally-produced services. "Wewill probably have two local channels initially," says Edwards, whosestaff are now in the process of acquiring shows and commissioning localproductions. Eventually, MBNS will have the capability to produce itsown programming once construction has been completed of the AsiaBroadcast Centre, a huge facility combining production, post-productionfacilities and uplinking. The centre will also enable the company tohelp localise the international services, in terms of providing dubbingand subtitling and possibly even providing local programming."Our experience is that local programming often drives the pay-TVpackages and that often international channels by themselves have notalways been especially successful in some markets," says Edwards. "Sowe are looking at a combination of local driver channels packaged withtop-quality international channels that have an element oflocalisation."Although contracts have yet to be signed, programmers who haveconfirmed they are in discussions for carriage as part of the DTHpackage include the Discovery Channel, ESPN, CNNI, TNT/Cartoon Networkand Asia Business News.With such services previously unwelcome in Malaysia, Edwards says a lotof focus is being channelled towards the issue of censorship, "toensure that whatever we broadcast will be acceptable," he says. "We arestill evaluating those standards but have employed some very advancedtechnology which will allow us to delay the transmission of content,subject to the usual permissions of the programme owners."CNNI for one will broadcast to Malaysia on a two-hour delay basis togive local censors plenty of time to cut out any offending programmematerial.With the launch of the DTH package still some eight to 10 months off,Edwards says negotiations are still underway with MPEG-2/DVB-compliantcompression technology suppliers. Also still being evaluated is thepricing structure. "We are still doing research into the market as towhat acceptance levels are," he says. Although a more comprehensivechannel package, coupled with the high cost of digital decoders, islikely to push the price up to at least twice that of Mega TV, sayindustry experts.Utilising compression rates of at least 10 to one and perhaps evenhigher on each of the 17 Ku transponders provided by both Measat Oneand Two, MBNS will be able to provide in the region of 150 DTHchannels, split between the satellites' several spot beams. "We willnot necessarily beam services into each of those countries but have thecapacity to do so," says Edwards. "And because the beams are switchableto a degree we can allocate transponder capacity to certain markets asthe need arises." Although Edwards says the services could also bedelivered to cable headends as well as to the home, "the experience ofEurope and the U.S. shows that there is a very definite role for DTH."Aside from Malaysia the first market to be targeted by MBNS is India,where an MoU to deliver a multi-channel DTH service, in conjunctionwith state broadcaster Doordarshan, has already been signed. Utilisingup to four transponders, a potential 40 channels will eventually beavailable. "India has been a cable market until now but it has grownvery fast indeed and we think that going forward there will be a veryviable DTH market there," he says.As regards the C-Band capacity on Measat One and Two, Maxis's StevenCorda says Binariang is "looking to provide any type of fixed satelliteservices you could imagine." The first will be a Vsat service scheduledfor the second quarter of next year, another will be telephony, withlong-distance learning another possibility. However one of the majortarget markets will again be broadcasters, for distribution toheadends. "We are looking at both international and domesticbroadcasters," says Corda. "Say if the domestic broadcaster wanted tomake its programming available in Indonesia, or Mindanao in thePhilippines where there is a large Bahasa Malaysia-speakingpopulation... When you look at the coverage, we cover just about all ofAsia Pacific and the power levels are quite large, so we can run twoanalogue channels per transponder at high quality, effectively doublingthe amount of programming you can see on our satellite versus some ofthe others," he continues.Corda views all the other regional satellites as Measat's directcompetition, but doesn't believe it is a major issue."Digital video and high-powered transponders have lowered the cost forindividual uses such that we are now getting a whole new marketsegment," he says. "Now instead of just the $1.5 million to $2 milliona year for a transponder, customers can lease an eighth or a quarter,we are now getting into the $500,000 and lower range." The cost for afull C-Band transponder on Measat will be $1.9 million a year.For Binariang though it is the construction of the fixed broadbandnetwork that is seen as potentially the largest revenue-earner. Thecompany is to invest R$2.9 million in its development over the nextfive years. So far two deals have been signed for the construction ofhybrid fibre/co-axial systems, with the aim being to capture an 8%market share by the year 2000.Edwards see synergies for MBNS and Binariang in this area too. "Such astate-of-the-art system will allow for VOD and interactiveprogramming... we see ourselves as a content-provider," he says.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995MEGA TV: NO SECOND BESTWith a population starved of choice yet relatively affluent, receivedwisdom is that the time is right for pay-TV in Malaysia. But doMalaysians need two services? The answer, according to both MBNS andcompetitor Mega TV, would appear to be yes.Although MBNS's proposed pay-TV plan is impressive, the country'ssecond pay-TV licensee, Mega TV, will still have an eight-month leadover its DTH-delivered competitor, and decidedly lower overheads.Test-launched in September with a four-channel package - comprised ofCNNI, Cartoon Network, Discovery Channel, and ESPN - Mega TV will beginits full, five-channel service in November with the arrival of HBOAsia. At this time viewers will be required to begin paying for thepackage.According to CEO Shamsul Khalid Ismail, the total cost of the serviceincludes an installation fee of R$260 ($104) to R$450, depending on thetype of property, a R$135 decoder deposit fee - the decoders are givenout free of charge, but on loan - and a monthly fee of R$45. For this,subscribers will get four 24-hour channels, plus a fifth channelincorporating 14-hours of the Cartoon Network, broadcasting from 08.00to 18.00, plus locally-packaged general entertainment programming,broadcasting from 20.00 to 01.00.Operated by Cableview Services which in turn is owned by a consortiumof five companies, including private broadcaster TV3 (40%) and theminister of finance (30%), Mega TV is initially targeting the wealthyKlang Valley area of Malaysia, which incorporates Kuala Lumpur. Targethouseholds are those with incomes exceeding $1,500 a month. Andalthough Mega TV is allowed to sell three minutes of commercial airtimeper hour on all channels except HBO, its main revenue is expected tocome from subscriptions.While it is likely all of the channels distributed by Mega TV will endup on Measat as well, Mega is playing on the cost factor. "We knowtheir service will be a lot more expensive," says Ismail. "They willhave to target the R$3000 a month income bracket." And by the timeMeasat's DTH service is up-and-running, Mega TV will have expandedbeyond its initial coverage area.With a nationwide licence, the plan is to expand coverage as quickly aspossible, using the same MMDS delivery. Channel capacity could also beextended to around 12, and even more, should digital MMDS beimplemented. This, says Ismail, could render it unnecessary to investin other forms of delivery, such as hard wire cable, because digitalMMDS would allow compression of the existing channels.Having invested R$110 million to date, breakeven point, says Ismail, is50,000 subscribers. "We have the capacity to install about 40,000dishes a month, so it is possible we could recoup by year end," hesays.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995A CRISIS OF IDENTITYCable TV in the Philippines is a growth industry, but regulatory issuesneed to be resolved before it can reallydevelop. By Sarah WalkerThe Philippines may be home to one of Asia's lesser developed economiesbut its cable system is surprisingly well developed and, coupled withinterest from overseas investors, is growing rapidly.A country with a population of 66 million, there are currently 5.5million TV households in the Philippines. To date, cable has passedover 40% of TV homes and there are an estimated 300,000 to 350,000subscribers. Projections for the year 2000 are over one million.The Philippines Cable TV Association (PCTA), an efficient industry bodyformed in 1987 with six charter members, now numbers 216, although thenumber of cable operators that have received cable licences from theNational Telecommunications Commission (NTC) is 320. PCTA estimates putthe total number of systems operating at between 260 and 300.Sky Cable, the country's largest cable operator, carries 55 channelsand has a subscriber base of 120,000 (see sidebar), however mostoperators carry between 10 and 20 channels and serve anything from 300subscribers upwards.Although monthly subscription fees, which range from P90 ($3.50) toP430 - depending on the location of the service - are low, the abilityof most Filipinos to speak English has provided a ready-made market forwestern companies.Most of the major satellite broadcasters are carried on Filipino cablesystems, including ESPN, TNT/Cartoon Network, HBO Asia, The DiscoveryChannel and Star TV. Operators receive the services from satellitessuch as Palapa B2P, PAS-2 and Apstar 1, and, like Indonesia, thegeography of the Philippines means most of the major VHF and UHF-delivered broadcasters such as ABS-CBN and GMA 7 are also carried viasatellite and then relayed by cable. In outlying areas whereterrestrial reception is poor this has resulted in a big demand forcable TV.However, in the bigger cities, where UHF and VHF signals can easily bereceived, the demographic of the average cable viewer tends to behigher, as in this instance cable is an add-on service, not anecessity.In Metro Manila for example, between 60% and 80% of viewers are in theAB category as opposed to elsewhere, where they only number 30% ofviewers.In addition to the relaying of foreign channels and nationalbroadcasters, a few locally-produced and packaged channels are alsocarried. Sky Cable has three of its own, while the Hollywood Channel,which began broadcasting off Palapa B2P in March, is a 16-hours-a-daynationwide cable network that, according to Liza Legaspi, programmemanager, broadcasts mainly acquired U.S. programming such as Time Traxand Lois and Clark.Carried by about 100 cable operators, Hollywood Channel has plans tostart producing original programming soon. Its sister company, CableBoss, is a distributor and acts as the middle-man between  programmersand cable operators, providing monthly figures and collecting revenue -under-reporting of the subscriber base is still a big problem in thePhilippines.The other major  distributors are Accion, and Yes Cable. Many of theU.S. broadcasters use all three, as does Star TV. According to itsgeneral manager, southeast Asia, distribution and marketing, DavidIlagan, the pan-Asian broadcaster will be launching a full FilipinoChannel, once Asiasat 2 launches.Although the Philippines can lay claim to having built one of, if notthe first, cable system in Asia - constructed in Bagio City in 1969 -the imposition of marshall law by the Marcos regime in 1972 put afreeze on the telecoms and broadcasting industry. From that point on,cable TV's development, like the country in general, stood still.It wasn't until 1987 when the government of Cory Aquino allowed anycitizen of the Philippines to build a cable system, (as long as theysubmitted the applicable technical and financial studies) that cablebegan to grow again.Now that President Fidel Ramos, who has set his sights on turning thePhilippines into a newly industrialised nation by the year 2000, cablecan really begin to develop beyond its formative stages. Or at leastthat's the theory. Regulatory wrangles and legal loopholes mean that,presently, Filipino cable does seem to be undergoing something of anidentity crisis.Currently cable in the Philippines is classified as broadcast media,but the NTC is formulating plans for it to be reclassified as telecoms.Should this take place it would bring about a number of changes, themost significant being a change in the foreign ownership ceiling from apresent zero to 40%.Most industry observers think foreign investment is the only way cableoperators will be able to upgrade their infrastructure significantly tocompete with the country's rapidly growing telecoms market. Indeed anumber are already forming alliances with U.S. cable companies inpreparation for an easing of restrictions.The most high-profile overseas operator is the Falcon Cable/CaviteCable Systems joint venture in which the U.S. company helped the cableoperator install a fully fibre-optic system. Fellow U.S. predator UIHalso has an alliance with Sun TV. Other U.S. companies thought to belooking for strategic alliances include Time Warner and TCI."To go from 250,000 [subscribers] to over 2.5 million the cableindustry needs to establish stability, a level of professionalism andvision," says Clive Flessig, vice president international, FalconCable. "Telecoms will come up with a compelling argument to get intothe business... International investors are in need of a local partnerwho is familiar with the environment."There have already been some informal tie-ups between telcos and cablecompanies to provide telephony over cable. To name just one, thePhilippines Long Distance Telephone Co (PLDT) and Manila's County CableCommunication's Network have been testing infrastructure pairingtraditional copper wire and co-axial cable for the provision oftelephony, using U.S. company First Pacific Network's (FPN) technology.The present telecoms bill currently allows telcos to provide cable TVbut not vice versa, therefore it is evident some changes in the law arenecessary to create a level playing field.The PCTA recognises this but is opposed to the possibility of aprovision for cable being inserted into the Telecoms Act. Instead it ispresently drafting its own cable TV bill to put before Congress whichwould classify cable as a separate entity.While not fully against foreign ownership of cable, the PCTA is anxiousto retain the industry's autonomy and is unlikely to recommend a full40% ceiling, perhaps opting instead for 30%, with ownership taking theform of equity participation, but not management control.Should cable eventually fall under the banner of telecoms, operatorswill also have to apply for a Congressional Franchise beforeapproaching the NTC for a licence. The PCTA vehemently opposes this,saying the cost involved would prejudice the smaller operator. Othersdisagree. "If you look at the 300 or so operators pending licences,many are mom and pop operations who really don't have enough money toget in here and offer a reliable service. A congressional franchisewould shake out the small guys from the big guys," says a Manila-basedconsultant. A Congressional licence requirement could also help limitoverbuilding, he adds. At the moment there is no limit on the number ofoperators allowed per district.Whatever the outcome of the regulatory changes, in order to develop,the industry will need some sort of financial boost. The current movetowards consolidation will provide operators with not only more financefor infrastructure upgrades and original programming production, butalso greater muscle with which to bargain with overseas programmersAdditional money could also come from advertising. At the moment thistoo is officially banned although many systems do sell commercialairtime.The PCTA is currently pushing for between four and five minutes an hourcompared to the 16 minutes currently allowed on the national stations -which in turn are opposing the proposal.Says one cable operator: "National broadcasters view us as a possiblethreat to their revenue base, but it is likely that we would be goingafter the local market."Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995LEADER OF THE PACKSky Cable - the Philippines' largest operator - reaches 100,000 cablesubscribers, of which 70,000 are located in Metro Manila.Operating a basic package of 55 channels at a cost of $16 a month, itis one of the few operators to package and produce its own channels.Currently numbering three, these are the I Channel, comprised of kidsfare in the daytime and adults at night, Sky Movies and a Filipinochannel that airs movies and locally-produced news and entertainment inthe local Tagalog dialect.Sky is also the first operator in the Philippines to operate a premiumtier. Launched on July 1 after two weeks of testing as part of thebasic package, the tier is initially offering two Mandarin-languagechannels: TVBS, the international arm of Hong Kong terrestrialbroadcaster TVB, at a cost of $4 and news service CTN, at a cost of $2.There is also a one-off members' fee of $100. By year end the cableoperator hopes to be providing 10 premium channels and is thought to bein discussions with MTV and Japanese terrestrial NHK.According to Sky Cable general manager Mel Verlade, the premium tier isinitially aimed at the country's minority, but wealthy Chinesepopulation.Sky is using General Instrument's Jerrold equipment for the service.David Johnson, GI's Asia Pacific support manager, says the deal marksthe first fully interactive, two-way addressable system to have beensold to the Philippines. Sky has also acquired some impulse PPV boxesand is currently negotiating with rights-holders. Verlade said VOD isalso a possibility in the future.Sky owns some eight cable systems nationwide and is looking for furtheracquisitions. It is also in the process of laying 100km of fibre-opticcable in  Metro Manila, with the economically-prosperous town of Cebuthe next possible target for a major infrastructure upgrade.Owned by the Benpres Group, holding company of the locally powerfulLopez family - whose subsidiaries include broadcaster ABS-CBN and localtelecoms operator Bayantel, in which Nynex owns a 25% stake - Sky isnot short of cash, or contacts.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995ASIAN AESTHETICSOn-air identities and graphics are crucial to the branding of achannel. Janine Stein looks at how networks are adapting their look tosuit the Far East marketsStaffers at the TNT & Cartoon Network Asia just don't talk about moviegenres anymore. The lavish Thirties swashbuckling drama, Captain Blood,has become a "magenta." The futuristic 1970s science fiction Logan'sRun, on the other hand, is "definitely a green," according to the newTNT-speak.To the crew that is creating an on-air Asian identity for the classicHollywood channel, films have become colours and clips set to music tocreate a certain mood, to encourage an emotional reaction.This emotion is TNT's greatest weapon in the American movie channel'sbattle for an Asian identity. "No-one has seen the movies and theydon't know our stars in this part of the world," says TNT's director ofprogramming, Andrea Miller.But the emotions are universal: love, jealousy, greed. "All thesemovies have great emotional content, great moods, great stories,"Miller says. And TNT has translated them into colour.While the palette the night-time channel uses reflects Asian citiesafter dark, in TNT-speak blue equals light-hearted, comic and musical -for movies like The Glass Bottomed Boat. Promos for an evening oftraditional family entertainment are gold, while screens filled withgreen herald edgy, sci-fi-types like Shaft or Children of the Damned.When the promos are purple, the movies will be darker, filled withmystery and suspense. Magenta is reserved for grandeur, for costumedramas and epics, for films like the Adventures of Don Juan.If TNT has moved away from its movie icons to achieve an Asian look,virtually all the channels have shunned traditional Asian icons intheir quest for an Asian identity."Anything that you would love to see on a postcard, we try to avoid,"says David Flack, MTV's director of on-air promotions. "We're lookingfor youth culture, the kinds of things that young people are interestedin."The traditional pool of instantly-recognisable Asian images - dragons,chop sticks, fans, jade carvings - are "kind of corny," Flack says. TNT& Cartoon Network's creative director, Ian Diamond, calls thesecultural icons tired and jaded, and steers clear of moviedom'sequivalents - the director's chairs, the strips of film, thespotlights."We wanted to create a look that was contemporary, unique and elegant;a look that suggested the essence of Hollywood yet avoided Western orAsian movie cliches," Diamond says.In contrast to the channel's nostalgic tone in Latin America, TNTAsia's pitch aims to "appear timeless, not too attached to particularfaces, styles, or periods... we will sell the emotions, energy anddynamics of Hollywood." It's a concept created in the U.S. For theirnew Asian image unveiled earlier this year, TNT went to New York-baseddesign firm PMCD."It was a case of people for the job," Diamond says. But he insistslocal artists have as much chance of participating in the network'songoing creative process as anyone else. "It's a matter of artistictalent."TNT's design elements include fire, water and light, a 3-D feel iscreated with movie clips in multiple backgrounds and light play.Diamond makes heavy use of what he calls "organic" (as opposed toelectronic) elements - 35mm film, original instruments, the real ratherthan the virtual - to create TNT's sumptuous night-time feel. Althoughhe later processes the images on 3-D particle animation using SGIWavefront software, he sets great store by their "real foundation."Just in case the subtle messages are missed, TNT has taken out an on-screen insurance policy - the word "movie" running in differentlanguages at the bottom of the screen. "This avoids disruptions to thebasic look and feel but successfully delivers a simple and directmessage to viewers," TNT says.In a much more powerful programming position, the Discovery Channel isless esoteric about the on-air image it is forging in Asia. Saffron-robed monks, the sun rising over a Buddha, traffic in Bangkok,Sukhothai, plus lots of Asian faces and places are all part of the on-air promotions and fillers. Each market has its own promos andinterstitials. "We are bringing people their own cities, something toidentify with, pieces of everyday life," says director of on-airpromotions, Susan Seelandt.The images are set to original music on traditional instruments - aroute also favoured by Asia Business News (ABN). "It's much softer, andthe melodies are Asia-specific," says ABN's deputy managing editor,Jeremy Pink.CNBC Asia also aims to echo on-screen pieces of its viewers lives. Atthe same time as avoiding the "hard-nosed aggressive approach," thechannel brings images of the way Asia does business to the screen.Exchanging business cards, greetings, scenes of industry, of stockexchanges, "things that are typical and obviously Asian, but notstereotypical," says Robert Wilson, director of network distributionand marketing.Creating an identity that works is an imprecise science in such a newarena. Apart from the obvious don'ts, such as being careful with imagesof pigs and pork for Muslim audiences - and that means no Porky Pig onthe Cartoon Network - the creators of on-air promos for Asia are mostlystill easing into the market.At the Discovery Channel, Asian graphics are currently being phased into take the place of graphics from the U.S. "We are in the process ofAsianising the look," Seelandt says.Next year, when the channel launches its Bahasa and Japanese services,new graphics with an Asian colour palette using reds and golds willreplace the flourescents and light colours of the U.S.-generatedimages. The graphics will be commissioned from Asian artists. "Theseare the people who are going to be watching. They know better what willmake people happy," Seelandt says.While even Asian-based channels such as Asia Business News has not leftcolour choices to chance, the global channel least concerned with anAsian colour palette is MTV."We use every colour of the rainbow, sometimes all at once," Flacksays. "The designers are locals, and we're dealing with a youngaudience which is less concerned about auspicious colours than olderaudiences. We trust them. We have sat down to discuss the wisest kindof design, but we haven't gone into colour details because that comesnaturally."Bowing to Asian tastes has been less in the form of content and more infeel. "We have gone out of our way here to soften the packaging andpromotions," Flack says. "There are fewer cuts than there would be inthe U.S. and Europe, and the whole thing is softer. It's still reallypowerful, but the pace is a little easier on the eye."With a choice of 300 to 400 station IDs, "if someone doesn't like oneof our IDs, a new one will be on in a couple of minutes," Flack says.Obviously, all efforts are made not to offend anyone. "There was one IDwhich has a guy eating a freshly-roasted pig, which we obviously didn'tscreen."Most of MTV's IDs are from the U.S. The Asian operation, launched inApril, has produced three so far, although they have come up with aswathe of image promos. "We only make IDs when we find very goodsubjects," Flack says.Although he makes heavy use of local talent in producing on-air promos,one of the problems Flack has "is that people come up with things theythink we want. We have to ask them to think beyond that... If producersare making something for a Taiwan audience, they have to think aboutthings from a Taiwan perspective. But it doesn't necessarily have tofeature a Taiwanese thing." Having injected the MTV attitude, "the bestthing for me to do is to take a back seat" and let locals get on withit, Flack says.Apart from the language, differentiating MTV Asia from MTV Mandarin iseasy: Although both have the kind of laid-back cool MTV cherishes, MTVAsia's attitude is less gentle, the humour less black. An MTV Mandarinimage promo will have some dude with wire coat-hangers rigged to hishead as antennas for the MTV signal. On MTV Asia, a skeleton in asuitcase and a gun show up on an airline's X-ray conveyor belt.Whatever the routes they've chosen to take in establishing their Asiancredentials, in every case there's a need for international programmersto meld modern Asian elements - a face, a skyline, a city street - withinternationally established channel brands."We are giving a local version of something that people want, in muchthe same way as they want other products from abroad," Flack says. "Wemake it local, but it still has to be MTV. It still has to be part ofthe world network."ESPN takes that thinking further. ESPN Asia's general manager forprogramming and production, John Davies, calls ESPN "a universal brand"with a distinctive graphic style that runs through all the networks."The network ID is just ESPN. The look is recognisable. We're notputting Mickey Mouse ears on anything."It's the same line Turner is taking with Cartoon Network, which is soldin Asia with TNT. "Donald Duck is universal," they say.Like the Discovery Channel and others who are customising withsubtitling and voice dubbing, ESPN's programming, language, andpromotions will be tailored for different markets. However, Daviesinsists, "we are not branding the channel Asian. We are not trying toidentify ourselves as anything - just ESPN... Colour is not somethingwe concern ourselves with."With its universally popular sports content and its proven record evenin Asia's most difficult markets, ESPN's identity requires a lot lessphysical effort than TNT's at this stage. As the movie channel found inMalaysia, sometimes, no amount of colour, mood or manipulation willwork. New MMDS service, Mega TV, which launches later this year, gavethe nod to the Cartoon Network and the flick to the classic movies.Mega TV's reason? They just aren't appropriate for a Malaysianaudience.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995FOR THE PEOPLE, BY THE PEOPLECasbaa is linking with Reed to bring this year's Cable & SatelliteConvention in Hong Kong (December 6-8) back to basicsA cliche it may be, but few can deny that Asia's satellite and cableindustry is growing at a rate of knots. Region-wide, almost withoutexception, cable and or DTH infrastructures are rapidly beingdeveloped. New satellite launches providing digital capabilities willfurther proliferate the number of channels available. Advances intechnology means Asian countries should be in the position to leapfroglevels of development that have characterised the growth of multi-channel environments in the U.S. and Europe.However there is a downside to Asia's rapid development. An overalllack of knowledge and expertise, an absence of uniform technical andoperational standards, and, in many cases a total lack of effective,regulatory legislation has lead to incoherent and disparate growththroughout the region.The Cable & Satellite Asia '95 show which is to be held at the HongKong Convention and Exhibition Centre, will attempt to address some ofthese issues through its convention, while allowing companies a chanceto showcase some of their products.The show is being organised by the Cable & Satellite BroadcastingAssociation of Asia (Casbaa) in conjunction with Reed ExhibitionCompanies. A non-profit association set up in 1993, the aim of Casbaais to bring together the various parts of the industry, includinginternational and national programmers, hardware suppliers and cableand DTH operators to achieve some stability and work towards achievingcommon goals."We are a young organisation," says Bill Hooks, immediate pastpresident of Casbaa and HBO Asia managing director (he has beenreplaced as president by Turner International's Ted McFarland). "Earlyon we were looking for a reason to exist, it was necessary to defineour mission and reach a point where we could convince our members thatCasbaa could make contributions by furthering the cable and satellitebusiness."The three-day convention will be the first in a series of industryevents organised by Casbaa. Hooks says the aim is for the show tobecome an annual date in the diary for delegates and exhibitors notonly from the Asia-Pacific region but also the U.S. and Europe, and thepremier event for those baffled by the ever-increasing and ever-costlynumber of conferences and exhibitions currently being staged in allcorners of Asia."There are too many conferences that look like each other and deliverthe same papers, run by for-profit companies who in our view don'tspend enough time worrying about what might be in the best interests ofattendees in terms of content and execution," says Hooks. "They arevery expensive and targeted at senior executives as opposed to what isemerging as an industry with many different levels... to the typicalTaiwanese or Philippine cable operator the relevancy of, say, adiscussion on telephony today, given where they are in terms of cabledevelopment, is so far removed from what they need to do as to beirrelevant."As such, the Casbaa conference plans to go back to basics, moving awarefrom "paper-delivering panels" and more towards general sessions andworkshops on issues that are meaningful to companies attempting tobuild basic cable infrastructures, such as the use of fibre in buildingcable systems, or an explanation of the technical specifications neededfor the building of a modern, not overtly expensive, cable network.Other subjects the committees have identified as possible workshoptopics include programming, marketing, on-air promotion and customerservice. General sessions will address broader issues such as marketaccess and copyright.The conference will also comprise a keynote address from a well-knownindustry leader.As for the exhibition itself, which will be located on Level 7 of theHong Kong Conference and Exhibition centre, almost 70% of the 2,500square metres of floor space has been booked.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995MONEY BY NUMBERSBoth China and India will continue to represent major growth areas inthe Asian cable and satellite market, says telecoms consultancy MTA-EMCI's Sam H. BookThe situation todayChina has nearly 40 million cable homes representing about 13%penetration of total households. Over 12,000, mainly low-capacity catvsystems carry between eight to 20 channels including terrestrialbroadcast stations, government channels and up to four Star TVchannels. Cable rates are about $1 per month and installation chargescome in at between $25 and $35. Reception is the primary motivation forsubscribing to cable television in China, a situation similar toAmerica in the 1950s and '60s when most American cable subscriberslived in rural areas and small towns with poor off-air reception.India, by comparison, has over 12 million cable homes which representsapproximately 7% of total Indian households and over 20% of urbanIndian households. Over 35,000 local cable systems provideretransmission of terrestrial broadcast stations and a growing array ofsatellite programming. Most Indian cable subscribers can now receiveCNNI, BBC World, Zee TV, and several Star TV services, in addition toregional TV stations and the national state-owned broadcaster,Doordarshan. Monthly cable subscription rates are between $3 to $5 withinstallation costs about $15.As regards the growth of satellite dishes for DTH delivery, thestatistics for China are particularly impressive. Despite an officialgovernment ban, there are currently over one million satellite dishesinstalled and additional dish sales are topping 5,000 a month.Likewise, India also has over one million installed dishes, but theproliferation of cable systems, each carrying most of the availablesatellite programming, is inhibiting the growth of dish sales to thehome.Projections For TomorrowThe economics of cable television require density of homes andhouseholds with disposable income. Hong Kong, Singapore and cities inJapan, Taiwan, Korea and several other Asian countries are economicallyviable cable markets, while areas with low population densities and lowincomes are not viable for modern, broadband systems. China's majorurban markets, especially Shanghai, Beijing, Tianjin, Guangzhou and afew other cities in Guangdong province contain most of China's newly-emerging middle class population, providing sufficient concentrationsof affluent households. Urban India, comprising 30% of the totalpopulation, includes four major metropolitan centres, each with betweenfive to over 10 million people and about 30 cities housing between oneto five million people. MTA-EMCI estimates that between 10% to 15% ofall urban Indian households have sufficient disposable income to beable to afford cable and satellite television.The market for satellite television equipment and programmingincorporates both cable operators and direct-to-home (DTH) services.Consumer demand for DTH depends again upon disposable income levels andalso the competition provided by cable services. Cable has first-moveradvantages over DTH in both China and India, especially in the upscaleurban markets. For example, recent MTA-EMCI focus studies in New Delhiand Bombay revealed that nearly 80% of a sampling of high net worthhouseholds subscribed to cable.However, despite pervasive poverty, rural areas in China and India arealso promising DTH markets. If only 2% of non-urban Chinese and Indianhomes had sufficient wealth to buy satellite equipment and programming,the non-urban potential market for DTH would be approaching threemillion homes in India and five million in China.Broadband, hybrid fibre/co-axial (HFC) cable systems are in developmentin Beijing, Shanghai and in each provincial capital, but most of thesesystems are still in the planning stage, and their economic viabilityis uncertain. In India, agglomeration of small cable systems isunderway in New Delhi, Bombay and a few other cities. The Indian cableindustry may evolve towards the U.S. model of multiple system operators(MSOs), or cable may remain a fragmented, locally-owned and operatedbusiness. Much of cable's future depends on government policy andregulation.Based on a combination of on-site data collection, analysis ofsecondary data and demographics and consumer demand modelling of cableand satellite television, MTA-EMCI forecasts the rapid growth of cableand satellite in both China and India.In China, cable and satellite homes are projected to grow from about 40million today to over 130 million in 2005. In India, cable andsatellite homes are projected to grow from 14 million today to 53million in 2005. Cable and satellite penetration of total households isprojected to increase from 12% to 34% in China and from 8% to 25% inIndia between 1995 and 2005.MTA-EMCI, resulting from a merger of Malarkey-Taylor Associates andEMCI, is a leading global telecommunications consultancy, with officesin Washington DC, London and SingaporeCopyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995ASIAN CHANNEL GUIDEChannel                    Satellite      Location   TP     PolarityABC                        Palapa B2P     113E       5      HABC-5 (Philippines)        Rimsat G-1     130E       8      LHCPABN                        Palapa B2P     113E       -      HABN                        PAS-2          169E       -      -ABS-CBN                    Palapa B2P     113E       -      HABS-CBN                    PAS-2          169E       -      -AFRTS                      Intelsat 703   66E        88/88  LHCPANBC                       Palapa B2P     113E       -      HAn-Teve                    Palapa B2P     113E       8      VAsahi Newstar              Superbird B    162E       5      VAsianet (Malaylam)         Rimsat G-1     130E       9      LHCPATN (Hindi)                Rimsat G-2     142.5E     6      RHCPAusTV                      Palapa B2P     113E       -      HBBC/HiVision               Intelsat 510   57E        43/53  LHCPBBC World                  Asiasat 1      105.5E     S6     VBBC World                  JCSat-2        154E       28     HCanal France International Intelsat 704   66E        15/25  RHCPCanal France International Palapa B2P     113E       4      VCBS                        PAS-2          169E       -      -CCTV                       PAS-2          169E       -      -CCTV 1                     Chinasat-5     115.5E     -      HCCTV 2                     Chinasat-5     115.5E     -      HCCTV 3                     Chinasat-5     115.5E     -      HCCTV 4                     Asiasat 1      105.5E     N11    HCETV-1                     Chinasat-2     110.5E     -      HCETV-2                     Chinasat-2     110.5E     -      HChannel 5 (Thailand)       Thaicom 1      78.5E      2      VChannel 7 (Thailand)       Thaicom 1      78.5E      2      HChannel 7 (Thailand)       Intelsat 511   180E       23/13  RHCPChannel 9                  Intelsat 511   180E       37/37  RHCPChannel 9                  Palapa B2P     113E       11     VChannel 11 (Thailand)      Thaicom 1      78.5E      5      VChannel [V]                Asiasat 1      105.5E     S5     VChannel [V]                Asiasat 1      105.5E     N4     HCTN                        PAS-2          169E       -      -CNNI                       Superbird B    162E       7      VCNNI                       Apstar1        138E       -      VCNNI                       Palapa B2P     113E       7      VCMT                        PAS-2          169E       -      VCTPI                       Palapa B2P     113E       10     HDiscovery Channel          Apstar 1       138E       11B    VDiscovery Channel          Palapa B2P     113E       1      HDiscovery Channel          PAS-2          169E       4C     HDoordarshan                Insat 2B       93.5 E     -      LHCPDoordarshan                Insat 2B       93.5 E     -      VDoordarshan                Insat 2B       93.5 E     -      VDoordarshan                Insat 2B       93.5E      -      VDoordarshan                Insat 2B       93.5E      -      VDoordarshan                Insat 1D       82.9E      -      LHCPDoordarshan                Insat 1D       82.9E      -      LHCPDoordarshan                Insat 1D       82.9E      -      HDoordarshan                Insat 1D       82.9E      -      HDoordarshan                Insat 2A       74.E       -      HDoordarshan                Insat 2A       74.E       -      HDoordarshan                Insat 2A       74.E       -      HEenadu                     Intelsat 704   66E        85/185 LHCPEl TV                      Asiasat 1      105.5E     S9     VEMTV(PNG)                  Rimsat G-2     142.5E     10     RHCPESPN                       Apstar1        138E       -      VESPN                       Intelsat 511   180 E      21/11  RHCPESPN                       Palapa B2P     113E       10     VESPN                       PAS-2          169E       -      VGadra                      Superbird B    162E       3      -Gemini TV                  Rimsat G-1     130E       11     LHCPGolden Eagle               Rimsat G-2     142.5E     9      RHCP(Tamil)Guizhou TV                 Asiasat 1      105.5E     N9     HHBO Asia                   Palapa B2P     113E       8      HIBC(Thailand)              Thaicom 1      78.5E      13     HIndosiar                   Palapa B2P     113E       9      VJ Jay TV (Tamil)           Rimsat G-2     142.5E     7      RHCPKorea                      Intelsat 703   177E       69/69  HLets Try                   Superbird B    162E       15     HMongolia TV                Asiasat1       105.5E     N2     HMTV                        Superbird B    162E       9      VMTV                        Palapa B2P     113E       11     HMyanmar TV                 Asiasat 1      105.5E     S11    VANBC                       PAS-2          169E       -      -NHK                        Intelsat 704   66E        61/21  RHCPNHK                        Intelsat 511   180 E      24/14  RHCPNHK                        PAS-2          169E       -      -NTV                        Intelsat 503   183E       71/61  HPacific Skyline            Intelsat 511   180E       87/87  LHCPPakistan TV                Asiasat 1      105.5E     S10    VPeoples Network            Palapa B2P     113E       9      HPrime/Liberty              PAS-2          169E       -      -Prime Sports               Asiasat 1      105.5      S4     VPrime Sports               Asiasat 1      105.5      N3     HRaj TV (Tamil)             Rimsat G-1     130E       24     LHCPRBS                        Palapa B2P     113E       9      HRCTI                       Palapa B2P     113E       3      HReuters TV                 Apstar 1       138E       -      VRFO -                      Intelsat 511   180 E      35/35  RHCPTV Tahiti RTB              Palapa B2P     113E       12     VTVRI                       Palapa B2P     113E       4      HSatellite Theater          JCSat-2        154E       26     HSCTV                       Palapa B2P     113E       7      HSichuan TV                 Chinasat-5     115.5E     -      HSIS                        Intelsat 510   57E        36/36  RHCPSi TV                      Palapa B2P     113E       12     VShandong TV1               Chinasat-5     115.5E     -      HSky A                      JCSat-2        154E       24     HSpace Shower               JCSat-2        154E       18     HSports - i                 JCSat-2        154E       22     HSrishti                    Intelsat 704   66E        86/186 LHCPStar Channel               Superbird B    162E       11     VStar Plus                  Asiasat 1      105.5E     N7     HStar Plus                  Asiasat 1      105.5E     S8     VStar TV Chin. Ch.          Asiasat 1      105.5E     N6     HStar Movies                Asiasat 1      105.5E     S12    VStar Movies                Asiasat 1      105.5E     N5     HSun TV (Tamil)             Rimsat G-1     130E       11     LHCPTBS - Tokyo                Intelsat 511   180 E      54/64  HTV-I (Malaysia)            Palapa B2P     113E       -      VTV3                        Palapa B2P     113E       5      VTNT/Cartoon Network        Apstar1        138E       -      VTNT/Cartoon Network        Palapa B2P     113E       6      VTurner                     Intelsat 704   66E        88/188 LHCPTV3 (Malaysia)             Palapa B2P     113E       -      VTV RTM 1                   Palapa B2P     113E`      3      VTVNZ                       Intelsat 501   57E        38/38  RHCPTVNZ                       Intelsat 511   180E       38/38  RHCPTVNZ                       Palapa B2P     113E       6      HTVNZ-TVBI                  Palapa B2P     113E       12     HTVRI                       Palapa B2P     113E       -      HTV Tokyo                   Intelsat 503   183E       71/61  HUSIA                       Intelsat 704   66E        38/38  RHCPUSIA                       Intelsat 511   180E       24/14  RHCPUdaya TV (Kannada)         Rimsat G-2     142E       11     RHCPVOA                        Asiasat1       105.5E     N2     HWold Communications        Intelsat 511   180E       54/64  HXizang TV                  Chinasat-5     115.5E     -      HXinjiang TV                Chinasat-5     115.5E     -      HYunnan TV                  Asiasat 1      105.5E     N9     HZee TV                     Asiasat 1      105.5E     S7     V                                      Aud         Trans   Enc/Channel              Frequency  Hrs   Freq        System  ClearABC                  3880MHz    24    6.8MHz      Pal     ClearABC-5 Philippines)   3675MHZ    5     -           Pal     ClearABN                  3920MHz    -     6.8MHz      Pal     ClearABN                  -          24    -           NTSC    EncryptedABS-CBN              3960MHz    -     6.8MHz      B Mac   B MacABS-CBN              -          24    -           NTSC    EncryptedAFRTS                -          24    -           B Mac   B MacANBC                 3880MHz    -     6.8MHz      Pal     ClearAn-Teve              4020MHz    20    6.8MHz      Pal     ClearAsahi Newstar        1261MHz    24    PCM         NTSC    SkyportAsianet (Malaylam)   3825MHz    13    -           Pal     ClearATN (Hindi)          3670MHz    24    6.6MHz      Pal     ClearAusTV                3880MHz    -     6.8MHz      Pal     ClearBBC/HiVision         -          24    -           Pal     ClearBBC World            3940MHz    24    6.3 MHz     Pal-B   ClearBBC World            1252MHz    24    5.7MHz      NTSC    CoatecCanal France International       -          24    -           Secam   ClearCanal France International       3860MHz    24    6.8MHz      Pal     ClearCBS                  -          24    -           NTSC    EncryptedCCTV                 -          24    -           NTSC    EncryptedCCTV 1               3883MHz    -     6.6MHz      Pal     ClearCCTV 2               3803MHz    -     6.6MHz      Pal     ClearCCTV 3               4160MHz    -     6.6MHz      Pal     ClearCCTV 4               4120MHz    -     6.2MHz      NTSC    ClearCETV-1               3848MHz    -     6.6MHz      Pal     ClearCETV-2               3928MHz    -     6.6MHz      Pal     ClearChannel 5 (Thailand) 3757MHz    21.5  6.6MHz      Pal     ClearChannel 7 (Thailand) 3751MHz    21    6.6MHz      Pal     ClearChannel 7 (Thailand) -          24    -           -       -Channel 9            -          24    -           -       -Channel 9            4140MHz    24    6.8MHz      Pal     ClearChannel 11 (Thailand)          3870MHz    12    6.8MHz      Pal     ClearChannel [V]          3900MHz    24    6.30 MHz    Pal-B   ClearChannel [V]          3840MHz    24    5.58 MHz    NTSC-M  ClearCTN                  -          24    -           NTSC    EncryptedCNNI                 1265MHz    24    PCM         NTSC    SkyportCNNI                 3980MHz    24    6.65MHz     B Mac   B MacCNNI                 3980MHz    24    6.8MHz      B Mac   B MacCMT                  4030MHz    24    -           NTSC    EncryptedCTPI                 4080MHz    18    6.8MHz      Pal     ClearDiscovery Channel    4140MHz    24    -           B Mac   B MacDiscovery Channel    3720MHz    24    6.8MHz      B Mac   B MacDiscovery Channel    3776.5MHz  24    -           B Mac   B MacDoordarshan          2615MHz    -     5.5MHz      Pal     ClearDoordarshan          3823MHz    -     5.5MHz      Pal     ClearDoordarshan          4073MHz    -     5.5MHz      Pal     ClearDoordarshan          3983MHz    -     5.5MHz      Pal     ClearDoordarshan          4140MHz    -     5.5MHz      Pal     ClearDoordarshan          2575MHz    -     5.5MHz      Pal     ClearDoordarshan          2615MHz    -     5.5MHz      Pal     ClearDoordarshan          4170MHz    -     5.5MHz      Pal     ClearDoordarshan          4190MHz    -     5.5MHz      Pal     ClearDoordarshan          4115MHz    -     5.5MHz      Pal     ClearDoordarshan          4150MHz    -     5.5MHz      Pal     ClearDoordarshan          4175MHz    -     5.5MHz      Pal     ClearEenadu               -          24    -           Not yet activatedEl TV                4060MHz    24    6.3 MHz     Pal-B   ClearEMTV(PNG)            3875MHz    Start -           Pal     ClearESPN                 4100MHz    24    -           B Mac   B MacESPN                 -          24    -           B Mac   B MacESPN                 4100MHz    24    6.8MHz      B Mac   B MacESPN                 3880MHz    24    -           B Mac   B MacGadra                1257MHz    21    -           Digital EncryptedGemini TV            3925MHz    3.5   6.6MHz      Pal     ClearGolden Eagle (Tamil) 3825MHz    7     6.6MHz      Pal     ClearGuizhou TV           4040MHz    -     6.6MHz      Pal-D   ClearHBO Asia             4000MHz    24    -           B Mac   B MacIBC(Thailand)        12594MHz   24    -           Pal     ClearIndosiar             4060MHz    20    6.8MHz      Pal     ClearJ Jay TV (Tamil)     3725MHz    start -           Pal     Clear                                AprKorea                -          24    -           -       -Lets Try             1253MHz    19.5  PCM         NTSC    SkysportMongolia TV          3760MHz    -     6.6MHz      Secam   ClearMTV                  1269MHz    24    PCM         NTSC    SkyportMTV                  4120MHz    24    6.8MHz      Pal     ClearMyanmar TV           4140MHz    -     6.6MHz      Pal     ClearANBC                 -          24    -           NTSC    ClearNHK                  -          24    -           NTSC    ClearNHK                  -          24    -           NTSC    ClearNHK                  -          24    -           NTSC    TBDNTV                  -          24    -           NTSC    ClearPacific Skyline      -          24    -           NTSC/                                                  Digital -Pakistan TV          4100MHz    -     6.6MHz      Pal     ClearPeoples Network      4050MHz    18    6.8MHz      Pal     EncryptedPrime/Liberty        -          -     -           NTSC    EncryptedPrime Sports         3600MHz    24    L6.3 MHz    Pal-B   ClearPrime Sports         3800MHz    24    L5.58 MHz   NTSC-M  ClearRaj TV (Tamil)       3675MHz    6     6.6MHz      Pal     ClearRBS                  4030MHz    18    6.8MHz      Pal     ClearRCTI                 3800MHz    20    6.8MHz      Pal     EncryptedReuters TV           3780MHz    -     6.6MHz      Pal     ClearRFO -                -          24    -           Secam   ClearTV Tahiti RTB        4180MHz    -     6.8MHz      Pal     ClearTVRI                 3840MHz    18    6.8MHz      Pal     ClearSatellite Theater    12643MHz   20    5.7MHz      NTSC    CoatecSCTV                 3960MHz    20    6.8MHz      Pal     ClearSichuan TV           3960MHz    -     6.6MHz      Pal     ClearSIS                  -          24    -           B Mac   B MacSi TV                4180MHz    -     6.8MHz      Pal     ClearShandong TV1         4000MHz    -     6.6MHz      Pal     ClearSky A                12613MHz   17.5  5.7MHz      NTSC    CoatecSpace Shower         12523MHz   24    5.7MHz      NTSC    CoatecSports - i           12583MHz   16    5.7MHz      NTSC    CoatecSrishti              -          24    -           Pal/                                                  Digital -Star Channel         1273MHz    24    PCM         NTSC    SkyportStar Plus            3960MHz    24    5.58MHz     NTSC-M  ClearStar Plus            4020MHz    24    6.3 MHz     Pal-B   ClearStar TV Chin. Ch.    3920MHz    24    5.58 MHz    NTSC    ClearStar Movies          4180MHz    24    6.3 MHz     Pal-B   StarCryptStar Movies          3880MHz    24    5.58 MHz    NTSC-M  StarCryptSun TV (Tamil)       3925MHz    20.5  6.6MHz      Pal     ClearTBS - Tokyo          -          24    -           NTSC    ClearTV-I (Malaysia)      3820MHz    -     6.8MHz      Pal     ClearTV3                  3900MHz    20    6.8MHz      Pal     ClearTNT/Cartoon Network  4020MHz    24    6.2MHz      B Mac   B MacTNT/Cartoon Network  3940MHz    24    6.8MHz      B Mac   B MacTurner               -          24    -           Pal     ClearTV3 (Malaysia)       3900MHz    -     6.8MHz      Pal     ClearTV RTM 1             3820MHz    20    6.8MHz      Pal     EncryptedTVNZ                 -          24    -           Digital -TVNZ                 -          24    -           Digital -TVNZ                 3920MHz    24    6.8MHz      Pal     ClearTVNZ-TVBI            4160MHz    20    6.8MHz      Pal     ClearTVRI                 3840MHz    -     6.8MHz      Pal     ClearTV Tokyo             -          24    -           NTSC    ClearUSIA                 -          24    -           Pal     ClearUSIA                 -          24    -           NTSC    ClearUdaya TV (Kannada)   3925MHz    11    6.3/6.6MHz  Pal     ClearVOA                  3760MHz    -     6.6MHz      Pal     ClearWold Communications  -          24    -           NTSC    ClearXizang TV            3843MHz    -     6.6MHz      Pal     ClearXinjiang TV          4120MHz    -     6.6MHz      Pal     ClearYunnan TV            4040MHz    -     6.6MHz      Pal-D   -Zee TV               3980MHz    24    L6.3 MHz    Pal-B   ClearCopyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE ASIA via NewsNetSeptember 1, 1995ASIA SATELLITES TRANSPONDER WATCH168oE: PAS-2CNBC Asia has now replaced ANBC on 411MHz. A transponder has been hiredby TVBI to beam programmes into northeastern Asia and Taiwan.138oE: Apstar 1The official inquiry on the fatal crash of a Chinese Long March 2Erocket has now been reported. Apstar 2, the sister satellite to thisone, was due to locate at or around 77 degrees East last January, butwas apparently lost when severe cross-winds above the site damaged thefairing - the fibre-glass cover on the nose cone which encloses thesatellite. International Telecom Japan recently started a feed ofReuters VideoNews via this satellite as the second hop from Intelsat704, with some additional regionally-specific feeds.113oE Palapa B2PAustralian Television, the ABC external TV service, is in seriousdifficulty. Although the signals on this satellite continue, a reviewof Australian global broadcasting is imminent. CNBC is in-the-clearuntil October and will use Asiasat 2 next year. MTV Asia has moved intoB-Mac encryption.116oE: Koreasat 1Koreasat 1, a Lockheed Martin Astro Space Series 3000 satellite, isSouth Korea's first domestic satellite. Launch was delayed by HurricaneErin and may have not achieved the correct orbit without considerableuse of the fuel reserves. The failure of a booster rocket to separatefrom the Delta rocket carrying the satellite into orbit will mean areduced life. The additional drag created by the booster meant that thesatellite could not be delivered into its intended orbit. The launchwas at Kennedy Space Center in Florida and the launch vehicle was aMacdonald-Douglas Delta 2 rocket. Delta 228 was the first major partialfailure of such a vehicle. The Hercules GEM solid booster, by failingto separate, caused the first stage to deliver less velocity. Thesecond stage compensated by burning for 35 seconds longer than plannedon its first burn, which placed the rocket in parking orbit. The secondstage shut down early when fuel ran out. The third stage placed thesatellite in an orbit with an apogee of just 30,000km, which is belowthe required 35,700km. A second satellite could provide back-up, it wasto have been put in a storage orbit until the capacity was required.93.5oE: Insat 2BAfter some false starts the DD3 channel has launched, with a scheduleof arts and current affairs programming. Insat 2C's launch will addmuch-needed transponder capacity over Asia. If granted capacity, asthey hope, a growing number of international TV channels could beam viaInsat into the regional DTH and cable audience. The evidence of thecontroversial deal between Doordarshan and CNN is being seen on Insat2B. Doordarshan and CNNI have launched a joint 24-hour on thissatellite at 4160MHz vertical Tp. C12. Pakistan and Bangladseh alreadyhave terrestrial arrangements with the 24-hour news channel.85oE: RadugaBusiness India TV, which has been reported on this satellite, isgearing up for a move to Ekspress, which may herald another launch as14 degrees West seems an unlikely location for such a geographically-targeted channel. On the 3875MHz RHCP channel, BITV has been showingTVI News - current affairs programmes - and TVI Prime entertainment.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing LimitedBack to Headline List WT03-B09-24IA087-000629-B022-273http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/pb65.html 205.156.212.5 19970122040333 text/html 293502HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:00:38 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:18 GMTContent-length: 293314Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/pb65.html Sample Issue Copyright CABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES NEWS OF THE WORLD (542 words) HAVAS FORCES CLT TO QUIT THE DIGITAL CLUB (227 words) KIRCH JOINS MMBG ON THE REBOUND (506 words) BELGIUM'S CABLERS THREATEN BLACK-OUT (385 words) DEUTSCHE WELLE TO LEAD ASIA BOUQUET (263 words) SNG 'RETIREMENT' PLAN FOR ASTRA 1A (209 words) HBO TO DECIDE ON CINEMAX VIA APSTAR (273 words) NETHOLD NORDIC SETS MODEST DIGITAL AIMS (354 words) THOR 2A FILLIP FOR ONE DEGREE WEST (288 words) SKY VENTURE TO AIR GRANADA ARCHIVES (334 words) TCI AND CANAL PLUS IN THEMATIC UNION (220 words) EUROSPORT DEFEATED IN DUTCH TEST-CASE (351 words) MSO TO BUILD NEW STOCKHOLM SYSTEM (263 words) OFT BEGINS BSKYB PROBE (181 words) SKY NETS MORE SOCCER (212 words) SUPERSPORT LAUNCHES (216 words) US TRIO BACK IBERIA CABLE (195 words) NEWS RACE HOTS UP (184 words) EC IN QUOTA COMPROMISE (228 words) FEATURE THE OTHER RUPERT (3609 words) IN LIVING COLOUR (2469 words) BET TAKES JAZZ TO AFRICA (392 words) TRANS-SIBERIAN AWAKENING (1418 words) PUBCASTER PLANS 'RUSSIAN SKY' (292 words) BEAR ON A WIRE (1329 words) FIRST TO SHOW (1148 words) SURVEY DTH SURVEY: HOW DOES YOUR MARKET GROW (796 words) DTH SURVEY: AUSTRIA (237 words) DTH SURVEY: BELGIUM (211 words) DTH SURVEY: BULGARIA (227 words) DTH SURVEY: CIS (168 words) DTH SURVEY: CROATIA (174 words) DTH SURVEY: CZECH REPUBLIC (167 words) DTH SURVEY: DENMARK (221 words) DTH SURVEY: ESTONIA (177 words) DTH SURVEY: FINLAND (216 words) DTH SURVEY: FRANCE (232 words) DTH SURVEY: GERMANY (199 words) DTH SURVEY: GREECE (203 words) DTH SURVEY: HUNGARY (251 words) DTH SURVEY: ICELAND (236 words) DTH SURVEY: IRELAND (151 words) DTH SURVEY: ISRAEL (197 words) DTH SURVEY: ITALY (175 words) DTH SURVEY: LATVIA (128 words) DTH SURVEY: LITHUANIA (133 words) DTH SURVEY: LUXEMBOURG (133 words) DTH SURVEY: NETHERLANDS (168 words) DTH SURVEY: NORWAY (163 words) DTH SURVEY: POLAND (327 words) DTH SURVEY: PORTUGAL (175 words) DTH SURVEY: ROMANIA (157 words) DTH SURVEY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (154 words) DTH SURVEY: SLOVAKIA (144 words) DTH SURVEY: SLOVENIA (208 words) DTH SURVEY: SPAIN (251 words) DTH SURVEY: SWEDEN (223 words) DTH SURVEY: SWITZERLAND (191 words) DTH SURVEY: TURKEY (236 words) DTH SURVEY: UK (385 words) FEATURE 47 VARIETIES (888 words) NEWS BRIEF CAPE BLAZE HITS DSTV ROLL-OUT (211 words) IRD SHORTAGES HIT UK TRADE (226 words) PACE DEALERS GO FOR GOLD (137 words) SAGEM, S-A, GI THAI UTV DEALS (85 words) BT OPENS UK UPLINK FOR PAS-4 (225 words) ORBIT BOOKS INTO EUROPE (76 words) LEBANESE JOIN ARABSAT 2A (149 words) THOMSON ANTI OPEN ACCESS DVB (339 words) PACE SCOOPS CHINA SET-TOP DEAL (201 words) BARCO SELLS ROSA TO GUANGDONG (218 words) CLI HANDED STATMUX PATENT (52 words) PRODUCT REVIEW DRAKE LAUNCHES GLOBAL IRDS (177 words) ECHOSTAR DIGITAL BOX UNVEILED (228 words) S-A EXPANDS 8600 SET-TOP FACILITIES (255 words) NEWS BRIEF LNB BY ALPS (68 words) SATELLITE READY REVISITED (137 words) FEATURE HIGH-END CHAPARRAL (895 words) RAINBOW WARRIORS (719 words) QUALITY TIME (793 words) TRANSPONDER WATCH (2858 words) CHANNEL GUIDE (PART 1 OF 4) (1675 words) CHANNEL GUIDE (PART 2 OF 4) (1672 words) CHANNEL GUIDE (PART 3 OF 4) (1666 words) CHANNEL GUIDE (PART 4 OF 4) (1825 words) CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEWS OF THE WORLDIf the penny hadn't dropped before, December's announcement by CapitalCities/ABC that it was joining the 24-hour news business in 1997confirmed that televised news is no longer the preserve of thetraditional networks, and that in order to retain market share betterto be a rolling service than one which relies on that now ratherdecrepit notion of expecting viewers to tune-in for their news at settimes during the day.In staking its claim for a piece of the all-news market, CapitalCities/ABC joins rival American network NBC and Rupert Murdoch's NewsCorp, all of which have in their sights the superabundance of existing24-hour news and business news channels now in service worldwide.So why the sudden rash of interest in 24-hour news? After all,programmers have long bemoaned that news is too expensive to produce -especially the thrifty generalist satellite channels. This, however, ischanging. News costs might not still be in the same league as, say, ahalf-hour of syndicated infotainment acquired from a US programmedistributor, but technology developments inside and outside the studio,coupled with the changing commercial view that news can be a profit-generator not just a cost-centre, are putting it within the reach ofthe many rather then the few.But while the entry barriers come tumbling down, for cable distributionthey still remain high, meaning carriage is more and more dependent onstrategic cable operator-programmer alliances. For example, the TimeWarner/Turner merger, combining, among others, the top two US MSOs (ifTurner shareholder TCI is included) and CNN, is a timely boost forAmerica's original all-news channel just as the competition is about tohot-up. Meanwhile, in the US, Europe, Asia Pacific and South America,Rupert Murdoch seems to be assembling the pieces which when connectedwill light up a global news network. And where cable distributioncannot be guaranteed by News Corp or even its own budding partnershipwith TCI, direct-to-home will be an effective alternative source ofsupply.For the rest of the field, however, even those with financial muscle,distribution will probably have to be sought outside of cable. Hencethe partnership between NBC and Microsoft to launch the USbroadcaster's proposed round-the-clock news service on the Internet.While audiences for such a channel might not at first be as widespreadas, say, cable or even DTH, new technologies and changing commercialstrategies, which are rewriting the way television news is packaged forconsumption, suggest the interactive medium is a better one for thedistribution of visual news.Bob Ross, Turner Broadcasting president, international, speaking inHong Kong in December, predicted that news channels of the future wouldact more like radio stations than traditional TV newscasters. Insteadof airing live bulletins, news channels would simply select from a'playlist' of recorded, but constantly-updated items, refreshing therunning order throughout the day.If news is to be presented as such - especially business news, whosenatural audience is in the workplace - is there a better way ofdistributing it than via an interactive medium which allows viewers todouble-click on the news that is relevant to their world?Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HAVAS FORCES CLT TO QUIT THE DIGITAL CLUBCOMPAGNIE Luxembourgeoise de Telediffusion (CLT) has reportedlywithdrawn plans to launch Club RTL, its Astra-based French-languagedigital direct-to-home bouquet.In return for dropping plans to launch the package of 15 to 20channels, which would be in direct competition to Canal Plus, theLuxembourg-based broadcaster is reputedly set to become a 25 per centshareholder in Canalsatellite Numerique and to contribute severaltelevision channels to the Canal Plus DTH bouquet.The news followed weeks of speculation. Havas, a mutual shareholder inCLT and pay-TV giant Canal Plus, had from the outset never beencomfortable with the idea of two competing bouquets for France and hadpushed for a union of the two projects. Havas president Pierre Dauziersaid in an interview last month that there could only be one Europeanbouquet, claiming "no one can beat Canal Plus."The two companies reached an agreement to share conditional access anddigital IRDs last summer, with CLT joining the SECA alliance led byCanal Plus and Bertelsmann to develop the Mediaguard system.CLT had seven transponders reserved on the Astra satellites 1E, 1F and1G. With this capacity probably about to become vacant, Europe's pay-TVgroups - most notably Canal Plus - may now be expecting an unexpectedincrease to their digital Astra allocations.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996KIRCH JOINS MMBG ON THE REBOUNDTHE digital decoder battle in Germany between the Multimedia-Betriebsgesellschaft (MMBG) consortium and the Kirch group took adramatic turn on December 1 when Deutsche Telekom confirmed it wouldnot be aligning itself to Kirch's digital decoder technology,effectively forcing Kirch to join the MMBG.While MMBG defied the sceptics by displaying its Mediabox decoder inCologne in November, the entire MMBG constellation was threatened byDeutsche Telekom's hesitation on whether to break away from MMBG andteam-up with Kirch and Vebacom, Germany's second largest cableoperator.Deutsche Telekom announced, however, that it was the MMBG's Mediaboxwhich offered "a very good platform for the establishment of an openand non-discriminatory system in Germany." The PTT cable operatorcriticised Kirch's failure to comply with its protocol and to providethe necessary technical specifications - Kirch, it seems, had beenbluffing about the superiority of its d-box technology.Now Kirch is to take an eight per cent stake in the MMBG and work on aunified decoder system for the German market - a solution which willallay fears of two competing decoder systems splitting the Germandigital TV market and confusing the consumer.Germany's Chancellor Kohl, a close political ally of Leo Kirch, steppedinto the digital decoder fray to ask why a French-developed decodersystem (MMBG's SECA-developed Mediabox) was to be chosen by the MMBG infavour of a German one (Kirch's d-Box). Prompted by Kohl, DeutscheTelekom, in its public service role, was forced to re-examine thequalities of MMBG's Mediabox against the Kirch/Nokia-manufactured d-box. MMBG had given Telekom until mid-December to decide on its role,leaving the digital decoder consortium in a very precarious position.As for Kirch, the Munich-based television company never enthused overthe idea of joining the MMBG and partaking in its "open and non-discriminauory system," despite an offer of a 15 per cent shareholding.Kirch preferred to fight for its position as the digital gatekeeper inGermany with its own decoder and Irdeto conditional access system. Nowpoised to join MMBG, it seems that Kirch has lost the decoder battle.Without Telekom, the MMBG would have been in trouble - Deutsche Telekomcurrently holds a 35 per cent share in the consortium and its 15million cable connections were vital for the MMBG to succeed. Vebacomhas a further 1.1 million connections.MMBG's recent display of its Mediabox decoder countered claims from theKirch camp that the consortium did not have a fully-functioningdecoder. The Franco-German consortium said it plans to start operationsin April with further members of the consortium to include oRF, SRG,Bauer Verlag, RTL-2 and Tele Munchen. Philips is to start massproduction of the decoder this month with key components coming fromits factories in Krefeld and Hamburg. By the start of 1996, the decoderwill be available to French retailers and in Germany by April, with anestimated qrice-tag of DM1,000-1,510 (#455!to #682).Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BELGIUM'S CABLERS THREATEN BLACK-OUTTHE re-negotiation of a global agreement between Belgium's cableoperators and rights-holders on the payment of authors rights reached astalemate in December, with cablers threatening to cease carriage ofhalf of the channels currently distributed if no progress is madebefore January 1.The dispute flared-up back in September when authors' association Sabamannounced that it did not want to renew the global contract on cablerights, concluded in 1993 between Belgian cable association RTD,broadcasters and copyright holders (Sabam, Agicoa, Belfitel). Under theagreement cable companies are allowed to distribute 16 channels from ofa list of 21 able to be received in Belgium via terrestrialtransmitters. Cable operators, meanwhile, pay an amount equivalent to15 per cent of the average subscription fee (BFr539 (#12)), which isadded to subscribers' bills. Other channels wishing to be carried oncable, such as pay-TV and satellite channels, have to pay for cableretransmission rights themselves.According to Sabam, any new agreement should take into account themultiplication of channels with the advent of the digital era andshould include a clause regarding neighbouring rights (performers,'producers' and broadcasters' rights) as provided by Belgian law fromlast year. The amount paid to rights-holders should therefore beincreased, the organisation said.Cable operators argued that, in the last 10 years, the amount paid torights-holders has increased by 79 per cent in-line with the increasein the number of subscribers and of the cable subscription fee. Anincrease in authors' royalties would jeopardise their profitability,they claim, as the Wallonian government forces them to pay a specialtax of BFr150 per subscriber to support local TV stations. They alsoconsider this a disadvantage in comparison with the DTH industry, assatellite equipment owners are not subject to the payment of authors'rights.According to RTD, the ideal solution would be for broadcasters to payfor authors' rights themselves. If the current system is maintained,they would like to see three new channels, M6, Sat 1 and La Cinquiame,included in the global agreement. And if neighbouring rights have to betaken into account, RTD claims it could only be practicable if theamount paid to authors is reduced by an equal amount.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DEUTSCHE WELLE TO LEAD ASIA BOUQUETA DIGITAL bouquet of between four and five European TV channels, 12European radio stations and a data channel is to be created for theAsia-Pacific region via the recently-launched Asiasat 2 satellite. Thepackage is being spearheaded by German overseas broadcaster DeutscheWelle, whose 36MHz C-Band Asiasat 2 transponder will be home to the newmultiplex.The transponder will be compressed using NTL's MPEG-2, DVB-compliantdigital compression system. Deutsche Welle will be using an 8MHzdigital stream and the other television channels between 6MHz and 8MHz.However, as the new craft will not be ready for digital broadcastersuntil April, the package will initially test-transmit in analogue.Contracts have yet to be finalised and the remaining channels in thepackage still to be announced, though it is expected that there will berepresentation from other European countries, including Italy's Rai,TVE of Spain and, if agreement can be reached with Star TV, MCM, thefrancophone music channel.Although some Deutsche Welle programming is already broadcast in theAsia region via tape-delivered distribution deals with terrestrialbroadcasters such as SBS in Australia, Mongolia Television and a numberof Chinese stations, which then dub programming into their locallanguages, the Asiasat service will mark the German pubcaster's firstfull channel service in Asia.Initial distribution will be to cable headends and hotels. Channeldistribution will be handled by Transtel, the distribution arm ofGerman public broadcasters ARD and ZDF. They in turn have agentrepresentation throughout the Asia region.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SNG 'RETIREMENT' PLAN FOR ASTRA 1ASOCIETE Europeenne des Satellites (SES) is planning to use its Astra 1Acraft for satellite newsgathering (SNG) and other related services whenthe satellite nears the end of its natural life. The first Astrasatellite, launched in December 1988, would be placed into inclinedorbit and moved to a second orbital slot, probably one of those appliedfor by Luxembourg's government on SES's behalf.Once in position, Astra 1A could be used for both news and sports feedsand, said the company, backhauls of programming services to the Astraplatform at 19.2 degrees East.According to SES, if Astra 1A has insufficient reserves of fuel itcould be placed into inclined orbit where, initially at least, it couldprovide service for 23 hours-a-day.Astra 1A has a design life of 12-and-a-half years. Although twotransponders have been shut down to prevent overheating, the remaining14 remain in sound working order. While establishing a digital platformat 19 degrees East, SES remains committed to providing a continuousanalogue service for existing customers and viewers.A move for Astra 1A would be most likely post-1998, when Astra 1H willassure back-up for the entire Astra fleet.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HBO TO DECIDE ON CINEMAX VIA APSTARASIA looks set to receive its second Hollywood satellite movie channelas HBO Asia reaches the final stages of its discussions on theviability of a Cinemax channel launch in the region. A decision isexpected early in 1996.HBO Asia's outgoing president Bill Hooks said there was room in theregion for a competitively-priced library-based movie channel tocompliment HBO.The Cinemax channel would be carried as one of the five or sixcompressed channels HBO Asia is planning next year for its Apstar-1satellite transponder. At the moment, the transponder is used totransmit a separate censor-sensitive version of the HBO movie channelto Malaysia's Mega-TV.HBO Asia also revealed that US equipment supplier General Instrumentwas the most likely vendor of HBO's digital compression technology.Other likely channels for the increased capacity are a channel forIndia and an uncensored feed for markets which want their HBO in itsoriginal form.Despite being forced by the lack of infrastructure into basic channeldelivery and in spite of its above-average charges, the pan-AsianEnglish-language Hollywood blockbuster channel has chalked upimpressive gains in the region. Hopes were that the channel would reachmore than one million cable subscribers by the end of 1995.At the end of 1994, HBO Asia had 600,000 subscribers. This was done atthe same time as the industry sounded the death knell for pan-Asianprogramming. Although HBO has ruled out local movies on HBO Asia, theprogrammer has not dismissed the possibility of local films on a secondmovie channel.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NETHOLD NORDIC SETS MODEST DIGITAL AIMSDIGITAL satellite services from Nethold and its subsidiaries FilmNetand MultiChoice are scheduled to commence via Astra 1E in mid-January.However, distributor MultiChoice is targeting mid-March as the datewhen there will be sufficient receiver numbers in the marketplace tomeet anticipated demand.MultiChoice Sweden is expecting a gradual build-up in supplies frommanufacturers, including Pace, Nokia, Echostar and Philips. From DayOne, few receivers are expected to be in the marketplace, but this isexpected to build within a matter of weeks. The company expects 100,000units to be sold across Scandinavia within the first 12 months.Prices will initially range between SKr6,000 and SKr8,000 (#600-800)according to the model and whether or not a dish, with or without auniversal LNB, has already been installed.MultiChoice said that the demand for receivers in South Africa, whereMultiChoice recently launched its PAS-4 DSTV package, was the mainreason why March was being sited as the optimum date for delivery ofregular supplies. However, demand in South Africa equates as much tostock shortages as it does to the public's appetite for digitalsatellite television.Nethold's three Astra 1E transponders 1E will carry shared servicesfrom FilmNet, SuperSport, Hallmark Entertainment Network andindependent channels for subscribers in Scandinavia and the Benelux.These are expected to include channels distributed by MultiChoice inthe VideoCrypt II package, among them Discovery, TCC and CMT. Inaddition, the subscriber management company will also make available 10near-video-on-demand channels and an audio service expected to beprovided by Digital Music Express. A majority of the services will becommon to all markets and carry local subtitling and soundtracks.Travel expects to start in-the-clear transmissions by March and BBCPrime - currently available via FilmNet's Eurocrypt card - and BBCWorld are believed to have been lined-up for Astra distribution.Separate digital uplinks across Scandinavia will deliver the Netholdservices to Intelsat 601 at 27.5 degrees West. These will be receivedin Hilversum, added to other services, then reuplinked to the Astrasystem.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996THOR 2A FILLIP FOR ONE DEGREE WESTNORWEGIAN telco Telenor has signed a contract with Hughes Space andCommunications International to build a new, 15-transponder satellitefor the one degree West orbital position. Thor IIA, as the satellite isto be known, is expected to be operational by spring 1997 and willdistribute both analogue and digital channels to cable networks andprivate dishes throughout northern Europe and Scandinavia.Telenor also plans to increase capacity with a further four to sixtransponders in 1996 and is claiming that one degree West will becomethe third largest digital satellite platform in Europe after Astra andEutelsat.Telenor launched a package of open digital satellite-distributed TVchannels in Oslo in late November. The digital Nordic bouquet containstwo Danish channels - Danmark's Radio TV1 and TV2 - Norwegian statebroadcaster NRK and Swedish channels TV1 and TV2, which will eventuallybe available on cable networks throughout Scandinavia.Telenor said it hopes to be able to offer the digital channels freewithin the next two years, so private households can access the digitalchannels without a smart card.It is the first time that the Danish state channels have been availableon Norwegian television - the Swedish channels have been on Norwegiancable for some time. Besides the Nordic digital channels, Telenordistributes 17 analogue channels to cable and DTH via Thor, Intelsat702 and TV Sat  at one degree West.Telenor CTV said the aim is to establish an open platform, as there isgreat consensus for open conditional access in the Nordic territories.An open standard, it said, will both maximise digital penetration andpromote the efforts of hardware manufacturers.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SKY VENTURE TO AIR GRANADA ARCHIVESUK BROADCASTER Granada and British Sky Broadcasting have joined forcesto create a new company, Granada Sky Broadcasting, which plans tolaunch eight new satellite channels late this year. The new channelswill be led by Granada Gold Plus, which will offer programming from theextensive libraries of both Granada and LWT, including episodes of thelong-running soap Coronation Street.The other seven channels will cover a range of lifestyle topics: healthand beauty, home and garden, food and wine, Granada Good Life, GranadaMen and Motoring, Granada Talk TV and Granada TV Shopping Guide.The GSkyB package will be available as part of the Sky Multi-Channelspackage, which currently offers 28 channels and programme streams at acost of #10.99 per month.David Chance, deputy managing director of BSkyB, was unable to saywhether this would increase as a result of Granada's channels: "Its waytoo premature to say whether we will change our retail pricingstructure at all."The GSkyB package will probably be spread across three transponders,possibly on Astra 1D, on which BSkyB still has spare capacity. GranadaGold Plus will broadcast for 18-hours-a-day, while the lifestylechannels will take the form of programme packages. Men and Motoring,for example, will have a late evening slot following on from GranadaGold Plus.All seven lifestyle channels will feature predominantly new programmingproduced by Granada and LWT. "This venture will open-up a whole newavenue of custom-programme making," said Charles Allen, chief executiveof Granada Television, "enabling us to significantly expand ourprogramme production facilities in both London and the North West."Granada's economic interest in the channel is 60 per cent, although itsownership is limited to 20 per cent under current regulations. However,Granada is hoping the government will remove the ownership restrictionson broadcasters becoming involved in satellite channels, and thus allowit to increase its stake in the new venture.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TCI AND CANAL PLUS IN THEMATIC UNIONTELE-COMMUNICATIONS International, Canal Plus and Generale D'Images,the media arm of Generale des Eaux, have joined forces to form a newcable and satellite programming company based in Paris. Each of thethree parties will hold an equal interest in the venture,Multithematiques.Canal Plus and Generale D'Images are contributing their combinedinterests in four French thematic channels to Multithematiques -documentary channel Planate (70 per cent), cult programming serviceCanal Jimmy (85 per cent), and mini-pay movie channels Cine Cinemas andCine Cinefil (60 per cent each). Canal Plus has also contributed a 50per cent share in the Spanish classic movie channel Cine Classics.TCI, meanwhile, has agreed to contribute Fr492 million (#66 million) toMultithematiques over the next two years to develop the thematicchannels worldwide.Multithematiques will act as a launch pad from which to expand acrossEurope, provide new services for TCI's Latin American cable and DTHventures and bring thematic channel concepts to TCI's Japanese cablesubscribers. TCI also anticipates co-operation between Multithematiquesand its UK division Flextech in production and channel development.TCI president, international, Adam Singer, will serve as the firstchairman of Multithematiques, while Canal Plus executive vice-presidentinternational Michel Thoulouze will be the company's CEO.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EUROSPORT DEFEATED IN DUTCH TEST-CASEEUROSPORT has lost its case against KTA before the Amsterdam court andwill be dropped from the cable operator's system in the Dutch capitalfrom January 1. The pan-European sports programmer refused to pay thecarriage fee sought by KTA, countering that it should be the recipientof a Gld0.20 payment. However, the court ruled that the cable operatoris entitled to seek payment from commercial channels.An offer from KTA to include the channel in its D2 Mac/Eurocryptextended basic tier was rejected by Eurosport. Other channels expectedto suffer the same fate include NBC Super Channel and TNT & CartoonNetwork.With the franco-American owned Eurosport standing to lose a largepercentage of its distribution in the Netherlands, the channel isexpected to appeal against the decision and is also lodging a complaintof 'misuse of monopoly' with the Ministry of Economic Affairs.Meanwhile, MTV regained distribution in The Hague after a court ruledthat the local operator, Casema, had broken its agreement with theViacom channel when it replaced MTV with local programmer The MusicFactory. However, the judge also ruled that the city of The Hague hadto keep its promise to Music Factory and so now both music channelswill be carried.It is likely that Music Factory's owner Arcade will now also take KTAto the courts in order to gain access to the Amsterdam cable system.During access negotiations, KTA demanded a fee of Gld750 for thechannel, as well as the right to insert local advertising breaks -conditions which were rejected by Music Factory.Relations between KTA and MultiChoice have also been showing signs ofstrain of late. The Dutch Commissariaat voor de Media upheldMultiChoice's claim to be able to use its own decoders and subscribermanagement system rather than KTA's D2 Mac/Eurocrypt set-top box.KTA's ailing pay-per-view service Teleselect is available via the sameD2 Mac decoders, and MultiChoice claimed KTA wanted to use its extendedbasic services to boost penetration of Teleselect.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MSO TO BUILD NEW STOCKHOLM SYSTEMKABELVISION, a major owner of Swedish cable systems, said it plans toinvest SKr100 million (#10 million) in a new cable network for thecentre of Stockholm. The new system will be designed to carry not onlypay-TV services and telephony, but also games, home-shopping andInternet connections.Kabelvision is initially planning to offer the new services toinhabitants of!some 1,000 apartmenu dwelliogs where individual disheshave, until now, been used to serve tenants.Kabelvision's plans are the result of a recent decision by Stockholm'sauthorities to build a high-capacity fibre-optic network for eachapartment block in the Swedish capital. Kabelvision will then connectand develop its own services.Construction work on the new network is due to begin this January andKabelvision plans to launch its services in either March or April.Some of Kabelvision's competitors are taking a more cautious stance onupgrading their systems, however. Singapore Telecom, the new owner ofStockholm operator Stjarn-TV, which already has one of the country'smost advanced cable systems, recently said that  Sweden is not yetready for advanced wired services. According to Stjarn-TV, subscribersin Sweden will not be willing to pay for the multimedia services thatmodern cable technology can offer until the end of the century.Kabelvision, 37 per cent owned by the Kinnevik division Netcom Systems,United Communications Inc and Time Warner (both 20 per cent) andBonnier (13.5 per cent), has around 500,000 households connected, or 20per cent of the Swedish market.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996OFT BEGINS BSKYB PROBEThe Office of Fair Trading has launched a six-month review of BritishSky Broadcasting's position in the UK's pay-television market. Thereview follows months of complaints by cable operators, includingCableTel, Videotron and General Cable, which last year asked Trade andIndustry secretary Ian Lang to refer BSkyB to the Monopolies andMergers Commission. The cable operators' chief concern is BSkyB'spractice of bundling channels, claiming that the satellite broadcasterovercharges them to keep cable rates high and boost Sky's direct-to-home service.The OFT's review will be confined to issues relating to the supply inthe UK of programme channels to cable operators. It will also includethe informal undertakings given by BSkyB in March last year.Once the six-month review is completed, the OFT will decide whetherfurther action under the competition legislation is appropriate.In a statement issued in December, BSkyB accused some cable operatorsof "using the regulatory process to further their businesses ratherthan on building their networks and serving their customers."Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SKY NETS MORE SOCCERIn a #125 million deal which left its terrestrial competitors standing,BSkyB scooped the rights to England's Endsleigh Football Leaguechampionship and Football League (Coca Cola) Cup for five years fromthe start of the 1996/97 season.Under the agreement, Sky has exclusive rights to show up to 60 livematches per season featuring clubs from all three divisions of theEndsleigh League. Sky will also provide the first ever coverage of allthree end-of-season promotion play-offs from Wembley, and will show atleast one live tie from each round of the League Cup, plus the final.Most of the live matches will be screened by the satellite pay-TVbroadcaster on Fridays and Sundays. Sky Sports indicated it was stilltoo soon to say how the coverage would fit into the existing schedule.Sky already holds exclusive rights to FA Premiership football (60matches per season) under its #300 million, five-year deal whichexpires at the end of the 1996/7 season. It also has long-termcommitments to broadcast live FA Cup ties and replays, and everyEngland international from Wembley, plus live rights to Scotland'sthree premier tournaments.Sky broadcast 143 live matches in the 1994/5 season.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SUPERSPORT LAUNCHESSuperSport, Nethold's new sports channel for the Nordic countries,launched earlier than expected on December 1. Without any show ofpublicity, the channel was offered to FilmNet's subscribers as "anearly Christmas present," according to one company representative.But the new sesvice was not immediately available to all FilmNetsubscribers. December and January are seen by Nethold as an'introductory period' when the contents of SuperSport will be triedout.The channel will also not be immediately available to all Nordic cableoperators. Negotiations with the region's cable companies are not yetall in place - most cable systems are already crammed and theintroduction of a new channel means that an existing service has to bedropped, or else moved to a less attractive slot.FilmNet's DTH subscribers will have to wait until the end of this monthor the beginning of February before the launch of SuperSport proper.Programme rights already secured for the new service include AmericanNHL ice hockey, the Italian Football Cup and German Bundesliga soccer.Among the tennis rights acquired are the Compaq Grand Slam and theHopman tournament.National events of particular interest to Nordic audiences are alsohigh on the channel's agenda.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996US TRIO BACK IBERIA CABLECapital Cities/ABC, United International Holdings (UIH), the LatinAmerican Urbina group and Spanish cable company Multitel have joinedforces to exploit cable television in Spain and Portugal.The new alliance has acquired the entire shareholdings of Spanish cablecompany TPS, set up by the Urbina group, which distributes the Spanish-language channels Canal Hollywood, Panda Club, Tele 1 and DiscoveryChannel to cable operators.A new company has been set-up by the four partners in the venture, withCapital Cities/ABC, UIH and Urbina each holding 30 per cent andMultitel 10 per cent. The group will initially invest Ptas4,000 million(#21 million) within a period of three years and distribute the packageof four channems for no more than Qtas600.The offer will initially consist of film channel Canal Hollywood,children's channel Panda Club (with programming mainly supplied byDIC), documentary channel Discovery and Spanish/Latin music channel HITTV. A fifth channel will be launched in the next five to six months.The channels will be broadcast  in Spanish and in their originalversions, with subtitles for the Portuguese market.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEWS RACE HOTS UPCapital Cities/ABC Inc is to launch its long -planned 24-hour newsnetwork in 1997, according to president Robert Eiger. ABC alreadygathers more news than it can use on its ABC network so the costs wouldbe relatively low and help spread the news division's expenses. ABC's200 plus affiliated stations are expected to provide more local newsthan CNN which has previously had the all-news field largely to itself.But in addition to the Capital Cities/ABC venture, General Electric-owned NBC also announced plans for a 24-hour all-news network for early1996, and Rupert Murdoch's News Corp is also planning to start an all-news channel.A problem for the new channels is expected to be gaining distribution,with several new channels battling for space in the crowded US cablemarket. When the cable companies go fully digital, this problem will bealleviated, but in the interim, ABC is also looking at otherdistribution methods, such as using telco distribution now beingcreated in the US, and direct broadcast satellites.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EC IN QUOTA COMPROMISEThe battle against  European programme quotas looks set to continue asa meeting late in November by EU culture ministers to revise theTelevision Without Frontiers directive ended with little change to theoriginal. The contradictions have been kept in the new 'revised'proposal, while salt has been rubbed into the quota wound with the newsthat the quota system will no longer be phased out after 10 years, butreviewed after five years.EU culture ministers reached what they called "a political compromise,"voting to keep the controversial phrasing of clauses Four and Five ofthe original directive to maintain quotas "where practicable and byappropriate means." The proposed change in the Presidency text to "byappropriate means" was not taken on. This will allow the UK to maintainits loose interpretation of the phrasing, but will anger the French,who had hoped to see a tougher stance on quotas and the "wherepracticable" phrase written out.The new five-year review will please the French, but not member statessuch as Germany and the UK, who were hoping to see the quota systemscrapped altogether.A new article has been added to the directive (article Z), whereby acommittee will be set-up acting alongside the EC to monitor theimplementation of the directive.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996THE OTHER RUPERTIn a rare interview, diamonds-to-tobacco tycoon Johann Rupert explainswhat lured him into pay-TV, and reveals his hopes and fears for thedigital future. Piero Muscaro and Eleonora Zamparutti ask the questionsAlthough he made his fortune in tobacco and luxury goods, today thename of Johann Rupert is synonymous with pay-television. Richemont isthe maker of world-wide brand names like Cartier, Dunhill, Rothmans,Piaget, Baume & Mercier, Montblanc, Karl Lagerfeld, Chloe and a fewothers. With a total turnover of #3.8 billion in 1995 and net profitsof #690 million, Richemont is also one of the largest groups in theworld's pay-television industry through Nethold Corporation, a 50-50joint venture with the South African public company MIH (MultiChoiceInvestment Holding).Nethold operates in 13 countries in the European pay-television sector,where it has a total of 2.5 million subscribers. It is present innorthern and eastern Europe as well as in the Benelux with theMultiChoice-FilmNet group and in the Middle East and Africa with theSouth African pay service M-Net.In 1995, the company booked 24 transponders on the Astra, Eutelsat andPanAmSat satellites. It has also recently entered the Italiantelevision market through the acquisition of 32.5 per cent  of Telepiu,the country's sole pay-TV operator, and 5.5 per cent of Mediaset, themedia holding of Silvio Berlusconi's Fininvest group comprised, amongother interests, Canale 5, Italia 1 and Rete 4, 25 per cent of Spain'sTele Cinco and 24.5 per cent of the sports channel DSF in Germany.From the calm shores of Lake Zug, a few miles from Zurich, Switzerland,Rupert, the managing director and owner of the Richemont Group, plotsthe map of the world's pay-television industry.Cable and Satellite Europe: What were the reasons behind your decisionto diversify Richemont from its tobacco and luxury goods activitiesinto the pay-television sector?Johann Rupert: Towards the end of the eighties we set in train aprofound restructuring plan of the group. It was clear since the verybeginning that our core activities, the tobacco and the luxury goodsbusiness, had one point in common: a great cashflow. This is the reasonwhy we started seeking an alternative diversification for ourinvestments. At that time, our now partners of M-Net, who operated inSouth Africa in the pay-TV business, offered us a chance to enter thisbusiness. After a deep analysis we realised a few things: firstly, pay-television companies are generally cashflow negative at the end of thefirst two years of activities; secondly, in order to reach breakevenpoint they need at least five or six years, though over this time theycreate added value and also an interesting distribution network.Beyond the necessities of diversification there are evident synergiesto be made between the pay-television business, the luxury goods andthe tobacco industry: in all three cases Richemont operates in thefield of intellectual properties and, in particular, trademarks.C&SEu: Apart from the obvious economic and financial synergy betweenthe three main sectors in which you operate, is there any other reasonthat pushed you to enter the television business?JR: In order to make a good business you have to project yourself 20years ahead of your time, and try to imagine what people will want bythat time. Then you have to try to retrace that path backward. And whenI look at today's consumer trends and the behaviour of the youngergenerations, I am convinced that the future will be based oninformation and that consumption will be tightly linked toentertainment in its widest sense. All economic choices, strategies andanalyses are subject to today's ever faster pace of our daily livingand must be constantly revised and adjusted. We cannot afford anylonger to stand still on a leading market position, because today,everything can change suddenly.C&SEu: What criteria did you use to invest in the pay-TV business?JR: It is very important to be the first entrants in a new market,especially when the sector is economically virgin. In reality, you donot buy market shares, you buy market opportunities. Geographicaldiversification is an objective linked to the single opportunitiesgenerated by the different markets. That is what happened in theNetherlands when Esselte decided to sell FilmNet. Recently, in Italy,we bought 5.5 per cent of Mediaset, Berlusconi's commercial televisionnetwork, and a 32.5 per cent share of Telepiu. Mediaset has sincereduced its overall debts and it now has a considerable cashflow.Telepiu represents a starting point for digital television: in Italythere is no cable television and satellite television is not thoroughlydeveloped - there's around 500,000 satellite dishes. Nethold, throughits conditional access developed by the subsidiary Irdeto, togetherwith the Kirch group, has created an open door on this new market.C&SEu: What is your relationship with Berlusconi? Some say you actuallyentered Mediaset to do Berlusconi a favour in exchange for a sort of'insurance' in order to guarantee a return on your investment in casethings went wrong....JR: This is pure science-fiction. Nobody did any favour to Berlusconi.In fact, we entered Mediaset once Berlusconi was already into politics.Besides, I only know Berlusconi as a businessman, since I must have methim four times altogether. Make it clear: Richemont is a public companythat obeys the London Stock Exchange rules and all our activities aretransparent.  According to my opinion, the Number One rule in businessis that any partnership and business decision I take should make thecover of the world's press.C&SEu: Nethold operates in many European countries. Do you think thatin the future it will be possible to offer a sole pay-elevision packagecommon to all the different territories?JR: I believe we could define Richemont as a multi-domestic companyrather than a multi-national company. You can think globally, thoughyou have to operate in different countries taking into proper accountthe national specifics. In Europe, we need to have companies with goodlocal market knowledge and also alliances with different countries weoperate in. In the pay-television business, for instance, we canoperate at European level as far as the technologies are concerned, orin the so called subscriber management system, and in programmeacquisition.C&SEu: With digital technology in Europe and in the rest of the world,there has been a proliferation of partnerships between the bigmultimedia groups in order to acquire key positions in tomorrow'stelevision market....JR: Now that we have developed our technology of conditional access indigital television, we are finding a great deal of possibilities inmany countries. Different media groups have approached us, thanks tothe decoder, in order to create partnerships aimed at the furtherdevelopment of the new technologies. Not only in Europe and the MiddleEast, but also in Thailand and in Australia, where Murdoch's digitaltelevision project will use our technology.C&SEu: Talking of the Middle East: what brought you to the partnershipbetween MultiChoice and ART, the media group owned by Saudi SheikhSaleh Kamel, for the distribution of the Arab-language televisionpackage?JR: In the case of the Middle East it has been a long-term investmentplan. Countries like Egypt, for instance, are key markets. Thepartnership between MultiChoice and ART follows the mainstream of themulti-domestic company we mentioned earlier. Also in this case ourcompanies brought in their technological know-how and the SMS, whileART, which has a great experience in broadcasting, will take care ofthe programme package. We expect to see the first results in five yearstime. For  Nethold it is a matter of being ahead of the competition ina critical expansion area at relatively low cost, since we can optimiseour economies of scale. After all, as pioneers in this particularmarket we will be able to extend our operations in marginal, yetinteresting sectors of the industry, such as education, a key problemin some remote regions of the Earth.C&SEu: Digital television - in Europe and in Africa you have been thefirst to introduce DSTV (Digital Satellite Television). How willtelevision users change in their consumption habits?JR: In the US DirecTv offers to its subscribers 150 digital channelsvia satellite. What is interesting to observe is that with such avariety of choice it is clear that consumers will approach the mediadifferently. For instance, the navigation system is based on menusclassifying the content in specific categories: cinema, sport, art,music, and so on. Then, through the use of the remote control one canselect an item, sport for instance, and other sub-menus will appearallowing more detailed choices, a game of golf or whatever. There wouldthen be five or more tournaments to choose from.Such changes in the architecture of choice will make irrelevant whatparticular network one is watching. Tomorrow we will not be able totell whether we are watching NBC or CBS, or at least this could be oneof the possible outcomes.C&SEu: A true war on digital television standards is being fought inEurope and in the rest of the world: on the one hand, Nethold and Kirchwith the Irdeto decoder, and on the other Bertelsmann-Canal Plus-CLT,and also Murdoch's News Datacom....JR: One of the few things I am certain of in life is that in economicsas well as in politics or in any other sector, if you want to geteverything, you will end up losing everything. This rule may also beapplied in the digital technology sector. I am certain Nethold will beable to further develop its present market position in Europe as in therest of the world, but it will never be able to be the sole serviceprovider.C&SEu: Canal Plus and BSkyB both have strong national identities andcompany policies. BSkyB is addressed to the UK where it has 4.2 millionsubscribers, whereas Canal Plus has also extended its interests outsideFrance, though its core activity lies within the French boundaries withits four million subscribers. Nethold, instead, operates in differentcountries none of which represents its main market....JR: The geographical diversification of our activities can be both astrength and a weakness. Being focused on one particular local market,as in the case of Canal Plus and BSkyB, allows you to have an enormouscashflow. Concentrating all efforts on one market can also meanemploying heavy structures and hence having a less flexibleorganisation, which in the medium-term could be a disadvantage for thecompany itself. As Nethold we grew in the opposite direction, in thesense that we had to develop a multi-domestic managerial know-how andat the same time we had to learn how to deal with different currencies,in different countries with different programmes in differentlanguages. We had to create a new distribution network which now findsits strengths in the conditional access which we first developed inEurope.C&SEu: Digital television will bring profound changes, above all fromthe industrial-economic viewpoint...JR: When looking at the present structure of the world industrialeconomy, one simple yet efficient consideration comes to my mind: ifyou don't eat your breakfast, someone else will eat it. This means thatyou must re-engineer your own business before somebody else does it.And this can only be done through continuous innovation which isdestroying your own business by building a new business.C&SEu: Which will then be the technological trend in the televisionindustry?JR: Here the question is, will present TV operators be able to convertanalogue TV into digital TV without jeopardising their presentsubscription status? One of the key elements of the conversion is thesoftware, which is the television programmes, the movies and all theproducts offered to the viewers. Consumers' attitude towards technologycan be more or less active, what is important here is what is offeredwith the technology. That is the reason why I am convinced that inEurope there will be big winners and big losers. All markets willexperience a shake-up of some sort, this includes us as well as CanalPlus and BSkyB. The real question is whether pay-TV operators will beable to convert their subscribers from analogue to digital beforesomeone else does it. I fear that in Great Britain, for instance, therewill be great battles in order to get the Premier League rights. Itwould be very strange if big media groups such as Pearson, Carlton TV,the BBC and British Telecom itself, allowed Murdoch to dominate thetechnological revolution for the British market. This would be a choiceof non-innovation. I am not saying that Britain will experience atechnological standards fight, though I reckon there will be commonpartnerships, perhaps with Murdoch himself for the joint control of thedigital television industry.C&SEu: As far as the software is concerned, one of the key questions isthe management of television programme archives....JR: This is an issue that involves all major public TV operators inEurope mainly due to their longer histories when compared with  thecommercial operators. For example, does the BBC - which has one of themost extraordinary television, film and documentary archives in theworld - own the rights for digital television exploitation? I don'tthink so, and I think nobody owns them today. 20 years ago, nobody evendreamt of digital television. Hence all rights were acquired forterrestrial broadcasting, or even cable or satellite. Certainly not fordigital.C&SEu: What will then be the role of European public television in thedigital era?JR: There will be synergies between pay-TV and public broadcasters,particularly if we manage to clear the TV property rights matterearlier mentioned. In sport events, for instance, there will mostcertainly be co-operation between public broadcasters and pay-television. In England, it will never be possible to broadcast theWimbledon tennis tournament in encrypted form, or just imagine whatcould have happened in Italy if we had encrypted with Telepiu the '96World Cup final, Italy versus Brazil - the government would haveprobably been dismissed. Nethold has a very strong traditionalrelationship with public broadcasters in Holland, Egypt and Greece.C&SEu: What will then become the position of the big US operators inEurope?JR: I think operators will opt for the development of thematic channelsto be inserted into programme packages offered to viewers, and at thesame time participate with stakes in the SMS. It is necessary to offergreat premium programme packages. Take any Hollywood studio as anexample, none of them is capable of filling five movie channels withtheir own productions.C&SEu: The relationship between pay TV distributors and TV softwareproducers remains a key issue world-wide. It seems that you areenvisaging a clear separation between SMS and TV channels...JR: The separation between SMS and television channels is a managementchoice which we have already applied to the markets we operate in. TakeM-Net, for instance, which manages the programme offer in South Africa.When a TV network wants to be distributed in the pan-African satellitepackage, it can buy shares of MultiChoice at the same conditions as M-Net and participate accordingly to the management of the company. Inthis way, we can guarantee equal treatment to all shareholders.Specifically to MultiChoice, it only directly owns four channels out ofthe 20 presently distributed.C&SEu: Could Nethold have a real interest in producing films, as CanalPlus has with Le Studio Canal Plus?JR: Software control is certainly one of the key issues in thetransition from analogue to digital. The point is that a single moviechannel airs at least 400 films a year, which means that even if webought aHollywood major we could cover 10-15 per cent at the maximum of ourproduct needs and at the same time the same Hollywood major would havereduced benefits being part of the same company. I am sure that the socalled chain distribution system will collapse in the next 20 years.Today, a film follows this kind of distribution pattern: first thetheatrical release, then the pay-per-view rights sale, then home videodistribution, pay-television rights, and last, the generic channels.Now, let's say that in 20 years time in Europe there will be 20 millionhouseholds with pay-per-view access. This could guarantee an extremelyimportant film purchase potential, then perhaps the pay-per-viewproviders will produce films for their own distribution networks.C&SEu: In fact, such integration makes front page news in the US onalmost a daily basis...JR: Yes, but have you ever heard of any of these multimedia companiespaying cash? I don't think so. It is only a matter of paper exchanges,just contracts, never real money. Sometimes I doubt that any of thesemergers and acquisitions would have really taken place if real moneywas involved. Do you know what $20 billion looks like on a table? Suchfinancial transactions can only work with share swaps, which is alsothe best way to reduce risks.C&SEu: As in the case of the latest merger between Turner and TimeWarner...JR: There is always a good reason behind any operation. A veryimportant and very rich American businessman once told me: 'Johann, howwould you define a successful acquisition? It has to do with a companyeasy to buy, hard to sell, and impossible to manage!'C&SEu: What about Germany which represents the most developedtelevision market in Europe? Are things going to be even harder?JR: Germany will perhaps be one of the most important tests of theconversion path from analogue to digital television as far as Europe isconcerned. In fact, this is the only country where two conditionalaccess system exist, that is, the d-Box developed by Nethold and LeoKirch, and the SECA consortium of Bertelsmann, Canal Plus and CLT.Today, Germany represents the biggest cable and satellite market inEurope with over 30 million homes connected, though it is a congestedmarket. If you wanted to launch a new TV channel in Germany, youfirstly have to buy a transponder on the Astra satellites, which is noteasy since they have all been booked out several years in advance.Secondly, you will need to sign a distribution agreement with a Germancable operator, an even more complex matter since all cable operatorsin Germany have already reached maximum capacity. Now it is obviousthat with the new digital technology, these problems can be solvedsince the new system through digital compression will be able to carryfrom four to eight channels in digital, per transponder.As far as we are concerned, Irdeto and Kirch have developed the onlyand best set-top box available in the market. We are already producingit industrially, and will be ready soon - in a matter of days - todistribute our set-top box to the public. It should be  sufficient toknow that Nethold ordered 1.1 million set-top boxes and Leo Kirchordered another million.C&SEu: Recently in France, TF1 and France Television announced anagreement for the development of digital television. Several observersconsider the SECA consortium as the key issue for the furtherdevelopment of digital technology in this country. Do you think theBertelsmann-Canal Plus-CLT alliance could come to an end?JR: Ca depend!  I don't really know, though what I can say is thatthere will be new entrants in the market and there will be morepartnerships with new companies. As far as the SECA consortium isconcerned, I don't think CLT, whatever situation they are experiencing,would break the Bertelsmann-Canal Plus agreement.  These are seriouscompanies and do normally respect all agreements. We are aware of CLT'sdifficult position within the consortium. If Havas will come back onits decision - a remote possibility - CLT would be an extremelyinteresting company but perhaps too big for anybody to take intoconsideration, even Murdoch.C&SEu: What are your relations with Mr Murdoch?JR: Let's say I have great respect for Mr Murdoch. We have never beenin his way!C&SEu: In conclusion, how will the digital war end?JR: Has it ever occurred to you while watching a football match ontelevision that a friend asked you, who is going to win? I normallyanswer: 'Well, that is exactly why we are watching the match!' Wecannot be 100 per cent sure of who is going to win or lose. Even indigital television, with new standards, new conditional access systems.I frankly do not know who is going to win, the same way as I am surethat everybody in the business does not have a clue. Everyone bets ontheir own horse. We are certain to own an outsider, the best. Though,there is always a risk that tomorrow Pierre Lescure, Rupert Murdoch andI will wake-up and read in the press that a big telecommunicationscompany has invented a new digital standard, hence upsetting all theplans of companies like us that today are struggling in this dogfight.C&SEu: What would you do first thing that morning?JR: I think I would light-up a good cigarette!Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996IN LIVING COLOURTwo years on, BETI, the first international outpost of US cablephenomenon Black Entertainment Television, is ready to fly as a fully-fledged cable service with an appeal which should be sweet music to UKMSOs. Bill Hicks reportsLawrence Nugent, co-founder and managing director, operations for theUK's first black cable television channel, Black EntertainmentTelevision International (BETI), pens a neat graphic to demonstrate theposition his channel has reached after two years in the market: it's alarge boulder, which has been pushed nine tenths of the way up theslope of a very steep mountain. "One more little push, we're there. Youwon't be able to stop us."The 'little push' for the service which began in London two years agoas Identity Television, but which took the name of its US backer, part-owner and chief programme supplier BET earlier this year, comes earlyin 1996 when the channel boards the Orion 1 satellite, making itssignal available to cable operators across the UK and (in theory) therest of Europe as part of Orion's growing bundle of digitally-compressed cable channels.The roll-out won't come a moment too soon for would-be viewers outsideLondon who currently go to the lengths of getting their metropolitanfriends to record the hugely popular shows and mail them the cassettes- adding new meaning to the phrase 'tape-delivered cable channel.'Ironically, though - having just taken on the BETI name - the channelis also about to market itself as 'Television In Colour' with the clearaim of building on its strong, and always deliberate, crossover appealto audiences of all races.The service now available in 262,000 UK cable homes - all in the Londonarea - launched in mid-1993 as Identity TV. The channel was created bythree black media professionals, Lawrence Nugent, Petra Bernard (ex-BBCand Warners, now BETI's managing director, corporate affairs) andPhilip Ismay, all of whom had been thinking along the lines of a TVchannel made by, and for, British Afro-Caribbeans."We knew there was a huge gap in the market for black-orientedprogrammes," comments Bernard, "and cable appeared to be the idealmedium for us. It was young, its intentions mirrored our intentions."Cable in the UK was, and remains, chiefly an urban medium, and most ofthe UK's two million-plus Afro-Caribbeans live in the main urbancentres, though from the start the aim was wider.The idea was to launch a channel which would primarily serve Britain'sblack communities, but which would be marketed as an "urbancontemporary" service having strong crossover appeal  beyond the Afro-Caribbean core audience. In that sense it would not be an 'ethnic'channel in the way of some of the Asian and other minority-languageservices, but a specialist channel: "Yes, we're a niche channel, andour niche is entertainment," says Bernard.Identity short-circuited the process of finding backers by goingstraight to the original and most successful black channel of all,Black Entertainment Television of Washington DC. With over 42 millionUS subscribers, revenues of $115 million (#76 million), net income ofaround $20 million in 1994/5 and a hard-won reputation for excellencein everything it touches, BET occupies a unique position both in thecable industry, and as an exemplary African-American business successstory."We contacted BET, we got access to the president, Bob Johnson, onconference lines, and we transacted the whole thing over thetelephone... it was, well you can imagine...," says Bernard.The chance to participate in a European-based cable channel came at agood moment for BET, which since its launch in January 1980, had builtup its subscriber base to well over 30 million homes across the US and(from 1992) Canada. On the way, BET had made history by becoming thefirst black-owned company to launch itself on the New York StockExchange (in November 1991); it had become a major, award-winningprogramme producer and had already diversified into magazine publishing(with YSB, Young Sisters and Brothers and Emerge), media sales andmerchandising through BET Direct. It had just picked up a 'Hot Growth'accolade in Business Week's 100 best Small Corporations awards, and wasmore than ripe for international expansion.With BET behind it, Identity was able to approach the UK cable industrywith renewed confidence. "First we went to the cable operators, and wewere fortunate in that the London Interconnect had just become fullyfledged," Bernard says. "We forged an agreement with the InterconnectMSOs - though we still needed individual agreements with each operator- and secured London distribution at a stroke, all except Cable Londonand Nynex. We got onto Cable London two months later - and with Nynex,well we're still in talks."Identity launched itself in style, rapidly building a loyal followingwith a mix of programming from BET, supplemented by series fromCaribbean broadcasters and (increasingly) from its own facilities nearLadbroke Grove (an area of West London fast becoming an alternative toSoho's media ghetto) and UK-based independent black producers.The six-hour schedule - rotated twice to form an 18-hour block from12.00-06.00 - majored then and now on music, which accounts, accordingto Bernard, for 42 per cent of programming: "It won't go any higherthan that," she adds - but nor is likely to get much less, since musicis right at the heart of the BET experience, both in the US andinternationally.According to BETI affiliate sales and marketing manager Alex Jackman,the music shows - Video Soul, Rap City, Video Vibrations, Video Mania(the UK scene, produced in-house), Caribbean Rhythms - are becomingrequired viewing for UK aficionados: "Video Soul and Video Vibes inparticular are bang up to date, up to the second on the USA scene, youwon't find anything more current. We're actually breaking black artistsin the UK, introducing names not heard here before," says Jackman.The other major ingredients of Identity's mix were sports, cultural andeducational programmes, comedy and magazine/discussion shows, all ofwhich are still represented, though since June 1995, there has, inBernard's words, been "a clean sweep of the schedule."That was the point at which the channel re-launched itself as BETI, andalthough there was no change in the US partners' shareholding ("Weremain effectively 50:50 BET and Identity," says Lawrence Nugent),BET's production styles became the measure for the rest of the output."We carried three hours a day from BET from the start, so our viewerswere already familiar with the look," she says. "Our job then was tomake everything else come into sync."Change always has its price, and BETI has had to placate many loyalIdentity viewers who didn't like the fact that a few of their favouriteseries disappeared because they didn't make the quality threshold. Thisparticularly affected some of the Caribbean-produced shows: "Thequantity was there, but the quality was sometimes tenuous," Bernardsays. "We now insist our suppliers maintain a Beta standard." Severalnon-BET series have survived, including the popular, newsy regionalmagazine show Caribscope, and the Nigerian soap Checkmate, set in theLagos business world.Unlike its US partner, BETI does not have its own news bulletins,though it provides regular coverage of "core community events, such assports, and the Notting Hill Carnival" in the occasional UK Profileseries.Since the name change, the religious output has also increased,reflecting the strong Christian philosophy of the US channel, and itsclose links with some of the best known evangelical broadcasters in theUS, including Morris Cerullo. On Sunday mornings, for example, the sixhours of 'downtime' are devoted to the Christian ministries: "This is avery, very strong element in our service," Bernard says, "and theaudience is very receptive. Someone like Morris Cerullo, one of thebiggest names, his audience is our audience."On other days this six-hour slot is given over to a "special audioservice" - currently a relay of the London black music station, ChoiceFM, though as Nugent remarks, "In the long term we would be looking tocreate our own audio service." Ultimately, Nugent  adds,  he intends todevelop multimedia services: "There are ways of going interactive whichdo not depend on the cable operators upgrading," he says, "though itwill depend on our having a live studio environment." Expansion of theBETI production facilities,  probably involving a move from its smartbut limited offices in a converted warehouse, is high on the list ofpriorities.Bernard is also looking forward to adding services: "I'd definitelylike more channels, maybe one with a European slant, and I'd like thechannel to get more heavily involved in its own production," she says."We already get more approaches than we can handle in the productionarea, people are coming to us with million-dollar ideas."In Washington, BET is planning to launch its long-awaited BET On Jazz:The Cable Jazz Channel in America this month, but although the servicewill go to Africa (see accompanying story) there are no hard plans asyet to bring it to the UK. The big priority for the London team is tobuild its UK audience, with Bernard admitting that "I had hoped thenational picture would come sooner, but it is happening for us now."As Nugent points out, however, it has taken the full two years to getthe message across to MSOs: "The biggest problem we had in the old dayswas that we were deemed to be black entertainment for blacksubscribers, so we had to go through the phase of changing theirperceptions. Of course they wanted a channel for their black customers,but we weren't too comfortable with the idea that we were just forthem, it could alienate other viewers and subscribers.""When we were IDTV, many operators were confused about us," confirmsJackman. "They knew about BET in the US, but were confused about thelevel of their involvement. They still liked us - they used to say,'well we prefer you to the foreign channels'!"Hence the name-change, hence the need for re-educating the industry andthe public, hence the 'Television In Colour' marketing push that brokein December with billboard, radio and press advertising highlightingBETI's strengths in sports, music and religious programming. "In theUS, they've achieved high penetration by being good programme-providers, and we're hoping to emulate that."The modest target is to "reach 900,000 homes by the end of 1996, and toget over the million mark very soon after." The stated aim is to reach4.5 million UK homes by the end of the decade, but to do so byremaining cable-exclusive. The decision to take digital capacity onOrion, Jackman stresses, is not a step on the road to going DTH: "Allalong we have had a policy of linking ourselves to the success ofcable, and to growing as cable grows. They need us, they need cable-exclusive original programming, and that's what we are."BETI UK's total loyalty to cable is not shared by its US godparent: inSeptember this year, BET joined DirecTv's 'Total Choice' DBS package,its first move into direct-to-home distribution. And now it is about touse digital DTH to take its jazz service to southern Africa.So had BETI never been tempted by BSkyB's Multi-Channels DTH bandwagon,which would effectively get it into another three million homes at astroke? Obviously the potential had been weighed up, but to date theadvantages of staying cable-exclusive, basic tier had outweighed thelure of the VideoCrypt club. On the other hand, as Bernard notes, "Ifthe question ever arises, we'd give it due consideration."National coverage will also raise BETI's attractiveness to advertisers.It has already attracted an impressive roster on the basis of itsLondon distribution, encompassing major brands - BT, Mercury, Levis,Volkswagen, EMI, Cellnet - as well as a host of advertisers from theblack business sector, ranging from travel services, record labels,hair and beauty products, food and drink specialist suppliers.Sponsorship is also becoming a useful add-on revenue source, with CaribBeer, for example, putting its name to BETI's in-house music show forclubbers, C-lector; and Jamaican building society, Victoria MutualFinance, sponsoring the latest six-parter, Sarge In Charge.At some point, BETI is expected to embark on its European roll-out,made possible by the Orion feed. "Yes, Europe's in the master plan,"Bernard says. "At the recent ECC show, we had lots of enquires fromEuropean operators - interest is very strong, even in eastern Europe."Capacity on cable systems is an even greater problem in parts of Europethan in the UK, but it's one which Bernard believes is not insuperablein either case: "They had no problem in the UK satisfying Disney, soobviously there are ways around the problem."BET MilestonesAugust 8 1979      Robert L Johnson creates BETJanuary 25 1980    BET launches as two-hours-a-day service to 3.8m                   cable homesMay 1980           Puts $1m into black collegiate sports specials,                   first venture into original programmingJanuary 1981       BET in 5.3m cable homesFebruary 1982      Taft Broadcasting becomes an equity partnerAugust 1982        Switch to Westar V: BET loses 6m homes, gains                   prime-time hoursApril 1984         Moves to Galaxy I, gains 6.4m homesSeptember 1984     HBO becomes minority equity partnerOctober 1984       BET goes 24-hours, reaching 7.6m subscribersOctober 1986       Launches BET News, first black national news                   programmeJanuary 1989       Rate increase to $0.5 per sub: rates to increase                   by one cent a year to 1994April 1989         $10m production facility openedMarch 1990         BET/Butch Lewis Productions partnership for                   special events PPV programmingNovember 1990      Enters publishing with YSB magazineNovember 1991      BET launched on NYSENovember 1992      Introduces 10-year rate card: 31 sign up (TCI                   follows in March 1993)June 1993          Forms BET Direct; buys 80 per cent of Action Pay                   Per View from AvalonJuly 1993          Launch of joint-venture Identity TV in LondonAugust 1993        Forms BET International to market programming to                   Africa and other regionsDecember 1993      Sets up BET Film Productions with Encore and LIVE                   Entertainment; and BET Pictures with BlockbusterFebruary 1994      Interviews Louis Farrakhan, leader of Nation of                   Islam movementMay 1994           Creates BET Networks to handle affiliate sales of                   BET, BET On Jazz and Action Pay Per ViewApril 1995         Opens 58,000sq ft studios on BET Media CampusMay 1995           BET/Home Shopping Networks BET Shop pilotedSeptember 1995     BET joins DirecTv DBS packageJanuary 15 1996    Scheduled launch for BET On JazzCopyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BET TAKES JAZZ TO AFRICABET's 24-hour jazz channel, BET On Jazz: The Cable Jazz Channel, is tojoin MultiChoice's South African DTH package, DSTV, on April 1, justthree months after the channel launches on cable networks in the US.The service, first mooted in 1993 and understood to be costing $20-30million (#13-20 million) to launch, will be the world's first channeldedicated to jazz, will be offered alongside DSTV's existing 18channels at no extra cost, and will be marketed in South Africa,Swaziland, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Lesotho, Mozambique and Botswana. Boththe channel and the MultiChoice deal are breakthroughs for BET, which,with 43.4 million cable subscribers in North America (at November1995), and with its domestic business already well diversified intorelated media and marketing activities, is now firmly looking tointernational markets for expansion. "This is a very big move for us,"BET International vice president George Amoah comments. "Although we'vebeen supplying programming to African broadcasters for the last year-and-a-half on a syndicated basis, this is the first time we've launchedthere in such a big way."BETI supplied Bop-TV with an eight-hour daily block of (chieflyeducational) programming which was distributed across African and theMiddle East from a C-Band Intelsat transponder, and now suppliessimilar programming to SABC's NNTV, as well as to affiliates in Kenyaand Nigeria the Caribbean, and even to Poland."Our plans call for global expansion," he adds, "and we're going intoit aggressively... our initial focus is Europe and southern Africa."As in the US, where BET has developed a range of complementarybusinesses, BETI intends to develop similar opportunities for programme-related merchandise in South Africa, by building up relationships withlocal business.While Amoah indicated that BETI was eager to bring the jazz channel tothe UK and the rest of Europe, how it will do so - whether as acomplement to the London-based BETI cable-exclusive service usingadditional digital capacity on Orion, or as a member of one or more ofthe evolving national digital DTH packages - was not yet decided.What is clear is that the promised mix of live concerts, classicperformances, jazz movies and documentaries will find big ready-madeaudiences across Europe and Scandinavia, whichever option is chosen.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TRANS-SIBERIAN AWAKENINGEutelsat's energetic courting of the Russians is beginning to paydividends, with Hot Bird thawing a long-frozen DTH industry, and plansfor the new SESAT satellites well advanced. Chris Dziadul reports fromMoscowEutelsat has played a key role in integrating the Russian Federationinto the global satellite industry, both by granting it full membershipstatus and greatly improving coverage of the country by its satellites.The process arguably began in 1990 when the organisation decided tomodify two of its Eutelsat II series satellites in order to extendtheir coverage to the Urals and Caucasus. Although one was subsequentlylost following the failure of Ariane V63 in early 1994, coverage had bythat time been extended to mid-Siberia and three former Soviet CentralAsian republics by relocating Eutelsat l F1 to 48 degrees East.Membership followed later in the year in a process that took only threemonths instead of the usual eight, thereby indicating how much valueEutelsat placed on the Russian Federation's future input into theorganisation.The results to date have undoubtedly been fruitful for both sides. InEutelsat's case, it has been able to draw on the country's vastexperience in the satellite industry to order a whole generation of newtelecommunications satellites, while for the Russian Federationbenefits of contacts with - and finally membership of - Eutelsat haveincluded use of the Satellite Multiservices System (SMS) for Vsatnetworks and - since the middle of 1995 - being linked up to theorganisation's international trunk telephony network via an earthstation in Moscow.Furthermore, in the field of satellite television broadcasting - whichcurrently accounts for 75 per cent of Eutelsat's income - the launch ofHot Bird 1 has made viewing of European channels possible in Moscowwith 90cm dishes (rising to 1.2-metres nearer the Urals). At the sametime, Russian broadcasters have been given the opportunity to transmittheir programming using Eutelsat's network far beyond the country'sborders.Although this has so far only been taken up by the independentcommercial station NTV (which is almost available nationally in theRussian Federation and claims a 40 per cent audience share in Moscow),Philippe Cayla, Eutelsat's head of service, new projects, says theorganisation would also like to see the national public broadcastersORT and RTR eventually become its clients.While the Hot Bird system (which currently comprises Eutelsat ll F1 andHot Bird 1) will by 1997 be expanded by three further satellites (HotBirds 2, 3 and 4) to give even better coverage of the RussianFederation, Cayla says the 18-transponder SESAT (Siberia-EuropeSATellite) satellite will be designed specially for the country. Due tobe launched in 1998, it will be built by the company NPO-PM inKrasnoiarsk, located at the 48 degrees East orbital position and coveran area from western Europe to central Siberia.In Cayla's view, the "best option" would be for half of SESAT'stransponders to be taken up by Russian clients and for them to offerviewers "a bouquet of five to six channels." He also feels thesatellite, which will in addition to its standard coverage have a spotbeam aimed at China and southern Asia, may be followed by a second(SESAT II) craft targeting the far east of Russia.Eutelsat's efforts have also made a great impact on Russia's domesticDTH industry, as Alexander Atrashkevich, commercial director of Telesetattests. Moscow-based Teleset is one of the oldest privately-ownedcable and DTH equipment companies in the Russian Federation, havingbeen set-up soon after the former Soviet Union gave the green light tofree enterprise in 1988.From the outset, its business has been divided into three parts: themanufacture of satellite antennas, which initially were nearly allexported to European countries due to poor local demand; the import ofelectrical components for cable and satellite systems; and theinstallation of complete cable and satellite systems throughout theRussian Federation.According to Atrashkevich, the country's DTH market only began toexperience "serious growth" in 1995 when Eutelsat's Hot Bird enabledviewers in Moscow to receive a wide range of European channels with a90cm dish. Indeed, whereas only a year earlier they had to pay between$700 to $800 (#460-530) for a 2.5-metre system to receive Eutelsat llF1, signals from the new satellite could now be picked up in thecapital with equipment retailing for around $230 - roughly the cost ofa 14-inch colour TV set.Signals from the Scandinavian platform at one degree West also onlyrequire small sized dishes, and while legal cards are unavailable inthe country pirated versions can be bought for as little as $50.Although Atrashkevich says it is impossible to give a figure for thenumber of dishes in the Russian Federation, information he receives"from partners and competitors" leads him to believe the total numberof systems sold each year could be between 50-80,000. What is clear,however, is that the market is growing to the extent that sales in 1995represented a three-fold increase on those of the previous year, andthis could to rise to six-fold in 1996 due to such factors as receptionof more satellites being possible with small dishes and the launch ofnew Russian-language channels which will be distributed by satellite.He adds that one of the peculiarities of the Russian market is thatalthough "99.9 per cent of people in big cities live in [apartment]blocks," smatv systems are relatively rare. Indeed, such are thediscrepancies in people's incomes, many are prepared - and can indeedafford to - buy their own systems. This may be especially  true inMoscow, where it is believed average monthly salaries are between $600and $700 as opposed to the national figure of around $140.Teleset was an official distributor for Pace between 1991 and 1993, butnow supplies several brands of DTH equipment. In Atrashkevich's view,there is no clear leader in a market which - in Moscow's case - isserved by only around a dozen retail outlets and several principaldistributors from which the public often buys directly.Teleset is also builds small private cable networks for offices andbanks. Geographically, its involvement stretches beyond the Federationto Belarus and Ukraine, although in the latter's case this is limiteddue to the poor economic situation.Atrashkevich believes that although both cable and DTH markets willcontinue to grow in the Russian Federation, competition will intensifyand - in the case of cable - the five-year breakeven point for newsystems may deter some investors.His views are to some extent shared by Alexander Drozdetski, thecommercial director of St Petersburg-based A & A Ltd - the officialdistributor for Pace in the Russian Federation, Belarus, Kazakhstan andUzbekhistan - and the General Satellite Association. Whileacknowledging growth in the DTH market, he feels this has been mostnoticeable in Moscow and central parts of the Russian Federation whereHot Bird has had the greatest impact, whereas in St Petersburgreception of most satellite signals (including Astra, Eutelsat and allthose serving Scandinavia) has always been easier with small dishes:TV3, for instance, can easily be picked up in the city but isunobtainable in Moscow.Moreover, this growth can to some extent be explained by risingincomes, although "there are wide discrepancies." Indeed, "sometimespeople buy equipment because of prestige, others with middle incomesbecause this is an area of their interest." What is clear, however, isthat the market is likely to "explode" once satellite-delivered Russian-language channels (such as those due to launched by RTR this spring)become widely available.Like Teleset, General Satellite is involved in the cable industry andis currently reconstructing networks in St Petersburg for the cityauthorities. It also has a mobile uplink station for Eutelsat andmanufactures dishes; total dish sales average around 2,000 a month andHot Bird systems sold by the company usually retail for between $260and $280.Drozdetski expects cable and DTH markets in Russia to "go the way ofPoland" and expand significantly over the next few years. However,while remaining free of "government interference," they are stilllikely to be hampered by such factors as viewers' low incomes and therebeing "not enough Russian-language programmes for individual systemsand cable networks."Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PUBCASTER PLANS 'RUSSIAN SKY'While Eutelsat is undoubtedly opening up the Russian market, thenational public broadcaster RTR is also well placed to make a majorimpact with the launch of the country's first digital satellite-delivered service from Intelsat 604.According to Stanislav Bunievich, the station's deputy chairman anddirector of engineering, RTR Network is a joint venture with an unnamedUK partner, though rumoured to be BSkyB, and will launch - at a cost ofbetween $10 to $15 million (#6.6-#10 million) for equipment alone - twochannels (sport and movies) this spring. Distributed by Intelsat 604,they will probably be followed by further channels for medical,business and children's television and be available to an audience ofsome 40 million "collective customers" - such as those served by cablenetworks - throughout the former Soviet Union.Bunievich says the idea behind RTR Network is to introduce viewers tothe idea of paying for their programming, which in his view is now "themain way for the development of television in Russia." It is also anattempt to make the broadcaster less dependent on the government forits funding and lessen the burden of having to pay 75 per cent of itsrevenue to the ministry of telecommunications for the use oftransmission facilities.Although RTR is currently negotiating agreements with several foreignprogramme-providers, Bunievich reckons a need for Russian material willhave to be met. He also believes there will be exceptionally stronginterest shown in the new service's children's and medical channels andthat within the next two to five years RTR, though remaining state-owned, will become a holding company for RTR Network and othercommercial ventures.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BEAR ON A WIREWhile Moscow's mayor attempts to bring the city's maze of cablenetworks under the control of the municipality, MMDS operator Kosmos isthriving. Can wired and wireless co-exist? Chris Dziadul reportsAlthough cable remains a relatively underdeveloped industry in theRussian Federation, there are numerous networks - including suchprofessional systems as Nika TV in Petrozavorsk around the country.Wireless cable is a more recent arrival -  but already there areseveral MMDS services operated by the US's ITI. But events now takingplace in Moscow are likely to have a major bearing on the future ofboth sectors.Viewers in the capital can for a monthly fee of around R3,300 (#0.47)currently receive 11 terrestrial channels, of which only six - ORT,RTR, NTV, 2x2, TV6 Moscow and TV5 St Petersburg - are distributed byVHF signals. While this allows them to be carried by the city's 80-pluscable networks, all of which are designed for VHF and have a limitedcapacity, the remaining five UHF services, including CNN on Channel 24and AMTV on Channel 27, can only be received by viewers able to affordexpensive aerials.This may change shortly, however, following the issue of a decree byJuri Luzhkov, the mayor of Moscow, requiring all cable operators in thecity to effectively unite into a single network serving some 3.5million households. In an attempt to stave-off the high levels ofpiracy currently found in the industry, Moscow Municipal CableTelevision (MMCTV), which in theory came into being on November 5, willsee large percentages of its airtime given over to official material(such as local news) and unified programming, with only a limitedamount being allowed for current cable operators' own output.The move has in effect seen the city authorities claim ownership of allthe networks' wires buried under Moscow, which had up until now beenassumed to belong to local prefectures. It has also led to the creationof a municipal channel which will have time slots allocated to severalparties, including Moscow's UHF Channel 15 and the production companyNKT.The creation of MMCTV will, in addition, present an opportunity toupgrade the city's existing systems. Mostly serving between 3,000 to15,000 households, few are able to offer viewers more than sevenchannels and nearly all are unprofitable.While it is still unclear who may undertake this work, one of the mostfavoured candidates is likely to be Mosteletechnic Corp, the city ofMoscow government's principal contractor. According to SergeiSamokhvalov, its owner and general director, the company firstapproached the authorities in 1991 with an offer to construct newnetworks using western technology which would overcome all thedeficiencies of existing systems. This was accepted and accompanied bya grant of $700,000 for a pilot project serving some 15,000 households.Due for completion this January, it is also backed by Business Sviaz,the General Centre for Radio and Television (GCRT-Ostankino), Mir (aholding company which transmits digital TV/telephony signals viaIntelsat) and Comstar (a joint venture between the UK telecoms companyGPT and Moscow City Telephone Network (MGTS)) and will have enoughcapacity for 60 channels. The 30 initially offered to subscribers -upon payment of $150 for an addressable converter - will be dividedinto three packages: basic - 11 terrestrial channels for $0.70 to $1 amonth; commercial - 16 channels including one operated by the city ofMoscow government for $6 to $8 a month; and two pay-per-view channelsfor an unspecified fee. The cost of constructing the whole network,excluding the headend, has been estimated to be $30 per subscriber andthis is expected to fall to $20 to $22 for any future projects.Samokhvalov says Mosteletechnic has signed agreements with a number ofprogrammers, including NBC Super Channel, MTV Europe and TurnerInternational, and will be able to transmit their channels free ofcharge for six months. During this time it will undertake a marketsurvey to determine which channels are most popular with itssubscribers, who in turn will not have to pay for their convertersuntil the survey is completed.He adds that the idea behind the project was to develop one of thefirst ever integrated cable networks in the Russian Federation.Although it has taken four years and the help of General Instrument(GI) to construct, Mosteletechnic now has a close working relationshipwith the US company and recently approached the ministry oftelecommunications with an offer to provide integrated equipment forthe new Moscow-wide cable network MMCTV. In Samokhvalov's view, thecompany will both secure the right to do so and also act as adistributor for GI throughout the whole country.Furthermore, while its pilot network will initially offer only cableservices, these are likely to be supplemented with digital telephonyand data later this year. The project will, in effect, aim to"demonstrate the possibilities" for similar schemes being undertaken inthe cities of Minsk, Erevan, Baku, Bishek, Alma Ata, Dushanbe and StPetersburg. It is looking for investors and has held talks with severalparties, including the EBRD.Another, potentially competing part of the industry showing strongsigns of growth is the MMDS, or wireless cable sector. MMDS TV servicesfirst appeared on the territory of the former Soviet Union shortlyafter the collapse of communism. Backed by the US company InternationalTelcell Inc (ITI) - itself a consortium of several companies includingMetromedia, McCaw Cellular, Comsat Video Enterprises and Morgan andAssociates - it can now be found in the cities of Riga (Latvia),Kishinov (Moldavia) and Tashkent (Uzbekistan), along with Moscow, NiznyNovogrod and, from early 1996, St Petersburg in the Russian Federation.Although some such as Baltcom in Riga can claim success purely on thegrounds of subscriber numbers - over 8,000 in the Baltic republic'scapital alone - the most lucrative in terms of potential reach andprofitability is undoubtedly Moscow's Kosmos TV. Launched as a jointventure between ITI and the General Centre for Radio and Television(GCRT Ostankino) in 1991, it employs three large antennas to receiveAstra, Eutelsat and Intelsat services which are then retransmittedwithin a 60-70km radius of the Ostankino TV Tower to the city of Moscowand several outlying suburbs including Krasnogorsk, Kurkino, Odintsovo,Peredelkino and Sheremetyevo.Kosmos TV offers its subscribers - who currently number around 1,500individuals and institutions such as businesses, hotels and embassies -a full basic 18-channel 'package A' comprised Eurosport, MTV Europe,RTL, Bloomberg, Bloomberg News, NBC Super Channel, a recently-launchedRussian film channel known as The New Channel and two services(Euronews and The Travel Channel) with Russian subtitles for $36.45(including VAT) per month. Those wishing to receive  the nine-channelbasic 'package B' of Russian and English-language channels, however,pay $19 (including VAT) a month, while the Adult Channel is availableto all subscribers for an extra $8. Individual subscribers are, inaddition, required to pay a $300 deposit and $60 (plus VAT)installation charge, while fees for hotels are determined by occupancyrates.Unlike most other cable operators in the Russian Federation, Kosmos TVhas full agreements with all the satellite channels it carries. It alsooffers subscribers insurance for equipment, its own listings magazine,a round-the-clock maintenance service and - perhaps more importantly -a distinct advantage over individual DTH reception, since this wouldrequire a two to 2.5-metre dish costing $1,500 to $3,000 and, for suchchannels as BBC Prime, Discovery Channel and MTV Europe, up to $360 fordescrambling equipment.According to Elvira Smirnova, Kosmos TV's commercial director, theservice would like to add more channels to those it already distributesbut is held back by "technical limitations." If these are overcome "thenumber of subscribers will grow accordingly," she says, and mayeventually reach its target of 50,000.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FIRST TO SHOWEurope's first single-sport subscription channel is covering notfootball, but the sport of kings. Julian Clover dons his silks to givea right royal welcome to The Racing ChannelThere can't be too many satellite subscription services which claim HerMajesty The Queen and other prominent members of Britain's royal familyas regular viewers. But SIS, owner of the Racing Channel, one of thenew crop of UK Astra channels and televisual purveyor of the 'sport ofkings,' boasts exactly this.Strictly speaking, the Royal household doesn't subscribe to the #20 amonth Astra 1D service, but Britain's first family of the paddock isthe recipient of SIS's sister satellite racing service which istargeted, predominantly, at bookmakers.SIS actually began its encrypted (in B Mac) service for UK bettingshops as long ago as 1987, with live horse racing from Chester andgreyhound meetings from Hackney. Now offered to bookmakers andindividual trainers for an annual subscription fee of #5,500, GeorgeIrvine, general manager of The Racing Channel, says when theprofessional service first got under starter's orders "we came to anagreement with Customs and Excise that we wouldn't, because it was abetting service, sell it to individuals unless we were fairly sure thatthey wouldn't start operating a betting shop in their front rooms."There are now less than 500 such private subscriptions - including theRoyals' - in addition to the 9,500 UK betting shops. Transmissions viaIntelsat's 601 satellite are also received as far afield as Andorra,North America and Saudi Arabia.Irvine says that a consumer DTH service had long been underconsideration, but only recently did all the technological elementsfall into place to make the channel a racing certainty. The channel'sintroduction was hastened when SIS's feed on Eutelsat I F4 switched todigital transmissions, allowing additional compressed capacity todeliver a proposed cable service to headends in the UK."We presented it to the cable companies with our thoughts and ideas ofwhat the service would consist of, the fact it was cable-exclusive, andhow we felt it would be a tremendous benefit to them, and how most ofthe customers would be the kind who, through betting, would usetelephony as well. It was a 'double whammy,'" recounts Irvine.But what was hoped to be a red-hot favourite stalled as cable operatorsproved "very, very unreceptive." Irvine ascribes cable operators'resistance to the channel to "technical problems" experienced withexisting channels.The Racing Channel's unlikely White Knight turned out to be British SkyBroadcasting, which came knocking on SIS's door with a proposal tolaunch the service direct-to-home via satellite. However, the UK'sdominant pay-TV broadcaster was not able to guarantee SIS the 24-hourchannel it had been hoping for. Instead, it was offered, and accepted,the daily transmission hours between 11.00 and 16.00 sharing capacitywith Sky Movies Gold on Astra 1D. However, from the summer of '96 TheRacing Channel will be able to extend its output to 19.00, beforereturning to a 17.00 closedown in time for the start of the autumnseason.SIS's cameras are in attendance at every daily race meeting in the UKand from this wealth of coverage two meetings per day are selected forthe direct-to-home service.An additional detail in the contract with Sky means SIS now producesthe daily Racing News magazine programme for Sky Sports, while TheWinning Post, another SIS production, returns in the summer on the samechannel with regular coverage of evening race meetings. Also during thesummer months, The Racing Channel will preview evening meetings andscreen the first few races before handing over to Sky Sports forcoverage of the remainder of the card.Irvine concedes that the present hours are a mite miserly should, forexample, The Racing Channel, wish to screen an entire meeting. However,since the key race is typically third on the card, coverage of the mainevent is virtually guaranteed.At #20 per month The Racing Channel ranks as the second most expensivesingle premium service beamed via the Astra platform - a short headbehind JSTV's #30-a-month Japanese-language channel. Irvine, though,says the figure should be put into perspective; #20, he says, might notbe quite so outlandish to punters who think nothing of placing bets of#10 on a single race - though he says the average is closer to #50 -via a credit or debit card."One of the good things is that you can subscribe to The Racing Channelas a solos subscriber. You don't need to take any of the otherchannels, and that was one of the things that we insisted on," saysIrvine. The implication is that BSkyB would have preferred The RacingChannel's subscribers to have first passed through one of its existingtiers, most likely Sky Sports.But as evidence that SIS was correct to stick to its guns, Irvineclaims reports from Sky's subscriber management centre in Livingstonshow that the enquiries have been streaming in from non-Sky customers.The Racing Channel's deal with Sky was not hammered out until theeleventh hour - last November 2 to be exact, four days before thechannel went live - and the agreement to use Sky's Astra 1D transponderon the morning of the launch. Pre-launch ballyhoo, as a result, waskept to a minimum to say the least, though in the time since ads haveregularly appeared in The Sporting Life and The Racing Post. And intrue pay-TV style, a daily clear window between 11.00 and 12.00 alertspotential subscribers to the service.In its first fortnight on-air The Racing Channel, Irvine claims,attracted 20,000 calls and 7,500 switch-ons. Niche audience channelsinevitably attract consumers new to satellite television and this, inturn, means acquainting them with the technology. The Racing Channel'stask is compounded, says Irvine, by the need among longer-standingsatellite viewers to fit "a new widget" - a reference to the enhancedLNBs needed by many older IRDs to receive Astra 1D.Providing such technicalities can be overcome, Irvine is targeting30,000 subscribers for Year One and 10,000 by 1998. And despite theoriginal set-back with the UK's cable operators, the channel has evenbeen given a leg-up into cable by BT's London-based operatorWestminster Cable, which had taken part in some earlier consumer trialsof the channel.When Sky migrates to digital - a deadline which is not expected to bemet until at least the end of 1996 - then The Racing Channel willbecome a 24-hour service as was originally envisaged. But for themoment, beams Irvine, "we're pleased that it is the first niche sportschannel, and it's racing."Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  HOW DOES YOUR MARKET GROWIn a year in which analogue equipment had the market all to itself forthe final time, saturation in Europe's major DTH markets suggests thetime is ripe for digital to take root. C&SEu's sixth annual DTH survey,researched and compiled by Chris DziadulC&SEu's latest annual DTH survey indicates that the European satelliteindustry had another successful year in 1995, with the number ofinstallations in December 1995 totalling around 20.5 million. Yet whilethis represented an increase of over 20 per cent on the previous year'sfigure, there were doubts in some countries as to how much longer thisgrowth could continue.In Germany, for instance, sales had been stagnant for some two yearsand dealers were finally being forced to concede that the market -which already amounted to some nine million DTH and smatv homes - waseffectively saturated. In France, on the other hand, strong growthcould not conceal the fact that the industry was starting from anextremely low base, while in Poland, which with an estimated 1.7million dishes was still Europe's third largest market, cheap importswere having a detrimental effect on sales.All was not gloom and doom, however. Although BSkyB had had its fairshare of problems in the UK, it finally turned a corner in 1995 byemploying highly successful marketing techniques which helped thenumber of installations rise above the 3.5 million mark - effectively a17 per cent increase on the previous year's total. Other countrieswhich notched up significant sales included Italy, Belgium and Denmark.The impact on Europe's DTH industry of Eutelsat's Hot Bird 1 - which isco-located with ll F1 at 13 degrees East -  could not be understatedand was perhaps most clearly felt in the Russian Federation, where itfinally made viewing of foreign satellite channels a reality formillions of people living in Moscow and central parts of the country.Meanwhile in Greece, which had hitherto also been outside thefootprints of most European satellites, the number of installationsalmost doubled following the satellite's launch.Hot Bird also brought home the importance viewers now attach to local-language programming. Although Astra is still undoubtedly Europe's 'hotbird,' more and more people are forsaking its English and German-language channels in favour of programming in their own vernaculars.This is being offered by several satellites including Telecom 2A and 2Bin France, Turksat in Turkey and one degree West in Scandinavia, whileimmigrant communities throughout the continent are increasingly wellserved by Eutelsat's programming services.What has, in addition, become clear is that each country in Europe is ahighly distinct market and developments in it should be viewed withthis in mind. The former communist countries of central and easternEurope, for instance, have seen their television industries develop atwidely differing rates over the last five years and this is clearlyreflected in their respective DTH markets. Even the Nordic countries,which are united by common satellites and the usage of D2 Mactechnology, differ greatly in such areas as growth, with Sweden andDenmark performing far more impressively than Finland and Norway.Programming nevertheless remains a key factor in the development of DTHservices throughout Europe and its importance was clearly illustratedin Belgium, where the sudden availability via satellite of the Dutchbroadcaster Veronica and newcomer SBS 6 contributed to an almost 75 percent increase in installations despite the country's high cablepenetration.Spain, on the other hand, experienced both success and failure in thisfield in 1995, with its Astra-delivered Canal Satellite package ofprogramming finally tasting success after an aggressive marketingcampaign and Cotelsat's four-channel package off of DBS bird Hispasatcollapsing due to lack of promotion, among other things.Although the UK's Pace has emerged as a clear market-leader in DTHequipment throughout Europe, its dominance is by no means complete andis challenged in a number of territories. Cheap imports, however,continue to trouble several markets, despite the problem being lesssevere in some countries - Austria, for instance - than before.As in previous years, it is instructive to compare growth in Europe'sDTH industry with those of Japan and the US, the world's two other mainsatellite dish markets. In the former, satellite penetration of its43.7 million TV households stood at around 13.7 per cent towards theend of the year. Meanwhile in the US, the impetus provided by therecent launch of such DBS services as DirecTv was maintained in 1995,with the total number of DTH subscribers in October being 4.36 millionand the total number of C-Band dishes almost 3.83 million.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  AUSTRIAPopulation:        8.1mTV homes:          3.035mVCR homes:         1.75mCable connections: 1.17mCable penetration: 38%Dish total:        300,000-500,000 (700,000)Austria's DTH industry had a largely indifferent year in 1995, with fewif any distributors recording significant increases in sales of dishes.There were nevertheless some important developments that offered avaluable insight into how the market was likely to develop.The cost of equipment, for instance, continued to fall and by the endof the year the cheapest Astra systems - which employed 60cm dishes inwestern parts of the country, rising to 80cm in Vienna and further east- retailed for as little as oSch1,290 (#82). More typically, 80cmmodels usually fetched up to oSch5,000 and motorised units aroundoSch10,000.Yet despite this, there was a movement away from sales of cheap 'blackimports' from such Asian countries as China and South Korea back tomore expensive equipment produced in the European Union (EU). Indeed,companies such as Pace and Hirschmann, which had previously dominatedthe quality end of the market, began to make significant inroads intoits mainstream.While ascertaining the size of the market remained difficult -estimates of the total number of dishes ranged from 300,000 to half amillion - most industry sources believed Eutelsat programming (thankslargely to Hot Bird) was becoming increasingly popular in the country.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  BELGIUMPopulation:        10.2mTV homes:          4.141mVCR homes:         1.91mCable connections: 3.99mCable penetration: 96%Dish total:        35,000 (20,000)Belgium's high cable penetration did not prevent its hitherto small DTHmarket almost doubling in size in 1995. The reasons for this weretwofold: the popularity of Eutelsat's Hot Bird and - perhaps moreimportantly - the dramatic increase of programming available to Flemishspeakers via Veronica and SBS 6.With sales of equipment to the country's immigrant Moroccan and Turkishcommunities having peaked, the focus of attention once more passed tothe local population. Still effectively split along linguistic lines -with French speakers in Wallonia opting for programming on Telecom andAstra being the first choice for Flemish speakers - it saw the cost ofsystems fall by around 15 per cent. As a result, typical Astra modelswith 80cm dishes, along with 90cm Telecom equipment, typically retailedfor between BFr5,950 and BFr11,900 (#129-259).With now no domestic manufacturing sector to speak of, all DTHequipment was supplied by foreign companies. Several, including Amstradand Echostar, were well represented at the quality end of the market,while Germany's Lasat performed well in sales of lower priced hardware.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  BULGARIAPopulation:        8.5mTV homes:          2m (est)VCR homes:         540,000Cable connections: 60,000 (min est)Cable penetration: 3% (min est)Dish total:        N/A (50,000 est)In the absence of a national commercial television service and a cableindustry still waiting on the starting blocks, Bulgaria's DTH markethad another good year in '95. Indeed, although industry sources wereunable to provide an accurate figure for the total number of dishes inthe country, it was believed to be well in excess of the 1994 figure of50,000.Astra programming could be received with equipment employing 1.5-metredishes in the western part of the country, rising to over three metreson the Black Sea coast, which - if using increasingly popular Russianex-military dishes - typically retailed for around $325 (#206).Eutelsat's Hot Bird, however, had become an instant hit and could bepicked up anywiere with generally cheaper systems (including receiverscosting around #63) which employed 1.2 metre dishes (80cm in Sofia).Furthermore, services carried on other Eutelsat satellites remainedpopular with the country's large Turkish-speaking community.Although Pace equipment was highly regarded, its price put it beyondthe reach of most Bulgarians. However, there was a wide range offoreign-made systems on the market and the end users' cost could oftenbe negotiated.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  CISPopulation:        147.5m (Russia)TV homes:          45.6m (Russia)VCR homes:         8.664m (Russia)Cable connections: N/ACable penetration: N/ADish total:        N/A (N/A)Although there was still no reliable figure for the total number ofdishes in the CIS, it was widely believed that the market stood on thethreshold of great change. The reason for this was the availability ofprogramming hitherto difficult if not impossible to receive in theterritory: Eutelsat had reduced the dish size required to pick-up itssignals from three metres to 90cm following the launch of Hot Bird 1,while Astra 1D's footprint was such that its programming services couldbe viewed in Moscow with 75cm equipment.With monitoring at borders kept to a minimum, there was a large influxof illegally-imported DTH equipment from western Europe, the MiddleEast, China and other parts of Asia.Pace nevertheless remained one of the leading distributors of receivingequipment in the country.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  CROATIAPopulation:        4.5mTV homes:          862,000 (est)VCR homes:         N/A (399,000)Cable connections: negligibleCable penetration: negligibleDish total:        200,000 (400,000 max est)Croatia's DTH market in late 1995 appeared to be smaller thanpreviously believed, but it still amounted to around 200,000installations - an impressive penetration rate of over 23 per cent -and sales were increasing. This could largely be put down to an almostcomplete absence of cable services in the country, except in the townsof Karlovac, Split and the capital, Zagreb, along with a terrestrialsector dominated by the national publicly-owned broadcaster HrvatskaTelevizija (HRT) and, following a new media communication law, awaitingthe launch of national and regional commercial services.Channels on Astra and Eutelsat's Hot Bird accounted for most of thecountry's satellite viewing, with systems for the former employing 60-90cm dishes, typically retailing for #146. While there was no market-leader, models produced by Pace, Provision and Grundig continued tosell well.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  CZECH REPUBLICPopulation:        10.4mTV homes:          3.8m (min est)VCR homes:         1.178m (min est)Cable connections: 400,000 (min est)Cable penetration: 8.3% (min est)Dish total:        600,000 (400,000 est)Dish sales in the Czech Republic held up extremely well in 1995 despitethe continued popularity of the recently-launched commercial station TVThe trends which have recently manifested themselves in Norway's DTHindustry dominated by the Ostrava-based operator Cable Plus. Indeed,some industry sources put the number of DTH installations in thecountry in late 1995 at 600,000 - effectively a 50 per cent increase onthe previous year's total.Astra still remained popular in the Czech Republic and could bereceived with systems employing 60cm dishes almost anywhere in thecountry and typically retailed for CKr7,000 (#169). Eutelsat equipmentcost a similar amount, while motorised systems were more expensive.As in previous years, although there were no clear market-leaders bothPace and Amstrad remained popular.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  DENMARKPopulation:        5.2mTV homes:          2.266mVCR homes:         1.45mCable connections: 1.359m (incl smatv)Cable penetration: 60% (incl smatv)Dish total:        Up to 300,000 (100,000 min est)Denmark's DTH market experienced tremendous growth in 1995 and was bythe end of the year believed to number up to 300,000 installations. Ofthese, aroune two thirds were accounted for by D2 Mac receivingsystems.One reason for this increase in sales was the success of the pan-Scandisatellite venture NSD, which effectively provided Danish cable and DTHviewers with a realistic alternative to services carried by Astra.While the latter remained attractive to viewers, channels on the onedegree West platform (which included TV3) rapidly gained in popularity.The market was also given a boost by a significant fall in the cost ofequipment, with D2 Mac systems employing 70cm dishes, for instance,typically retailing from DKr2,495-3,495 (#288-404). Those capable ofreceiving both Astra and NSD services, meanwhile, cost around DKr4,000if specifically designed to do so and DKr4,500 if they combined two70cm dishes. Although Pal systems also continued to fall in price, theyremained far less popular.As in previous years, Pace was the market-leader and Triax, Nokia andBang & Olufsen were also well represented.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  ESTONIAPopulation:        1.5mTV homes:          492,000VCR homes:         26,076Cable connections: 123,000Cable penetration: 25% (max est)Dish total:        21,000 (18,000 max est)Estonia maintained its position as one of the Baltic region's leadingtelevision markets in 1995, recording significant growth in both itsterrestrial and cable industries. As in previous years, it also saw asharp rise in the number of DTH homes: although the previous year'sfigure was overestimated, the late 1995 total of 21,000 represented anincrease in real terms of 40 per cent.Astra was the most watched satellite but faced stiff competition fromEutelsat and Russia's Gorizont. Indeed, the top five satellite channelsreceived either by cable or DTH in the country were - according toNational Media Survey - Pro 7, ORT, RTL, MTV Europe and Eurosport.The typical cost of DTH equipment -which usually employed a 1.8-metreantenna and Pal receiver - was little changed at around EEK9,000 (#500)and Pace, Finlux and Nokia/Salora remained the market-leaders.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  FINLANDPopulation:        5.1mTV homes:          2.081mVCR homes:         1.352mCable connections: 749,000 (est)Cable penetration: 36%Dish total:        50,000 (30,000)The size of Finland's DTH market was revised upwards for the secondyear running, though industry sources indicated there had been littleif any increase in sales in 1995. There was, however, an importantchange in viewing habits as viewers began to switch from Astra toEutelsat's Hot Bird and the CTV package at one degree West.Besides offering attractive programming, both new services could bereceived with competitively priced equipment: systems with one-metredishes were sufficient to pick-up Hot Bird almost anywhere in thecountry and typically retailed for FM1,200-1,900 (#178-292), while theend-user cost of 70cm CTV models was FM1,900-2,900. Astra's decline inpopularity was nevertheless expected to be temporary, with severaldigital services on its forthcoming 1E satellite likely to targetScandinavian audiences.In the absence of a local manufacturing industry - Nokia having shiftedproduction of both Pal and Mac receivers to Sweden - sales of equipmentwere effectively confined to foreign-made systems. Pace and Nokia(along with its brand names Salora and Finlux) each accounted for 30per cent of the market, with several other companies the remainder.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  FRANCEPopulation:        58.1mTV homes:          20.896mVCR homes:         13.352mCable connections: 2.131mCable penetration: 10.2%Dish total:        1m (min est) (385,000 est)France's hitherto small DTH market caught up on lost time in 1995, withone industry source estimating the number of dishes in the country atthe half-year point to be at least one million. It also put total salesof equipment at 270,000 in 1994 and expected the figure to rise to350,000 in 1995.One reason for this impressive growth was demand from France's largeforeign community: Arabic, Spanish, English, Italian, German and Polish-speakers all found programming on Eutelsat - and in particular Hot Bird - increasingly attractive, and by some estimates accounted for between50 and 60 per cent of dish sales. Astra, on the other hand, wasconsidered by most of the French viewing public to be too gearedtowards English and German-language speakers, with most still plumpingfor Telecom satellites.The latter (Telecom 2A and 2B) could be received with equipment whichtypically retailed for Fr2,000 (#259), whereas Astra systems usuallycost less. As in previous years, the market-leaders included Philipsand Nokia.Although it was expected dish sales in France in 1996 would reach470,000, the effect on the market of Canal Plus's digital Astra packageremained hard to predict.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  GERMANYPopulation:        81.7mTV homes:          32.149mVCR homes:         18.968mCable connections: 15.491mCable penetration: 48.1%Dish total:        9.23m (DTH & smatv) (7.71m, max est-DTH only)Following two years of disappointing sales, dealers believed Germany'sDTH market had finally reached saturation point. Indeed, in a countrywith over 14 million cabled homes and at least nine million served byDTH or smatv, most were agreed that everyone who wanted to watchsatellite television now had the means to do so.The slowdown in dish sales was uniform throughout Germany and not - asfirst believed - confined to the more cabled, western part of thecountry. It was also reflected in the cost of equipment, with thecheapest 60cm Astra systems retailing for as little as #60-70 and dualAstra/Eutelsat models (which usually employed 85cm dishes and two LNBs)fetching #100.With DTH equipment costing so little, imports from the Far East whichhad previously made strong inroads into the market no longer had theedge. As in previous years, producers of high-quality kit such asKathrein, Technisat and Pace maintained a strong presence in thecountry.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  GREECEPopulation:        10.5mTV homes:          3.161mVCR homes:         1.58mCable connections: 1,900Cable penetration: 0.06%Dish total:        5,000 (est) (3,000)Greece's small DTH market received a welcome boost in 1995 with thelaunch of Eutelsat's Hot Bird and a fall in the cost of equipment. As aresult, there were around 5,000 systems in the country at the end ofthe year (compared to 3,000 in late 1994) and sales were buoyant.Signals from the new Eutelsat satellite - on which Eurosport was themost popular channel - could be received almost anywhere in the countrywith systems employing 80cm dishes. These usually retailed for between#160-#226, whereas those used to pick-up other satellites could costanything from #400 (1.2-metres) to #2,700 (for the most expensive three-metre model). Reception nevertheless remained a problem, with Greece'sgeographical location effectively limiting Astra viewing to Corfu andthe north, and requiring 1.8-metre systems to watch Intelsat in Creteand western parts of the country.While there was still no market-leader, equipment supplied by Pace,Amstrad and Echostar remained popular. Drake, Hirschmann and Kathrein,however, continued to dominate sales of more expensive models.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  HUNGARYPopulation:        10.2mTV homes:          3.8mVCR homes:         1.596mCable connections: 1.52mCable penetration: 40%Dish total:        400,000 (max est) (190,000)Previous estimates of the size of Hungary's DTH market appeared to havebeen incorrect, with industry sources believing the number of dishes inthe country in late 1995 to be up to 400,000. Although this was almostdouble the previous year's total, it was widely felt there had beenlittle if any growth in the market during the period.There was also an acceptance that the country's television industry wason the threshold of great change: a long-awaited broadcasting billseemed imminent and was likely to be followed by the launch of anational commercial television service. How this would affect its DTHand cable industries - the latter being one of the largest in centraland eastern Europe - remained far from clear.The non-terrestrial sector had nevertheless been given a boost duringthe previous year by the launch of MultiChoice Hungary. In late 1995subscribers could receive the basic package - upon payment of Fts35,000-45,000 (#167-215) for hardware and a connection fee of Fts5,200 - forFts29,990 a month. Both Astra and Eutelsat programming remained popularin the country, with systems employing 0.9 to three-metre dishesranging in price from #71-#390. Although there were no clear market-leaders, equipment produced by several companies, including Pace,Amstrad, Neuhaus, Radix and Echostar, continued to sell well.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  ICELANDPopulation:        300,000TV homes:          93,595VCR homes:         49,500 (est)Cable connections: 1,216 (min est)Cable penetration: 1.3%Dish total:        3,000 (max est) (2,500)The number of dishes in Iceland grew steadily in 1995 and at the end ofthe year stood at around 3,000. Although this represented an impressiveincrease of up to 20 per cent on the previous year's total, industrysources were far from optimistic as to the future.The key to any further growth in the market rested firmly withprogramming: while the introduction of microwave relays of foreignchannels by Stod 2 had failed to dampen sales of DTH equipment and theprospect of the PTT offering cable services still seemed distant, mostpeople felt the (legal) viewing choice on offer was limited.Nor was their view likely to be altered by the cost of equipment in amarket in which - despite the presence of such companies as Pace andEchostar - there was still no dominant supplier. Indeed, 1995 sawtypical 1.2-metre Astra systems with IRDs fall in price by IKr5,000(#49) from IKr60,000 to IKr55,000, while 1.8-metre systems normallyused to receive such channels as CNN and (illegally) Sky Sports alsodropped in price by a similar amount to IKr110,000. Neither had theeffect of raising the total annual sales beyond 300 to 500installations.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  IRELANDPopulation:        3.6mTV homes:          1.056mVCR homes:         623,040Cable connections: 401,280Cable penetration: 38%Dish total:        66,000 (min est) (60,000)Ireland's DTH market shrugged off high cable penetration, widespreadMMDS distribution and the illegal retransmission of foreign channels torecord significant growth for the second year running. This was in partdue to a large influx of illegally-imported equipment and thewidespread use of pirate cards.Viewing patterns were little altered, however, with Astra programmingby far the most popular and neither Eutelsat or Intelsat being able tosecure a large audience. The cost of equipment was also little changedon 1994: the cheapest Astra models with 80cm dishes typically retailedfor IR#199 (#194.6), while more expensive systems could fetch up toIR#350.Pace remained the market-leader, with several other manufacturersincluding Lenson Heath and Grundig represented.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  ISRAELPopulation:        5.5mTV homes:          1.2mVCR homes:         819,600Cable connections: 840,000 (min est)Cable penetration: 70% (min est)Dish total:        5,000 (5,000 max est)Israel's cable industry had another highly successful year in 1995,with the number of connected homes rising to over 840,000 (effectively70 per cent penetration). Most were offered six Hebrew-languagechannels, over 25 foreign services and home shopping.Yet despite this, the country's small DTH market not only held its ownbut recorded an increase in sales. Industry sources believed itnumbered around 5,000 systems in late 1995: most belonged to Arabsresident in the Occupied Territories or Israel proper and were used toreceive programming via Eutelsat, Asiasat and Arabsat, with thelatter's Arab Radio and Television (ART) being especially popular.Equipment employing 0.9-metre dishes typically retailed for NS1,500(#314), while 1.1-metre systems cost an additional NS200 and motorisedunits could fetch up to NS3,500. All prices included both VAT andinstallation. As in previous years, Pace remained the clear market-leader at the medium-to-high end of the market and no single companydominated sales of lower-priced equipment.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  ITALYPopulation:        57.7mTV homes:          20.222mVCR homes:         9.726mCable connections: negligibleCable penetration: negligibleDish total:        600,000 (est) (120,000 min est)Italy's DTH market grew significantly for the second year running in1995, with some industry sources putting the number of dishes in thecountry at up to 600,000. It also looked forward to a period of furthergrowth following the 1996 launch of Hot Bird 2 - which will boost salesin southern parts of the country by allowing reception with 85cm dishes- and Telepiu's move onto satellite.Astra and Eutelsat's Hot Bird were the most watched satellites in thecountry at the end of the year and could usually be received with 85cmsystems, which ranged in price from between Lire300,000-550,000 (#119-219) for single and Lire450,000-700,000 for double feeds. 1.2-metremotorised units, however, could fetch anything up to Lire2.8 million.As in previous years, the principal suppliers of DTH equipment includedNokia, Pace, Fracarro, Echostar and Emmesse.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  LATVIAPopulation:        2.5mTV homes:          1.23mVCR homes:         86,100Cable connections: 246,000Cable penetration: 20%Dish total:        24,600 (N/A)No accurate figure for the total number of dishes in Latvia in late1995 was available,  though some industry sources estimated there couldbe almost 25,000, giving a penetration rate of almost two per cent.What was clear, however, was that growth in the industry continued tobe held back by the country's expanding terrestrial sector and -perhaps more importantly - the success of the Riga-based MMDS serviceBaltcom. Backed by the US company International Telecell Inc (ITI) andlocal interests, it offered at least 8,000 subscribers in the city andenvirons 24 channels in three packages.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  LITHUANIAPopulation:        3.7mTV homes:          1.459m (max est)VCR homes:         364,750Cable connections: 70,000 (max est)Cable penetration: 4.8% (max est)Dish total:        N/A (265,000)Some industry sources believed the previous year's total of 265,000 tobe an overestimate. With continued expansion of terrestrial servicesand a cable industry estimated to number up to 70,000 connections,however, there was undoubtedly general growth in the country'stelevision market and, most probably, dish sales, though no reliablefigure was available.While programming carried by Astra and Intelsat remained popular,Eutelsat's Hot Bird made viewing of satellite channels financially moreaccessible to the public and was likely to eventually result in thesame growth in the DTH industry as in the neighbouring RussianFederation.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  LUXEMBOURGPopulation:        400,000TV homes:          143,205VCR homes:         N/ACable connections: 130,459Cable penetration: 91.1%Dish total:        3,000 (est) (2,000)Luxembourg's DTH market continued to expand in 1995, though industrysources believed the territory's high cable penetration was likely tolimit further growth for the foreseeable future.As in previous years, programming supplied by Astra - whose operatorSES is based in the Grand Duchy - continued to dominate viewing andcould be received with equipment which retailed for as little asFLux4,000 (#87). More expensive motorised systems, on the other hand,could be bought from around FLux17,500. While Alfa J Weirich Sarremained the country's only DTH manufacturer, several foreign companiesincluding Grundig were strongly represented in the local market.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  NETHERLANDSPopulation:        15.5mTV homes:          6.4mVCR homes:         4.096mCable connections: 5.824mCable penetration: 91%Dish total:        280,000 (250,000)Although the launch of several new channels on satellite, includingSBS6, TV10 Gold and a revamped Veronica, made 1995 an eventful year forDutch broadcasting, sales of DTH equipment remained sluggish due to thecountry's already high cable penetration. Moreover, they were notexpected to increase significantly in the near future despite Nethold'splans to target the country with digital pay-per-view.The Netherlands' large Turkish and Moroccan immigrant communitiescontinued to account for most low-cost equipment sales, with manymodels being used to receive channels carried by Eutelsat and - to alesser extent - Arabsat and Intelsat. The cheapest Astra and Eutelsatmodels usually employed 60-80cm dishes and typically retailed forGld200-300 (#79-119). While Pace remained the market-leader, Amstradand Echostar both had a significant market share and Philips continuedto enjoy a degree of success.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  NORWAYPopulation:        4.3mTV homes:          1.77mVCR homes:         867,300Cable connections: 672,600Cable penetration: 38%Dish total:        220,000 (200,000)The trends which have recently manifested themselves in Norway's DTHmarket - namely a switch from motorised to fixed systems and asignificant fall in prices - continued almost unabated in 1995. Thelatter was to some degree spurred on by the success of the one degreeWest package, which prompted MultiChoice to enter into an agreementwith Pace that resulted in hardware becoming available to the paychannel's subscribers for as little as NKr3,000 (#304). This costeventually became the norm for multi-Mac equipment and represented a 66per cent reduction on 1994 price levels.Although Nokia remained the market-leader, Pace's deal with FilmNetstrengthened its presence in the country and several other companies,including Philips, remained well represented. The local manufacturersStop and Tantec, however, remained largely on the sidelines.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  POLANDPopulation:        38.6mTV homes:          11.88mVCR homes:         5.821m (min est)Cable connections: 1.497m (est)Cable penetration: 12.6 (est)Dish total:        1.7m (max est) (1.5m max est)While Poland maintained its position as Europe's third largest DTHmarket in 1995, it continued to be troubled by a development that tookplace in February of the previous year. The event in question was thegovernment's decision to impose a 10 per cent 'luxury tax' on allPolish-made systems (15 per cent on imports) and inadvertently plungethe whole local industry into a crisis. Besides creating a black marketthat accounted for at least 70 per cent of all DTH equipment sold inthe country, its action led to a fall in the number of official dealersand left those remaining uncertain about their future.Their predicament was clearly borne out by the cost of equipment, withthe cheapest Astra systems sold - typically for around Zl440 (#113.4) -being equivalent in price to illegally-imported Pace models.Yet while the market continued to grow, the halcyon days of the early1990s were clearly over: more choice of local-language programming ledto Astra gradually losing viewers to terrestrial services and - perhapsmore significantly - Eutelsat. Indeed, at the end of the yearEutelsat's share of the market (thanks largely to Hot Bird) had risento 10 per cent and industry sources predicted it could reach 50 percent if more Polish-language channels became available.With Pace equipment still popular at the higher price end of themarket, and no one supplier dominating sales of cheaper models, thetime seemed right for a local company to enter the fray.Poznan-based Astra-TV took the plunge by producing the country's firstintegrated satellite receiver-positioner and - following the launch ofother new products - aimed to eventually capture up to 70 per cent ofthe local market.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  PORTUGALPopulation:        9.9mTV homes:          2.997mVCR homes:         1.546mCable connections: negligibleCable penetration: negligibleDish total:        100,000 (min est) (100,000)There was little agreement on the fortunes of Portugal's DTH market in1995, with some dealers believing it had finally turned the cornerafter bearing the brunt of the country's economic recession and othersfeeling it was still far from out of the woods. What was clear,however, was that it faced growing competition from both theterrestrial sector and newly-emerging cable industry.Although Astra remained popular, it too faced competition fromEutelsat's Hot Bird, which, arguably, offered Portuguese viewers moreinteresting programming. Both could be received with 85cm systemscosting as little as Esc20,000 (#85), though more typically Esc50,000.Combined Eutelsat/Astra models employed 1.1-metre dishes and could bebought for a little extra.As in previous years, Antel and Famavel remained the leading localmanufacturers, while the largest distributors included Cintra & Leal,Contera, Televes, Grundig, Prosat and TV Babo.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  ROMANIAPopulation:        22.7mTV homes:          7.277mVCR homes:         1.164m (min est)Cable connections: 1.797mCable penetration: 24.7% (max est)Dish total:        300,000 (est) (300,000 max est)Although Romanian dealers were unable to provide a figure for the totalnumber of DTH installations in the country in late 1995,  it was likelyto be only slightly higher than the previous year's maximum estimate of300,000. While Hot Bird had undoubtedly had a positive impact on themarket, the impressive growth which followed the overthrow ofCeausescu's regime in 1989 had long ended and domestic televisionservices were transformed beyond all recognition. Indeed, besideshaving a vibrant terrestrial sector served by a growing number of localcommercial stations, the country had one of the largest cableindustries in the whole of central and eastern Europe, with someestimates putting the number of connections at up to 1.8 million.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  SERBIA & MONTENEGROPopulation:        10.8mTV homes:          2m (min est)VCR homes:         1.6m (min est)Cable connections: 150,000 (max est)Cable penetration: 7.5% (max est)Dish total:        200,000 (135,000)Serbia and Montenegro's DTH market showed further signs of growth in1995 and at the end of the year stood at around 200,000 installations.Although Astra programming remained extremely popular, Eutelsat's HotBird was watched by a significant number of viewers and both Intelsatand Turksat also had large followings.The cheapest Astra models (which accounted for up to 80 per cent of themarket) retailed for as little as DM250-300 (#112-135), while Hot Birdsystems (some 20 per cent of sales) were motorised and fetched DM600-700. Although as in previous years there was no overall market-leader,Neuhausat, Teletronik, Telemax and Protek were well represented insales of receivers and Cambridge of LNBs.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  SLOVAKIAPopulation:        5.4mTV homes:          1.93mVCR homes:         455,480Cable connections: 353,000 (est)Cable penetration: 18.3% (est)Dish total:        100,000 (est) (100,000 max est)Slovakia's television industry has been slower to develop than that ofmost other former communist countries in central and eastern Europe,but the recent award of a national commercial licence is likely to havea positive effect on its future.In the absence of such a service, however, both the country's cable andsatellite industries have prospered and in late 1995 there were atleast 350,000 cable connections and 100,000 DTH homes. The latter couldreceive both Astra and Eutelsat programming (including Hot Bird) usingequipment which typically retailed for SKr10-11,000 (#214-236).While there were still no market-leaders, systems including receiverssupplied by Pace were increasingly favoured.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  SLOVENIAPopulation:        2mTV homes:          650,000VCR homes:         59,800 (min est)Cable connections: 260,000 (min est)Cable penetration: 40% (min est)Dish total:        150,000 (50,000)Although the previous year's figure for the total number of dishes inSlovenia appeared to be an underestimate, most industry sources feltthe market had finally reached saturation point. Indeed, hampered by arapidly expanding cable and terrestrial sector, along with high dutiesand a tide of illegally-imported equipment, it was likely to remain inthe doldrums for some time to come.With the number of installations believed to be up to 150,000, however,Slovenia could still boast an impressive satellite penetration rate ofsome 23 per cent. Astra remained popular and could be received with 80-85cm equipment which - if bought on the black market - retailed for aslittle as DM280 (#126), rising to DM350 including installation in thecase of legal low-cost models. Eutelsat systems also employed 85cmdishes and cost slightly more, while Italian channels on Intelsat couldbe received with motorised 1.2-metre systems typically costing aroundDM1,300.While there was still no market-leader, equipment supplied by Pace,Echostar and Technisat continued to sell well.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  SPAINPopulation:        39.1mTV homes:          11.721mVCR homes:         6.751mCable connections: 1.172mCable penetration: 10%Dish total:        225,000 (min est) (210,000 max est)1995 was a year of mixed fortunes for the Spanish DTH market. On theone hand it could reflect on the success of Astra's Canalsatelitepackage - which thanks to aggressive marketing passed the 25,000subscriber mark - and look forward to Hispasat's plans to launch astring of digital services in the near future. On the other, it had toface up to the abysmal failure of the Cotelsat subscriber managementconsortium, which managed to secure only 4,000 subscribers for its four-channel Hispasat package before collapsing in the summer.Although it was hoped a local DTH market would eventually emerge, salesof equipment were still largely confined to the country's largeexpatriate community. Many continued to favour programming on Astra,which could be received with 60cm systems in the north, rising to 80cmin the central region and 1.5-metres in the south, and - due to strongcompetition - retailed for as little as Ptas49,000 (#254) in such townsas Malaga, though up to Ptas100,000 in places with fewer foreignresidents. Scandinavians, however, generally opted to watch a widervariety of programming, including channels carried by the new, highly-successful one degree West satellite.While there was still no market-leader, in the country, Pace andseveral minor brand names were all well represented.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  SWEDENPopulation:        8.9mTV homes:          3.983mVCR homes:         2.87mCable connections: 1.852mCable penetration: 46.5%Dish total:        475,000 (max est) (385,000)Sales of DTH equipment remained strong in Sweden in 1995 despite thecountry's high cable and smatv penetration. They were neverthelessinfluenced by a train of events that got under way in August 1994 withthe launch of the Sirius package.Offering four Pal channels (TV3, TV4, TV6 and ZTV) in-the-clear, theservices provided a boost for sales of compatible equipment until anannouncement in mid-1995 which revealed that they would all soon beencrypted. This effectively spelt the end of stand-alone Pal receptionequipment market in Sweden and by late 1995 sales were almost entirelyconfined to Mac systems.Costs were little changed on 1994, however, with standard D2 Macequipment retailing for around SKr4,000 (#381) including VAT. Morepopular Nordic package systems (one degree West and five degrees East)including a 70cm dish and double LNB, however, fetched between SKr4,500-5,000.Figures released by the Swedish Association of Antenna Suppliers (CANT)indicated that Finnish manufacturer Nokia and its associate companieshad a market share of up to 41 per cent. Other suppliers which werestrongly represented in the Swedish marketplace included Triax,Amstrad, Philips and Pace.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  SWITZERLANDPopulation:        7mTV homes:          2.581mVCR homes:         1.677mCable connections: 2.039mCable penetration: 79%Dish total:        100,000 (min est) (40,000)Most industry sources felt Switzerland's DTH market was larger thanpreviously believed - with some estimates putting the total number ofdishes in the country at up to 120,000 - but they could not agree onwhether it was growing or relatively static.Those serving the French-speaking community - effectively 40 per centof the population - nevertheless had some cause for optimism: besidesbeing able to reflect on the success of Telecom, they could lookforward to the launch of Canal Plus on Astra in early 1996.Yet, while Eutelsat also had a large following (especially among thecountry's expatriate communities), Astra channels remained the mostpopular and could be received with 80cm systems which retailed for atleast SFr300 (#168). More expensive systems, however, could costviewers up to SFr1,200.In the absence of a local production industry, several foreigncompanies were well represented in Switzerland's DTH market. Theyincluded Pace, Echostar and Technisat.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  TURKEYPopulation:        61.4mTV homes:          15mVCR homes:         1.485mCable connections: 735,000Cable penetration: 4.9%Dish total:        160,000 (min est) (80,000)Sales of DTH systems rose significantly in Turkey in 1995 and towardsthe end of the year were peaking at around 100,000 a month. Althoughthey were largely confined to rural areas and coincided with theincreased seasonal buying power of the local population, they alsopointed to a number of important developments in the Turkish market.The most important of these was undoubtedly the rising popularity ofTurksat, which offered viewers over 10 Turkish-language channels,including the pay-TV service Cine 5. Both these and Eutelsat's Turkishservices attracted a growing audience outside the main cities, whichwere already served by numerous terrestrial broadcasters.The cost of equipment, though little changed on 1994, also attractedbuyers from Syria, Iraq and Iran who subsequently supplied the DTHmarkets of their countries. The cheapest Turksat equipment employed a60cm dish and usually retailed for around $200 (including cable andinstallation), while Hot Bird (90cm/1.2-metre) and general Eutelsat(1.2/1.5-metre) systems cost more.Cost was in fact the determining factor and as a result there was noclear market-leader. However, receivers produced in the Far East byGalaxy and Calibre sold well, while Raster and Laser Merih remainedamong the country's own leading dish manufacturers.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DTH SURVEY:  UKPopulation:        58.6mTV homes:          22.402mVCR homes:         16.488mCable connections: 3.181m (incl smatv)cable penetration: 14.2% (incl smatv)Dish total:        3.504m (3m)The UK's DTH market ended 1995 on a strong note, with figures releasedby Continental Research indicating that the number of installations inthe country had risen to over 3.5 million - effectively a 17 per centincrease on the previous year's total.This welcome upturn in what was, despite a recent slowdown in sales,Europe's second largest DTH market could largely be put down to thehighly successful marketing techniques employed by BSkyB. While one inthree UK sales were admittedly to replace existing systems, viewerscould buy a receiver and dish for as little as #99 plus #30installation (the former normally cost between #150-250) providing theyagreed to subscribe to the whole Sky package - including premium movieand sports channels - for #24.99 a month. As a further incentive, theywere also given access to free sports and movies channels for sixmonths after signing up.The UK market was also buoyed by the launch of several new channelsinto Sky's 'basic' Multi-Channels tier. The introduction of Sci-Fichannel, The History Channel, Sky Sports Gold, Paramount TV andEuropean Business News (EBN) to the Astra-delivered package broughtwith it an increase from #9.99 per month to #10.99, but this didn'tseem to deter the market. New premium services Playboy, The RacingChannel and The Disney Channel, which was offered free to subscribersto Sky's film channels, also created extra publicity and marketingsupport for the UK's main 'dish-driver.'While Pace remained the market-leader, it faced strong competition fromseveral other companies, including Grundig Satellite Communications.The latter had enjoyed considerable success since its launch in early1994, while Amstrad, which at one time was the leading player in theindustry, continued to experience a downturn in its fortunes.While the cost of analogue DTH equipment was significantly down onprevious years, the predicted price of digital receivers  - a hefty#400-500 - was seen as a factor in BSkyB's decision to delay theintroduction of digital satellite television services, probably untillate 1996 or 1997.Total 1995 dishes: 20.5m (1994 total: 16.8m)Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 199647 VARIETIESBy applying the logic of digital to analogue Astra transponder 47,reports Julian Clover, Sky has been improving its standing inContinental Research's Star ReportJust how many channels is it possible to squeeze into a singletransponder? This is not a question involving bit rates for theimminent digital era, but one which remains firmly in the analoguedomain, at least as far as Sky is concerned.Astra transponder 47 is home to a fistful of Sky television services;Sky Soap, Sky Travel, The History Channel, Sci-Fi Channel, Sky SportsGold, Sky Sports 2 and the 'non-aligned' Christian Channel. All areproudly described by Sky as 'channels,' though only Sky Sports 2 is on-air for a period longer than 16 hours - and that for only twoconsecutive days. Some of these 'programme streams' are either owned orcontrolled by BSkyB, while others, such as Sci-Fi, are merely sittingtenants, albeit for only several hours at a time.However, the sum of these various parts amounts to a more thanrespectable, if variable product. The popularity of Sky Sports 2, forinstance, rests largely on whether its full-time sister channel isscreening an event which requires its normal football coverage to beshunted across. And as BSkyB racks up the rights to more and moreevents in the sporting calendar - Endsleigh league football has becomethe latest - then Sports 2 will enjoy a greater share of therecognition.Sports though isn't the only audience-grabber on transponder 47; co-habitor Sci-Fi has been performing remarkably well for a channel whichhas only nine weekly hours of prime-time. A round-the-clock version isavailable  for cable viewers only via Eutelsat, but this is not auditedby Continental Research's Star Report.Sci-Fi Channel's opening programme, Inside Space, ranks ninth in thelist of top-rated transponder 47 programmes, while its first big movie,Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan, came in at fifth position, despitehaving been aired on several occasions by terrestrial television. Theaudience level for Khan and, to a lesser extent, Alien are on a parwith movies screened by UK Gold - which, arguably, has the best crop ofmovies of any basic channel.The History Channel also has an audience to be proud of; at 109,000 itstop-rated programme would not look out of place in The DiscoveryChannel's top 10, which begs the question what could it achieve if itstransmission hours were extended beyond 19.00?Outside of the all-singing, all-dancing transponder 47, the othernewcomers to Sky's tiers have enjoyed a mixed response. Bravo's noon-to-midnight cult television service is now sandwiched between businessnews channel EBN (06.00-12.00) and Playboy channel (00.00-04.00).EBN's audience is hard to quantify; by its very nature most of itsviewing takes place in City dealing rooms. But it also has a 24-hourfeed on Eutelsat Hot Bird 1, allowing direct-to-home viewing and, moreimportantly cable retransmission, which is not necessarily included inBravo's viewing combo. The rows of zeros notched up by EBN during itsdaily Astra transmission hours also belies an upswing in the number ofABC1 viewers to Bravo's Astra transponder.Viewing Shares By Daypart                   Bravo     Sky/Tp.47Adults 16+0600-0930          0.0       1.20930-1330          0.0       1.61330-1730          0.8       2.31730-2000          1.2       2.12000-0100          0.7       1.30100-0600          0.9       0.9Children 4-150600-0930          0.0       0.00930-1330          0.0       1.01330-1730          0.0       0.91730-2000          0.3       0.92000-0100          0.4       0.70100-0600          0.5       0.5Channels sharing with Bravo are The Playboy Channel (00.00-04.00)and EBN (06.00-12.00) dailyChannels occupy irregular timeslots on transponder 47 making directcomparisons between programmes impossibleSource: Barb/Continental Research Star ReportSky (Other) Channels/Transponder 47Pos.  Programme                Channel          Date    Time  Aud                                                              (000s) 1    Football                 Sky Sports 2     Nov 19  1600  824 2    Scottish Football        Sky Sports 2     Nov 19  1800  635 3    Super Sunday Preview     Sky Sports 2     Nov 19  1500  252 4    Goals On Sunday          Sky Sports 2     Nov 19  1100  175 5    Star Trek II/Khan        Sci-Fi Channel   Nov 1   2000  152 6    Golf                     Sky Sports 2     Nov 5   2000  114 7    Biography                History Channel  Nov 8   1800  109 8    Alien-Movie              Sci-Fi Channel   Nov 8   2000   86 9    Inside Space             Sci-Fi Channel   Nov 1   1904   8210    World Cup Classic        Sky Sports Gold  Nov 1   2230   8211    Big League               Sky Sports 2     Nov 19  1900   8012    Sky Sports Gold          Sky Sports Gold  Nov 1   2200   7713    History Alive            History Channel  Nov 3   1700   7414    Soccer Extra             Sky Sports 2     Nov 5   1701   7215    Houdini                  History Channel  Nov 7   1758   6616    Rugby Union              Sky Sports 2     Nov 4   1400   6617    Soccer AM                Sky Sports 2     Nov 11   701   6618    World Cup Golf           Sky Sports 2     Nov 11  1800   6419    Bowling                  Sky Sports 2     Nov 12  1401   6320    Raw                      Sky Sports 2     Nov 11  1100   5821    R. Bradbury Theatre      Sci-Fi Channel   Nov 7   1930   5722    Mysteries/Miracles       Sci-Fi Channel   Nov 6   1902   5623    Our Century              History Channel  Nov 10  1601   5624    On Top Of The World      Sky Travel       Nov 13  1431   5525    Lost Ark                 Histroy Channel  Nov 7   1659   54Source: Barb/Continental ResearchCopyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CAPE BLAZE HITS DSTV ROLL-OUTA SERIOUS fire at the Cape Town factory producing Panasonic MPEG-2/DVBreceivers for MultiChoice's recently-launched DSTV service has worsenedan already severe shortage of boxes.The fire, started by an electrical fault, caused R30 million (#5.31million) worth of damage, destroying the production line from whichPanasonic was hoping to deliver 35,000 digital boxes before the end ofthe year.According to MultiChoice general manager, marketing, Cobus Scholtz,Panasonic is hoping to restore full production by the end of January:but he confirmed the fire had "severely affected" early roll-outtargets for the 16-channel DTH service.Although Pace has pledged to step-up deliveries to supply "20-25,000"DSTV receivers before Christmas, Scholtz said, "We had hoped to havethat many in the market right now." To date, he said, some 5,500 Paceunits had been delivered, along with "two to three thousand" fromPanasonic. Because of the shortages, MultiChoice is in talks with theconsortium launching a German-language digital package for Africa, witha view to joint marketing of a Grundig digital IRD suitable for bothservices. Rumours that Nokia boxes might also be shipped in to relievethe crisis were dismissed: "Not true," Scholtz said, "not yet."Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996IRD SHORTAGES HIT UK TRADEDESPITE Pace's efforts to boost output of analogue IRDs, the UK tradereported serious shortages continuing into the peak pre-Christmas salesseason.Pace said it had pulled out all the stops to up volume, with output ofanalogue IRDs 30 per cent up on the same period last year. As a short-term measure it resumed production of the old PRD800 receiver, withscarcity of essential silicon the chief factor limiting MSS rangeoutput.The knock-on effect has left other manufacturers struggling to keep upwith demand. At least one brand - Maspro - sold out completely, with mdChris Lack explaining that the last batch of Maspro ST8 MkII IRDs hadgone by mid-November: the stock was supposed to last until March.Distributor Satellite Solutions' md Grant Lester reported "asignificant shortage... I've got five times more orders than stock.Everything is pre-sold."  Grundig's Keith Armour confirmed that under-supply was still a problem in the first weeks of December: "We've metall our orders, but the problem is that people are looking to us tofill the gap in the pipeline," he said. "The market's doing better thanany of us expected. Quarter Four '95 is up on '94 and '93 - it's thebest in the last three years."Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PACE DEALERS GO FOR GOLDPACE is backing the debut of digital satellite television in the FarEast and Middle East with the launch of the Pace Gold Club. The conceptwill provide dealers with a complete service support and marketingpackage with the goal of developing maximum market penetration in theshortest possible time. The Gold Club will be extended to other areasincluding Europe as digital television services become established.Leading retailers will also qualify for status as a Diamond Dealer,providing they meet  minimum criteria. Qualifying dealers will be givenpreferential pricing and staff training programmes covering softwarecosts and smart card authorisation.All orders and transactions will be made direct to Pace headquarters inSaltaire through a modem link, providing accurate information on stockavailability.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SAGEM, S-A, GI THAI UTV DEALSFRENCH manufacturer Sagem is to supply a complete MPEG-2/DVB-compatibledigital compression and access control system to Thai cable operatorUTV. Scientific Atlanta, meanwhile, is providing UTV with its 8603analogue two-way set-top model, complete with on-screen graphics andimpulse pay-per-view capability. Additional equipment is to be providedby General Instrument.The equipment will be used in a soon-to-be operational digitalcompression system, which will broadcast by satellite 10 channelsdirect to cable headends.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BT OPENS UK UPLINK FOR PAS-4BT HAS inaugurated a new uplink site at Martlesham, Suffolk to uplinkservices to the PAS-4 satellite. "The PAS-4 look angle is so low so youhave to go east as far as you can," explained head of broadcastservices John Swingewood. "The best site we had was our research centreat Martlesham Heath, where the original Sky uplink was sited."BT has installed 16 and 13-metre antennas, one for C-Band and the otherfor Ku-Band at a cost of over #3 million. "We don't spend that kind ofmoney unless we are confident that there is a market," said Swingewood.The facility will be used for coverage of Asia and India with bothinbound and outbound traffic.The service will be jointly marketed by BT and PanAmSat, who alreadymarket services together with their third partner, WashingtonInternational Teleport, including a 6MBit space segment on PAS-1.The most likely first clients for the service are MultiChoice, Viacom(for MTV and other services) and ART for its proposed services to theregion. BT is already transmitting backhaul services to PAS-4 for theMultiChoice package in South Africa. Seven originate at Madley, wherethey are taken from existing satellites, while the remaining seven aredelivered from the BT Tower in central London.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ORBIT BOOKS INTO EUROPEORBIT has booked three transponders on Intelsat 702 to allow small-dishreception of its digital DTH pay-package across western Europe andNorth Africa.Orbit says the new capacity, which will fire up early in 1996, willenable viewers from London to Algiers to access its channels via 80cmdishes, giving the same level of service as provided to Middle Easternterritories via Intelsat 704.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996LEBANESE JOIN ARABSAT 2AFUTURE Vision - the Lebanese broadcaster owned by billionaire primeminister Rafiq Hariri - as well as Bahrain TV - have each booked a high-power Ku-Band transponder on Arabsat 2A, the first of the second-generation Aerospatiale craft scheduled for launch in July 1996.In the interim, Future is expected to use a transponder on Arabsat 1DR- two years after the Lebanese channel first went onto satellite, onlyto be removed a few weeks later as a result of licensing problems.Arabsat 2A, to be located at 26 degrees East, and its follow-up, 2B(destined for 30.5 degrees East after a May 1997 launch) will eachcarry 12 Ku-Band and 22 C-Band transponders. With domestic and regionaldemand for the satellites building up, Arabsat is conducting afeasibility study for a third new satellite.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996THOMSON ANTI OPEN ACCESS DVBTHOMSON, first-year sole supplier of digital IRDs to DirecTv, sees asimilar pattern of exclusive deals driving the European market.Delivering this year's Royal Television Society Shoenberg lecture inLondon, Thomson research director David Brooks warned would-be digitalbroadcasters that manufacturers would not be willing to bear the risksof launching open-standard DVB boxes into the marketplace.Exclusive or limited-supplier deals, such as those made by Canal Plusin France, would be "the only way to ensure a return on investments,"he said. With a million DSS sales clocked up, a new order for threemillion MMDS digital set-tops from the US Tele-TV consortium, plus aone-year exclusive window for Galaxy Latin America's digital IRDs,Thomson has got further than most of its rivals.Brooks believed that set-top-boxes would dominate the digital TV marketfor several years, rather than integrated digital TV sets. "It's clearthe set-top-box offers the fastest way into the market," he said."Access control is the key issue here - it would be very difficult tointegrate a proprietary system into the TV set, in commercial terms."Full integration would come, but only after interface requirements hadbeen fully standardised, and large (40-inch-plus) plasma displaytechnology had been brought to the market. He felt the DVB-proposed"PCMCIA-like" common interface was "not the ideal solution,"particularly in the "hostile environment" of the TV set. Analternative, he added, could soon be available in the shape of "moresophisticated smart cards" which would be able to cope with the fullMPEG-2 bitstream.Terrestrial barely figures in Brooks' forecasts for European DVB marketgrowth, with satellite dominating for at least the first three years.Brooks' forecasts (see table) were based on market projections forFrance, Germany, UK, Benelux, Scandinavia and Italy.Thomson Digital Projections         Total     DTH       Cable     Terrestrial         (000's)   (%)       (%)       (%)1996     800       60        40        01997     1.5m      55        44        11998     2.4m      54        44        2Source: ThomsonCopyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PACE SCOOPS CHINA SET-TOP DEALPACE Micro Technology has won an order to supply three million  set-topdecoders to cable operators in China. The UK manufacturer will besupplying the units to Guangdong Catv, a provincial cable operator,over a three-year period.Located on the Chinese border with Hong Kong, Guangdong Catv negotiatedthe deal also on behalf of four other Chinese networks in the 66million homes region, taking in the six million homes in the capital,Guangzhou. The first 60,000 units, incorporating News Datacom'sNewsCrypt conditional access, will be delivered by June 1996.Subsequent production of the units will be carried out by aPace/Guangdong joint venture company in China.According to Pace estimates, China has almost 40 million cable homesrepresenting penetration of around 13 per cent of total households. Thesystems themselves are small, with around 12,000, mainly low-capacitynetworks carrying between eight and 20 channels. These typicallyinclude the local terrestrial and government channels, but sometimes asmany as four channels from Star TV. By 2005 as many as 130 millionhomes are expected to be connected. This is against the background of anationwide satellite dish ban.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BARCO SELLS ROSA TO GUANGDONGBELGIAN cable equipment manufacturer Barco has sold its Rosa CatvManagement System and the Pulsar TV modulator to China. The productsare destined for the Guangdong Province Catv system. The Rosa system,which has also been sold to operators in Taiwan and Australia, is setto be operational across 40 headends in Guangdong Province by the endof March 1996.Rosa allows fully automated monitoring and control of headends througha PC interface and can be operated from thousands of miles away. Thesystem continuously checks the performance of the headend and in theevent of a fault can switch to back-up modulators based on pre-setparameters.Pulsar is a microprocessor controlled TV modulator featuring its ownremote monitoring capabilities and Barco's unique concept of automaticalignment to catv headends.According to division manager, broadcast and cable products, JosVancoppernolle, Asia now represents 20 per cent of Barco's business.There are regular sales of fibre-optic and headend equipment and,according to Vancoppernolle, plenty of interest in Rosa.Many Barco products already have the capability to work with Chinesegraphics, and Mandarin software for Rosa is also being introduced.Vancoppernolle said the investment for this could be recouped in aslittle as six months.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CLI HANDED STATMUX PATENTCompression Labs Inc (CLI) has patented its statistical multiplexingtechnology, StatMux, which has been developed as part of  its'Magnitude' MPEG-2 encoding system.CLI says Magnitude is the only MPEG-2 encoder operating in "a majormulti-channel environment" with this capability.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DRAKE LAUNCHES GLOBAL IRDSR L DRAKE has launched its first IRDs, the ESR800 XT and the ESR2000XTmulti-standard, multi-voltage version. Both are engineered to accept arange of decoder modules including VideoCrypt and D2 Mac Eurocrypt, andincorporating a card-reader accessed from the front panel. TheESR2000XT offers Pal/NTSC compatibility, and has dual smart cardreaders.The receiver section offers variable threshold extension to less than3dB, programmable for customised settings for different regions of theworld. It also allows programmable audio threshold extension, withWegener-compatible noise reduction and companding circuitry adjustableto market conditions.The ESR800XT has 800 programmable channel memory, each with individualvideo/audio and antenna setting, plus 400 favourite channels. Its bigbrother offers a useful 2,000 programmable channels, 400 favourites,and can  track inclined orbit satellites using an optional IOA600module.Both models offer six-language on-screen display option, includingPortuguese and Arabic, which as product manager Dan Albrecht notes,"greatly increases the usability of our products in many regions of theworld."Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ECHOSTAR DIGITAL BOX UNVEILEDWITH the launch of the Echostar 1 satellite from the Chinese Long Marchrocket due on December 28, the US company displayed its first digitalsatellite receiver at Hong Kong's Cable & Satellite Asia show inDecember.The MPEG-2-compatible receiver includes conditional access provided byNagra Plus of Switzerland. Digital encoding is supplied by Divicom.Programme choice is made through a sophisticated EPG. "We've tried tomake it as simple as possible, some other brands make it quitedifficult to get from their menu back into the programming, you've gotto go through a lot of gyrations. We do it in one button," saysEchostar's Peter Knowles.The utilities menu includes an aid to align the dish towards thecorrect satellite. If the subscriber enters his zip code then thereceiver will automatically display the correct azimuth and elevationangles for anywhere within the US. There is also a field strengthindicator, changing colour to green when the Echostar satellite isfound. Diagnostic features help installers talk through problems on thetelephone without the need to make house calls. Smart cards and phonelinks through the RGA14 point can be checked.Echostar's DBS system will offer over 100 channels of digital video and250 channels of audio, transmitting across the US to 18-inch dishes.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996S-A EXPANDS 8600 SET-TOP FACILITIESSCIENTIFIC Atlanta is upping the bandwidth on its 8600 set-top box. Anew 750MHz version will be made available to the Asian market next yearhaving already been successfully deployed in the US where it is used bythe top 10 MSOs where 700,000 units have so far been shipped, says S-A.Marketing manager, subscriber products international division broadbandcommunications, Vibha Rustagi said that operators would typicallypurchase both the 550MHz and 750MHz versions. The 750MHz versions wouldonly then be deployed in homes which had subscribed to premiumchannels, saving network operators a possible $15 (#10). Bandwidth of550MHz can normally carry up to 60 channels.The 8600 series features an on-screen display capable of individualmessaging either to individuals or to groups of subscribers. Pay-per-view ordering can be made through impulse on the RF.A key part of the 8600 is the electronic programme guide. Following thefamiliar pattern of EPGs, subscribers can look up shows in the schedulerequesting greater detail on their desired programme choice. Through'virtual channels' an operator can add additional sections of data,perhaps with backing from a sponsor, which do not take up the fullamount of bandwidth required by a broadcast network, thus adding to thecustomer's perceived value.A built in set-top diagnostic enables the subscriber to quote areference number back to the service engineer, saving a house call ifthe problem can be solved from the headend.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996LNB BY ALPSTHE latest digital-ready LNB comes from the German manufacturer/importer Alps. The Alps Universal BSNE8 serves the entire analogue anddigital frequency range from 10.7 to 12.75GHz.It is designed for DVB-compliant satellite reception and complies fullywith SES recommendations. The noise figure is typically 0.97 dB, phasenoise is 57.7dB. Feedhorn size is 40mm (standard).Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SATELLITE READY REVISITEDMITSUBISHI has joined the select band of manufacturers offering Nicamand Dolby TV sets with on-board satellite receivers - recognising thatin the UK at least, Sky Television remains the chief source of surroundsound transmissions.The Japanese manufacturer's latest AV18B and AV18BDS series offers 59cmand 66cm models, in either Nicam or full Dolby Pro Logic versions, eachcomplete with integrated 150-channel satellite receiver/VideoCryptdecoder.The satellite section is pre-tuned to all current Astra (1A to 1D) TVand radio channels, with dedicated Scart for simultaneous recording.The sets offer many other advanced features, - including NTSC and Secamplayback capability.Interestingly the satellite-equipped models retail at just #50 morethan the terrestrial-only versions, with the top model to sell at#899.99.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HIGH-END CHAPARRALUS receiver maker Chaparral has never been one to shy away from thehigh end of the market. On a visit to its 'Euro-bunker,' Julian Cloverfinds out whyCraig Howard is a long way from home. On this occasion, the US receiverand LNB manufacturer's representative in Europe is in Heerhugowaard, asuburb of Amsterdam, and nominally Chaparral's European headquarters.Before arriving in Europe, the company had considered London as apossible base, but with its Dutch distributor, The Satellite Shop,already making a major contribution to the business, coupled withfavourable local regulations for the incorporation of foreigncompanies, the Dutch capital became the preferred option.The Satellite Shop is a major element in the Dutch DTH business. Fromits base in Heerhugowaard, TSS has developed from being a dealer todistributor and is now even getting into the manufacturing business.Its newest product is a low-cost mount, which allows the tracking ofinclined orbit satellites, preferably as an accompaniment toChaparral's high-end receivers for the motorised market."We knew that we wanted to get a base in Europe, but we just didn'tknow where to commit," explains Howard. "The Satellite Shop has alwayshoused our Info Centre and we've done a lot of testing here in the pastof alpha products. We decided early in 1994 that if we were going tobase somewhere this should be it."Chaparral's first reconnaissance trip to Europe was nine years ago whenDave Thomas was despatched from the company's base in San Jose to finddistributors for its product. "They were essentially just dealers,hobbyists who were fascinated with the technology," says Howard. "Someof them have developed into people like Rens Maas or Steve Chilver, whobecame people who were significant in their respective markets."Chaparral Europe is, in fact, something of a misnomer; Howard - whosefather Taylor is chairman of the board of the SBCA, America's satellitetrade association - spends at least half of his time outside of theNetherlands. "There was a really long debate in the company as towhether I was going to be based in Dubai after Spain, because we had somuch going on there. But, we've spent a long time developingpartnerships in the key Middle East markets, and they're working outvery well. We're comfortable that we've covered there," he says.In addition to the US and Europe, Chaparral boasts offices in Beijingand Jakarta. The company also a presence in South America, though notan office.Feeds and LNBs remain, according to Howard, Chaparral's lifeblood."It's interesting because in the US we're so well known for our feedsand LNBs and in so many other markets it's receivers - that's whatwe're famous for in Europe. We sell a lot more feed and LNB products inEurope than we do receivers dollarwise, but we hold that high-end nichewhich most people have left alone."In the US, Chaparral has pulled out of the receiver business - theresult of the market's recent shift away from 'backyard' C-Band todigital DBS. In addition, the cost of Japanese-manufactured equipmenthas fallen as the dollar continues to take a pounding from the Yen.However, receivers for the US business and educational sector, whereChaparral is the market-leader, remain in production."Internationally, our receivers are still quite strong and there arethree models we manufacture for markets specifically other than theUS," says Howard. The Monterey 140 and MC115 are set to be joined by anew product, the 200C, for educational and overseas distance-learningmarkets. The new product has more extensive control via telephone linesand PC links.In Europe, the company hasn't been afraid to mix and match its productsto suit its target markets. In the UK, for instance, not only hasChaparral elected to stay out of the low-end receiver business, but ithas taken a unique approach to the high-end niche. "The UK marketnearly demands that you have VideoCrypt built-in, or the ability to addit later on. Steve Chilver Trading - our exclusive full-linedistributor in the UK - is a value-added reseller and they make somespecific models for the market, like the rebranded Highway version."But as always with bespoke tailoring, it doesn't come cheap. TheMonterey 140, which retails for #1,500 without a decoder goes up inprice by another #1,000 by the time either D2 Mac or VideoCryptdecoders are added.With digital on the horizon and most new non-Astra channels taking theMPEG route, won't demand for motorised systems simply dry up? "Peoplewho have exposure to satellite currently have a better taste for it.People that go digital immediately are not going to know any better,"replies Howard. Chaparral's receivers too are future-proof, or at leastcompatible with digital decoders, unlike those of its competitors."Satellite receivers became such a competitive business that mostpeople looked at the circuitry and said why bother in a market for thatis going to be relatively slim," says Howard. He believes that southernAfrica, among other emerging markets, will eventually see combinedanalogue and digital receivers - a product which will prove expensive,but for which there will probably be great demand.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996RAINBOW WARRIORSSouth Africa may have the first MPEG-2 DSTV service, but it seems theRainbow Nation will demand a wider variety of services. Nick Snowreports from Satsem '95If ever a land was made for direct-to-home satellite televisionservices it was South Africa, where the 'Rainbow Nation' is spreadacross distances that defy the European imagination. In 1973 the SouthAfrican Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) said "DBS is the obviousroute... but economic factors are a problem."The quotation could happily have run 22 years later as the headline forSatsem '95 in November, the second annual gathering at Johannesburg'sWorld Trade Centre organised by SCASA (Satellite CommunicationsAssociation of South Africa) for the growing DTH industry.The industry conference allied to a small exhibition brought togetherthe main players from broadcasters to installers, and brought out themain issues confronting this potentially huge market.From a scratch start South Africa recently became the world's firstdigital satellite broadcasting nation with full DVB MPEG-2compatibility following the launch of MultiChoice DSTV off of PAS-4.MultiChoice is, of course, part of the Nethold sphere of pay-televisioncompanies which, among others, includes South Africa's long-establishedterrestrial pay-TV broadcaster M-Net, encryption services providerIrdeto and signal distribution offshoot Orbicom. It is hard tooverestimate the group's dominance in this its home market, and thelack of current competition was high on the agenda of this gathering ofindependent-minded distributors, dealers and installers.In theory, there was good news for them. Gert Claassen, CEO of SABC,arrived to announce it was pressing ahead with plans to launch (atleast) five analogue free-to-air channels on PAS-4 and Intelsat 704,and by summer 1996 eight digital subscription channels building to 21channels by July 1998.Failing to arrive were the team from Africa Satellite EntertainmentCorporation (ASEC), which has transponder rights on Intelsat 704 andwhose test-card was still promising a launch of services in the lastweek of November.Suddenly, South Africa was to be awash with signals both digital andanalogue, although apart from MultiChoice's supermarket shelf of theleading channel brands from Europe and the US, and SABC's rebroadcastof national and regional channels, there was little clue what would beon them. And would it matter anyway? Availability of receivers - inparticular the DSTV receivers of exclusive licensees Pace and Panasonic- was a dominant theme. At least four of five receivers were at theshow and after some cajoling several of them worked. Estimates of howmany would be available by Christmas '95 ranged from virtually nil to50,000.An inauspicious start it might seem - although dire warnings about theperils of regular complete signal loss for viewers in South Africa'shostile climate (the idea of a small problem with a digital signal isapparently in the same category of wishful thinking as being a littlebit pregnant), lead some to imply installers would be better offstarved of supply until they'd had some practice. Needless to say, theinstallers didn't see it that way.MultiChoice, though, remains relaxed. And why not? Its service is veryexpensive (possibly over #50 a month for the full package and up to#500 for the receiver) but it hits breakeven at not much over 200,000subs or 10 per cent of the target affluent white market. And in acountry where most urban white homes sport notices pronouncing armedresponse alarms, it isn't difficult to see them paying up for more in-home entertainment.Meantime, there remains a vast if less affluent market to be served andthe ANC government is anxious it should be recognising broadcasting asa potentially benevolent binding element for the Rainbow Nation.It seems certain that either through the SABC (whose future is in doubtbut some form of privatisation seems the most likely option), or morelikely a commercial joint venture with MultiChoice, a range of analogueservices can and will co-exist alongside DSTV.If, however, everyone pursues the digital dream too soon, many feltSouth Africa could have the unwelcome distinction of being the firstmarket outside the US into the digital market and the first to beforced to abandon it.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996QUALITY TIMEGate numbers weren't, perhaps, all they might have been at Hong Kong'sCable and Satellite Asia exhibition, allowing vendors to spend a little'quality time' with their potential customersAlong the growth curve of satellite exhibitions Cable & Satellite Asiais, like the market it serves, still in its genesis. However, Year Twoof the show, which took place at Hong Kong's Convention and ExhibitionCentre (December 6-8), proved that the Singapore office of ReedExhibition Companies is making steady progress in its development. 120international exhibitors were present, between them boasting as many as90 new products. Visitor numbers nudging just 2,000 were approximatelya third down on a year ago, which was attributed by some to MipAsiataking place the week before and not simultaneously, as it did in 1994.Nevertheless, Cable & Satellite Asia '95 witnessed a 20 per cent growthin size and the organiser is banking on further 30 per cent growth forthis year's event, which again takes place in Hong Kong November 20-22.And according to Jimmy Lau, regional vice president, Reed ExhibitionCompanies, the amount of floorspace booked for 1997 is double again."This year we have seen an even higher number of overseas visitors,people who actually make plans to come in and visit the show," saysLau. "From my conversations with the exhibitors, they've maybe comeacross only one dissatisfied customer, the rest are making goodcontacts."One problem which seems to afflict Cable and Satellite Asia, as it doeswith the sister show in London, is a shortage of cable operators.Though some were present, particularly at the conference, Lau has someideas up his sleeve to boost their attendance in future years.Yet, there was certainly no lack of exhibitors targeting the cablesector; among others, the mighty AmericansGeneral Instrument and Scientific Atlanta were present, as were Eurosuppliers Barco and Sagem. The latter proving that there is a marketfor D2 Mac, even in Asia.Barco of Belgium, took the opportunity to launch its Pulsar remote-monitoring TV modulator into the Asian market. The company, whichcounts Hong Kong among almost 30 offices, announced that it had alreadysold both Pulsar and Rosa catv management system to the GuangdongProvince Catv System. Guangdong, in fact, was on everybody's lips,especially because of Pace's announcement that it was supplying theregion with three million cable set-tops. Guangdong, located on China'sborder with Hong Kong, also acquired hardware on behalf of otherprovinces within the PRC. The first 60,000 Pace units are slated fordelivery in June.Pace shared its stand with the BBC, apparently to promote a commonterrestrial/satellite digital platform, an ambition which extendsbeyond the confines of their domestic, UK markets. Though according toJohn Sykes, head of BBC Resource's transmission section, developmentplans have stalled slightly of late because of the debate over QAMvariants. With NTL having proposed 2QAM for the UK and most of the restof Europe pushing for 8QAM, Pace, he suggested, would probably take thecommercial decision to include both in its box.Though attendees came from right across the region, including thePhilippines, Indonesia, Taiwan and Thailand, Lau says he wants to buildup the numbers coming from Taiwan and India, which he says are stillstrangers to the show. "There are more people coming who are moreinterested in hardware than programming, but I think this will increaseas we continue our association with Casbaa," he says.The involvement of Casbaa (the Cable and Satellite BroadcastingAssociation) - itself a growing industry force in the region - produceda conference line-up which read like a who's who in the industry in theAsia region. Bill Hooks, (outgoing) president HBO Asia, Gary Davey,Star TV's managing director and Casbaa and Turner's Far East president,Ted McFarland, made for a formidable line-up. Lau though suggests thatMcFarland's boss, Ted Turner (or is it now Gerry Levine) might even betempted to appear at a future conference.Programmers were few and far between on the exhibit floor, but notentirely absent. ESPN and CNBC were both present, as was TurnerInternational. However, Star was there only in the guise of itshardware arm, Starnet, and satellite operators were also conspicuous bytheir absence in the exhibition hall.The next Cable and Satellite Asia will run parallel to Reed'sIntermedia show, which has been a successful exhibition in its ownright in both the US and Singapore. Lau's aim is for synergies betweenmultimedia companies and cablecos, already flowering in the US, to alsobe cultivated in the Asia Pacific markets.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TRANSPONDER WATCH45W: PAS-1PAS-3R is due to fly with an Ariane 4 launch vehicle to 43 degreesWest, joining this satellite which launched in June 1988. The originalPAS-3 met a watery grave a year ago. The new satellite is an HS601satellite with 16 C-Band and 16 Ku-Band transponders, and will be usedfor television programme distribution on both sides of the Atlantic andin North and South America and Africa. NHK feeds are now at 68.5degrees East at 12GHz.37.5W: Orion 1NTL has a five-year contract with Orion for distribution to cableheadends. London's Channel One will be uplinked from London in digitalMPEG-2, DVB-compliant System 3000 for around 40 cable systems, eachwith a top-specification 2.4-metre dish. Most signals on this satelliteare actually acceptable on dishes half that size. The Yugoslavian peacedeals prompted the return of TV from Pale on 12586MHz vertical and anewcomer is South Korean KDBS, every night at around 19.00-20.00GMT inPal on 12654MHz vertical, Tp.3 with a good signal originating inGermany. Hindi-Urdu channel Asianet is on 11585MHz horizontal from NewJersey, USA and is probably the best of the bunch, especially as itremains, for the time being, in-the-clear. Plenty of feeds have beennoted on 11539MHz vertical.l 27.5W: Intelsat 601BBC Prime slogs away in D2 Mac on Tp.71 vertical along with fellow UKTravel channel in Tp. 63B, while on the opposite polarity CMT Europefeeds into Europe from the US 24- hours-a-day, but at a signal strengththat makes smaller dish reception difficult. SIS has long used atransponder on this satellite to feed UK betting shops and is on11591MHz horizontal, hence the 1.2-metre fixed polarity and positiondishes close to many UK betting establishments. The other B Mac signal,a system that remains unhacked, is UK cable channel SelecTV, sharingthe lower part of Travel's transponder. FilmNet has a digital multiplexon this satellite and some UK cable-only channels use the MPEG-2compression system here too.29.4W: Intelsat 504Intelsat 504 was removed from geostationary orbit in mid-November. Itwas launched in 1982 serving the Atlantic Ocean Region. The oldestIntelsat - 501 - is still in service.21.5W: Intelsat K & 512US wrestling for Sky One continues to be fed over this craft at11532MHz vertical in NTSC. Feeds for the Mir-Atlantis space expeditionwere seen on 11499MHz horizontal and 11533MHz vertical. New Intelsatsdue above the Euro horizon this year are 708, at 50 degrees West, 709,at 56 degrees West and 803 at 64 degrees East. It is at the end of thisyear that two degrees spacing around 60-66 degrees East is implemented.19W: TDF1/2There are three active transponders. Canal Plus on Tp.5 1804MHz, CineCinemas on Tp.9 11881MHz and Canal France International on 12034MHz,all in D2 Mac. Generally, the situation now is that there are onlyseven high-power DBS satellites active in European skies which carryless than 10 unencrypted TV channels. Apart from second-hand value forbroadcasts to Scandinavia, the European DBS satellites each with fivehigh-power 100 watt transponders have proved to be the wrong platformfor the wrong job.14W: Ekspress 2The Ekspress satellite has four more transponders than the precedingGorizont class; 10 C-Band and two Ku-Band transponders are available.An adaptable mixture of cross-strapping and six antennas allows moreflexibility than before. This satellite has maintained station-keepingbetter than any other Russian satellite to date, apart from the GalsDBS craft. TV use is confined to C-Band and amounts to six channels;Apna, Muslim, RTPi, Cuba, TV3 Russia and ORT Russia, sharing fourtransponders.5W: Telecom 2ATucked away on teletext was a short but notable announcement that TF1and France Television (operators of France 2 and 3) are to join forcesto investigate digital pay-TV services via Eutelsat. France Telecomwould appear to have under-estimated the in-orbit capacity required forTV services.3E: Telecom 1CAfter Flight 80's success at delivering a space-telescope, ArianeFlight 81 returned to the serious business of satellite TV and tookTelecom 2C and Insat 2C into orbit. Bayern 3 broadcast the launch liveon Astra, as it has most recent Ariane launches. Insat 2C is the firstof the Insat 2 series to be for telecommunications-only; there is nometeorology equipment on-board. In place of that payload there are twoKu-Band transponders. Insat 2C will be located at 93.5 degrees East.The French satellite will replace Telecom 1C this month and bring much-needed second-generation Ku-capacity to the French Telecom portfolio.The new satellite has C-Band and 12GHz capacity in horizontal as wellas the Telecom 1 series vertical polarisation. Feeds of the USPresident's visit to Ireland for BBC News were noted on 12648MHzvertical. Also, inserts for the terrestrial channel TV de Catalunyaappeared. Play from the ATP-Championship-tour in Germany destined forSky was seen in-the-clear on 12606MHz vertical.5E Tele-X & SiriusSwedish channel SVT 2 has switched to digital format on 12422MHz.13E: Eutelsat II F1 & Hot Bird 1La Cinquieme has joined Arte on Tp.26 11080MHz vertical. It shows aneducational mix of programmes each daytime. RTL-2 has been joined by aJazz sound sub-carrier of unknown origin on 8.10MHz, 11096MHzhorizontal, but probably a filler from RFE. Italian TV channels Rai Unoand Rai Due moved here from 10 degrees East last year. The lastinternational TV service from Italy was Raisat on the Olympus satelliteat 19 degrees West, which died in August 1993. Rai is to join theinternational TV league this year when a satellite-delivered service tothe Americas and Australia is anticipated. VOA Europe, a music andspeech mix reflecting the American way of life, has been taken by cableand a few terrestrial stations over the years. At present it usesDeutsche Welle TV sub-carriers but US government cuts are forcing thestation to find private financing. However it has been granted areprieve until March, when it might have to leave the air. In Europe,CNN and NBC do such do good job in the private sector, that VOA andradio's days must be numbered. Latest VOA convert is Melody 91.5 FMheard on a recent visit to Beirut. The 36MHz, six-channel Viacomdigital multiplex signal on this satellite includes an MTV feed, MTVItalian and German streams, Sci-Fi Channel and Bloomberg TV, a versionof the already successful US financial service on PAS-2. The analogueVH-1 Germany signal on 11238MHz horizontal has ceased and dual-illuminates the digital multiplex. Tp.40 12521MHz on this satellite hasbeen taken by AB-1 Channel, a French family entertainment network inanalogue Pal, for cable networks. Tp.41 is used by both WTN and APTVfor digital feeds from the Gray's Inn Road Teleport in London. XXX-TV,or TV Erotica, on 11534MHz in D2 Mac, has been deemed too hot forBritain, if not for Hot Bird 1, and has been given the same treatmentmeted out to Red Hot Television. The UK Heritage minister has issued anorder outlawing the supply of smart cards, programmes and advertisingrelated to the channel. At least two more adult channels are due on-airthis year, Babylon Blue and Adam and Eve, the latter with no link tothe US channel of the same name. The Rabin funeral last year was thecause of largest bookings of space segment yet, according to Maxat.Also using the resources of adaptable Maxat; Herbalife TV has been seenon this satellite at 12586MHz vertical. Longer term, Eutelsat hasagreed the launch next year, of three satellites with Arianespace. Theyare Hot Bird 4 and two other (W24) satellites at other locations.16E: Eutelsat II F3The most obvious change on this satellite is the colourful Thaiwave,from Thailand each evening around 18.00-20.00GMT. In a welcome additionto satellite TV, the tests are seen every evening on Tp.22, 11163MHzhorizontal with audio at 6.6MHz. Scrambling of the signal will followand the fee will be DM56 each month. Egyptian TV is to add anotherrelay of its international service this year. Besides the relay on thissatellite, Arabsat C-Band at 31 degrees East and 1 degree WestIntelsat, a new relay to the Americas starts in May via the AlphastarDBS satellite, or AT&T's Telstar 402R as it correctly known. It isowned by Canadian-based Tee-Comm, and a medium-power, 100-channelservice to the US will start early this year to 60cm dishes from 89degrees West. ATN, Asian Television Network will also join them.Radiotelevisao Portuguesa Internaaional, which reaches most corners ofthis small globe, has never been easy to find programme details for. AnInternet web though has just opened to provide those missing facts. Thechannel will probably be available live via the same route within acouple of years. TV Roumania International and for a while ActualitatiRadio, the channels that sadly could not bring you PresidentCeausescu's Christmas message in 1989, seem to be fully operationalfrom the new Bucharest Scientific Atlanta uplink to Tp.37, 11575MHzvertical 19.30-23.00GMT daily. An indication of the true pace of changethere is the recent ban on the cable TV relay of Duna TV from Hungaryin nearby Timisoara. TVRi was formed as many eastern European nationshave been starting satellite TV services for expatriates or foreignaudiences. The abandoned Polsat slot at 11638MHz horizontal wasoccupied by Apna TV, the Hindi channel also at 11 degrees West Ku-Band,but has now ceased.19.2E: Astra 1A, 1B, 1C, 1D & 1EThe end of next month sees CNBC launch more fully on Astra with Asian,live US and four hours of The European Money Wheel programme. Astra 1Eis invisible to most fixed-dish owners due the frequency band used. Thesatellite tested at around 14.7 degrees East and had been moved intoposition by the first week of December, after blank carrier tests butno analogue pictures were seen. As production rates and costs will be afactor in the take-up of DVB digital TV, the news of a new single chipreceiver, the LS64704, from LSI Logic Corp, is a welcome development.Early users will be ZDF and ARD, which start parallel transmissions oftheir analogue Pal signals soon. America One is the new audio serviceon VH-1 Tp.22 at 11538MHz, 7.74MHz. Live speech programming is providedby National Public radio in Washington and Public Radio Internationalof Minneapolis. The service was due to start January 1 and is providedby successful radio-relay agent WRN, World Radio Network, which nowruns four different programmes on various satellites. The operatingfrequencies at this location are now 10700-12100MHz. There are variousways of achieving such reception, but the new Universal LNBs areprobably the most cost-efficient and flexible units yet produced forthe European market. The lack of digital signals and suitable receiverseffectively rules out the need for DBS band reception, at least atpresently. No serious BSkyB digital involvement is expected until 1997.As we enter this New Year, the channels now at this location look quitevaried. There are two clear news channels, Sky News and CNN, as well asportions of NBC/CNBC. There are also two clear sports channels, multi-lingual Eurosport and German DSF. TNT is the only clear English/Frenchfilm channel, sharing time with Cartoon Network. Arte is a clearcultural German/French channel with some original-language programming.It is a rather long list, but in addition to the above there are theclear German broadcasters, both public and private, four channels forthe Dutch market and some offerings from further afield; Japan's NHKthrough JSTV, Mexico's Galavision, Hindi Zee TV and two Chinesechannels. Three versions of TV3 for Denmark, Norway and Sweden,accounting for three transponders, looks wasteful though, while Spanishthematic channels absorb another three. QVC's home shopping service isthe only free access VideoCrypt signal in Europe, and the remainingsignals on the satellites are either German or UK-based scrambledchannels, mainly with Videocrypt scrambling, though some run dual VC2codes. Also, 58 different radio programmes in an assortment oflanguages are transmitted on FM audio sub-carriers.20E: Telstar 301/Arabsat 1DRIf it was not for the cooling effect of winter temperatures on our LNBunit, we would have lost the signals from the Orbit barker channel plusSyrian, Sudanese and the four ART channels on this satellite. Allsignals are in the 3740-4060MHz range, are horizontal and, thus, limpinto Europe.28.5E: DFS Kopernikus 2 Flight 2VT4 for the Flemish audience uses digital capacity played out from theMaxat teleport at Brookmans Park, using the Tandberg, Sagem and Divicomsystem on 12544MHz vertical. Other occupants are the Hungarianscrambled music channel Top-TV and Czech channels Premiera and CablePlus. The satellite is also used for video feeds within Germany andbeyond.42E: Turksat 1BLook out for Bosnian TV from Sarajevo - the logo is BIH. The signal mayappear here or on a Eutelsat, although reports of it being ready forthe New Year proved over-optimistic. Kanal 6 and Interstar bothsuffered programme suspension at the end of last year, puzzling manyviewers. The Turkish state regulator had upheld complaints against thechannels over political, sexual and economic allegations made on newsand current affairs programmes.68.5E: PAS-4Doordarshan TV International (DDI) is on this satellite on C-Band atTp.12C 4040MHz horizontal with programming from 03.30 to 0630GMT inHindi and English. It brought news of the official opening of DD3, anew domestic Indian TV broadcaster. All other TV direct from Indian ison satellites beyond the Euro-arc, including NEPC (the exception,spotted this month on 66 degrees East), another new Indian channelwhich has taken to air with Hindi family programmes. BT at Martleshamin Suffolk has installed a new dish to access this satellite and isalready supplying programmes into the South African market. The look-angle to this satellite is low, hence the easterly location.71E: Gals 1Gals 2 was launched by a Proton-K rocket on November 17 and has thesame three wide Ku-Band transponders as Gals-1. The orbital destinationis still far from clear but it was at 87.5 degrees East when lastspotted and  drifting at a daily rate of one degree West. A clutch ofreports have the satellite variously leased to Chinese Land Group.Shareholders include the Loral Corp, General Instrument  and TCI CableTV Co, British General Telecommunications Ltd and Asian TV network, aSouth African concern and Russian State broadcasting. They all talkabout a co-location here or further over at 31 degrees East. The Gals-1craft spent some time at 44 degrees East with Russian TV relays in the12GHz band. The South African IBA has even approved initial consent fora space TV service from Gals, but a location at the hot South African51dBW slot at 66 degrees East and PAS-4 at 68.5 degrees East would seemmore logical.80E: Gorizont 24Be thankful this satellite is a difficult one to catch; the formerKazakh TV occupant has been criticised for televising executions. Moreacceptable behaviour is seen on HTB (NTV), as seen at 11575MHz verticalon 16 degrees, East and also from TV6 Moscow.100.5E: Asiasat 2A Long March 2F rocket took Asiasat 2 aloft from Xichang in Sichuan atthe end of last year. The Lockheed Martin series 7000 satellite isequipped with 24 C-Band and nine Ku-Band transponders. Known bookingsare for Deutsche Welle, RTP Portugal, APTV and Star TV, as well asChina, Vsat systems and other telecommunications projects. Star TVplans expansion, despite continuing financial losses ascribe bymanagement to it still being in "investment mode." Those plans includebetter targeting of specific countries instead of pan-Asian services.China Central TV has started to test digital TV services; a filmchannel, sports, entertainment and a clear youth/science/military or'variety channel,' will use capacity here or on Chinasat 5 at 115.5degrees East. It is notable that the Chinese Public TV station did notshow the Asiasat 2 launch live, in case of public humiliation in arepeat of the disaster a year ago. Echostar 1, a US DBS satellite boundfor 101 degrees West, is the next Chinese launch and aims to rival thealready established DirecTv.116 E: Mugunghwa 2The launch of Koreasat 2, also known as Mugunghwa 2, should have takenplace around New Year. To attend to the problems which shortened thelife of the first satellite, McDonnell-Douglas worked on the Delta 2rocket's pressure and temperature systems and then successfully usedthe same type of vehicle to launch a Canadian Radarsat from Californiain November. This year will see the success or failure of the newAriane 5, the Russian Proton and the Chinese Long March launchers.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHANNEL GUIDE (PART 1 OF 4)Channel:           AFRTS EuropeSatellite:         Eutelsat II F2Location:          10oETp:                27WPol:               VFrequency:         11.180GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             B MacScramb. sys.:      B MacChannel:           Adult Channel, TheSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                63Pol:               VFrequency:         10.921GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCrypt I/IIChannel:           Algeria TVSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                34Pol:               HFrequency:         11.678GHzHrs:               8Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Antena TresSatellite:         Hispasat 1ALocation:          30oWTp:                13Pol:               HFrequency:         12.671GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           Apna TVSatellite:         Gorizont 26Location:          11oWTp:                K1Pol:               LFrequency:         11.525GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           ARDSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                19Pol:               HFrequency:         11.494GHzHrs:               21Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           ART EuropeSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                26WPol:               VFrequency:         11.095GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           ArteSatellite:         Astra 1DLocation:          19.2oETp:                49Pol:               HFrequency:         10.714GHzHrs:               7Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           ArteSatellite:         DFS 3 KopernikusLocation:          23.5oETp:                BPol:               VFrequency:         11.549GHzHrs:               7Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           ArteSatellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                26WPol:               VFrequency:         11.080GHzHrs:               7Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           ArteSatellite:         Telecom 2BLocation:          5oWTp:                R3Pol:               VFrequency:         12.606GHzHrs:               7Aud. fre.:         5.80MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           AsianetSatellite:         Orion 1Location:          37.5oWTp:                16Pol:               VFrequency:         11.595GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           ATVSatellite:         Eutelsat II F2Location:          10oETp:                20Pol:               HFrequency:         10.986GHzHrs:               5Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Bayern 3Satellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                45Pol:               HFrequency:         11.141GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           BBC PrimeSatellite:         Intelsat 601Location:          27.5oWTp:                71APol:               VFrequency:         10.995GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           BBC WorldSatellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                38Pol:               VFrequency:         11.620GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Bloomberg Information NetworkSatellite:         Eutelsat Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                2Pol:               VFrequency:         11.237GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             DigitalScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           Bloomberg Information NetworkSatellite:         Eutelsat Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                4Pol:               VFrequency:         11.283GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             DigitalScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           BravoSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                42Pol:               VFrequency:         11.097GHzHrs:               12Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Cable PlusSatellite:         DFS 1 KopernikusLocation:          28.5oETp:                A1Pol:               HFrequency:         11.475GHzHrs:               9Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Canal ClasicoSatellite:         Hispasat 1ALocation:          30oWTp:                -Pol:               RFrequency:         12.149GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Canal HorizonsSatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                10Pol:               VFrequency:         11.408GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      Clear/NagravisionChannel:           Canal jSatellite:         Telecom 2ALocation:          8oWTp:                R6Pol:               VFrequency:         12.732GHzHrs:               13Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           Canal JimmySatellite:         Telecom 2ALocation:          8oWTp:                R6Pol:               VFrequency:         12.732GHzHrs:               7Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           Canal Plus 16:9Satellite:         Telecom 2ALocation:          8oWTp:                R1Pol:               VFrequency:         12.522GHzHrs:               22Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           Canal PlusSatellite:         Telecom 2ALocation:          8oWTp:                R4Pol:               VFrequency:         12.648GHzHrs:               22Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           Canal PlusSatellite:         TDF 1/2Location:          18.8oWTp:                2Pol:               RFrequency:         11.804GHzHrs:               22Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           Canal Plus (Espana)Satellite:         Hispasat 1ALocation:          30oWTp:                14Pol:               HFrequency:         12.711GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           Canal Plus PolskaSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                38WPol:               VFrequency:         11.617GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Canale 5Satellite:         Intelsat 602Location:          63oETp:                63BPol:               HFrequency:         11.173GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Cartoon NetworkSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                37Pol:               HFrequency:         11.023GHzHrs:               17Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Channel 6 St. PetersburgSatellite:         Gorizont 17Location:          53oETp:                -Pol:               RFrequency:         11.525GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           China News/EntertainmentSatellite:         Astra 1DLocation:          19.2oETp:                53Pol:               HFrequency:         10.773GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Chinese Channel, TheSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                54Pol:               VFrequency:         10.788GHzHrs:               5Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           Christian Channel, TheSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                47Pol:               HFrequency:         11.171GHzHrs:               12Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Cine 5Satellite:         Turksat 1BLocation:          42oETp:                15Pol:               HFrequency:         11.130GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           Cine-CinefilSatellite:         Telecom 2ALocation:          8oWTp:                R9Pol:               HFrequency:         12.627GHzHrs:               16Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           Cine-CinefilSatellite:         Telecom 1CLocation:          3oETp:                R1Pol:               VFrequency:         12.522GHzHrs:               16Aud. fre.:         DigitalVideo:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           Cine-CinemasSatellite:         Telecom 2ALocation:          8oWTp:                R10Pol:               HFrequency:         12.669GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           Cine-Cinemas 16:9Satellite:         Telecom 2ALocation:          8oWTp:                R5Pol:               VFrequency:         12.690GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           CineclassicsSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2 oETp:                40Pol:               VFrequency:         11.068GHzHrs:               12Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           CinemanxaSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                30Pol:               VFrequency:         11.656GHzHrs:               16Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           Cinemanxa 2Satellite:         Hispasat 1ALocation:          30oWTp:                31Pol:               LFrequency:         12.303GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           CinquestelleSatellite:         Intelsat 602Location:          63oETp:                62APol:               HFrequency:         11.055GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           CMT EuropeSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                24Pol:               VFrequency:         11.568GHzHrs:               13Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCrypt/IIChannel:           CMT EuropeSatellite:         Intelsat 601Location:          27.5oWTp:                73Pol:               VFrequency:         11.171GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           CNN InternationalSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                28Pol:               VFrequency:         11.627GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           CNN InternationalSatellite:         ThorLocation:          0.8oWTp:                4Pol:               RFrequency:         11.785GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt S*Channel:           Deutsche Welle TVSatellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                27WPol:               VFrequency:         11.163GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Discovery Channel, TheSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                41Pol:               HFrequency:         11.083GHzHrs:               8Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCrypt I/IIChannel:           Discovery Channel, TheSatellite:         ThorLocation:          0.8oWTp:                12Pol:               RFrequency:         11.938GHzHrs:               8Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Disney Channel, TheSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                26Pol:               VFrequency:         11.597GHzHrs:               16Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCrypt I/IIChannel:           DocumanxaSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                32Pol:               VFrequency:         11.686GHzHrs:               16Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           3SatSatellite:         Astra 1ALocation:          19.2oETp:                10Pol:               VFrequency:         11.347GHzHrs:               10Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           DSFSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                21Pol:               HFrequency:         11.523GHzHrs:               17Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           DSFSatellite:         DFS 3 KopernikusLocation:          23.5oETp:                6Pol:               HFrequency:         12.692GHzHrs:               17Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Duna TVSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                33WPol:               HFrequency:         11.596GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         6.50MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           EDTV (Dubai)Satellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                15Pol:               HFrequency:         11.516GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           EuroticaSatellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                22Pol:               HFrequency:         11.181GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCrypt I/IIChannel:           European Business NewsSatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                3Pol:               HFrequency:         11.262GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           European Business NewsSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                42Pol:               VFrequency:         11.097GHzHrs:               6Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Europe by SatelliteSatellite:         Eutelsat II F2Location:          10oETp:                21Pol:               HFrequency:         11.077GHzHrs:               8Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             Pal/D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Clear/MChannel:           Euro ShowSatellite:         Turksat 1BLocation:          42oETp:                6Pol:               VFrequency:         11.145GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Egypt Space ChannelSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                27WPol:               VFrequency:         11.176GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           ET1Satellite:         Eutelsat II F2Location:          10oETp:                33Pol:               HFrequency:         11.596GHzHrs:               10Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearCopyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHANNEL GUIDE (PART 2 OF 4)Channel:           Euro 7Satellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                32WPol:               HFrequency:         11.556GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           EuronewsSatellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                37WPol:               VFrequency:         11.575GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           EuroPaceSatellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                41WPol:               HFrequency:         12.563GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           EuroStepSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                20SPol:               HFrequency:         10.987GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           EurosportSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                4Pol:               VFrequency:         11.259GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           EurosportSatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                5Pol:               HFrequency:         11.387GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Eurosport FranceSatellite:         Telecom 2ALocation:          8oWTp:                R11Pol:               HFrequency:         12.711GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           Eurosport NordicSatellite:         ThorLocation:          0.8oWTp:                8Pol:               RFrequency:         11.862GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt S*Channel:           EuroticaSatellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                22Pol:               HFrequency:         11.181GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCrypt I/IIChannel:           Family Channel, TheSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                35Pol:               HFrequency:         10.995GHzHrs:               12Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           FemmanSatellite:         Tele-XLocation:          5oETp:                3Pol:               LFrequency:         12.476GHzHrs:               5Aud. fre.:         6.50MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           FilmNet (Central Europe)Satellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                63Pol:               HFrequency:         10.921GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCrypt IIChannel:           FilmNet (Greece)Satellite:         Eutelsat I F4Location:          25.5oETp:                2Pol:               HFrequency:         11.095GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      SatboxChannel:           FilmNet (Benelux)Satellite:         Intelsat 601Location:          27.5oWTp:                79Pol:               VFrequency:         11.648GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             compressedScramb. sys.:      System 2000Channel:           FilmNet 2/Supersport (Belgium)Satellite:         Intelsat 601Location:          27.5oWTp:                79Pol:               VFrequency:         11.648GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             compressedScramb. sys.:      System 2000Channel:           FilmNet 2/Supersport (Neths)Satellite:         Intelsat 601Location:          27.5oWTp:                79Pol:               VFrequency:         11.648GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             compressedScramb. sys.:      System 2000Channel:           FilmNet Plus (Scandinavia)Satellite:         Astra 1ALocation:          19.2oETp:                11Pol:               HFrequency:         11.362GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           FilmNet: The Comp. Movie ChSatellite:         ThorLocation:          0.8oWTp:                4Pol:               RFrequency:         12.015GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt S*Channel:           France 2Satellite:         Telecom 2BLocation:          5oWTp:                R2Pol:               VFrequency:         12.564GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         5.80MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           France SupervisionSatellite:         Telecom 2ALocation:          8oWTp:                R3Pol:               VFrequency:         12.606GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           GalavisionSatellite:         PanAmSat 1ALocation:          45oWTp:                19Pol:               HFrequency:         11.515GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.80MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           GalavisionSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                44Pol:               VFrequency:         11.126GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Hallmark Entertainment NetworkSatellite:         Intelsat 601Location:          27.5oWTp:                79Pol:               VFrequency:         11.648GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             compressedScramb. sys.:      System 2000Channel:           HBB TVSatellite:         Turksat 1BLocation:          42oETp:                4Pol:               VFrequency:         10.980GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           History Channel, TheSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                47Pol:               HFrequency:         11.171GHzHrs:               3Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Hrvatski (Croatia) TVSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                20SPol:               HFrequency:         10.987GHzHrs:               7Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           InterStarSatellite:         Eutelsat II F2Location:          10oETp:                38WPol:               VFrequency:         11.617GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           IRIB (Iran) 1Satellite:         Intelsat 602Location:          63oETp:                73Pol:               VFrequency:         11.155GHzHrs:               8Aud. fre.:         6.80MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           IRIB (Iran) 2Satellite:         Intelsat 602Location:          63oETp:                71Pol:               VFrequency:         10.992GHzHrs:               6Aud. fre.:         6.80MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           IRIB (Iran) 3Satellite:         Intelsat 602Location:          63oETp:                72BPol:               VFrequency:         11.098GHzHrs:               6Aud. fre.:         6.80MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Italia 1Satellite:         Intelsat 602Location:          63oETp:                63APol:               HFrequency:         11.137GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           JSTVSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                24Pol:               VFrequency:         11.568GHzHrs:               11Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Kabel 1Satellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                9Pol:               HFrequency:         11.332GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Kabel 1Satellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                21SPol:               HFrequency:         11.055GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Kanal 6Satellite:         Turksat 1BLocation:          42oETp:                14Pol:               HFrequency:         11.080GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Kanal 7Satellite:         Turksat 1BLocation:          42oETp:                5Pol:               VFrequency:         11.012GHzHrs:               12Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Kanal 7Satellite:         Turksat 1BLocation:          42oETp:                9Pol:               HFrequency:         11.462GHzHrs:               12Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Kanal DSatellite:         Turksat 1BLocation:          42oETp:                8BPol:               VFrequency:         11.181GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Kanal DSatellite:         Turksat 1BLocation:          42oETp:                8BPol:               VFrequency:         11.180GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           KDBSSatellite:         Orion 1Location:          37.5oWTp:                3Pol:               VFrequency:         12.654GHzHrs:               1Aud. fre.:         6.60Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Kindernet/VTVSatellite:         Intelsat 601Location:          27.5oWTp:                3BPol:               HFrequency:         11.175GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           La Chaine InfoSatellite:         Telecom 2BLocation:          5oWTp:                R8Pol:               HFrequency:         12.585GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           La Chaine MeteoSatellite:         Telecom 2BLocation:          5oWTp:                K4Pol:               HFrequency:         12.648GHzHrs:               2Aud. fre.:         5.80MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           ChannelSatellite:         SatelliteLocation:          LocationTp:                TpPol:               PolFrequency:         FrequencyHrs:               HrsAud. fre.:         Aud. fre.Video:             VideoScramb. sys.:      Scramb.sys.Channel:           La CinquiemeSatellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                26WPol:               VFrequency:         11.080GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           La CinquiemeSatellite:         Telecom 2BLocation:          5oWTp:                K3Pol:               VFrequency:         12.606GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         5.80MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Live TVSatellite:         Intelsat 601Location:          27.5oWTp:                62Pol:               HFrequency:         11.080GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             compressedScramb. sys.:      System 2000Channel:           M6Satellite:         Telecom 2BLocation:          5oWTp:                R1Pol:               VFrequency:         12.522GHzHrs:               10Aud. fre.:         5.80MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           MBCSatellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                32SPol:               HFrequency:         11.554GHzHrs:               10Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           MCMSatellite:         Telecom 2ALocation:          8oWTp:                R7Pol:               HFrequency:         12.543GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           MCMSatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                5Pol:               HFrequency:         11.304GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             Pal PlusScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           MDRSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                43Pol:               HFrequency:         11.112GHzHrs:               10Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Med TVSatellite:         Eutelsat II F2Location:          10oETp:                37Pol:               VFrequency:         11.575GHzHrs:               2Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           MinimaxSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                36Pol:               VFrequency:         11.009GHzHrs:               12Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Movie Channel, TheSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                18Pol:               VFrequency:         11.479GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           MTV EuropeSatellite:         Astra 1ALocation:          19.2oETp:                15Pol:               HFrequency:         11.421GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           MTV EuropeSatellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                39WPol:               VFrequency:         11.658GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCrypt IIChannel:           MTV EuropeSatellite:         ThorLocation:          0.8oWTp:                20Pol:               RFrequency:         12.092GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt S*Channel:           MTV EuropeSatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                2Pol:               VFrequency:         11.237GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             DigitalScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           MTV EuropeSatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                4Pol:               VFrequency:         11.283GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             DigitalScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           MTV (Germany)Satellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                2Pol:               VFrequency:         11.237GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             DigitalScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           MTV (Germany)Satellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                4Pol:               VFrequency:         11.283GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             DigitalScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           MTV (Italy)Satellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                2Pol:               VFrequency:         11.237GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             DigitalScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           MTV (Italy)Satellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                4Pol:               VFrequency:         11.283GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             DigitalScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           Music Factory, TheSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                20BPol:               HFrequency:         11.024GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             compressedScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHANNEL GUIDE (PART 3 OF 4)Channel:           Muslim TV AhmadiyyaSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                37WPol:               VFrequency:         11.575GHzHrs:               3Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           N3Satellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                25Pol:               HFrequency:         11.582GHzHrs:               12Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           NBC Super Channel/CNBCSatellite:         Astra 1DLocation:          19.2oETp:                50Pol:               VFrequency:         10.729GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           NBC Super ChannelSatellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                25WPol:               VFrequency:         10.987GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           NHK InternationalSatellite:         PanAmSat-4Location:          68.5oETp:                6KPol:               HFrequency:         12.604GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.20/6.80Video:             NTSCScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           NickelodeonSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                46Pol:               VFrequency:         11.516GHzHrs:               13Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Nickelodeon (Germany)Satellite:         DFS3 KopernikusLocation:          23.5oETp:                C1Pol:               HFrequency:         11.625GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Nile TV InternationalSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                27WPol:               VFrequency:         11.146GHzHrs:               6Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Norsk TV2Satellite:         Intelsat 702Location:          1oWTp:                65Pol:               HFrequency:         11.555GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           N-TVSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                29Pol:               HFrequency:         11.641GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           NTV (Moscow)Satellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                37Pol:               VFrequency:         11.575GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Orbit promoSatellite:         Intelsat 602Location:          63oETp:                -Pol:               HFrequency:         11.516GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Paramount Channel, TheSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                46Pol:               VFrequency:         11.516GHzHrs:               6Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Paris PremiareSatellite:         Telecom 2ALocation:          8oWTp:                K2Pol:               VFrequency:         12.564GHzHrs:               12Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           Parliamentary Channel, TheSatellite:         Intelsat 601Location:          27.5oWTp:                62Pol:               HFrequency:         11.080GHzHrs:               8Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             compressedScramb. sys.:      System 2000Channel:           PlanateSatellite:         Telecom 2ALocation:          8oWTp:                R8Pol:               HFrequency:         12.585GHzHrs:               15Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           Playboy Channel, TheSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                42Pol:               VFrequency:         11.097GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Polonia 1Satellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                34Pol:               HFrequency:         11.673GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           PolsatSatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                11Pol:               HFrequency:         11.428GHzHrs:               10Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           PremieraSatellite:         DFS 2 KopernikusLocation:          28.5oETp:                A2Pol:               HFrequency:         11.525GHzHrs:               16Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           PremiereSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                17Pol:               HFrequency:         11.464GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           PremiereSatellite:         DFS 3 KopernikusLocation:          23.5oETp:                3Pol:               VFrequency:         12.591GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           Pro 7Satellite:         Astra 1ALocation:          19.2oETp:                14Pol:               VFrequency:         11.406GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Pro 7Satellite:         DFS 3 KopernikusLocation:          23.5oETp:                2Pol:               HFrequency:         12.558GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           QVCSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                38Pol:               VFrequency:         11.038GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCrypt (Clr)Channel:           Racing Channel, TheSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                60Pol:               VFrequency:         10.877GHzHrs:               5Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Rai DueSatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                8Pol:               VFrequency:         11.566GHzHrs:               16Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      Clr/DiscretChannel:           Rai UnoSatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                12Pol:               VFrequency:         11.449GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      Clr/DiscretChannel:           RendezvousSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                20APol:               HFrequency:         10.987GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt S2Channel:           Rete 4Satellite:         Intelsat 602Location:          63oETp:                61BPol:               HFrequency:         11.011GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           RIK 1Satellite:         Eutelsat II F4Location:          7oETp:                22WPol:               HFrequency:         11.144GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           RTL-2Satellite:         Astra 1ALocation:          19.2oETp:                11Pol:               HFrequency:         11.214GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           RTL-2Satellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                21SPol:               HFrequency:         11.095GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           RTL-4Satellite:         Astra 1DLocation:          19.2oETp:                52Pol:               VFrequency:         10.759GHzHrs:               7Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           RTL-5Satellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                64Pol:               VFrequency:         10.935GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      Clr/LuxcryptChannel:           RTL-9Satellite:         Telecom 2BLocation:          5oWTp:                K7Pol:               VFrequency:         12.732GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         5.80MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      SmartcryptChannel:           RTL TelevisionSatellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                33Pol:               HFrequency:         11.596GhzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           RTL TelevisionSatellite:         Astra 1ALocation:          19.2oETp:                2Pol:               VFrequency:         11.229GHzHrs:               20Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           RTL TViSatellite:         Telecom 2BLocation:          5oWTp:                K9Pol:               HFrequency:         12.627GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      SmartcryptChannel:           RTM (Morocco)Satellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                25WPol:               VFrequency:         10.970GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           RTP InternaaionalSatellite:         Eutelsat II F2Location:          10oETp:                39WPol:               VFrequency:         11.660GHzHrs:               9Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           RTS SerbiaSatellite:         Eutelsat II F4Location:          7oETp:                22Pol:               HFrequency:         11.178GHzHrs:               6Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           RTT Tunisia TV7Satellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                39WPol:               VFrequency:         11.658GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Sat1Satellite:         Astra 1ALocation:          19.2oETp:                6Pol:               VFrequency:         11.288GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Sat1Satellite:         DFS 3 KopernikusLocation:          23.5oETp:                APol:               HFrequency:         11.475GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Satel 2Satellite:         Eutelsat II F2Location:          10oETp:                20Pol:               HFrequency:         11.017GHzHrs:               14Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           SBS-6Satellite:         Astra 1DLocation:          19oETp:                53Pol:               HFrequency:         10.773GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      LuxcryptChannel:           Sci-Fi Channel, TheSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                47Pol:               HFrequency:         11.171GHzHrs:               3Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Sci-Fi Channel, TheSatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                2Pol:               VFrequency:         11.237GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             DigitalScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           Sci-Fi Channel, TheSatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                4Pol:               VFrequency:         11.283GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             DigitalScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           SelecTVSatellite:         Intelsat 601Location:          27.5oWTp:                63BPol:               HFrequency:         11.144GHzHrs:               7Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             B MacScramb. sys.:      B MacChannel:           Shqiptar TVSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                37WPol:               VFrequency:         11.575GHzHrs:               2Aud. fre.:         6.50MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           SIS Satellite RacingSatellite:         Intelsat 601Location:          27.5oWTp:                69APol:               HFrequency:         11.591GHzHrs:               6Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             B MacScramb. sys.:      B MacChannel:           Sky Movies GoldSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                26Pol:               VFrequency:         11.597GHzHrs:               6Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCrypt I/IIChannel:           Sky Movies GoldSatellite:         Astra 1DLocation:          19.2oETp:                60Pol:               VFrequency:         10.877GHzHrs:               12Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Sky MoviesSatellite:         Astra 1ALocation:          19.2oETp:                16Pol:               VFrequency:         11.436GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Sky NewsSatellite:         Astra 1ALocation:          19.2oETp:                12Pol:               VFrequency:         11.377GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Sky OneSatellite:         Astra 1ALocation:          19.2oETp:                8Pol:               VFrequency:         11.318GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Sky SportsSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                20Pol:               VFrequency:         11.509GHzHrs:               11Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Sky Sports 2Satellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                47Pol:               HFrequency:         11.171GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Sky Sports GoldSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                47Pol:               HFrequency:         11.171GHzHrs:               3Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Sky SoapSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                47Pol:               HFrequency:         11.171GHzHrs:               12Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           Sky TravelSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                47Pol:               HFrequency:         11.171GHzHrs:               5Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           SportsmaniaSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                36Pol:               VFrequency:         11.009GHzHrs:               6Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Sudwest 3Satellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                48Pol:               VFrequency:         11.185GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearCopyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EUROPE via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CHANNEL GUIDE (PART 4 OF 4)Channel:           Super RTLSatellite:         Astra 1ALocation:          19.2oETp:                13Pol:               HFrequency:         11.391GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           SVT1Satellite:         DFS Kopernikus 3Location:          33.5oETp:                B1Pol:               HFrequency:         11.550GHzHrs:               6-7Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt SChannel:           SVT2Satellite:         Intelsat 702Location:          1oWTp:                63BPol:               HFrequency:         11.177GHzHrs:               6-7Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt SChannel:           TCCSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                35Pol:               VFrequency:         10.994GHzHrs:               11Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCrypt I/IIChannel:           TCCSatellite:         ThorLocation:          0.8oWTp:                12Pol:               RFrequency:         11.938GHzHrs:               11Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt S*Channel:           Tele-5Satellite:         Hispasat 1ALocation:          30oWTp:                3Pol:               VFrequency:         12.631GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           Tele Monte CarloSatellite:         Telecom 2BLocation:          5oWTp:                K4Pol:               VFrequency:         12.648GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         5.80MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           TelepiuSatellite:         Eutelsat II F`1Location:          13oETp:                45Pol:               VFrequency:         12.542GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             compressedScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           TeleclubSatellite:         Astra 1DLocation:          19.2oETp:                55Pol:               HFrequency:         10.803GHzHrs:               15Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      NagravisionChannel:           TeleDeporteSatellite:         HispasatLocation:          30oWTp:                23Pol:               RFrequency:         12.149GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Tele NoticiasSatellite:         Hispasat 1ALocation:          30oWTp:                13Pol:               HFrequency:         12.671GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TelePaceSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                37Pol:               VFrequency:         11.575GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Telesat 5Satellite:         Hispasat 1ALocation:          30oWTp:                -Pol:               RFrequency:         12.379GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TF1Satellite:         Telecom 2BLocation:          5oWTp:                R5Pol:               VFrequency:         12.690GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         5.80MHzVideo:             SecamScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TGRTSatellite:         Eutelsat II F2Location:          10oETp:                26Pol:               VFrequency:         11.095GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           ThaiwaveSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                22Pol:               HFrequency:         11.163GHzHrs:               2Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TLCSatellite:         Intelsat 601Location:          27.5oWTp:                62Pol:               HFrequency:         11.080GHzHrs:               7Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             compressedScramb. sys.:      System 2000Channel:           TLCSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                41Pol:               HFrequency:         11.083GHzHrs:               7Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           TNTSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                37Pol:               HFrequency:         11.023GHzHrs:               10Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Top TVSatellite:         DFS 2 KopernikusLocation:          28.5oETp:                K3Pol:               VFrequency:         12.591GHzHrs:                -Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      Nokia LSC256Channel:           TravelSatellite:         Intelsat 601Location:          27.5oWTp:                63BPol:               HFrequency:         11.175GHzHrs:               10Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TRT AvrasyaSatellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                22SPol:               HFrequency:         11.181GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TRT TV1Satellite:         Turksat 1BLocation:          42oETp:                2APol:               HFrequency:         11.555GHzHrs:               12Aud. fre.:         6.80MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TRT TV2/TV GapSatellite:         Turksat 1BLocation:          42oETp:                2BPol:               HFrequency:         11.595GHzHrs:               10Aud. fre.:         6.80MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TRT TV3/TBMMSatellite:         Turksat 1BLocation:          42oETp:                3APol:               HFrequency:         11.645GHzHrs:               8Aud. fre.:         6.80MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TRT TV4Satellite:         Turksat 1BLocation:          42oETp:                3BPol:               HFrequency:         10.680GHzHrs:               9Aud. fre.:         6.80MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TV PlusSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                32SPol:               HFrequency:         11.554GHzHrs:               3Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           TV PlussSatellite:         Intelsat 702Location:          1oWTp:                69Pol:               HFrequency:         11.679GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           TV PoloniaSatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                13Pol:               HFrequency:         11.471GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TV RomaniaSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                37WPol:               VFrequency:         11.575GHzHrs:               -Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TV1000Satellite:         Astra 1ALocation:          19.2oETp:                7Pol:               HFrequency:         11.303GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           TV1000Satellite:         Intelsat 702Location:          1oWTp:                72Pol:               VFrequency:         11.054GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           TV1000 CinemaSatellite:         TV Sat 2Location:          1oWTp:                10Pol:               LHFrequency:         11.899GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           TV1000 CinemaSatellite:         Intelsat 601Location:          27.5oWTp:                69BPol:               HFrequency:         11.171GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           TV3 DanmarkSatellite:         Intelsat 702Location:          1oWTp:                75Pol:               VFrequency:         11.478GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           TV3 DanmarkSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                27Pol:               HFrequency:         11.612GHzHrs:               8Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           TV3 NorgeSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                31Pol:               HFrequency:         11.670GHzHrs:               8Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           TV3 NorgeSatellite:         Intelsat 702Location:          1oWTp:                61Pol:               HFrequency:         11.096GHzHrs:               8Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           TV3 SverigeSatellite:         Astra 1ALocation:          19.2oETp:                3Pol:               HFrequency:         11.244GHzHrs:               8Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           TV3 SverigeSatellite:         Intelsat 702Location:          1oWTp:                79Pol:               VFrequency:         11.597GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           TV3 SverigeSatellite:         SiriusLocation:          5.2oETp:                4Pol:               RHFrequency:         11.785GHzHrs:               8Aud. fre.:         6.50MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TV4 SverigeSatellite:         SiriusLocation:          5.2oETp:                3Pol:               RFrequency:         11.938GHzHrs:               8Aud. fre.:         6.50MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TV5Satellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                6Pol:               VFrequency:         11.325GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TV6 DenmarkSatellite:         TV Sat 2Location:          0.6oWTp:                18Pol:               LFrequency:         12.053GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           TV6 SverigeSatellite:         SiriusLocation:          5.2oETp:                8Pol:               RHFrequency:         11.862GHzHrs:               5Aud. fre.:         6.50MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TV6/ZTV multiplexSatellite:         Tele-XLocation:          5oWTp:                24Pol:               LHFrequency:         12.668GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             compressedScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           TV10 GoldSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                20BPol:               HFrequency:         11.015GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             compressedScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           TVE InternaaionalSatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                1Pol:               HFrequency:         11.221GHzHrs:               14Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           TVN (Norge)Satellite:         Intelsat 702Location:          1oWTp:                61BPol:               HFrequency:         11.016GHzHrs:               5Aud. fre.:         6.60MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           UK GoldSatellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                23Pol:               HFrequency:         11.553GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           UK LivingSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                34Pol:               VFrequency:         10.979GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           VeronicaSatellite:         Astra 1DLocation:          19.2oETp:                51Pol:               HFrequency:         10.744GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      LuxcryptChannel:           VH-1Satellite:         Astra 1BLocation:          19.2oETp:                22Pol:               VFrequency:         11.538GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCryptChannel:           VH-1 GermanySatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                2Pol:               VFrequency:         11.237GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             DigitalScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           VH-1 GermanySatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                4Pol:               VFrequency:         11.283GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             DigitalScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           VH-1 GermanySatellite:         Orion 1Location:          37.5oWTp:                14Pol:               HFrequency:         11.470GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             compressedScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           Viacom Digital MultiplexSatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                2Pol:               VFrequency:         11.242GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCrypt IIChannel:           VivaSatellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                20Pol:               HFrequency:         11.006GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Viva 2Satellite:         Eutelsat II F1Location:          13oETp:                20Pol:               HFrequency:         10.972GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           VoxSatellite:         Astra 1ALocation:          19.2oETp:                5Pol:               HFrequency:         11.273GHzHrs:               12Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           VoxSatellite:         DFS 3 KopernikusLocation:          23.5oETp:                BPol:               VFrequency:         11.602GHzHrs:               15Aud. fre.:         6.65MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           VT4Satellite:         DFS 1 KopernikusLocation:          28.5oETp:                K1Pol:               VFrequency:         12.541GHzHrs:               18Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             digitalScramb. sys.:      MPEG-2Channel:           VTVSatellite:         Eutelsat II F2Location:          10oETp:                25Pol:               VFrequency:         10.972GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           WDRSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                39Pol:               HFrequency:         11.053GHzHrs:               10Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           XXX TVSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                22Pol:               HFrequency:         11.163GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           XXX TVSatellite:         Eutelsat II F3Location:          16oETp:                37WPol:               VFrequency:         11.575GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           XXX TVSatellite:         Hot Bird 1Location:          13oETp:                16Pol:               HFrequency:         11.534GHzHrs:               4Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           ZDFSatellite:         Astra 1CLocation:          19.2oETp:                33Pol:               HFrequency:         10.964GHzHrs:               16Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearChannel:           Zee TVSatellite:         Astra 1DLocation:          19.2oETp:                54Pol:               VFrequency:         10.788MHzHrs:               17Aud. fre.:         7.02/7.20Video:             PalScramb. sys.:      VideoCrypt I/IIChannel:           ZTV DenmarkSatellite:         TV Sat 2Location:          0.6oWTp:                14Pol:               LFrequency:         11.977GHzHrs:               24Aud. fre.:         (digital)Video:             D2 MacScramb. sys.:      Eurocrypt MChannel:           ZTV SverigeSatellite:         SiriusLocation:          5.2oETp:                20Pol:               RHFrequency:         12.092GHzHrs:               8Aud. fre.:         6.50MHzVideo:             PalScramb. sys.:      ClearCopyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List WT03-B09-25IA087-000629-B022-322http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/pb66.html 205.156.212.5 19970122040411 text/html 130484HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:02:00 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:17 GMTContent-length: 130296Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/pb66.html Sample Issue Copyright CABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNet January 11, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CLT CONFIRMS INTENTION TO JOIN CANALSATELLITE (568 words) UK GOLD, VIDEOTRON CLASH OVER PACKAGING (447 words) ASTRA 1E BEGINS DIGITAL BROADCAST (190 words) NEWS BRIEF REWE BUYS INTO PRO 7 (99 words) ORBIT INTO EUROPE (113 words) AFCO BACKS ARABS (118 words) KIRCH REACHES COMPROMISE WITH MMBG (549 words) OVER 300 GET THE AXE IN NYNEX RESTRUCTURE (506 words) GRANADA, SKY LAUNCH GSKYB (420 words) AB LAUNCHES CHANNEL FOR DIGITAL BOUQUET (472 words) FRANCE TELECOM SLAMMED IN REPORT (395 words) BBC SEEKS EXPLANATION OF ORBIT 'CENSORSHIP' (363 words) DR/TV2 LAUNCH DANISH SPORTS PAY-TV CHANNEL (405 words) NETHOLD/TV4 FORM STRATEGIC ALLIANCE (419 words) STRONG SALES FOR DTH IN 1995 (456 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW DIGITAL DTH OUTSHINES CABLE PROSPECTS (441 words) NEW DEBATE ON GERMAN BROADCASTING LAW (436 words) UAP VERSIONS TCC AND DISCOVERY (470 words) BSKYB JOINS RTR FOR RUSSIAN BOUQUET? (294 words) HUNGARIAN COMMERCIAL TV IN THE WINGS (427 words) PREMIERE TOPS ONE MILLION SUBSCRIBERS (220 words) CME LAUNCHES SLOVENIAN POP TV (569 words) RADICAL CHANGES AT POLONIA 1 (224 words) VIACOM POISED FOR MID-EAST LAUNCH (215 words) CHANNEL V LAUNCHES THAI MUSIC CHANNEL (470 words) CZECH CABLE AND SATELLITE DEREGULATION (379 words) TERRESTRIALS SET TO TAKE ON SKY (317 words) BET ON JAZZ FOR AFRICA (381 words) TELEGRAAF POISED TO ACQUIRE SBS6 STAKE (280 words) SURVEY POLL GAUGES BELGIAN SUBSCRIBER SATISFACTION (336 words) MC EUROPE JOINS PREMIERE PACKAGE (417 words) NOZEMA PLANS TO SHELVE CASEMA STAKE (286 words) ARCADE GAINS AMSTERDAM ACCESS (203 words) SHAW, COGECO LAUNCH INTERNET SERVICES (268 words) CANADA PLANS WORLD'S LARGEST MMDS SYSTEM (383 words) HUGHES OPTS FOR SEA LAUNCH TO LOWER PRICES (381 words) CAPE BLAZE DASHES DSTV HOPES (369 words) EXPRESSVU, DIRECTV GET DTH LICENCES (485 words) ECHOSTAR LAUNCHES DBS, COMPETITION BEGINS (448 words) NEWS BRIEF EAST GRINSTEAD (57 words) SKI INTERACTIVE (77 words) DUTCH INVITATION (108 words) STAR REPORT NOVEMBER (594 words) FEATURE AN UNCERTAIN LAW (1174 words) SHARE OF VIEWING IN UK BROADBAND CABLE HOMES (234 words) UK SATELLITE TV CHANNELS WEEKLY REACH (210 words) NEWS BRIEF KIDS CHANNELS INCREASE VIEWING SHARES (234 words) MEHR MUSIK (78 words) DUTCH AD SPEND (127 words) HOT NATIONAL LICENCE (105 words) CASEMA PPV SUCCESS (89 words) ARIANE BRAZIL LAUNCH (74 words) SIRIUS SWITCH (81 words) TELERATE ON EBN (76 words) PERFORMANCE ON ORION (64 words) CONTINENTAL PHONE SERVICE (85 words) MEDIASET SALE (72 words) MICROSOFT/NBC NEWS (100 words) RAISING THE STAKES (42 words) PEARSON TUMBLES (81 words) ON THE MOVE (245 words) CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996CLT CONFIRMS INTENTION TO JOIN CANALSATELLITECanal Plus' digital DTH company Canalsatellite is being valued inpreparation for the entry of la Compagnie Luxembourgeoise deTelediffusion (CLT) as a shareholder (C&SE Vol.12 No.24). "We arecurrently in negotiation with Canal Plus about joining the capital ofCanalsatellite," confirmed Geneviave Yver, senior manager at CLT'sdigital arm, Club RTL. "However the value of Canalsatellite has to befirst established, as we do not think it is worth the amount cited byCanal Plus, of around Fr4 billion (#526m)."According to Patrick Jousseaume, media analyst at stockbroker Ferri,Canalsatellite was valued at Fr1 billion when it launched as ananalogue service in November 1992 and should now be worth Fr2-3billion. If CLT were to take a 25% stake, as has been suggested, itwould correspond to between Fr500 and Fr750 million. Canalsatellite'sownership would then stand as follows: Canal Plus (52.5%); CLT (25%);Compagnie Generale des Eaux (15%); Chargeurs (7.5%). Canalsatellite iscurrently owned by Canal Plus (70%), CGE (20%) and Chargeurs (10%).Several factors have pushed CLT to change its strategy. First, theinvestment needed to launch its own French-speaking digital bouquet of25 thematic channels was estimated at around Fr5 billion compared withFr400 million invested by Canal Plus in Canalsatellite. CLT has nothalted its own digital plans so far, revealed Yver. "Until a finalagreement on CLT joining Canalsatellite is reached, we will continueworking on our own bouquet. We intend to be an active partner inCanalsatellite and bring our knowledge in marketing and programmes."For the deal to go-ahead, all shareholders (Canal Plus, CGE, Chargeurs,CLT) have to agree, said a source at Canal Plus. An agreement beforethe launch of Canalsatellite planned at the end of the first quarter of1996 is preferred, but the shareholders do not outrule the discussionscontinuing.For Havas, the common shareholder in CLT and Canal Plus,  CLT joiningCanalsatellite would resolve Havas' concern over the two companieslaunching two competing bouquets. Anne Brucy, Havas senior manager,said, "We are glad that things are developing as they are. We alwaysexpected that only one bouquet would be launched."CLT also faces difficulties on the German market where a recent articlein German magazine Der Spiegel claimed that Bertelsmann was close to atake- over of CLT.The German story was flatly denied the next day (December 27) by theLuxembourg prime minister Jean-Claude Junker, however, who claimed hehad "the personal assurance" from CLT's Belgian shareholder AlbertFrare that he was not to sell his stake in the company.Junker did confirm that CLT is negotiating taking a 25% stake in CanalPlus digital bouquet Canalsatellite. CLT has long been battling with co-shareholder Bertelsmann over control of German TV station RTL.Bertelsmann which controls 48.1% of the capital wants to buy out the 2%owned by Burda to reach 50.1% of RTL capital.This delicate position of the CLT in France and in Germany goes someway towards justifying the rumours about the sale of CLT to aconglomerate composed of Bertelsmann/Canal Plus/Havas.Industry observers suggest CLT may now take the option of opening upits capital (Fr16 billion or #2bn) - to foreign partners like RupertMurdoch's News Corp, Disney, Viacom or Time Warner, to ward offBertelsmann and Canal Plus.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996UK GOLD, VIDEOTRON CLASH OVER PACKAGINGFailed year-long negotiations have resulted in UK Gold instructingVideotron to stop distributing the channel to its London and Hampshirefranchises from February 12, a move described by Benjamin Ball, head ofprogramming at Videotron, as "a strong-arm negotiating tactic."The crux is Videotron's refusal to carry UK Gold on its lowestretention tier of five channels called Option 1, (to which channels canbe added a la carte). Gold is carried in a 10-channel tier calledStandard Pack - Videotron's 'big basic' is called Super Pack.Videotron claims that UK Gold is asking for #0.10 per subscriber morethan any other cable operator because it wants flexibility ofpackaging, and is bundling UK Gold with UK Living, making it uneconomicto carry UK Gold alone.Bruce Steinberg, chief executive of UK Gold, told C&SE, "It's nothingto do with UK Living. We offer them the same single channel deal as tothe rest of the industry. We believe that UK Gold should go to the mostwidely distributed package, not in the second tier. Videotrondistributes UK Gold as an o la carte channel against our wishes. Wehave offered deals on lower than 95% penetration, but there's a price.They can keep their tiered structure and even a la carte, but they willhave to pay a tiered price. We are buying top quality content and it'sexpensive. We need realistic penetration rates to sell. We won'tjeopardise 98% of our business for 2%, giving preferential terms."UK Gold is received by 87% of Videotron subscribers, the remaindercould do so for #1 as an a la carte channel, or #3 pcm for the nexttier. Unconfirmed industry estimates put the current price persubscriber for UK Gold at around #0.28 and #0.38, with currentinvoicing to Videotron around #0.45.Videotron says it is resisting attempts by UK Gold to imposecontractual conditions that do not give its customers a flexible low-cost cable TV service. Steinberg countered, "Videotron goes on abouthow much better its packaging is, but its penetration levels are thesame as the rest of the industry - 21%. As Option 1 only has a coupleof channels, the terrestrial channels and their interactive services,their penetration rate is actually a lot lower. Let them make theirinteractive services a la carte."Videotron responds that it has one of the lowest churn rates in theindustry and is building penetration by removing the financial barrierto entry. Videotron intends to continue negotiations with UK Gold,which is also hopeful the dispute will be resolved.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996ASTRA 1E BEGINS DIGITAL BROADCASTThe first digital services have been switched on to the newly-commissioned Astra 1E. However, the lack of available receivers meansthat the services are only being viewed by a select few.The first two channels to be switched on were the German nationalpublic broadcasters ARD and ZDF (Transponder 71). Since December 31 theclear MPEG-2 transmissions have been broadcast direct from SES inLuxembourg after being converted from the analogue format.The French Canalsatellite package is using transponders 66 and 70; thetransmissions had previously been made from Astra 1D, which alsooperates in the Astra 1E band. The number of channels included in themultiplex package continues to vary.Nethold is using transponders 77 and 80 for its test transmissions fromits digital centre in Hilversum. Again, the number of programmesincluded is regularly varied, but will include channels inMultiChoice's Scandinavian package.MultiChoice premium channel FilmNet was rebranded from January 1. Astrachannel FilmNet Plus became FilmNet 1 while the Thor-delivered FilmNet:The Complete Movie Channel is now titled FilmNet 2.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996REWE BUYS INTO PRO 7Germany's largest food retailing group Rewe entered the media businesslast week with the purchase of a 40% stake in commercial TV station Pro7, set up by Thomas Kirch and Pro 7 chairman Georg Kopfler in 1989.Rewe is thought to have paid around DM60 million (#27m) for the shares,which it bought off the two Munich banks BFH Bank and BayerischeHypotheken (which held 75% of the shares). The two banks are now leftwith a 35.5% share in Pro 7, while Kirch still holds 24.5%.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996ORBIT INTO EUROPEOrbit has booked three transponders on Intelsat 702 to allow small-dishreception of its digital DTH pay-package across western Europe andNorth Africa. The new capacity, which will fire up early in 1996, willenable viewers from London to Algiers to access its channels via 80cmdishes, giving the same level of service as provided to Middle Easternterritories via Intelsat 704.The three transponders will enable Orbit to offer its full 30-plus TVand radio channels, though in Europe access is likely to be restrictedto those (chiefly Arabic-language) channels for which Orbit holdsrights outside the Middle East region.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996AFCO BACKS ARABSFor the first time, the French cable operators' association AFCO hasdemanded the authorisation to carry North African channels (C&SE Vol.12No.23). Until now, this kind of demand has been made by individualoperators and didn't succeed. Under the umbrella of AFCO, the cableoperators now stand more chance of success. During the December meetingin Cotonou (Benin, Africa), the head of French regulatory body, CSA,Herve Bourges, asked the French president of the Republic, JacquesChirac, to allow the CSA to sign agreements with Arabic channels. AFCOargues that cable should receive the same treatment as satellite whichis allowed to broadcast Arabic-speaking channels without regulation.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996KIRCH REACHES COMPROMISE WITH MMBGSeemingly defeated in the digital decoder war in Germany, Leo Kirch hasswallowed his pride and signed up to the Multi-mediaBetriebsgesellschaft, the consortium of Deutsche Telekom, Canal Plus,CLT, German public broadcasters ARD and ZDF and private broadcaster RTLset up to develop an open, unified decoder system for Germany. Seca(the joint company formed by Bertelsmann and Canal Plus) and Kirch'stechnical arm, BetaTechnik, are now forming a joint company to developa standardised digital decoder and conditional access system for theGerman market."There are still questions to be answered such as distribution,technical details and the exact shareholder structure," said Kirchspokesman Johannes Schmitz. "It's a new situation for us. Both sidescould have blocked each other, so we decided to join the MMBG and workon a common decoder system."After Deutsche Telekom's decision to opt for the MMBG's Mediaboxdecoder technology, dismissing Kirch's "offer" on the grounds thatinsufficient technical information on the decoder and conditionalaccess system was submitted and Telekom's tender protocol was notadhered to (C&SE Vol.12, No.24), Kirch's position looked veryuncertain.Without Deutsche Telekom, Kirch did not have the 16 million Germancable homes, key to the digital developments in Germany and was leftwith an order for one million Nokia decoders - it is still unclear whatwill become of this order. "The order stands firm. The decoders can beused in other markets [such as Scandinavia]," offered Schmitz. Thedecision by Kirch to join the MMBG has been welcomed by the members ofthe consortium, for it prevents the situation which the MMBG wanted toavoid all along - having two competing decoder systems in the Germanmarket - which could only serve to fragment the market and confuse theconsumer.Kirch is reportedly to take an 8.8% stake in MMBG, along withBertelsmann, CLT and ARD/ZDF, while Canal Plus and RTL are expected tohold a 4.4% stake. Kirch reportedly demanded an 11% share along withBertelsmann, but was blocked by the other MMBG members who refused tolet Kirch muscle in at the last moment and steal the show.5% will be held by broadcasters including the oRF and the SRG and theBauer publishing house. Deutsche Telekom and cable operator Vebacomwill hold the remaining 51% share. Further cable operators are expectedto join the Telekom/Vebacom stake.The German cartel authorities have initially agreed to the newconstellation of the MMBG. Their wish for as many service providers andservice carriers as possible to be included in the consortium nowseemingly fulfilled. The MMBG still has to be approved by the EC,while, the German media authorities are concerned that the decodersystem is as open and non-discriminatory as the MMBG claims it will be.Kirch's compromise with the MMBG is also good news for Germany's onlypay-TV channel, Premiere, which is to play a vital role in the launchof digital television. Premiere had been caught in the middle of theMMBG versus Kirch digital decoder fray - its main shareholders beingCanal Plus, Bertelsmann and Kirch. A common decoder system will now beable to be offered to the channel's one million subscribers.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996OVER 300 GET THE AXE IN NYNEX RESTRUCTURENynex CableComms, the UK's second largest cable company, is cutting itsworkforce by 310 employees - including a 20% cut at executive directorlevel - as part of a major restructuring forecast to reduce overheadsby #7 million to #10 million per year."Nynex came out very low in an efficiency comparison with other cableoperators published last October by Goldman Sachs. The restructuringwas entirely forecastable," commented Neil Blackley, media analyst atGoldman Sachs.Despite the improved cost/revenue balance, and the positivepresentation of the move by Nynex as 'restructuring for growth', tocreate what Allen Saunders, executive director corporate communicationsat Nynex CableComms described as "a new, leaner Nynex", the initialmarket reaction was negative, with shares dropping 1.5p. Longer term, amore positive response on shares is expected, but Nynex hadunderperformed the market by 25% over the last three months.With the departure of former president Eugene Connell to the US, JohnKillian has been appointed joint CEO and president at Nynex CableComms,his former separate role of chief financial officer disappearing.Similarly, Sally Davies, responsible for regulatory affairs anddevelopment, is moving to Nynex in the US, her duties spread amongother staff.And as the company consolidates to a central sales organisation, withcentralised installation, maintenance and repair and customer services,there will no longer be separate North and South directors ofoperations, with the director of operations South, Peter Morse,resigning. Accounting and management support are expected to see mostlosses, through a combination of natural wastage, voluntary andinvoluntary redundancies."The cuts are spread across the board, geographically, with no sacreddisciplines, and affecting all levels. We have revenue objectives whichwe need to correlate with costs. If it had been a pure cost-cuttingexercise we could have just cut staff by 10% three months ago. Instead,we have conducted a complete review with a 100-man team, andconsultants Coopers & Lybrand, which has just concluded," explainedSaunders.He continued, "We have identified significant efficiency improvementsand are confident the new organisation is correctly sized to meet ournew business objectives. Our North and South areas will now report to asingle manager, no longer using different routes to the sameobjectives."Saunders also accepted that last year's performance was not up toexpectations, "We were delighted with our telephony penetration and lowchurn, but we have never hidden our disappointment at the level of catvpenetration [18.9%] and this is still a priority issue to address."Killian pointed out that Nynex has, "doubled in size each year since1991," and now aims to cut life-cycle costs and achieve economies ofscale. But ironically, it is the two largest UK players, Nynex andTelewest, which underperformed in the Goldman Sachs efficiency table,while small players like Diamond Cable, General Cable, and Comcast UKCable did well.Nynex's share price dropped to 104p at press time on January 9.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996GRANADA, SKY LAUNCH GSKYBFormer Granada executive and currently controller of factual programmesat the ITV Network Centre, Stuart Prebble, has been appointed as chiefexecutive of GSkyB, the new company set up by Granada and BSkyB, whichplans to launch eight new channels in late 1996. Travel Channelcommercial director Jerry Glover, meanwhile, has been named as managingdirector (commercial) of GSkyB.The GSkyB package will be available as part of Sky Multi-Channels andwill probably be spread across three transponders, possibly on Astra1D, on which BSkyB still has some spare capacity.The new channels will be led by Granada Gold Plus, which will offerprogramming from the extensive libraries of both Granada and LWT,including classic episodes of Coronation Street.The other seven channels will cover a range of lifestyle topics: Healthand Beauty, Home and Garden, Food and Wine, Granada Good Life, GranadaMen and Motoring, Granada Talk TV and Granada TV Shopping Guide.Granada Gold Plus will broadcast for 18 hours a day, while thelifestyle channels will take the form of broadcasting blocks. Men andMotoring, for example, will have a late evening slot, following on fromGranada Gold Plus.All seven lifestyle channels will feature predominantly newprogramming. Granada Talk TV will be produced at LWT's London studios,while the other six channels will all come from the North West."This venture will open up a whole new avenue of custom programmemaking," said chief operating officer of Granada Group and Chiefexecutive of Granada's television division, Charles Allen, "enabling usto significantly expand our program production facilities in bothLondon and the North West." With the addition of a new air-time salesteam within Laser, Granada's London-based sales house, the new ventureis expected to create around 200 new positions.Granada's economic interest in the channel is 60%, although itsownership is limited to 20% under current regulations. However, Granadais hoping the government will remove the ownership restrictions onbroadcasters becoming involved in satellite operations, and thus allowit to increase its ownership in the new venture to reflect its economicparticipation.The cost of the venture is expected to be #25 million over its firsttwo years, including start-up costs of #10 million. It hopes to be inprofit in three years and repay the initial investment in four years.In the long run Granada also hopes to develop these channels for theinternational market.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996AB LAUNCHES CHANNEL FOR DIGITAL BOUQUETLeading French youth TV producer AB-Productions (Dorothee and sitcomnumber one Helane et les Garaons) offered its young audience a newchannel for Christmas. Launched live during a party on December 7, ABChannel 1 is broadcasting series and sitcoms programming via a Belgacomtransponder on Eutelsat II F1 at 13 degrees East.AB1 is the first channel of a future digital bouquet, the seventh inFrance, after those announced by Canal Plus, CLT, TF1, Arte, FranceTelevision and France Telecom. According to AB, in a few months timethe current analogue Eutelsat transponder will be switched into amultiplex of nine digital channels, each of them dedicated to athematic genre: classic movies, thrillers, cartoons, comedy, romance,action films, documentaries and adult.Two other transponders would be used afterwards to upgrade the offer to25 digital channels within two years. The digital package will beoffered to DTH viewers as well as cable. For the latter, AB's policywill be to let the MSOs use their own conditional access if desired, inexchange for offering the whole package.Such an ambitious project has aroused surprise and doubt among theFrench media world, especially since AB-Productions is a small companyin comparison to the TV giants engaged in the digital race.It is understood that the company is in talks with four companies withthe aim of acquiring a whole package, including an encryption system, aset-top-box and a subscription management service, but AB declined tocomment if such names as Canal Plus, France Telecom, Nethold or Kirchare among the candidates.Despite the choice of a Hot Bird slot, the channel's audience islimited to the few motorised dish owners who receive the 12GHz band ofthe transponder thanks to their multiband converters, indispensable toreceive the French channels elsewhere, on the Telecom 2 satellites. Themajority of the million or so French DTH viewers use fixed dishes withmonoband converters: 12 GHz LNBs for Telecom 2 or 11 GHz LNBs for theAstra and Eutelsat series.Cable is therefore essential to increase the audience. AB1 was granteda cable licence by the CSA on December 21, despite the fact that thechannel currently screens mostly US-made products from the catalogue of14,000 hours of programming that AB-Productions acquired oninternational markets. Negotiations have already begun with Frenchcable operators.Capacity is scarce on most cable networks, especially in Paris wherethe basic tier is full and only two D2 Mac upper-tier channels remainvacant. According to Videopole, it could be the first company to offerAB1, if negotiations over the price lead to an agreement. AB is askinga Ffr 2,50 per subscriber per month carriage fee after a six-month freetrial.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996FRANCE TELECOM SLAMMED IN REPORTFrench minister for Post, Telecommunications and Space, FranaoisFillon, unveiled last week the main points of the report he orderedlast September from Georges Vanderchmitt, a former adviser of Frenchaudit body Cour des Comptes. Fearing that France could miss out in thedigital race by having too many digital bouquet projects, Fillondemanded a clear overview of the country's policy on satellitetelecommunications.The Vanderchmitt report recommends the creation of a "digital superalliance" between all the major French players, (public and private)with broadcasters' access to the set-top boxes ensured "under fair,reasonable and non-discriminatory conditions". The report insists onthe necessity to guarantee competition among the players inside thealliance while having a strong policy on an external offer. Thanks todigital technology, the latter should be adapted to the differentgeographical zones it targets.Vanderchmitt foresees that the digital market should be supervisedtogether by the CSA and the Conseil de la Concurrence (competitionbody).In his report, Vanderchmitt wants at the same time "to help Eutelsat toset up a credible alternative to Astra" by changing the organisation'sstructure, while he would also "establish stronger links" with Astra.The Luxemburg system could be, according to him, "the dominant operatorin the French sky within the next three years".The Telecom 3 series of crafts, however, is condemned by the reportwhich underlines the fact that Telecom 2D still has no clients.Moreover, Vanderchmitt claims that France Telecom paid "too littleattention to marketing" and is now "marginalized and isolated". Thereport concludes that the company is not in a situation to competeanyway and should give up its DTH activities, by slipping "towards arole of satellite services provider" only.Commenting on the Vanderchmitt report, minister Fillon said FranceTelecom's role in satellite television needs to be "redefined" andrecommended "more cooperation" with Eutelsat. Fillon also stressed thatthe prejudice against the SES has to be ended and agreed with thereport's remarks that cable and satellite jurisdictions have to beharmonized and lightened, mainly by bringing French law in line withthe European directive on transfrontier broadcasting signals.Fillon revealed that he has ordered another report from former TDFgeneral director Philippe Levrier on whether or not to develop digitalterrestrial television.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996BBC SEEKS EXPLANATION OF ORBIT 'CENSORSHIP'The BBC is to "investigate as a matter of the utmost importance"reports that Orbit has been censoring its Arabic news channel'scoverage of the case of Saudi dissident Mohammed al-Mas'ari. Senior BBCand Orbit representatives were due to meet to discuss the allegededitorial interference as CSE went to press.According to Arabic and UK press reports, blackouts of the BBC's al-Mas'ari reports started on Friday 5 January and continued over theweekend. A spokesman for BBC Worldwide, which produces the Arabic-language channel under a long-term contract with Orbit, said thatreports of "repeated interruptions" to the service had been confirmed -but it was not yet clear whether this was deliberate censorship of theal-Mas'ari deportation story or a "technical fault...we do not yet knowthe source of the interruptions," he said.Orbit was "concerned" about the reports and would be "looking into thematter", a spokesman said - but would not comment further beyondinsisting that "reports of subscribers seeking compensation areunfounded".If the blackouts were deliberate, Orbit will have infringed the termsof its contract with BBC Worldwide which guaranteed the editorialindependence of the service, as well as its pledges not to resort tocensorship. The BBC spokesman said that coverage of the Mas'ari casewould continue on the Arabic channel - "there has been further coveragethis week" - whatever the outcome.For Saudi-owned Orbit, which already faces the problem of a patchily-enforced dish ban in its home market, the al-Mas'ari affair coincidedwith the first week of hard encryption - and thus could hardly havecome at a worse time. It had to face the dilemma of whether to riskenraging the Saudi government, notoriously intolerant of journalisticenquiry into its dealings, or of upsetting its partner and itspotential subscribers, just at the point when they were being asked topay for the first time. And also just before the launch of the rivalMultiChoice digital DTH package into which - it's not too hard toimagine - a BBC-type news service could fit very well.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996DR/TV2 LAUNCH DANISH SPORTS PAY-TV CHANNELDanish public service broadcasters, Danmarks Radio (DR) and commercialchannel TV2, together with state-controlled  Danish Telecom and TeleDanmark are to launch a sports pay-TV channel, primarily aimed at thesome 1.3 million households (some 60% of the total population)connected to cable systems. The new channel will eventually be alsooffered via satellite to private DTH owners.The as yet unnamed channel will primarily broadcast sports (mostlyfootball, the most popular sport in Denmark), as well as films andpopular entertainment.The new project seems to have been triggered by the big deal recentlystruck by DR and TV2 with the Danish Football Union - described as"historical" by the Danish press, partly because of the amount of moneyinvolved, and partly because it is the first time DR and TV2 havejoined forces, to fend off competition from the private commercial TVsector.The contract with the Danish Football Union is for eight years with aprice tag of over DKr0.5 billion, (#58m). For that money, the new pay-TV channel, DR and TV2 will have the rights to all Danish football(also international matches) of public interest.Per Kregh Simonsen, head of sports at DR, commented, "From our side itrequired quite a new way of commercial thinking. And without our trumpcard, the new pay service, we would never had been able to land thecontract."One snag in the project, is that under Danish law, Tele Danmark is notallowed to be involved in programming operations, but it is expectedthat the law will be changed by the Danish parliament this summer.Despite the law, Tele Danmark, which is expected to put up most of theinvestment money for the project, has obviously had plans to launch apay-TV service for some time. One year ago, it recruited one ofDenmark's most respected personalities in the film and media business,Bo Christiansen, who has a long history with Denmark's biggest film andmedia group, Nordisk Film, and is believed to have been instrumental inplanning the new sports service. Peter Herforth, former MD of NordiskFilm Production, was recently hired to manage the new station.The new pay-TV service will be offered at a monthly fee of DKr100 andis expected to break even with a subscriber level of around 200,000households.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996NETHOLD/TV4 FORM STRATEGIC ALLIANCESwedish TV4 and Nethold Nordic have formed a strategic alliance. Fromoccasional collaboration in recent years - mainly in the sports field -the leading Swedish commercial station and the increasinglymultinational Nethold have now realised their cooperation into a fully-fledged alliance. Furthermore, TV4 and FilmNet have jointly taken overan office building in Stockholm that used to be the Swedish head-quarters of Philips.Jan Friedman, vice president of Nethold Nordic, said the new alliancewould "spread throughout" the two companies, and that it would alsolead to similar alliances with local broadcasters in other Nordicterritories.TV4 and Nethold/FilmNet have identified a number of areas where the newalliance will take effect: Joint acquisitions of programme rights, bothto films and mini-series, sports and other big events. Instrumental inthis area is Nethold's acquisitions organisation, Holland-based ProNet.Friedman points out that in Europe, ProNet acquires rights for FilmNetnot only in the Nordic Countries and Benelux, but also in Poland, CzechRepublic, Slovenia, Slovakia, Hungary, Greece, Cyprus and Italy: Jointco-production of Swedish movies and TV-movies together with localproduction companies. Over a three-year period TV4 and FilmNet willinvest SKr 30 million (#3m), of which FilmNet will provide one third."We will also cooperate in producing other kinds of programming, likefillers and film magazines", said Friedman.If and when TV4 launches its second channel, satellite-delivered TV4Plus, as it is called internally, it will be exclusively distributedvia Nethold's digital platforms. The parties have also agreed toinclude the existing TV4 transmissions, also with exclusive satelliterights, on the Nethold platform.Nethold's SMS operation, MultiChoice, will also be made available forTV4 in many different areas. Nethold's digital platforms are expectedto be used by TV4 in future news services, home shopping, games etc.In the sports field, where FilmNet and TV4 have already establisheddifferent ways of cooperating, for instance in sharing rights like theSwedish national ice hockey league and the English Premier FootballLeague, plans are now to establish shared programme archives, researchfunctions and news desk services for TV4 .FilmNet is already a client for the TV4 air-time sales group, but theairtime bought in the future by FilmNet is expected to increaseconsiderably.It has been hinted in the Swedish trade press that a future element ofcross-ownership would be a very plausible development of the newstrategic alliance.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996STRONG SALES FOR DTH IN 1995UK sales of satellite receiving equipment revitalised during 1995.BSkyB reports that 904,555 units were sold during 1995, however thiswill include non-domestic sales, to pubs, sports and social clubstogether with resales between satellite retailers.Included in the total is the largest ever sales figure for a singleweek, 40,153, for the week ending December 16. The total amount ofsales in December was 111,320. The actual installed base of satellitehomes increased by 339,000 reflecting replacement sales and churn.According to Continental Research, on December 31, 1995 the installedbase of UK satellite homes had risen to 3.698 million, including 55,000smatv homes. The number of UK smatv homes has progressively fallen overrecent years, often resulting from the growth of cable services.Continental estimates the total of UK cable homes at December 31 to be1.205 million.The UK DTH market has been spurred by the offer of "under #100"receivers from manufacturers including Pace and, under the Minervabrand, Grundig. According to market research company GfK, Pace nowholds over 40% of the UK market with Pace increasing its volume salesfor November year-on-year by 66%.The combined growth of DTH and cable homes for the fourth quarter of1995 was 232,000. New dish installations - replacement sales continueto run at a little over one in three - represented 135,000 homeseclipsing cable at 97,000.Cable installations had been running ahead of new dish homes. The DTHrenaissance can be attributed to pre-Christmas sales, particularly innon-cable areas, where the only way to gain access to the new mediachannels is through a dish. The launch of Astra 1D, which operates atfrequencies lower than a majority of the installed base of equipmentcan receive, will also be a factor.According to Continental Research director David Chilvers, in order forcable to reach more homes the installed base would have to consistentlygrow at over 100,000 more per quarter than DTH homes - a target whichcable has so far found unattainable. At this rate cable would still noteclipse DTH until well after the turn of the century.A new study by Continental shows that the saturation point for cableand satellite television in the UK to be 35%. The 35% penetration,equivalent to eight million homes, is in line with Continental's lastmajor forecast produced, separately, last April.Chilvers added that generation effects will create an impact in around20 years time creating a slow build up in penetration. Chilvers likensfuture growth to the telephone where penetration grew quickly to 80%,but the last 20% is proving more difficult.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996DIGITAL DTH OUTSHINES CABLE PROSPECTSCable penetration rates could be significantly held back in Europeanmarkets where digital direct-to-home pay-per-view has first-moveradvantages, according to a new circular from SBC Warburg.The investment bank, whose conclusions are based on the last 18 monthsof satellite-delivered PPV in the US, says with average DirecTv andUSSB subscribers generating PPV sales of $17 (#11) per month, "thesigns are that PPV can become a really significant generator ofbusiness for BSkyB and Canal Plus. In our BSkyB model, weconservatively estimate PPV revenues in 2002 of #200 million. Based onthe US experience, that implies about 800,000 subscribers spending #10per month. We could easily be a factor of five times too low.""This is not good news for the European cable industry, and thoseoperators who are either still building out their networks or who havenot yet upgraded narrowband... may find progress difficult if digitalsatellite has first-mover advantages," claims SBC Warburg.DirecTv, which has targeted operational breakeven for the second halfof this year, or three million subscribers, notched up its onemillionth customer in November. SBC Warburg says the Hughes-backedventure has been scoring PPV buy rates of between 150 and 200 per centon some of its movies - five to six times higher than on cable.According to the report, European Media Monthly, in October last yearalmost 80% of DirecTv and USSB subscribers registered PPV buys, with3.78 the average number of monthly purchases. Estimated PPV revenue forthe month was $13 million for DirecTv and USSB, and $16 million forcable operator-backed DTH service Primestar.PPV on US cable, meanwhile, has been plagued by poor release windows, alack of channel capacity and confusing listing schedules in TV guides,says SBC Warburg.By comparison, DirecTv and the other digital DTH service providers aredevoting 60-plus channels to near-video-on-demand PPV and havedeveloped more user-friendly electronic programme guides.More bad news for the cable industry, says the bank, is that DirecTv,which is growing at a rate of 90,000-100,000 new subscribers per month,has been recruiting up to 50% of its customer base from cabled areas,while over 40% were or continue to be subscribers to cable."Furthermore, those subscribers lured away tend to be the big spenderswho part with more than $60 per month to feed their TV appetites,"notes the report.Cable operators hoping to fend off digital DTH with local programmingservices may also be disappointed, suggests SBC Warburg, since "theseare not a driver of subscriber take-up."Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996NEW DEBATE ON GERMAN BROADCASTING LAWOnly four weeks after the premiers of each of Germany's 16 statesreached a compromise on the long-disputed new broadcasting act, a newlist of controversial points have come to the fore.The main bone of contention is the media ownership rules and whethernew media or digital services will require licences from the mediaauthorities. The SPD-governed states are now demanding that no singleowner can have a significant stake in companies which together hold anaudience share of 25%. This would mean, for example, that the KirchGroup could not hold stakes in channels which have a market share over25%. If the stake exceeds 30%, new anti-trust regulation would comeinto force. Besides this strongly-criticised point, the socialdemocrats want television channels with over 10% marketshare to beobliged to distribute their programming within an independent company.Spiegel TV has its own licence scheduling its magazines on Sat l andRTL Television. If the other premiers agree to these new demands, thesocial democrats will agree to the media ownership ruling allowingshareholders to own 100% in one television channel, 49.9% in the nextand 24.9% in other special interest programmes.To control all these regulations, the prime ministers intend toestablish a new media concentration commission (KEK) acting alongsidethe media authorities. The commission would be closely involved in thedecisions of the media authorities.There is also a question mark over the limits on public programming andits financing. Much of the monthly public fee of DM 23,80 (#10.70) isneeded to fund the ARD and its member stations administration. Manypoliticians and commercial stations are demanding that ARD and ZDF stoptheir expansion and broadcast news, information, culture, children'sprogramming and a mixture of entertainment as in the past.The commission for financing public broadcasting KEF has to come upwith a proposal for the next broadcasting fee which runs from 1997 tothe year 2000. According to the government of Lower Saxony, thebroadcasting fee will increase to DM28.25 a month - an increase ofDM4.45. The ARD will receive DM2.35 and ZDF DM2.05. The money will helpfund a new parliamentary and a children's channel to be launched by theARD from 1997 - a move strongly criticised by private broadcastersassociation VPRT, which fears that the new publicly-financed specialinterest channels will target commercial channels as Nickelodeon andall-news channels such as N-TV.On February 8, the premiers will meet again to try and reach a newagreement on the act.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996UAP VERSIONS TCC AND DISCOVERYUnited Artists Programming has introduced a version of TCC for theNordic market and for Discovery in the Netherlands. TCC has now alsobeen withdrawn from the Dutch market though minimal distributionthrough the VideoCrypt II package will continue for the time being.A backhaul was introduced on January 1 for TCC Nordic to feed the Thorsatellite which has previously taken the single UK-produced versionfrom Astra. The backhaul is at present transmitted in clear analoguePal from Intelsat 601, though the intention is to switch to anencrypted feed in the near future.UAP vice president, distribution Andrew Shaw said that soundtracks inthe four Scandinavian languages - Swedish, Norwegian, Danish andFinnish - would represent 45% of TCC Nordic's output. He said TCC hadreached the point in the Nordic region where such local versioning wasfeasible. 80% of TCC subscribers in Scandinavia are now able to viewthe Nordic version and Shaw expects this to be brought up to a near100% within a few months. At the same time TCC is, at 1.2 millionhomes,  closing the distribution gap on Discovery, the result of thetransponder share on Thor, which allows cable operators to take aseamless feed of the two channels.General manager Franklin Getchell said TCC Nordic had been created as atotally separate service running for 12 hours a day as opposed to the11 hours of the Astra service. TCC is on-air between 06.00 and 18.00CET. "The 12 hours will be a mix of programming. All of the live actionprogramming will be regionalised, the pre-school will be added by theend of the year." Programming for older children, including some of thehigh-profile animation will be subtitled. For younger children dubbingwill be used where the rights allow it. Three quarters will be dubbedby the end of 1996.The decision to withdraw TCC from the Dutch market follows theacquisition by parent company Flextech of a 33% share in the Dutchlanguage children's channel Kindernet. While Kindernet has a virtualsaturation penetration of the market at 5.5 million, TCC is onlyavailable to 850,000 homes, principally in the Rotterdam area. TCC'slong-time refusal to pay for carriage in the region means distributionis unlikely to increase further.Discovery Channel, which has been available in the Netherlands since1989 and is available in 4.3 million homes, will carry Dutch continuityannouncements on a separate audio subcarrier. In addition Discoverywill be increasing the amount of programming reversioned into the Dutchlanguage and intends to buy some Dutch documentaries. Teletextsubtitling in the Dutch language will be expanded with the goal ofoffering subtitles on 95% of output by the end of the year.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996BSKYB JOINS RTR FOR RUSSIAN BOUQUET?Russian national public broadcaster RTR has forged a joint venture witha "unnamed UK partner" to launch the country's first digital satellite-delivered service from Intelsat 604. Sources suggest that this UKpartner is none other than British Sky Broadcasting. According toStanislav Bunievich, the station's deputy chairman and director ofengineering, RTR Network has formed a joint venture with a UK partner(he declined to give a name) to launch - at a cost of between $10 to$15 million (#6.5-9.7m) for equipment alone - two channels (sport andmovies) this spring. Distributed by Intelsat 604, they will probably befollowed by further channels for medical, business and children'stelevision and be available to an audience of some 40 million"collective customers" - such as those served by cable networks -throughout the former Soviet Union.Bunievich says the idea behind the RTR Network is to introduce viewersto the idea of paying for their programming, which in his view is now"the main way for television to develop in Russia." It is also anattempt to make the broadcaster less dependent on the government forits funding and lessen the burden of having to pay 75% of its revenueto the ministry of telecommunications for the use of transmissionfacilities.Although RTR Network is currently negotiating agreements with severalforeign programme-providers, Bunievich feels there is a need forRussian material which it will have to meet. He also believes therewill be exceptionally strong interest shown in the new service'schildren's and medical channels and that within the next two to fiveyears RTR, though remaining state-owned, will become a holding companyfor RTR Network and other commercial ventures.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996HUNGARIAN COMMERCIAL TV IN THE WINGSHungary is soon to have commercial television now that the HungarianParliament has finally passed the long-awaited broadcasting bill, whichis now waiting to be approved by the Hungarian president. In mid-October, the six main parliamentary parties in Hungary came to a backroom agreement over the future of the nation's state-run televisionstations and the law was passed at the end of December.The broadcasting bill will have the greatest effect on state-owned TVnetwork Magyar Televizio (MTV) which now faces the prospect of itssecond public chain MTV2 being privatised. The terrestrial frequency ofMTV2 will be offered in concession for ten years and the current MTV2programme will be aired by satellite with an intended viewership ofethnic Hungarians both inside and outside contemporary nationalborders. The largest commercial radio station Danubius will also beprivatised. The main state channel, MTV1 and satellite-deliveredchannel Duna TV will remain largely untouched, however.Saatchi & Saatchi Budapest senior media planner Andreas Vigh says thatanother terrestrial frequency will be opened [in the public tender],possibly under the name of MTV3, which, at the beginning, would have60% to 70% penetration. This national channel will also be offered inconcession for ten years. The arrival of commercial television inHungary is set to kick-start the industry, he says. "The state channelswill have to become much more competitive and produce better qualityprogramming."MTV2 which has an 80% penetration rate will be privatised with a viewtowards starting up in January of 1997, along with the new MTV3.A tender for MTV2 is expected to be announced sometime this spring andapplications will be due in July or August. The new private channelwill most likely begin broadcasting the following January. But beforethe tender is announced, the new media council will have to beappointed, and the council's first order of business will be replacingthe director of MTV, Adam Horvath, who resigned as of January 1996.Under the draft law, the director's powers will be significantlyreduced.Several major media investors are expected to enter the tender for theprivate channel, including MTM Communications, which has entered into ajoint venture with Scandinavian Broadcasting Systems (SBS) lastSeptember, Central European Media Enterprises (CME), which is currentlypreparing a regional TV channel in the Budapest area with the Hungariancompany 2002, and CLT. French broadcaster TF1 is also reportedly in therunning as is TV Nova operator Marc Palmer.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996PREMIERE TOPS ONE MILLION SUBSCRIBERSThe first German pay-TV channel Premiere reported around 1.1 millionsubscribers at the beginning of the new year 1996 generating revenuesof about DM500 million (#227m), making Premiere the fourth largestcommercial TV station in Germany, announced managing director BerndKundrun. Premiere has invested about DM600 million (#273m) over thelast five years and Kundrun forecast that the company would break eventhis year.Kundrun said that the decision of MMBG and Kirch Group to develop astandardised digital decoder was a signal for Premiere to start thefirst trials in the interactive world. To produce and distribute 12digital programmes, a company has to invest about DM 5.1 billion(#2.3bn) over a five year period on the basis of about two millionsubscribers, he said. But the revenues in the same period would onlyamount to DM1.2 billion, if the subscribers pay a monthly fee of DM50.This means digital programmes will remain a very risky business in thenext few years, he said.In the spring, Premiere will start a trial with 1,000 households inHamburg. Partners in the venture are publishing companies Bauer, AxelSpringer and Gruner & Jahr/Bertelsman, retailer Otto Versand, facilityhouse Studio Hamburg (subsidiary of public broadcaster NDR) andDeutsche Telekom.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996CME LAUNCHES SLOVENIAN POP TVSlovenia's broadcasting industry has received a major boost followingthe launch of the country's first national independent televisionservice. Backed by the US-owned investment company Central EuropeanMedia Enterprises (CME) and the local stations MMTV (based inLjubljana) and Tele 59 (Maribor), Pop TV - a television programmetrademark of the company Pro Plus - will offer a mixture ofentertainment and information programming and initially reach some 70%of the country's 650,000 television households.CME, which already has direct equity interests of 58% and 33% in ProPlus and MMTV respectively, will shortly also acquire 33% of Tele 59.With both its Slovenian partners also major shareholders in Pro Plus,it will effectively have a 72% economic interest in the new venture.According to Len Fertig, the president and CEO of CME, total investmentin Pro Plus is likely to be between #10-11.5 million, of which thecompany will provide 58% and MMTV and Tele 59 the remainder. Whilehaving to compete in an industry already served by a national publicbroadcaster (TV Slovenija) and several local commercial stationsincluding the long-established Kanal A, the country's healthy TV admarket (which stood at #15m) in 1994) and per capita income (#4,000)one of the highest in central and eastern Europe) are likely to ensurethe service's survival.Pro Plus, whose programming will be entertainment led and targeted at ayoung audience, has secured agreements with most Hollywood majors andhopes to obtain exclusive rights for Slovenian soccer. While initiallyconforming to a minimum local production quota of 10%, it intends toraise the level to 40% by the end of this year.Although Pop TV has effectively guaranteed its status as a nationalSlovenian broadcaster through being distributed by MMTV, Tele 59, TVRobin (which serves western parts of the country) and several cablenetworks, an agreement with Euro 3, a privately owned service employinga powerful transmitter in Krvavec to cover Ljubljana and environs, fellthrough after objections by Kanal A.The latter, which is owned by Vladimir Polic and had itself at onestage been involved in talks with CME, is believed to have acontrolling stake in Euro 3 and felt undermined by the latter's dealwith the media investment company. It is also beset by seriousfinancial problems and has recently benefited from a programmingagreement with Turner.The launch of Pro Plus and its associated television network Pop TV byCME has come shortly after the establishment of Media ProInternational, a company which will manage a new commercial networknamed Pro TV in Romania. With other projects either being prepared orup and running (and in some instances, such as the Czech Republic's TVNova, already highly successful), CME is rapidly becoming one of theleading players in central and eastern Europe's television industry. Asa result, some form of networking (and therefore satellitedistribution) of its services throughout the region is a distinctpossibility in the near future.Within Slovenia, the appearance of Pro Plus/Pop TV has neverthelessovershadowed the launch of a further new national channel. Set up at acost of DM10 million (#4.5m) and backed by the Catholic Church andseveral local institutions, TV3 will terrestrially broadcast around 20hours of family-oriented programming daily to around 80% of thepopulation.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996RADICAL CHANGES AT POLONIA 1The Polish satellite channel Polonia 1 has begun 1996 under newmanagement and with a radical change in programming policy.Set up by the Italian entrepreneur Nicola Grauso barely four years ago,it initially operated as an unlicensed network of local terrestrialstations before being forced out of the country and deciding todistribute its programming by Eutelsat. On January 1 its ownershipofficially passed into the hands of Mariano Vollani - once the leadingshareholder in the Czech commercial station Premiera TV - along withseveral Polish and foreign investors.According to Katarzyna Kieci, the marketing manager of Publipolska (anagency which undertakes all commercial activities for Polonia 1), thebroadcaster will attempt to move away from the perceived image of beinga service aimed solely at women by targeting men, people aged up to 40and young urban families.The first changes to the 24-hour service's programming - which Kiecisays can be received by around 28% of the population - should occur inthe first week in February and the remainder will be graduallyimplemented over the following month to six weeks. Besides carryingmore music, it will also show sport, news and information (withmaterial obtained from Euronews) and a wide range of films anddocumentaries.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996VIACOM POISED FOR MID-EAST LAUNCHViacom is developing two new channels for its five-channel Ku-Banddigital DTH package for the Middle East, which is expected to launchvia PanAmSat 4 during the first quarter.The package will include MTV Europe and VH-1 UK, as well as a moviechannel - expected to be a version of Showtime - and new generalentertainment and children's/family channels.Although Viacom would not elaborate on marketing plans for the serviceprior to an official launch announcement "within the next two weeks,"it is understood the package will be offered alongside ART and Netholdchannels as part of MultiChoice's Middle Eastern digital DTH operation.This is to use the same MPEG-2/DVB standard with Irdeto conditionalaccess as the South African DSTV service, for which Pace has beencontracted to supply 200,000 decoders. Pace, while it has yet to shipany DVB units into the region, is already priming its Middle Easterndealers with its digital 'Gold Club' scheme.The launch of the MultiChoice mid-East bouquet, initially intended tobe pre-Christmas, is understood to have been put back to give thepartners more time to develop services which would be sufficientlydistinct from the analogue-free-to-air ART channels already popular inthe region.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996CHANNEL V LAUNCHES THAI MUSIC CHANNELChannel V, the Star TV-owned music channel has formed a three partydeal to create and broadcast a 24-hour customised music channel forThailand. The new venture, to be called Channel V Thailand, is apartnership between Channel V, pay-TV licensee Universal Cable NetworkPublic Company Ltd (UTV), and Broadcasting Network (Thailand) Ltd(BNT). The latter is a 12 year old Thai company specialising in concertpromotion and music licensing.The new channel, which is set to launch mid-March, will be an ad-freesubscription channel and will form part of UTV's premium programmingtier, although as yet the "appropriate pricing point has yet to bedecided," said Channel V executive producer Steve Greider.As with the two other localised versions of Channel V - for India andTaiwan, Channel V Thailand will be heavily reliant on localisation,with most of the programming to be either dubbed or produced in Thaiand fronted by local Thai VJs. Initially, said Greider, 60% of musicvideos will be Thai with the remaining 40% international. Thepartnership has already built a studio in which to customise and makenew productions.The deal with UTV is despite the fact that Star TV also has a carriagedeal on rival service ThaiSky Cable's MMDS service. According toGreider, Star chose to go with UTV as Thaisky already has its own musicservice called Smile TV. Greider said Channel V Thailand will competefavourably with Smile TV as it will be a "much better looking channel,that is truly Thai but produced to an international standard."UTV is currently broadcasting 35 channels down its 64-channel capacityfibre-optic cable network which is currently being laid in the greaterBangkok area.It is also rumoured that UTV and Star TV may collaborate further toform a DTH package for Thailand. This would be beneficial to both, asUTV would then be able to use Asiasat 2 as a distribution platform(currently it only has C-Band capacity on Thaicom 1 and 2) and, inturn, Star TV would gain access to the Thai DTH market by piggy-backingon UTV's required pay-TV licence. Currently it is estimated that thereare some 400,000 back yard C-band dishes owners in Thailand, many ofwhom already received Star TV.The market for pay-TV in Thailand is both intensifying andconsolidating. In December 1995, Thai terrestrial broadcaster and pay-TV licensee Channel 3 and Hong Kong based satellite broadcaster TVBI,announced the formation of a joint venture company, the TVB3 Network CoLtd, which will launch a full service Thai language generalentertainment channel to be called Asia Entertainment Network in early1997, using Thai dubbed Chinese programmes and Thai language programmesproduced by the joint venture company.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996CZECH CABLE AND SATELLITE DEREGULATIONThe Czech Parliament implemented several changes to the broadcastinglaw in mid-December. It has approved extending the broadcasting rightsof CT2, the second nationwide channel, to public broadcaster CzechTelevision for an indefinite period. Under a law passed in December1992, Czech Television was granted only temporary possession of thefrequency, because the legislation agreed at that time that the secondfrequency should eventually be privatised.As of January 1, 1996, potential cable/satellite operators no longerhave to apply to the Czech Broadcasting Council for a licence, althoughthey must still register with the council. The council no longer hasthe authority to regulate programming conditions for cable andsatellite operators. Potential operators must still obtain clearancefrom the Czech telecommunication authority and a construction permitfrom the municipality where the cable system will operate. The lawfurther reduces advertising restrictions on Czech Radio from 1% to 0.2%for all five channels, although it is possible to group this time onone station.Industry analysts believe the deregulation of satellite and cablebroadcasting is partly the result of heavy lobbying on the part of HBO,which feared the programming quotas the council wanted to implement oncable operators which carry the pay-television channel. Some furtherbelieve that the new decision is a compromise between supporters anddetractors of commercial broadcasting, citing that opponents of thedecision to allow Czech Television to retain its second channel wererewarded for their support with far-reaching concessions in thelicensing of cable and satellite ventures.Council member Helena Havledkova finds this analysis too subjective butshe agreed that the amendment, while fundamentally conforming toEuropean Convention regulations, is regarded as a victory for the cablebusiness. "HBO [and other cable operators] will be absolutely free todo whatever they want with their programmes," she commented.The Czech cable industry has experienced substantial investment fromforeign companies in the past two years from companies such as HBO,which launched in the Czech Republic in November, 1994, US WestInternational, which purchased a 28% stake of Cable Plus, the largestCzech cable operator, in May, 1995, and United International Holdings,which has taken part in several cable ventures since 1993.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996TERRESTRIALS SET TO TAKE ON SKYThe UK government published its broadcasting bill before Christmasfeaturing some significant changes from its white paper proposals. Thenew law is not expected to come into effect until summer, possibly aslate as January 1997.Now ITV predators such as Granada, Carlton and Mai look set to flourishunder the new bill with the proposal for a two licence limit for ITVoperators abolished in favour of a new threshhold of 15% of total TVaudience. Bearing in mind that the largest ITV owner Carlton holds 9.4%of the total audience, the scope for expansion and takeovers is great.All but the two largest newspaper owners (News International and Mirrorgroup) will be able to control commercial television licences for thefirst time, favouring a greater cross-ownership between newspapergroups, TV companies and radio.Existing terrestrial broadcasters are to be given much more digitalcapacity in the new bill with the BBC awarded the best multiplex, andITV, Channel 5 and Channel 5 awarded half a multiplex each. In return,the broadcasters have to air their existing channels in their entiretyin digital though they have been allowed to offer pay-TV services -vital for their survival. With sports rights being snapped up by BSkyB,while NBC bid $2.3 billion (#1.5bn) for the Olympics, the fear is thatthe fierce bidding will also spread to entertainment. The freedom torun a universally free and premium pay channel will place theterrestrial broadcasters in a much more powerful position to fend offSky.The government has retreated on the idea of a final date for a completemove from analogue to digital. Instead, the analogue switch off datewill be reviewed once 50% of UK households can receive digitalterrestrial channels, or five years after the start of the firstmultiplex licence.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996BET ON JAZZ FOR AFRICABlack Entertainment Television's 24-hour jazz channel, BET On Jazz: TheCable Jazz Channel, is to join MultiChoice's South African DTH package,DSTV, on April 1, three months after the channel launches on cablenetworks in the US.The service, first mooted in 1993 and understood to be costing $20-30million to launch, will be offered alongside DSTV's existing 18channels from PanAmSat 4 at no extra cost, and will be marketed inSouth Africa, Swaziland, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Lesotho, Mozambique andBotswana. Both the channel and the MultiChoice deal are breakthroughsfor BET, which, with 43.4 million cable subscribers in North America(at November 1995), and with its domestic business already welldiversified into related media and marketing activities, is now lookingto international markets for expansion."This is a very big move for us," BET International vice presidentGeorge Amoah said. "Although we've been supplying programming toAfrican broadcasters for the last year-and-a-half on a syndicatedbasis, this is the first time we've launched there in such a big way."BETI supplied Bop-TV with an eight-hour daily block of (chieflyeducational) programming which was distributed across African and theMiddle East from a C-Band Intelsat transponder, and now suppliessimilar programming to SABC's NNTV, as well as to affiliates in Kenyaand Nigeria the Caribbean, and even to Poland."Our plans call for global expansion," Amoah added, "and we're goinginto it aggressively... our initial focus is Europe and southernAfrica."As in the US, where BET has developed a range of complementarybusinesses, BETI intends to develop similar opportunities for programme-related merchandise in South Africa, by building up relationship withlocal businesses.While Amoah indicated that BETI was eager to bring the jazz channel tothe UK and the rest of Europe, how it will do so - whether as acomplement to the London-based BETI cable exclusive service usingadditional digital capacity on Orion, or by joining national digitalDTH packages - was not yet decided.As the world's first dedicated jazz channel, BET On Jazz promises a mixof live concerts, classic performances, jazz movies and documentaries,and seems destined to find big ready-made audiences across Europe andScandinavia.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996TELEGRAAF POISED TO ACQUIRE SBS6 STAKEDutch newspaper De Telegraaf says its negotiations to acquire a 30%share in SBS6 are at an advanced stage. Bank Mees Pierson is acting asmediator for the two parties. SBS has been looking for some time for aDutch partner, because the channel wants to strengthen its localpresence. SBS has strong financial backing including ABC/Cap Cities andParamount/Viacom, but a link with a major Dutch publishing house couldbe beneficial for both parties and give the broadcaster a more Dutchface. SBS experienced a slow start late last August, but now claimsabout 92% cable penetration in the country as well as a slowlyincreasing market share.De Telegraaf currently has only very limited new media investments. Thecompany owns local radio station Radio Amsterdam as well as a cabletextnewspaper (with rolling text pages) also in its home town of Amsterdam.Together with PCM Publishers De Telegraaf owns 5% in the A2000/KTAAmsterdam cablenetwork. The company's investment in SBS6 would mark adeparture from its otherwise conservative acquisition policy. Dutchpublisher Wegener announced its talks to acquire the Arcade MediaGroup, who owns TV10 Gold, The Music Factory and three radio stations,have successfully ended. Wegener will take control of Arcade for anundisclosed sum, which insiders estimate to be around Gld300 million(#120m). The new company will be known as Wegener-Arcade. Arcade isprivately owned, with three quarter of the shares owned byfounder/president Herman Heinsbroek, who will remain with the newcompany as a consultant. The second man of the company, A de Liefde,will take a seat on the board of Wegener-Arcade.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996POLL GAUGES BELGIAN SUBSCRIBER SATISFACTIONThe quality of cable distribution varies depending on the region wheresubscribers live, particularly regarding the number of programmesavailable, the quality of the retransmission and the cable subscriptionfee, according to a survey conducted by consumers' association Test-Achats. Each of the 36 cable distributors operating in Belgium enjoys amonopoly in its own franchise territory and not all of them have putthe same efforts into upgrading their network and meeting theirsubscribers' wishes, notes Test-Achats.The number of channels available on cable varies from 19 in theArdennes region to 37 in Limburg, while cable capacity ranges from 24to 73 channels. The cost of a new connection varies from Bfr1,346 inBrussels to Bfr4,033 (#29-#88) in some parts of Brabant, while thedelay required before being connected can be anything from 3 days to 3weeks. As regards the subscription fee, it can vary from Bfr 4,000 toBfr 5,000 (#88-#108), but without any bearing on the number of channelsprovided by the cable distributor.The survey also shows that cable subscribers' chief complaint is lackof consultation with them by cable companies regarding the choice ofchannels they receive. In both linguistic regions, viewers show,unsurprisingly, a strong preference for channels broadcasting in theirown language. However, it seems that, in Flanders, subscribers wouldalso like to have access to French-speaking channels such as Tele 21,Club RTL, Arte, TV5 and Canal Plus, while French-speaking viewers inWallonia fell they are deprived of VTM, Filmnet and CNN. Obviously,subscribers are not aware that copyright licences, administrative rulesand political motivations prevent cable distributors to broadcastingCanal Plus in Flanders and FilmNet in Wallonia.Test-Achats concludes, saying that, most subscribers seem satisfiedwith their cable distributor, the average of dissatisfied subscribersvarying from 5 to 10%. The main reasons for dissatisfaction are lack ofconsultation of customers (46%), the non-availability of certainchannels (35%) and poor reception quality.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996MC EUROPE JOINS PREMIERE PACKAGEPay-TV channel Premiere is to trial Music Choice Europe's digital audioservice in a commercial trial this spring. The arrangement is expectedto lead to a full launch in the Cologne area during the autumn and anational rollout in 1997 as part of Premiere's Astra-delivered digitalpackage. Competitor DMX expects to receive Astra carriage as part ofthe MultiChoice package and already utilises capacity on the first fourAstras.MC Europe sales and marketing director Jennifer Churchill said that anumber of pricepoints would be trialled on the Cologne network, whichhas 268,000 homes connected. Existing pricing ranges from #7.45 permonth in the United Kingdom to an equivalent #12.00 in Norway. InCologne the pricing may be as low as DM5 per month, but as director ofbusiness strategy Simon Bazalgette pointed out the cost of the rentalcost of the General Instrument decoder is generally included.While adopted by Deutsche Telekom as its preferred premium audioservice MC Europe still has the task of applying to each of the 15regional media authorities. To date licences have been applied for andobtained from each of the larger regions; Bavaria, NorthrhineWestphalia and Hessen. MC Europe's themed music service includes localchannels such as Deutscher Rock, Golden Schlager and Volksmusik.Chief executive Stuart Graber said MC Europe was building itsdistribution and was now available in "well over eight million homesall over Europe," including a significant deal recently concluded withTelewest in the UK.Asked about repeated rumours of a merger with the European operationsof DMX Graber responded that MC Europe had, "the right combination ofpartners and the right strategy to do the job of building a business."MC Europe had concentrated on the programming rather than thetechnology. The two companies, said Graber, were considerably differentin their management style.Churchill is confident of increasing the potential subscriber base toover 20 million by the end of 1996. She sees further opportunities ascable operators migrate towards digital services. "When we started itwas in analogue and we've been able to work with the cable operators,they enjoy working with us, and all have plans to go digital.MC Europe has now added Comcast's Cleveland and Darlington franchisesto its roster of UK cable operators. The service will potentially beavailable to an additional 225,000 homes. It follows the rollout ontothe Birmingham franchise.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996NOZEMA PLANS TO SHELVE CASEMA STAKEDutch transmission company Nozema wants to shelve its 22 % stake inDutch MSO Casema - and KPN is quick to express its interest in gainingfull control of the company. KPN now owns 76.7% of Casema, Holland'smajor MSO with over 1.2 connected cable homes.Nozema is a Dutch company that owns and operates the transmitters forDutch public and private television and radio broadcasters. The companyis partially privatised, but the Dutch government plans to sell theremaining 59% share it still owns later this year. Once completelyprivatised, Nozema will need to invest heavily in new transmitters forthe upcoming DAB and terrestrial digital television. Therefore, itwants to shed its Casema shares and concentrate on its core business ofterrestrial broadcasting. Nozema has appointed the British bankRothschild to handle the sale of its share in Casema.KPN's intention to buy up Nozema's shares in Casema have angeredMinister Jorristma of Transport and Communication, who says KPN's sharein Casema should be decreased. The minister is afraid that Dutch cablecompanies will not start cable telephony in competition with KPN aslong as KPN is a major shareholder in Casema. After acquiring Nozema'sshares KPN would own 99.3% of Casema. The company wants to have astrong hold on Casema when its planned merger with the cable systems ofPhilips Media takes place.Casema announced it wants to double its capital by issuing new shares.The company says it needs fresh capital to invest in updating its cablenetworks and offering new services. Casema plans to issue new sharesworth Gld175 million (#70m) only with its existing shareholders.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996ARCADE GAINS AMSTERDAM ACCESSFrom January 17 the two channels from the Arcade Media Group (TV10 andThe Music Factory) will at last be carried by the A2000/KTA network ofAmsterdam, but not all problems have been solved. A2000/KTA demands apayment of Gld750,000 (#300,000) per channel per year (equallingGld1.50 per subscriber per channel), an amount which is five to sixtimes what Arcade pays to other cable operators. It is also much higherthan the amounts other broadcasters such as RTL4, Veronica and SBS6 arepaying A2000.Arcade claims A2000 is misusing its monopoly and filed a complaint withthe Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs. It also began proceedings atthe Court of Amsterdam to force entrance to A2000. The Amsterdam judgerefused to rule as long as the proceedings at the Ministry are stillongoing, but suggested the two parties to agree voluntary to atemporary solution. The agreement between Arcade and A2000 calls formonthly payments of Gld62,500 (#25,000) per channel until Arcade'scomplaint at the Ministry of Economic Affairs has been resolved. Shouldthe ministry decide A2000's behaviour constitutes misuse of a monopoly,the money will be restituted to Arcade.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996SHAW, COGECO LAUNCH INTERNET SERVICESHot on the heels of Rogers Cablesystems' announcement of Wave, itscable-modem PC access service, two more Canadian MSOs are dipping theirfeet in the Internet. Shaw Communications has signed an agreement inprinciple with Motorola for the purchase of 100,000 CyberSurfer cablemodems and Cogeco Cable has announced a partnership with St.Remy PressInc. for the development and marketing of a PC-based, mulitmediaplatform supporting a virtual shopping mall, to be run on its cablenetwork.While Wave is now up and running, Shaw's access service is justentering trials now and won't be launched until autumn. "We are lookingat some innovative concepts in packaging different tiers of services,"said Brian Walters, Shaw's vice president for PC interactive services.We are in the process of looking at the way we can nurture contentdevelopers. At the end of the day we have to have an open platform sothat anyone who wants to, can be there."Walters added that Shaw's basic Internet service will feature localcontent, such as municipal services, entertainment and events tailoredto specific communities. Cogeco launched an Internet access service inDecember and is in the process of rolling it out through its Quebec andOntario cable systems. It plans to test its virtual mall next spring,for two months and then roll it out on a commercial basis. So far, allof the announced cable provided PC access services are chargingsomewhere in the C$35-$40 (#15-20) range, depending on whether or notthe modem is purchased or rented.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996CANADA PLANS WORLD'S LARGEST MMDS SYSTEMManitoba-based Craig Broadcast Systems Inc. plans to become the world'slargest MMDS broadcaster in terms of geography. "It will be the largestsystem in the world," said Stuart Craig, president and managingdirector. "Nobody has ever tried this before. We will be broadcastingfrom the Ontario to the Saskatchewan borders, east to west and from the52 parallel to the American border, north to south."In effect, Craig will be building a broadcast network that willeventually cover more than half a million square kilometres with apotential audience of slightly over one million."Manitoba is an ideal place for wireless cable with its flat terrain.It's perfect for the delivery of signals and of course we have hightowers across the province which makes the project viable." CraigBroadcast's wholly owned subsidiary SkyCable won the first licenceallocated by the Canadian Radio-television and TelecommunicationsCommission, (CRTC) on December 20.Craig has applied for an MMDS licence four times, beginning in 1983.'The past applications were not successful because of CRTC decisionsand policies favouring cable." SkyCable's present business plans callfor investing C$26 million (#13m) to build nine transmission sites thatwill reach 80% of Manitoba's population. Its initial target will be the50,000 rural Manitobans who are outside cable areas. It will thencompete with existing cable companies in urban areas.The addressable digital service will initially offer 40 channels ofprogramming including local, off the air stations, Canadian andAmerican networks and speciality channels, pay-per-view, pay TV, localcommunity channels and an educational channel and intends to upgrade to60 channels.Subscribers will pay a C$100 (#50) installation charge and a C$200refundable deposit on the reception equipment. Antennas will vary insize depending on the location of the nearest transmitter, ranging froman 18 inch by 18 inch wire mesh receiver to a pencil-like antenna.Subscription costs will be competitive with cable, starting with an$18.95, 20 channel basic package and including three advanced tiersranging from $6.00 to $8.95. Craig's business plan calls for signing up30,000 subscribers to be successful. He believes that compared to the$1,000 plus costs of DTH systems, his MMDS network will proveattractive to Manitobans.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996HUGHES OPTS FOR SEA LAUNCH TO LOWER PRICESSea Launch, the first commercial satellite launching system to lift offfrom an ocean-going platform has sold an initial series of ten launchesto Hughes Space and Communication Co, the Los Angeles-based satellitemanufacturer. It is the rocket consortium's first contract and thefinancial details have not been released, although the contract's valueis believed to be in the $500 million (#325m) range.Hughes' launches are scheduled to begin in 1998. Sea Launch Co is aninternational joint venture with Boeing Commercial Space Co being thelead partner with 40% of the equity, followed by Norwegian shipbuilderthe Kvaerner Group with 30%, Ukrainian rocket builder NPO Yuzhnoye with15%, and Russian engine producer RSC Energia holding the remaining 25%.The contract is seen as one of a series of moves by Hughes to 1ower theprice of commercial satellite launches by backing a number of differentlaunching systems. Large commercial satellite launches vary in costfrom $80 million (#52m) from reliable western providers, while Chineselaunches are believed to be in the $40 million (#26m) range. In thepast, Hughes has supported Chinese launch systems and recently gave aten launch contract to McDonnel Douglas Corp as an incentive to developa new rocket.When asked if Hughes was attempting to lower the cost of launchingsatellites, A spokesman for the Boeing space program replied, "If yousubscribe to the opinion, the more competition the better the price,then I think that is the correct assumption. One of the goals of oursystem is to be more cost effective and very competitive in price."Sea Launch will be based in southern California. The Ukrainians will beproviding two stage Zenit rockets for the project while the Russianswill be supplying the upper stage or the rocket and other key systems.The rockets will be assembled on a 650 foot (197)m long assembly andcommand ship being built by the Kvaerner Group in Glasgow which is alsoconverting a 450 foot oil rig into a launch platform. Boeing issupplying project management. The assembly and command ship willprobably be located in Long Beach, California and the launches willtake place in international waters in the Pacific.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996CAPE BLAZE DASHES DSTV HOPESMultiChoice's hopes of meeting early sales targets for its SouthAfrican digital DTH package, DSTV, have been dashed as a result of thefire which destroyed the Cape Town factory producing Panasonic's MPEG-2/DVB receivers in December, leaving the market totally dependent onPace.The fire, apparently caused by an electrical fault, caused R30 million(#5.31 million) worth of damage, destroying the production line fromwhich Panasonic was hoping to deliver 35,000 digital boxes before theend of the year.At the time of the fire, Panasonic had shipped only some "two to threethousand" receivers, according to MultiChoice general manager marketingCobus Scholtz, who confirmed that the fire had "severely affected"early roll-out targets for the 16-channel DTH service.Soon after the fire, Panasonic said it hoped to restore production byFebruary. However, the full extent of the damage only became clearlater, and according to MultiChoice general manager, sales anddistribution, Deon Coetzee, Panasonic is now unlikely to be able tosupply any units until April, thus threatening prolonged shortages."Fortunately for us, Pace has come to the party rather nicely," hesaid, "They're expected to supply 15,000 units in January and 10,000 inFebruary."Hopes that Grundig might emerge as an alternative supplier had notmaterialised, Coetzee added: "I understand they are still in talks withIrdeto in Europe over the conditional access system." Grundig ishowever expected to supply DVB IRDs for the consortium launching aGerman language digital package for Africa. Meanwhile Echostar isexpected to bring its Star Walker approved DVB receivers into themarket, but not until March/April.Despite the setbacks, Coetzee estimated sales since the DSTV launch inNovember had totalled around 10,000 - "not too bad, considering." Whilemuch of the momentum created by the first phase of marketing had beenwasted because there wasn't product to meet demand, he added, a "secondthrust" would be launched in late January, highlighting the latestadditions to the package: Discovery in early January, plus a localChristian channel, Rhema; with EBN, Sci-Fi Channel, Bloomberg, Zee TVand BET On Jazz to follow over the coming months.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996EXPRESSVU, DIRECTV GET DTH LICENCESOn December 20, the Canadian Radio-television and TelecommunicationsCommission licensed Expressvu and Power DirecTv as authorised providersof DTH services in Canada. It rejected a bid by Homestar, owned by acable consortium led by Canada's second largest MSO, ShawCommunications.Homestar's bid was rejected because the commission judged that it wouldnot be able to gain transponder space. Homestar intended to lease spacefrom Primestar, the American DTH operator owned by cable MSOs.Primestar recently lost an orbital slot when the American FederalCommunications Commission took back the one it had intended to use tolaunch a DBS satellite.While DTH licences have now been granted, it is still uncertain as towhen operations will finally begin. Power DirecTv had asked thecommission to establish a cable tax on all cable subscribers to coverits estimated C$17 million (#8.5m) in uplink costs. Without the tax,Power DirecTv has said that it won't be able to turn a profit. PowerDirecTV is now considering its options and has declined to state whatit will do.ExpressVu, which had originally been granted a licensing exemption in abid to kick-start cable competition is once again stalled in technicalproblems with a glitch in its descrambling technology.ExpressVu had originally been slated to launch last September butfailed to do so claiming at the time that the cable companies werehogging transponder space. ExpressVu now believes that it will be inservice by the second quarter of 1996.While the company has been unable to launch, it has been carrying on amarketing program. "We are looking foreward to bringing a hundred pluschannels of digital audio and video services to places that have neverhad that kind of service before," said Chris Franks, ExpressVu's vicepresident of regulatory affairs.'We are just working the last bugs out of our technology and we want tocome to the marketplace with a bullet proof operation. All the othermajor DTH/DBS operations around the world have had significant delays.I don't think we have lost any credibility. We have had over 10,000calls on our 800 number."The Commission's decision stated that within six months of the launchof Canadian DTH services it would hear new applications for DTHlicences. Shaw has said that it will reapply at that time.Meanwhile StarChoice, owned by Direct Choice of New Brunswick, hasalready filed an application for a DTH licence. It plans to receive itsAmerican signals from the just launched Echostar 1.The company plans to use Echostar receiving equipment. Like EchostarStarChoice plans to distribute through an established TVRC company,Walling Communications Corporation.StarChoice plans to launch by the third quarter of 1996. If the alreadylicensed services fail to launch quickly, that date will be rolledback.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996ECHOSTAR LAUNCHES DBS, COMPETITION BEGINSEchostar Communications Corp, successfully launched its high poweredDBS satellite Echostar 1 from China on December 28 and now hopes to bein the marketplace by late February or early March.Echostar plans to launch Echostar 2 from China during the summer. Theservice will provide over 200 channels of digital video, audio and dataservices and become America's second true DBS provider, after DirecTv.While Primestar offers DTH services, it transmits from a medium poweredsatellite restricting its receiving dishes to a now ungainly 30 inches(76cm). AlphaStar, slated to start service during the first quarter of1996, will also transmit from a medium powered satellite. True DBSdelivery systems use 18 inch receivers.Echostar believes that it is in a strong position to compete with theestablished American DTH and DBS providers. To begin with it has beenin the TVRO business as a hardware supplier since 1980 and hasoperations in Holland, Spain, Singapore, China, Hong Kong, Indonesiaand India. For the five years ending in 1994, the company captured 25%of the over 2.1 million DTH units sold in the US."We have experience with DTH satellite products and dealers and we havea very loyal existing base of TVRO dealers that will be our firstdistribution path," said an Echostar spokesperson. "We also have themost advanced technology. We are fully MPEG-2 compliant. DirecTv ismostly MPEG-2 but in the area of communication between various piecesof electronic equipment they are not. In addition DirecTv has twosources of programming, DirecTv and USSB. If you want the fullcompliment of cable programming you have to subscribe to both whichcreates two bills and two cost centres. That gives us an advantage;there will be a programming price difference."While not yet ready to release its marketing or launch plans, Echostarplans to come into the market at prices below other DBS/DTH providers.Its prospectus states that the retail cost of an Echostar receivingsystem will be in the $500 (#325) range, well below the cost entrylevel costs of $700 (#455) for a DirecTV system.Echostar will also be offering the system for direct sale, purchasethrough financing and a leasing option. As far as subscription fees go,the prospectus states that EchoStar intends to offer customisedpackages of programming at prices below current cable and DBS/DTHservices."As far as the market goes," said Echostar, "we have seen numbersanywhere from 12-20 million and we think it is at the high end of thatrange. Certainly there is room for three to four players."Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996EAST GRINSTEADThe ITC has invited applications for the local delivery franchise ofEast Grinstead which covers some 42,000 homes including the Mid-Sussexdistrict north of Worth Abbey, the south eastern part of Reigate andBanstead Borough, Tandridge District and the Wealden District north of,but including Crowborough.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996SKI INTERACTIVEVideotron has teamed up with Eurosport to offer its customers theopportunity to watch live coverage of this year's Skiing World Cup andWorld Championship skiing events from December 16 to March 10 on itsVideoway interactive service. Viewers will have access to foursimultaneous channels and can switch between live coverage of theskiing events, skier profiles, results and rankings, skiing tips andaction replays.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996DUTCH INVITATIONDutch junior minister of European Affairs Patijn has invited Belgiumpublic broadcaster BRTN to join the proposed pan-European Dutchlanguage satellite channel BVN - best of Dutch TV. Early last Summerboth Radio Nederland Wereldomroep (the Dutch world service radio) andNOS simultaneously, but independent of each other, launched the idea ofa Dutch public satellite channel to reach the 600,000-odd Dutch livingabroad in Europe. So far, the plan has not materialised, mainly becauseof difficulties in funding the project. With the possible co-operationof the Flemish pubcaster, BVN might get off the ground in 1996.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996STAR REPORT NOVEMBERTOP 50 SATELLITE PROGRAMMES IN novemberPos Programme            Channel         Date       Time TVR Aud                                                             (000's) 1  Jurassic Park        Movie Channel   Thu 9 Nov  2002 15  2007 2  Football Match       Sky Sports      Wed 15 Nov 2000 12  1557 3  Football             Sky Sports      Wed 8 Nov  1600 10  1282 4  Philadelphia         Sky Movies      Sat 4 Nov  2202  8  1079 5  Simpsons             Sky One         Sun 26 Nov 1800  8  1067 6  Beethoven's Second   Sky Movies      Thu 23 Nov 2001  8  1054 7  No Escape            Sky Movies      Sat 18 Nov 2202  7   911 8  Football             Sky Sports 2    Sun 19 Nov 1600  6   824 9  Goldfinger           Sky Movies      Sun 25 Nov 1801  5   67710  Scottish Football    Sky Sports 2    Sun 19 Nov 1800  5   63511  Fist of Justice      Sky Movies      Tue 7 Nov  2201  4   59012  Beverly Hills 90210  Sky One         Sun 12 Nov 1900  4   56913  Serial Mom           Sky Movies      Sat 25 Nov 2202  6   54414  Cool Runnings        Disney Channel  Sun 26 Nov 1800  4   52515  Football Intro       Sky Sports      Sun 25 Nov 1445  4   51416  Rookie of the Year   Movie Channel   Thu 2 Nov  2002  4   50217  Striking Distance    Movie Channel   Sun 5 Nov  2201  4   48918  Earth 2              Sky One         Wed 1 Nov  2000  4   47519  Super Sunday Review  Sky Sports      Sun 5 Nov  1800  3   46120  Serial Killers       Sky One         Sat 11 Nov 2130  3   44221  Grumpy Old Men       Movie Channel   Sun 26 Nov 2002  3   44222  Cops                 Sky One         Sat 11 Nov 2100  3   44123  Police Stop          Sky One         Thu 16 Nov 2000  3   41724  Voyager              Sky One         Sun 26 Nov 2000  3   41725  Tom and Jerry        Cartoon Network Fri 10 Nov 1759  3   40426  Body Bags            Sky Movies      Sat 11 Nov 2203  3   37727  World Premiere Toons Cartoon Network Fri 10 Nov 1832  3   36328  Flintstones          Cartoon Network Wed 8 Nov  1829  3   35629  Review               Sky Sports      Sun 12 Nov 1800  3   35630  Deadly Invasion      Sky Movies      Tue 21 Nov 2001  3   35531  Super Sunday Preview Sky Sports      Sun 25 Nov 1200  3   34932  2 Stupid Dogs        Cartoon Network Fri 10 Nov 1849  3   34033  Jack Reed            Sky Movies      Fri 24 Nov 2002  2   33534  Snowbound            Movie Channel   Mon 13 Nov 2002  2   32935  Bigtime Boxing       Sky Sports      Sat 25 Nov 2000  2   32436  Deadly Advice        Movie Channel   Wed 22 Nov 2203  2   32037  Goals On Sunday      Sky Sports      Sun 5 Nov  1200  2   31438  Scottish Cup Review  Sky Sports      Sun 25 Nov 1700  2   31239  13 Ghosts of Scooby  Cartoon Network Fri 3 Nov  1702  2   31240  Road Flower          Sky Movies      Wed 1 Nov  2202  2   31041  Sister Act 2         Movie Channel   Fri 10 Nov 2001  2   30842  Star Trek Nxt Gen    Sky One         Wed 8 Nov  1703  2   30643  Rambo: First Blood   Sky Movies Gold Mon 13 Nov 2206  2   30144  Mask                 Cartoon Network Thu 23 Nov 1729  2   29845  Highlander           Sky One         Sun 5 Nov  2100  2   29646  Scooby Doo           Cartoon Network Fri 10 Nov 1901  2   29647  Death Wish V         Sky Movies      Tue 31 Oct 2201  2   29448  Terror in the Night  Movie Channel   Fri 17 Nov 2201  2   28849  Demolition Man       Movie Channel   Thu 9 Nov  2338  2   28650  Sleepless in Seattle Sky Movies      Wed 8 Nov  2001  2   285Source: Barb/Continental ResearchCopyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996AN UNCERTAIN LAWSpain's cable law was finally passed by Parliament on December 15 andcame into effect On January 1. The law seems to satisfy no one, buteverybody agrees that it is much better to have a bad law than noregulation at all, reports David Del Valle.The Spanish cable law could have a short life if, as forecast, theConservative party (Partido Popular) comes to power in March andoverturns the legislation. Flying in the face of the law, PP isinsisting on putting cable TV cable licences out to tender within itstownships. Now the new law has come into effect there is some doubtover the powers of the government to overturn licences already awardedby regional and municipal authorities in PP-governed areas of Spain.Besides PP's ardent opposition to the law, the Spanish cable bill hasfailed to meet the demands of programmers, operators, political partiesand even the Government has voiced its opposition. The law wasintroduced to fill a legal vacuum in the cable telecommunicationsindustry in Spain and to try to put the industry in order. Allpolitical parties (PSOE, IU, CiU and PNV), except the conservatives,reached a general consensus and decided, despite not being sure aboutit, to approve a cable law. "The most important thing is there is alaw", said Miguel Puig, of CiU, who added that there are many thingswhich now need to be resolved on the technical side. Puig said the lawis too municipalist and is worried that networks awarded by townshipswill give rise to "unadvanced networks dedicated only to television".Puig agreed with programmers and operators that the law "fails to limitthe monopoly held by Telefonica and Canal Plus" and doesn't agree withthe limit of 2 million subscribed homes. The minister of Public Worksand Transport, Jose Borrell, also made his disagreement with this limitclear and claimed "it will have constitutional problems because itdiscriminates, as well as not corresponding with technologicalreality". Borrell explained the need of having a cable law, however."We have bet on the future, not on the past. We think that this lawwill allow the development of cable-based  multi-media services andbroadband networks. If a law had been passed three years ago, it wouldhave been obsolete by now and wouldn't have been able to meet thecurrent demands". He attacked PP's move to award cable licences andcalls on the party to "abandon hasty initiatives which are outside thelaw, only satisfy political opportunism and which could endangerinvestment in and the future of cable". He added, "we will challengePP's licence allocations if we consider that they exceed municipalauthority and invade ours (state authority) and if licences are awardednot just for television, but also telecommunication services."The Government is to create a regulatory authority responsible forsolving problems and conflicts between programmers and cable operatorswhich would be composed of administration, operators and programmers.The president of Telefonica, Candido Velazquez claimed his network willbe "open to any programmers, besides Cablevision (Canal Plus). We willbe in cable wherever possible and we have approached Antena 3, PrensaEspanola, Grupo Moll and many others". Velazquez, who assured that"Cablevision will be operating under the same conditions as others"considers the period of nine months which Telefonica will have to waitbefore starting operations as "too long for those who want to havecable television as soon as possible". In cities where the privateoperator has no licence, Telefonica and Canal Plus will have to delaytheir plans until their competitor has the correct authorisation.Programmers, for their part, are also very critical. Eugenlo Galdon,president of Multitel, the company which recently joined with ABC andUIH to exploit cable in Spain and Portugal, claimed that this"conservative" law "benefits Telefonica and Canal Plus, which both havethe monopoly of telephony and pay TV, respectively, in Spain". For him,"it is very worrying that this law comes to light without the supportof one of the main political parties (Partido Popular)".  Galdoncriticised the limits of each demarcation (50,000 minimum and 2 millionas maximum subscribers). In his opinion, this law gives a lot ofprivileges to Telefonica, because it will be able to offer bothtelephony and television services, while private operators will be ableto offer only television. "This doesn't promote competition", heconcluded. According to his forecasts, two different scenarios couldtake place between years 2000 and 2010 regarding cable penetration andtelephony shares in the hands of cable companies. The first one, whichhe described as a good and acceptable situation, indicates, accordingto his figures, that in the year 2000 cable penetration might be 20%and in 2010, around 60%. In this situation, by the year 2000 cablecompanies would manage 3% of telephony and in 2010, 20%. The secondone, a failure situation, in 2000 cable penetration would be around 10%and in 2010, 35%. Regarding telephony, it would be 6%.Terrestrial channel Antena 3, which has just launched five digitalChannels on Hispasat through a new company called Cable Antena, is veryunhappy with this law and has accused the Government of favouring CanalPlus. "This law discriminates against programmers in favour of CanalPlus", complained Manuel Campo Vidal, vice president of Antena 3. Hecriticised Telefonica for joining up with Canal Plus which, accordingto him, "will act as a gatekeeper which everyone, who wants to offerhis programmes through Telefonica's networks, will have to pass groupsall autonomous channels), Jordi Vila, claims that "our intention is tobe on satellite and there are four televisions (TV3, Canal Sur, ETB andTVG) interested in it. We will form national or international alliancesto compete".He also cast doubt on Telefonica's claim that it will have its networkopen to everyone. "Canal Plus will determine the encryption system, fixprices and determine where each channel goes. "Free access toTelefonica's network is vital, as otherwise the development of cablewill be stopped."Juan Luis Cebrian, member of the Canal Plus board, replied that 'thislaw doesn't have any effect on the agreement between Canal Plus andTelefonica" and justified the alliance on the need of making huge joint-ventures to exploit cable.  He added, "according to our forecasts, wewon't make any profit on cable until within 10 years". He made it clearthat pay TV will only mean between 8 and 10% of turnover on cable, withtelephony services the most profitable. Cebrian denied that Cablevisionwill act as a gatekeeper and fix prices".Meanwhile, Cablevision continues its expansion throughout Spain - 16cities already receive its 41 channels. Subscription to Cablevisionavailable from the end of the month will cost Pst 2,675 and Pst 6208 ifthe subscriber also wants Canal Plus. In Barcelona, Cablevision hasalready 2,600 homes connected out of a potential 12,000 homes.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996SHARE OF VIEWING IN UK BROADBAND CABLE HOMES(% share of total weekly TV viewing taken by each channel withinhomes receiving that channel)                       October   October   October                       '95       '94       '93ITV                    30.1      30.3      29.3BBC1                   21.2      24.3      19.9The Movie Channel       5.8       4.9       6.2Sky Movies              5.2       5.4       6.8Channel 4               5.1       6.3       5.4Sky One                 4.8       6.6       9.6Cartoon Network+        4.8       2.1       4.6+Sky Sports              4.4       4.4       4.1BBC2                    4.0       4.2       3.3UK Gold                 3.3       3.2       4.1Disney Channel          3.0         -         -Nickelodeon             2.1       2.8       0.3The Box                 1.6       2.1       1.8TCC                     1.3       0.6       1.3Sky Movies Gold         1.2       1.0       1.6Discovery               1.1       1.1       1.1Eurosport               1.1       0.7       1.2Bravo                   1.0       1.0       1.2MTV Europe              0.9       1.3       2.0VH-1                    0.9       0.9         -Family Channel          0.9       0.5       1.4Sky Sports 2            0.9       0.5         -UK Living               0.8       1.1       0.8Sky News                0.6       0.9       1.8TNT                     0.6       0.4         -The Adult Channel       0.6       0.3       0.2Channel One             0.5         -         -All Others              Less than 0.5Source: ITC/Continental ResearchOther channels carried on cable systems and included in the surveyinclude Live TV, SelecTV, Sky Soap, HVC, CNN, Travel, TLC, CMT,Sky Travel, QVC, NBC Superchannel, The Landscape Channel andPerformance: The Arts Channel.+ In 1993 TNT and Cartoon Network share were added together.Comparablre figures would be a 2.5% share in 1994 and 5.4% in 1995.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996UK SATELLITE TV CHANNELS WEEKLY REACH(within homes receiving each channel)                        Oct 95    Oct 94    Oct 93                        %         %         %Sky One                 40.3      50.2      56.9The Movie Channel       39.2      36.9      35.9Sky Movies              38.9      45.7      42.6Sky Sports              29.7      34.3      34.6UK Gold                 25.4      32.9      34.7Cartoon Network         19.5      14.3         -Disney Channel          18.0         -         -The Box                 15.6      11.5      14.8Sky Movies Gold         15.3      13.6      14.0Eurosport               13.7      10.9      15.0Nickelodeon             13.4      18.0       4.6MTV                     12.8      14.8      17.5Discovery               12.8      13.9      12.4VH-1                    11.6      12.6         -The Family Channel      11.2       8.5      12.6Bravo                   11.0      10.1      13.5TCC                     10.7       6.9      12.2UK Living                9.4      11.7      13.9Sky News                 9.1      12.2      20.1The Adult Channel        8.7       8.0       4.8Sky Sports 2             8.0       5.5         -Channel One              6.8         -         -SelecTV                  5.5         -         -TNT+                     5.5       3.7         -QVC                      5.1       2.2       5.7Travel                   4.9       8.3         -CMT                      4.6       4.1       6.9HVC                      3.9       4.8       9.7NBC Superchannel         3.2       3.9       3.5Sky Travel               2.6         -         -CNN                      2.5       2.5       2.6TLC (Learning Channel)   1.9       3.7         -Live TV                  1.8         -         -Performance              0.9       0.5         -Asian Channels           0.8       3.6       5.1Sky Soap                 0.8         -         -Landscape                0.5       0.7       0.5EBN                      0.3         -         -Source: ITC/Continetal ResearchCopyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996KIDS CHANNELS INCREASE VIEWING SHARESThe success of children's channels helped cable and satellite channelsregain some of their audience share lost in 1994, according to a reportfrom the ITC. The viewing share for cable and satellite channelsincreased from 34.9% to 39.6% between October 1994 and 1995, whileBBC1's share slipped from 24.3% in 1994 to 21.2%.Children's viewing of cable and satellite channels as a whole accountsfor over half of their total viewing according to the survey conductedby Continental Research. Some 54.4% of 2 to 15 year olds viewed cableand satellite channels in 1995, compared with 47.3% in October 1994.Preference for cable and satellite channels is even more pronouncedamongst younger age groups accounting for 63.9% of viewing among 2 to 9year olds.The viewing share for Cartoon Network rose across all individuals from2% in 1994 to 4.5% in 1995. This share reaches 30.5% among 2 to 9 yearolds.The recently launched Disney Channel accounts for 1.8% of total viewingrising to 6.2% of all children's viewing (2 to 15 year olds) and 10.1%of the younger age group (2 to 9 year olds).TCC, increased its share from 0.6% in 1994 to 1.3% in 1995 (allindividuals, while its share among children (2 to 15 year olds) rose to5.1% of all viewing.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996MEHR MUSIKGermany's fifth music TV channel, Onyx TV, launched last week targetingolder viewers with an 18 hour a day programme mix of schlager, countrymusic, oldies, rhythm and blues, musicals and classical music. Onyx TVwill launch initially on the Rheinland-Pfalz and Nordrhein-Westphaliacable networks, and shortly will also broadcast in Hamburg during thebroadcasting break of TM3. The channel is a 100% subsidiary ofExcalibur Communications.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996DUTCH AD SPENDFor the first time in history spending on TV advertising on Dutchchannels surpassed the one billion guilder mark (#400m). Publicbroadcasters are not the beneficiaries of the extra money spent oncommercials - the share of Ster went down from 50% to 35%, while IPwent up top 60%. SBS 6 is expected to take in between 3 and 5%. In realterms, Ster's 1995 income is down 30 million guilders to 455 million.IP's income is up to 555 million, mainly because of the arrival ofVeronica as a commercial channel. SBS 6 will take in around 20 million,while other channels, including Euro 7, Kindernet and local cablechannels will grab 40 million.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996HOT NATIONAL LICENCEThe German homeshopping channel HOT Home Order Television jointly ownedby Pro 7 Television and the retailer Quelle got a licence from themedia authority of Bavaria BLM. HOT is broadcasting on Astra 1D andalso has cable distribution in the Bavarian cities Munich andNuremberg. In the next six months, HOT will switch to an Astra 1Etransponder. BLM has given the national satellite licence against thevotes of the majority of all other German regional media authorities.RTL Television was unsuccessful in its bid to stop the nationaldistribution by legal action.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996CASEMA PPV SUCCESSDutch MSO Casema says it now has well over 10,000 subscribers to itsnew Casema Plus PPV service. Casema is offering the new service - withprogramming provided by TeleSelect - to its 400,000 subscribers inUtrecht and The Hague. Subscribers need to rent a D2 Mac/Eurocryptdecoder to receive the PPV channels at a monthly cost of 10 guilders(around #4). Learning from KTA's experience, Casema gave away thedecoders for free during a three-month trial period.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996ARIANE BRAZIL LAUNCHEmbratel of Brazil has chosen Arianespace to launch its fifthtelecommunications satellite Brasilsat B3 in a deal signed at thePalais du Pianalto, presidential seat of the Brazilian republic.Brasilsat B3, due for launch between late 1997 and early 1998, will bebuilt by Hughes Space and Communications using an HS 376W platform. Itwill have 28 C-Band and 4 extended C-Band transponders.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996SIRIUS SWITCHModern Times is preparing to commence D2 Mac transmissions on itsSirius channels for the Swedish market. TV6 will switch off its Palfeed on January 15 after a period of dual illumination in D2 Mac usingthe former FilmMax transponder. From January 17 the transponder willtransmit a D2 Mac version of youth channel ZTV. The then vacanttransponder will be reserved for the launch of Sportkanalen in March.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996TELERATE ON EBNDow Jones Telerate specialist news service for market professionals isto be merged into European Business News (EBN) from January 1996. EBNwill now include over two hours daily of Telerate programming withmarket reports from the US and Europe, interviews with key marketplayers as live coverage of market news as it breaks. EBN can benetworked to dealers' workstations and is available free.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996PERFORMANCE ON ORIONPerformance: The Arts Channel is to be distributed to cable operatorsfrom Orion 1 through the NTL digital video satellite transmissionfacility in Central London. Transmissions will commence on February 1.It joins Channel One, also owned by Associated Newspapers, which willalso use Orion. Compression will be using the DVB-compliant System3000.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996CONTINENTAL PHONE SERVICEContinental Cablevision, America's third largest MSO with 4.1 millionsubscribers, has received permission from the California PublicUtilities Commission to offer competitive local telephone service in 10California counties with a potential market of 14 million subscribersin urban and rural markets in southern California. Operating under thename of Continental Telecommunications of California, the companyintends to start testing telephone service during the third quarter of1996 with market rollout slated for 1997.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996MEDIASET SALESilvio Berlusconi's Fininvest has sold a further 5.49% of itstelevision and advertising arm Mediaset to a group of banks for L370billion (#152m) and announced its intention to list Mediaset on thestock market as soon as possible this year. Berlusconi sold an initial18.49% of Mediaset last July and plans to reduce Fininvest's stake inMediaset to under 50%.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996MICROSOFT/NBC NEWSMicrosoft and NBC are to create two 50/50 joint ventures -  a 24-hournews and information cable channel, called MSNBC Cable, and aninteractive on-line news service, MSNBC On-line news, distributed onthe Microsoft Network (Microsoft's Internet on-line service). Both willbe offered globally and integrated with the NBC television network.Microsoft has agreed to pay $220 million (#143m) over five years for a50% interest in MSNBC Cable. In addition, the parties expect to investapproximately $200 million over five years to fun the cable and on-lineservices.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996RAISING THE STAKESLyonnaise Communications has increased its share in the children'schannel Canal J to 32.7%. The Lyonnaise des Eaux affiliate bought 2.5%off Canal Plus and the same amount off Generale d'Images.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996PEARSON TUMBLESShares in Pearson fell 3.8% after a statement from the company warningthat its 1995 earnings would fall below market forecasts due to higherthan expected reorganisation costs. Shares closed on Wednesday December13 at 641p, down 25p from the previous day. Pearson said, however, thatits1995 pretax profit would easily exceed that of previous years,largely due to proceeds from the September sale of its 9.75% stake inBSkyB.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List CopyrightCABLE AND SATELLITE EXPRESS via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996ON THE MOVEDanny Bryan has resigned from his post as chief operating officer atTeleWest, with effect from January 1.Stuart Prebble has been appointed as chief executive of Granada SkyBroadcasting. Prebble is currently controller of factual programmes atthe ITV Network Centre. Jerry Glover has been appointed as managingdirector (commercial) of GSkyB. Glover is currently commercial directorof the Travel Channel.Lis Howell has been appointed as the new chairperson for Women In Cablefor 1996. Howell is director of programmes for UK Living.Dennis Garrison is leaving his position as group director ofprogramming at Bell Cablemedia to return to Jones International (amajor shareholder in Bell) working in its international programmingdevelopment division.David Van Valkenburg has been appointed as executive vice president ofcable/telephony at US West International. West was formerly senior vicepresident of US West Multimedia.John Makinson (FT MD), David Bell (CEO FT Group) and Greg Dyke (CEOPearson Television) will join the board of Pearson in March. Makinsonwill join as finance director, while Dyke and Bell will becomeexecutive directors.Peter Salmon has been named as director of programmes at GranadaTelevision. Salmon was formerly controller of factual programmes atChannel 4. Sarah Doole has been appointed as head of commercialdevelopment (programmes) at Granada Group's television division. Doolepreviously worked as director of enterprises at Yorkshire/Tyne TeesTelevision.Copyright:  21st Century Publishing Limited.  All rights reservedBack to Headline List