WT03-B12-1IA086-000622-B035-8http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te92.html 205.156.212.5 19970122044510 text/html 2484HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:43:21 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:56 GMTContent-length: 2298Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te92.html Sample Issue Copyright COMLINE JAPAN DAILY: TELECOMMUNICATIONS via NewsNet JANUARY 08, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES KDD Gets Direct Access to Hongkong Telecom (84 words) 1994 Orders of Electric Communication Devices (98 words) CopyrightCOMLINE JAPAN DAILY: TELECOMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetJANUARY 08, 1996KDD Gets Direct Access to Hongkong Telecom   KDD <9431> is utilizing Internet KDD, its internationalgateway service for the Internet, to create direct lines toHongkong Telecom CLS, and has already started the service.  Inservice trials, which began in April 1995 and will continueuntil April 1996, KDD has set up direct lines with America's MCIas well as Singapore Telecom.  The new alliance with HongkongTelecom CLS is KDD's third gateway.Des: ZDB11/YAA07/YAA05Ref: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbun, 12/28/95, p. 6; Japan IndustrialJournal, 12/28/95, p. 8Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMLINE JAPAN DAILY: TELECOMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetJANUARY 08, 19961994 Orders of Electric Communication Devices   According to the Ministry of International Trade andIndustry, which has compiled data on orders and shipments ofelectric communication devices by 38 major domestic makers in1994, the aggregate total came to 2.6 trillion yen, up 2.7% fromthe previous year.  A breakdown by product category reveals thatwired communication equipment dropped 1.6%.  However, wirelesscommunication devices jumped 14.0%, particularly because of a38.6% surge in orders and shipments of mobile communicationdevices.  Demand by the private sector grew 5.1%.  Exportsdeclined 10.9%.Des: ZDA30/ZDA40/ZRA10/XAE00/YAA05Ref: Nikkan Kogyo Shimbun, 12/28/95, p. 2Back to Headline List WT03-B12-2IA086-000622-B035-50http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te26.html 205.156.212.5 19970122044535 text/html 82331HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:43:31 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:05 GMTContent-length: 82144Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te26.html Sample Issue Copyright COMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * THIS WEEK'S NEWS * THIS WEEK... FCC ON HOLD (220 words) BIDDING IN FCC'S 2ND PCS AUCTION AT TWICE PACE OF FIRST ROUND YEAR AGO (779 words) SEVERAL FCC OPERATIONS CONTINUE IN GOVT. BUDGET SHUTDOWN (291 words) TELECOM REFORM BILL WAITS FOR THIS WEEK, AT LEAST (354 words) FCC PROPOSES COMPENSATION POLICY FOR LEC-WIRELESS INTERCONNECTION (606 words) INTERNET PATHS CHALLENGE RHCs FOR LONG DISTANCE BUSINESS (712 words) RESELLERS FIGHT NEW AT&T BILLING POLICY REMOVING ITS NAME FROM BILLS (473 words) AT&T ABANDONING LECs FOR BILLING, SENDS OWN BILLS DIRECTLY TO CUSTOMERS (559 words) CAL. PUC ADOPTS FINAL TELECOM COMPETITION RULES, GIVES OKAY TO 31 ENTRANTS (511 words) * COMMON CARRIER PERSONALS * Marvin Rosenberg and Edward Hummers, partners in law firm (303 words) * FCC ACTIONS * FCC launched proceeding to reduce inconsistencies in home (248 words) FCC Wireless Bureau rejected Radiofone request for delay in (194 words) Atlanta Trunking Assoc. filed request for waiver at FCC (151 words) * COMMON CARRIER NOTEBOOK * AT&T estimated that 4% of managers -- 2,900 of 72,000 -- (83 words) Ill. Circuit Court, Chicago, dismissed Health & Environmental (179 words) CWA accused NBC-owned WCAU-TV Philadelphia of censorship for (160 words) Committee T1-Telecom adopted guidelines for privacy and (69 words) RHCs' share of access revenues is likely to decline to 80% (190 words) House Telecom Subcommittee Chmn. Fields (R-Tex.) received more (178 words) Rep. Tauzin (R-La.) said he won't run for Senate, as once (120 words) Ameritech gave $1.4 million to Wis. Advanced (46 words) Ameritech and U S West said their customers are first in (59 words) Brooks Fiber Communications said it plans to spend more than (49 words) SCT Inc. received patent for tunable microwave devices that (53 words) LCI International signed definitive agreements to buy long (55 words) Telecom meetings: USTA National Issues Conference, Jan. 29-31 (37 words) FiveCom Inc. has started constructing New England fiber (40 words) Pacific Bell will offer emergency backup service for users of (68 words) AirTouch Paging acquired assets of privately held Message (69 words) AT&T issued prepaid calling cards worth $20 to U.S. Army (46 words) U S West sold 32 rural Minn. exchanges to Pacific Telecom (PT) (109 words) Ameritech said it had begun arbitration against Poland, (61 words) U.S. and Mexico will look into allegations by Telephone (151 words) Ameritech and Deutsche Telekom consortium acquired majority (103 words) Italian-owned Stet has pulled out of plan to buy 25% of (35 words) Alcatel joined AT&T cable unit to promote, design, build and (151 words) Australian govt. approved MCI's planned $2-billion investment (28 words) Elcotel shipped first 100 pay phones to Chile last week under (28 words) AT&T and Indian partner Aditya V. Birla Group won 2 cellular (83 words) Cellular Communications International said it had waived its (25 words) TeleDanmark and Telenor, Norwegian carrier, plan to seek 49% (46 words) Bangladesh plans $735-million, multiyear project to expand (26 words) MicroCell Telecommunications and Clearnet Communications each (74 words) Panama expects to offer cellular license for service in Panama (32 words) AT&T Network Systems said it won $10-million contract from (42 words) Ameritech boosted quarterly dividend 6% to 53 cents -- $2.12 (68 words) Telecom Financials: Tel-Save Holdings estimated that (98 words) Citizens Utilities plans to make $175-million convertible (32 words) Mobile Telecommunications Technologies said SkyTel subsidiary (29 words) Ericsson said recent stock market turbulence won't alter (61 words) * STATE ACTIVITIES * Bell Atlantic (BA) submitted price cap plan to Md. PSC that (157 words) Ohio PUC should intervene in interconnection negotiations (71 words) Fla. PSC approved 2-year interconnection agreement involving (59 words) Ida. PUC said it's seeking comments on proposal to allow GTE (97 words) Cable & Wireless announced UniLink service in N.Y.C. area to (65 words) Ill. Commerce Commission (ICC) should require Ameritech to (61 words) AT&T praised Dane County (Wis.) Circuit Court decision (35 words) AT&T said it filed application with Md. PSC to enter local (27 words) MFS Communications said it applied to Va. Corp. Commission for (34 words) Ill. Commerce Commission (ICC) approved Southwestern Bell (67 words) Ariz. Corp. Commission (ACC) approved AT&T and MCI (85 words) Conn. Dept. of Public Utility Control (DPUC) finalized rules (65 words) Ga. PSC order that BellSouth offer discounted basic rates to (46 words) CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996THIS WEEK... FCC ON HOLD     After 2 weeks of being closed down, FCC's backlog of paperworkis mounting and Jan. 18 agenda meeting may have to be rescheduled. Although talks between Administration and Congress were expected tocontinue over weekend, there was no indication when govt. shutdownwould end.  Meanwhile, numerous FCC filing deadlines have come andgone, applications have been held up and stacks of paperwork arelanguishing on conference rooms at law firms throughout city.  OnceFCC gets back to work, it undoubtedly will be hit with avalanche ofrequests for rescheduled deadlines in dozens of proceedings.     FCC's Block C PCS auction, which was declared exempt fromfurloughs, received high bids totaling $1.2 billion beforerecessing Dec. 21 for Christmas holiday.  Auction, which willresume Jan. 5, started Dec. 18, day shutdown began.  SpecializedMobile Radio (SMR) auction also continued during first week ofshutdown, then recessed until Jan. 2.  FCC officials said SMRauction was slowing down and Commission may move to Stage 2 biddingrules after holiday break.     Things have been quiet up on Capitol Hill too.  Legislatorswent home for holiday without settling budget impasse or completingaction on telecom reform bill.  Although conferees week ago wereballyhooing agreement on telecom legislation, disagreement amongHouse Republicans stalled final action and Congress adjourned forholiday without filing conference report.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996BIDDING IN FCC'S 2ND PCS AUCTION AT TWICE PACE OF FIRST ROUND YEARAGO     Long-delayed Block C PCS auction set fast pace with 293companies seeking 493 licenses through first 4 rounds, easilyeclipsing pace for first round in 1994 when bigger, richercompanies sought 99 licenses.  Auction recessed Dec. 21 forholidays after Round 4 ended with $1,209,613,496 in net revenue vs.$678.9 million through same stage in earlier auction.  Althoughlicenses cover same territory, industry observers suggested smallerservice areas in Block C coupled with repeated delays in launchingsales may be contributing to faster pace.  "There is a lot ofpent-up demand for these licenses," said Kathleen Ham, chief, FCCAuctions Div.  Auction resumes Jan. 5. (Fri.)     Specialized Mobile Radio (SMR) auction for 1,040 licenses,more commercial and less glitzy industry, slowed "to a crawl" andFCC may move to Stage 2 bidding rules after holiday break, Ham toldus.  SMR bidding through 13 rounds ended with $166.9 million in netrevenue from high bids, although Atlanta Trunking's erroneous bidof $125 million skewed numbers.  Without withdrawal of payment owedby Atlanta Trunking, net revenue is $60.6 million, FCC said.  Hamsaid Stage 2 rules require companies to bid on 75% of eligiblepops, compared with 50% in Stage 1, or face reduction ineligibility.  Auction staff will review bidding pace after saleresumes Jan. 2, she said.     Interest in PCS Block C licenses grew as legal delays pushedback start from April to summer, then fall and finally to Dec.,with further one-week delay during first govt. shutdown.  Ham saidpent-up demand combined with 2-week hiatus for holiday probablycontributed to aggressive bidding.  Wireless Bureau Chief MicheleFarquhar said:  "This shows that good things come in smallpackages."  Ham said experience acquired in first action also maycontribute to speed of bidding in current sale.     Block C licenses could generate greater value based on smallerterritories compared with A and B Block licenses, which raised $7billion from 18 bidders.  Ham said speculation has focused onrevenue possibilities that would increase for smaller licenses. Larger A and B territories, such as N.Y. and L.A., covered morethan one state, requiring substantial buildout.  Block C is gearedto Basic Trading Areas (BTAs), with 10 BTA licenses for each MTA.     Industry analyst Herschel Shosteck offered additional reasonfor size of opening round:  Block C companies are vehicles for bigcompanies to expand existing cellular or PCS holdings, usingability to hold up to 49% of Block C bidder as minority partner. "This is a facade for the big boys to take another crack at it," hetold us.  "It all has to do with ideology."  For example, he saidU.S. AirWaves, headed by former U S West executive John DeFeo, hasbacking from MCI, which has loaned company $25 million.  Wirelessentrepreneur Craig McCaw acquired 25% of Personal-ConnectCommunications of Seattle.     To qualify, companies had to have revenues under $125 millionfor last 2 years, and assets below $500 million, but Shosteck saidseveral companies had up-front payments -- in cash -- of more than$50 million.  AirWaves paid $81 million and NextWave, which isthought to have Qualcomm as backer, $79 million.  At end ofauction, he said, small companies that bid "will sell out" tolarger companies, leading to news stories on success ofentrepreneurs.     Analysis of Round 4 bids showed PCS 2000, P.R.-based company,still would pay premium for its licenses of $11.24 per pop comparedwith other leaders bidders' $7.50-$9.  Company also bid $46.5million ($11.24) in Boston and $46.3 million ($11.24) inWashington, D.C.  For example, GWI PCS offered $112.5 million forL.A. ($7.73 per pop) and $48.9 million for San Francisco ($7.59),DCR PCS offered $70.3 million, $8.58.  NextWave bid $53.1 million,$9, in Philadelphia, and $37.8 million, $8.03, in Detroit.  InBlock A & B auction, Pacific Telesis bid high of $21.39 in L.A. andSan Francisco, Poka Lambro $1.83 for Wash.-Mont. and Guam.  Mostpaid $10-$15.     PCS 2000 is partnership formed in P.R. as Unicom dominated 3of 4 rounds, paying premium over competitors.  Unicom Pres. JavierLamoso said company was created earlier in 1995 specifically to bidin Block C auction, raising money by selling shares in $25,000blocks to unidentified bidders.  Company paid $50 million inupfront payments to qualify for auction, ranking 4th behindAirWaves, NextWave, GWI PCS.     Lamoso wouldn't comment on bidding strategy, and said he wassurprised his per-pop total was well above competitors.  "We looklike bullies," he told us from San Juan.  "I've never felt thatway, even when I was in first grade."  Lamoso said he also workedfor Cellular Communication of P.R. and P.R. Cable Assn.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SEVERAL FCC OPERATIONS CONTINUE IN GOVT. BUDGET SHUTDOWN     Some FCC staffers remained on job as lack of budget caused 2ndfederal govt. shutdown in 5 weeks.  Unlike last time, when only 95Commission employees were considered "essential" and remained onjob, mostly those working on World Radio Conference, portions ofmany bureaus and FCC operations remained open this time.  Theyinclude Auctions Div. handling sales for specialized mobile radio,Block C PCS and multipoint distribution service (MDS) licenses. Govt. has been shut down for more than 2 weeks and, although talkswere expected over weekend, it wasn't certain whether budgetimpasse would be over in time to call workers back to their desksthis week.     FCC working staff included employees for auctions,International and Wireless Bureaus, litigation employees in Gen.Counsel's Office (including Gen. Counsel William Kennard) becauseof 2 court arguments scheduled in mid-Dec.  As was case during Nov.shutdown, commissioners are permitted to work, but their personalstaffs aren't, except with special dispensation.     Commission employees reported to work Dec. 18, were told toleave with 3 hours' notice.  FCC hq building at 1919 M St. NW, plus3 other M St. buildings housing Commission offices, posted shutdownnotices on front doors, plus 2-page memorandum from FCC ManagingDir. Andrew Fishel explaining situation and spelling out employees'rights.  He cited "sudden emergency requiring curtailment of theagency's activities;  therefore, no advance notification [toemployees] is possible."      As in last shutdown, comments due during shutdown days can bedelivered first day FCC returns to work after impasse ends,official said.  Filings associated with auctions will be acceptedin lobby of 1919 M St. and reference room at 2025 M St.;  MDSreference room at 2033 M St. is open, but only for auction-relatedbusiness, Commission said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TELECOM REFORM BILL WAITS FOR THIS WEEK, AT LEAST     Congress adjourned Dec. 22 for Christmas holiday withoutfiling conference committee report on telecom reform legislation. Senate Republicans and Democrats said final arrangements had beenworked out.  House Democrats were satisfied with language, pendingfinal examination.  But House Republicans were split:  CommerceCommittee Chmn. Bliley (R-Va.), urged members to sign conferencereport while Telecom Subcommittee Chmn. Fields (R-Tex.), calledlegislators from his Houston home to urge them not to signconference report.  Rep. Hastert (R-Ill.), member of leadership andCommerce Committee, said members "will have to make up their ownminds" about which side to take.     One final factor is House leadership, Rep. Stearns (R-Fla.)pointed out.  Despite differences between Bliley and Fields, nobill will be closed out without leadership's approving it, Stearnssaid.  At time House adjourned, several Republicans told us theystill had problems with bill.  As Rep. White (R-Wash.) said onleaving House chamber:  "We're still working on it."  Rep. Oxley(R-O.) and Rep. Goodlatte (R-Va.), mentioned Internet regulation aspoint that should be revisited.  They told us in interviews thatthere was no reason that language preventing FCC from regulatingcontent or prices on Internet should be removed, noting that Househad passed it by large margin.     Final language agreed to, according to Senate staff, waslittle changed from night before, when Commerce Committee Chmn.Pressler (R-S.D.) said "framework" existed.  Negotiations resultedin removal of language covering one-year delay in RHC jointmarketing of local and long distance services.  One new phrase wasadded to clarify Justice Department's role in determining whetherRHCs should enter long distance.  It said FCC should give DoJ'sopinion "substantial weight," but "such evaluation shall not haveany preclusive effect on any Commission decision..."     Despite uncertainty on House side, Sen. Hollings (D-S.C.),senior Commerce Committee Democrat, said:  "There's no question inmy mind that there's agreement.  It's a good bill and it's agreedupon.  I think ultimately you've got some political atmospherespoisoned when the Vice President says he's for it and they [HouseRepublicans] say, 'We're against it.'  Maybe we can get the VicePresident to announce he opposes it."Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FCC PROPOSES COMPENSATION POLICY FOR LEC-WIRELESS INTERCONNECTION     FCC proposed compensation arrangements for LEC-wirelessinterconnection at final 1995 meeting that would mandate interimuse of "bill-&-keep" as reimbursement method.  Under bill-&-keep,each carrier terminates calls for others at no charge. Commissioners said bill-&-keep isn't ideal system, but speed is ofessence.  Comr. Quello warned that "search for an economicallyperfect system would be the enemy of the economic good."     Common Carrier Bureau Chief Regina Keeney told commissionersthat interconnection is becoming increasingly important "as theinfrastructure evolves into a network of networks" and agency isconcerned that current FCC policies "aren't enough."  Current rulesrequire "mutual compensation" but don't set more specificrequirements.  Beauty of bill-&-keep is that it's "administrativelysimple," Keeney said, and doesn't require setting up new billingsystems.     At present, more calls flow from wireless to wireline, meaningLECs may have to bear more costs under bill-&-keep, but thatsituation is changing.  Wireless companies, on other hand, havecomplained that LECs are charging them inflated prices forterminating their calls.  "There's a real danger" that without FCCaction, telephone companies will be able to impede development ofPCS through high prices and delays, Comr. Ness said.     Although it considers bill-&-keep "preferred" solution,Commission will seek comments on other options such as settinguniform rate, charging whatever LECs charge neighboring LECs toterminate calls, picking up one of various state solutions.  Comr.Ness said she would be willing to listen if someone came up withbetter system, "but it's got to be less regulatory and it's got tobe speedy."     Cellular Telecommunications Industry Assn. (CTIA) praised FCCcompensation proposal that it said would result in decreased feesto wireless customers and increased competition.  CTIA said thatunder current practice, wireless providers are required to pay LECsfor terminating calls that originate on mobile phones but LECsdon't pay wireless carriers for terminating their calls.  CTIAPres. Thomas Wheeler said that in 1994 wireless carriers paid LECsmore than $800 million to terminate their calls.  "Such a fee canonly act to impede development of wireless as a competitive localexchange service," he said.     Commissioners took pains to emphasize that they weren'tstepping on toes of state PUCs.  Fact that FCC has authority to setcompensation arrangements was mentioned several times -- as waseagerness to keep states in loop.  "We have a good relationshipwith the state commissions and we don't want to lose it," Chmn.Hundt said.  "We want to work with them."  Key issue affectingstate PUCs is how FCC rules will apply to termination of intrastatetraffic.  Commission invited comments on whether it should adoptinterconnection model that isn't binding on state regulatorycommissions or whether it should opt for mandatory model.     Commission tentatively concluded that information onLEC-wireless interconnection arrangements should be made public andwill take comments on how to do that -- through tariffing, publicdisclosure report or other approach.  Agency will seek comment onwhether new rules should apply to interconnection between LECs andall commercial mobile radio services or should be limited toarrangements between LECs and 2-way providers such as PCS, cellularand specialized mobile radio.  Other option would limit rules tointerconnection between LECs and PCS providers.     Personal Communications Industry Assn. (PCIA) Vp Mark Goldencalled FCC action "an important step for making a right thatexisted in the rulebooks happen in the marketplace."  He applaudedCommission for "doing something fast and simple" rather thanfollowing "a long, drawn-out process in search of the perfect." Comcast said action "may be the single biggest step the FCC hastaken so far to promote local telephone competition." Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996INTERNET PATHS CHALLENGE RHCs FOR LONG DISTANCE BUSINESS     Several months ago, Nynex quietly pulled plug on one of itslittle-known experiments, VermontNet, small bulletin board servicethat was started to help start reentry into information servicesfollowing crash of expensive and complex InfoLook gateway service. Reason for ending service, company said, was that Justice Dept.didn't agree with how VermontNet provided Internet connectivity.     Even as Nynex withdrew from Internet, however, Ameritech andPacific Telesis moved in and are providing Internet access as partof service to business customers, without DoJ objections. Difference, according to officials of each company, is relationshipamong RHC, customer and Internet provider.     New England Telephone (now Nynex-New England) gradually grewVermontNet from local bulletin board offering local electronic mailand opportunities for electronic commerce for neighboringcommunities to one providing wider Internet access, includingelectronic mail and file transfer protocol (FTP) service, crudeprecursor to today's World Wide Web.  Internet e-mail alone "wasenough to send it over the edge," Nynex official said.  Nynexattorneys talked with DoJ and it became clear that providingInternet access "was not consistent with Justice's view of theantitrust decree," company said, noting that Justice interpretedNew England's Internet access as indirectly providing forbiddeninterexchange service.  Nynex had contracted with 3rd party fortransport to Internet access, but by connecting its service toInternet service provider, Nynex permitted customers to get servicearound world, Nynex official said.  Nothing ever was put inwriting, with opinions from DoJ coming in conversations with Nynexattorneys.     In theory, network arrangements between telco and longdistance company are similar to those between telco and Internet. In each case, telco sends call to switch of another service, whichthen transports it to destination out of local calling area.  ButNynex officials said key difference wasn't in network but ineconomics.  In telephony, subscribers pay telco monthly bill forlocal service and pay separate bill to long-distance carrier.  WithVermontNet, subscribers paid flat fee that included Internetcharges that VermontNet paid to Internet service provider to behooked into Internet.  "That's where the violation is," Nynexofficial said, adding that it was Nynex that recognized there mightbe problem, consulted DoJ and then took down service.  Officialsaid that important factor to consider wasn't whether Nynexviolated MFJ but that under law local telco couldn't be Internetservice provider, which it wants to be.  Also important, he said,is that law should be changed.     With other RHCs, MFJ questions have been avoided bystructuring service differently.  Pacific Telesis, not PacificBell, offers entire package of services on server, ranging fromhosting customer information, such as Web site, obtaining domainname (such as pbi.com), routing customer's Internet access to localInternet service provider, providing Web browsers such as Netscapeand mail programs such as Eudora for customer local area networks. One thing Pacific doesn't do is provide direct link to Internet orselect path for getting there.     Telesis attorney Keith Epstein said that when customerscontract for Internet services, they're given choice of Internetprovider much as those signing up for regular telephone service aregiven choice of long distance carrier.  Telesis calls can't leaveLATA and can provide connection only to Internet.  Epstein said: "It's a weird way to provide service.  It's what we need to do."     Ameritech also entered Internet business through its AdvancedData Services unit, which isn't part of its regulated telephonecompanies.  Ameritech data unit packages range of products andservices, starting with broadband access for businesses, includinghosting of customer Internet data for Web sites, gopher servers ornewsgroups, while providing local high-speed access to Internet,such as through frame relay or other broadband data services.  Aswith Pacific, however, Ameritech stops when it reaches Internetservice provider.  Spokesman Richard Maganini said customers mustchoose their own Internet carrier.  As with Pacific, Ameritech alsooffers customers help in registering Internet domain names, managescustomers' network and provides single point of contact forInternet connectivity, while giving client single bill. Promotional material for Ameritech's Dedicated Internet AccessService notes that service is flexible because "Ameritech allowsyou to choose your route to the Internet."  But brochure also says: "You [customer] will also need to choose a Long Distance InternetProvider for global access to the Internet."Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996RESELLERS FIGHT NEW AT&T BILLING POLICY REMOVING ITS NAME FROMBILLS     Telecommunications Resellers Assn. (TRA) is meeting with AT&Tin hope of convincing it to reconsider new billing policy foraggregators and other resellers.  AT&T, which provides end-userbilling and support service for some resellers, wants to reduce itsname identification on those bills.  For example, it would removeits name and logo from end-user bills and delete AT&T billing,maintenance and customer service numbers.  AT&T identificationwould be replaced by name, logo and numbers of resale carrier. Aggregators, which tend to be smaller than many resellers, would behardest hit by new policy, TRA said.  They resemble buying groups,buying AT&T service in bulk and reselling it to end users.     TRA Gen. Counsel Charles Hunter said talks have produced "somemovement," though not enough to ease Assn.'s concerns.  He saidAT&T has indicated willingness to:  (1) Grandfather use of AT&T'scustomer maintenance number for life of existing contracts.  (2)Permit its logo to be used on joint letters to customers explainingchanges.  (3) Allow aggregators to retain blue border on bills,indicating similarity to AT&T bills.  (4) Delay start date to June1 from earlier in spring.     Nonetheless, "potential for damage is still very substantial,"Hunter said.  Selling point for resellers is identification withAT&T, he said, then "all of a sudden, the bill looks different andthe customer doesn't hear AT&T when the phone is answered."  Hesaid "there is a very real fear of substantial customer attrition,"with some resellers estimating they could lose upward of 40% oftheir customer base.  In addition, AT&T policy change could lead toadditional "back office" costs for resellers that have reliedexclusively on AT&T to provide billing and customer service, Huntersaid, and there could be regulatory changes as well.  Because AT&Taction could change role of aggregators, they may have to obtainauthorization by FCC or states as resale carriers, he said: "Depending on which states are involved, this process can take 9 to12 months or more, at a potential cost of more than $100,000."     AT&T spokeswoman Karen Way said "confusion to customers" isreason company wants to take its name off reseller bills.  Severalstates, including Fla., have ordered AT&T to change practice"because of problems with misrepresentation and slamming," shesaid.  There's no way of knowing whether customer is slammed byreseller because AT&T's name, rather than reseller's, continues toappear on bill, Way said.  Change "brings AT&T's practices in linewith industry practices and state PUC requirements," she said.     Two AT&T billing services are affected:  (1) Bill ManagerService, which resellers can buy from AT&T.  Service not onlyrenders bills, it also provides customer service.  (2)Multilocation billing, which was designed for use by AT&T corporatecustomers that need separate bills sent to various offices. Resellers use service to send bills to their end-user customers.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996AT&T ABANDONING LECs FOR BILLING, SENDS OWN BILLS DIRECTLY TOCUSTOMERS     AT&T returns to consumer billing this month when it beginssending more than 500,000 long distance customers in Cal., Fla. andTex. bills for service, separate from GTE bills that now carryIXC's charges.  AT&T targeted 3 states and GTE for launch buteventually will direct-bill all LEC customers, giving companyaccess to customers, it said.  AT&T said process gives itopportunity to notify customers of promotions and other specialbenefits, while also providing updates on benefit and loyaltycredits.  "We do need to be able to communicate directly with ourcustomers," said Nancy Smith of AT&T Consumer Service unit.  Beforedivestiture, AT&T handled billing for all services.     Move also allows AT&T to bypass LECs that currently don'tallow IXCs or other carriers to communicate directly with customersthrough billing process.  For example, new AT&T bill will includeinformation on alternate calling plans, True Reward credits forparticipants in loyalty program, cost savings based on competingservices.  Official said bill also will give customer long distanceplan options based on calling patterns monitored by company.  Forexample, cheaper rates might be available for certain kinds ofservice or at certain times of day, and such information would bereflected on new bill, carrier said.     AT&T official said new bills being introduced in GTE territoryeventually will appear in other regions, but declined to revealtimetable or targets for next year.  Ultimately, company plans toprovide service to most of its 80 million residential customers, asit does for 10 million business customers, official said.  Billsare printed in Charlotte, N.C., and official said company doesn'thave plans to erect other billing centers.     GTE officials didn't comment on AT&T plans, which will giveGTE-AT&T customers in 3 states separate bills.  GTE providesservice in Tampa, most of Tex. and substantial portions of SouthernCal.     New AT&T bills are larger than many of LECs', which are 4"x7"and printed on one side of page.  New version is 6-1/2"x10", withwide margins where service-type information is carried.  First pageincludes summary of charges, with section showing savings comparedagainst AT&T standard rates and points earned in loyalty program.     LECs said they were aware of AT&T plans.  Ameritech said movewould further confuse customers already bombarded by bills andmessages from utilities, including LEC.  At Nynex, for example,AT&T recently signed one-year contract to continue using LEC forbilling customers, Nynex spokesman Bob Varettoni said.  "It's acompetitive market.  People can do what they want to do."  He saidNynex had attractive billing and collection service for othercarriers.  Company declined to elaborate on contract terms withIXCs.     Nynex also will unveil new bills this month, beginning with500,000 customers in Buffalo and reaching all by end of firstquarter, he said.  Bills will include promotional and cost-savinginformation, similar to AT&T's, but features won't be extended toIXCs or other carriers.  He said summary page will spell out costsclearly for local, interLATA long distance and other long distancecharges along with total for billing period:  "It will be anattractive package" based on "lot of" customer research.     Ameritech spokesman said company thought move would addconfusion in residential market.  "Why should they reinvent whatalready exists," spokesman said.  Like Nynex, Ameritech providesbilling and collection services as "common carrier" to allcompanies, for fee.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CAL. PUC ADOPTS FINAL TELECOM COMPETITION RULES, GIVES OKAY TO 31ENTRANTS     Cal. PUC  approved rules to open local telephone loop Jan. 1and granted certificates to 31 companies that hope to become localexchange carriers (LECs).  They include broad cross-section oftelecom industry and at least one electric utility.  PUC said rulesare "largely the same" as proposed regulations released in Julythat set broader outline for opening markets.  Agency also adopted3-year freeze on price caps for Pacific Bell (PB) and GTE, andlowered productivity factor to rate of inflation because"underlying assumptions and data" that created current 5% factorare "obsolete."  Commission also granted some increases for 4 smalltelcos.     Companies that won certificates:  Advantage Communications,Assoc. Group, AT&T Communications, Brooks Fiber (of Bakersfield,Fresno, Sacramento, San Jose, Stockton), Cable Plus, CenturyTelecommunications, Continental Telecommunications, ElectricLightwave, Fiber Data Systems, GST Lightwave, GST PacificLightwave, GTE-Cal., GTE Intelligent Network Services, ICG AccessServices, Info-Tech Communications, Linkatel Pacific, MCI MetroAccess Transmission Services, MFS Intelenet, NewTelco, Nextlink,Pacific Bell, Pac-West Telecomm, TCG (of L.A., San Diego, SanFrancisco), Viacom Communications, Winstar Wireless.     New rules set terms for interconnection, interim numberportability (through remote call forwarding) and universal service,PUC said, and keep "same level of access" for deaf and disabledresidents.  PUC said it will determine cost of remote callforwarding in separate proceeding early next year.  All telecomproviders will have to provide 911 access, directory databases and"warm-line service," which allows residents to access emergencyservices even if phone has been disconnected for other calls. Rules contain provisions to protect against slamming by requiringwritten confirmation of each sale, with description of services andprice breakdowns.     In other actions, PUC:  (1) Granted rate increases to 4 smalltelcos -- Calaveras (68.5%), Hornitos (379%), GTE W. Coast (30.6%),Happy Valley (29.6% for Olinda, and 53.2% for Platina exchange) --and approved changes in state's high-cost fund, which subsidizesrural telephone rates.  Portion of increases for Calaveras andHornitos will be offset by elimination of suburban mileage charges,PUC said, covering 80% of boost for Calaveras and 20% for Hornitos. Agency reduced to 0.27% from 0.5% amount companies must contributeto high-cost fund because it has grown since last year while totaldraw has decreased 44%.     (2) Released its report to state legislature on howcompetition may affect universal service and proposed that basicservice include 911 access, free customer service, directoryassistance, others.  It also proposed high-cost voucher fund tosubsidize companies in rural areas and said it would lobbylegislature to change existing law to make change possible. Voucher system would set credits on customer bills to make surethey received subsidy regardless of chosen provider, PUC said, andwould base amount of subsidy on cost-rate differential withincentives to improve efficiency.  It floated idea of competitivebidding for subsidy and said it would decide issue by June. Commission proposed grant programs to hook up libraries and schoolsto new telecom services through bill surcharge, taxes on sale oftelecom products, or mandated discounts.  All companies also shouldmeet same service quality standards, PUC said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Marvin Rosenberg and Edward Hummers, partners in law firm     Marvin Rosenberg and Edward Hummers, partners in law firmFletcher, Heald & Hildreth, join Washington office of Fla.-basedfirm Holland & Knight... Joseph Farrell, ex-U. Cal.-Berkeley,appointed chief economist, FCC;  Robert Peck, former FCC deputydir.-legislative affairs, named commissioner, General ServiceAdministration Public Bldgs. Service... Michael Houghton resigns asCTIA asst. vp-media relations to open Alexandria, Va., telecom PRconsulting firm, Communicreate... Richard Hanna promoted to pres.,MFS Intelenet... Michael Franz, ex-Murata Business Systems, joinsSprint as pres., Diversified Brands Group, Long Distance Div... RodOlsen, Cable & Wireless exec. dir.-finance, appointed acting CEOuntil permanent replacement is found;  Richard Wainright-Lee, chiefexec.-regional businesses, also appointed deputy dir.-finance...David Van Valkenburg moves from U S West Multimedia to U S WestInternational as exec. vp-cable/telephony... Peter Curley retiresas vp, Bell Atlantic (BA) Purchasing, succeeded by William Doherty,who moves from vp-special projects, BA Network Services... RichardAnderson promoted to pres., BellSouth Business Systems, succeedingPhil Jacobs, appointed COO, Australia's Optus Communications...Mark Brown, ex-MCI, named corporate counsel/dir.-state regulatoryaffairs, Continental Cablevision.     Kevin Inda, former MCI senior mgr.-financial PR, namedvp-corporate & financial communication, DCR Communications... DanBart, vp, Standards & Technology, Electronic Industries Assn. andTelecommunications Industry Assn., elected to American NationalStandards Institute (ANSI) board;  Other appointments to ANSIboard:  Lawrence Wills, IBM dir.-standards, reelected chmn.;  NancyKippenhan, 3M mgr.-product responsibility systems & services, andRobert Hermann, United Technologies senior vp-science & technology,named vice chmn... Laird Simons advanced to exec. vp-operations,Sprint/Northern Supply... Elected to AT&T board:  Kenneth Derr,Chevron Corp. CEO, and Ralph Larsen, Johnson & Johnson CEO...Christine Killorin, vp-gen. mgr., Nynex Telecommunications Groupoperator services, adds vp-quality, new position... Scott Cooper,ex-Intel, named dir. technology & telecom policy, AmericanElectronics Assn., effective Jan. 8... J.G. Harrington electedpartner in Washington law firm Dow, Lohnes & Albertson.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     FCC launched proceeding to reduce inconsistencies in home     FCC launched proceeding to reduce inconsistencies in homewiring rules between telcos and cable, saying change is neededbecause of convergence of industries.  Action was taken at Dec. 15agenda meeting.  Rulemaking will deal with demarcation betweencustomer-owned and company-owned wiring, signal leakage andquality, technical standards, customer-premises equipment (CPE) anddivision of state and federal responsibilities.  Regulation ofcable and telcos should be comparable "where appropriate," FCCComr. Ness said, and Commission should deregulate "where it makessense."  Comr. Chong said she would have preferred to movedemarcation point immediately, but went along with launchingrulemaking "since we have agreed to move swiftly."  Chmn. Hundtsaid owning wiring "can be a tremendous competitive advantage" forincumbent, and new rules could make cable CPE market as competitiveas telephone equipment market.  Rulemaking seeks comment on:  (1)What demarcation point would be appropriate, acknowledging it mightbe different for single-family and multiple dwelling units.  (2)Whether telcos' broadband services should have to meet same signalleakage and signal quality standards as cable.  (3) Whether cableshould have to standardize on jacks to connect CPE to cable system,as telcos have for telephony.  (4) Whether cable should have sameregulatory distinctions between residential and nonresidentialwiring as telcos.  (5) Whether consumers should have same access toin-home broadband wiring as they do to telephone wires.  (6) How todivide regulatory responsibility for wiring among franchiseauthorities, states and FCC, and harmonize state and federalregulation of telephony and video programming.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     FCC Wireless Bureau rejected Radiofone request for delay in     FCC Wireless Bureau rejected Radiofone request for delay inBlock C PCS auction, saying company's request for emergency reliefdidn't meet test required and would hurt bidders in currentauction.  Order signed by Michele Farquhar, acting chief of Bureau,said granting stay in fact would cause "irreparable harm to otherparties and would be inconsistent with the public interest." Radiofone sought stay Dec. 8 as part of challenge to Commission'srules barring cellular license holders from seeking 30 MHz PCSlicenses in same region.  Order said Radiofone's argument thatCommission can't apply its rules to restrict ownership isinsufficient to overturn rulemaking developed last year.  "It isvery unlikely that the Commission would... reexamine the merits ofthe 45 MHz spectrum cap, which was adopted a little over a year agoto promote competition, discourage anticompetitive behavior andcreate incentives for innovation and efficiency in CMRS [CommercialMobile Radio Service], including broadband PCS," order said.  Italso said rule wasn't at issue when 6th U.S. Appeals Court,Cincinnati, remanded rulemaking to Commission.  Bureau said furtherdelay in auction, which began Dec. 18, "will cause severe harm toeach of the other C Block applicants."Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Atlanta Trunking Assoc. filed request for waiver at FCC     Atlanta Trunking Assoc. filed request for waiver at FCCseeking to avoid substantial withdrawn-bid penalty in specializedmobile radio auction (SMR) after intended $125,000 bid became $125million error.  Company said bid filed electronically carried 3extra zeros.  In waiver request, it asked Commission to considersize of company and nature of mistake in granting waiver.  FullCommission will have to review request at end of auction, lawyerDiane Law said Thurs.  Under FCC rules, companies that withdrawbids are liable for penalty based on difference between withdrawnoffer and eventual high bid at end of sale.  Company earlier bid$1,100 for same license, designated P frequency block;  high bidbefore error was about $100,000, submitted by FCI 900 -- which isNextel.  Atlanta Trunking resubmitted $125,000 bid in Round 10, FCCsaid.  Efforts to contact company, part of Southland Corp. and SMRoperator at 900 MHz in Atlanta, were unsuccessful.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     AT&T estimated that 4% of managers -- 2,900 of 72,000 --     AT&T estimated that 4% of managers -- 2,900 of 72,000 --offered early buyout in Nov. have accepted it.  Company will havefinal count this week.  Spokesman said AT&T had expected 3-4% toaccept, so rate is on target.  Additional involuntary layoffs maybe required, although spokesman wouldn't give number.  He saidcompany has to weigh how many need to be cut because ofrestructuring, vs. additional staff that will be needed as itexpands into new businesses such as wireless and consulting.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Ill. Circuit Court, Chicago, dismissed Health & Environmental     Ill. Circuit Court, Chicago, dismissed Health & EnvironmentalSciences Group (HES) and Dr. George Carlo as defendants in lawsuitbrought by Debbra Wright, who charged cellular telephone causedbrain cancer and who accused industry of conspiracy to concealevidence.  Judge Paddy McNamara said Wright case, originally filedagainst Motorola, included substantial evidence, but nothinglinking HES to conspiracy.  He's expected to issue written opinionthis month and rule in March on similar charges Wright filedagainst Wireless Technology Research (WTR), which also is headed byCarlo and set up by industry to study health effects of cellularphones.  WTR said all allegations should be dismissed because "theyare based on the same key factual issues the judge has nowresolved... WTR believes that lawsuits such as the Wright case arewasteful attacks on the scientific community, that they slowcompletion of the research necessary to answer the public'squestions about the health effects of all wireless technology andthat these tactics could themselves pose threats to public healthif they delay implementation of any interventions that may provenecessary."Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     CWA accused NBC-owned WCAU-TV Philadelphia of censorship for     CWA accused NBC-owned WCAU-TV Philadelphia of censorship fordeclining to broadcast anti-Bell Atlantic (BA) commercials carriedby other stations.  "This is censorship, plain and simple," CWA VpVincent Maisano said.  Union, locked in 5-month contract disputewith BA, hasn't been able to place several commercials criticizingRHC on Philadelphia station.  Latest spot features actor as "Larry"that union said is parody of contractors hired by company toperform work done by union-covered employees.  "Bell Atlantic runsmillions of dollars worth of advertisements on WCAU," Maisano said. "All we are asking for is the opportunity to pay for our own ads totell our side of the story."  Official said station doesn't carryissue-oriented ads, such as CWA spots.  "It wasn't in response tothe issues that CWA raises," spokeswoman said.  Station andABC-owned WPVI, also Philadelphia, rejected all CWA ads focusing onbargaining with BA, she said.  Company commercials discuss serviceoptions and describe corporate initiatives, don't address labordiscussions.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Committee T1-Telecom adopted guidelines for privacy and     Committee T1-Telecom adopted guidelines for privacy andsecurity of PCS networks using 5 "common security requirements"established earlier by industry groups.  Latest Technical Report onSecurity Management Guidelines to Support PCS covers:  (1)Authentication of users.  (2) Concealment of location of users fromattempted eavesdropping.  (3) Bearer and signaling channel privacyfor wireless terminals.  (4) Security of data in smart cards.  (5)Exchange of information among networks -- 202-434-8841.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     RHCs' share of access revenues is likely to decline to 80%     RHCs' share of access revenues is likely to decline to 80%from current 97% when local competition begins, putting pressure oncash flows and causing drop in average credit ratings to A1 fromAa3, Moody's said.  Revenue growth will slow to 1.4% annuallythrough 1999 compared with average 2.2% growth for 5 years through1994, rating agency said.  "Unprecedented challenge" to residentialand business customer base will occur with or without reformlegislation, as state lawmakers and regulators seek to openmarkets, said Stephen Gutkowski, vp-senior credit officer. Business segment will be first target of competitors, he said, withresidential competition much later.  "It will be a number of yearsbefore any facilities-based alternative can provide a mass-marketedswitched voice service that will have a material impact on thetelephone companies' market share."  RHC revenues also will be hitby bypass technologies and price cuts charged to IXCs, to 1.5 centsper min. from current 3 cents, Gutkowski said.  "Moody's believesthe loss of market share in existing lines of business will havegreater impact on credit quality than the possible benefits fromentering new lines of business," he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     House Telecom Subcommittee Chmn. Fields (R-Tex.) received more     House Telecom Subcommittee Chmn. Fields (R-Tex.) received morethan $175,000 in Jan.-June 1995 from contributors in communicationsindustry, according to study by Center for Responsive Politics,Washington.  Fields was given $72,000 by media/entertainmentcontributors, $63,000 by telcos, $44,000 by telecomservices/equipment entities.  Next highest was House CommerceCommittee Chmn. Bliley (R-Va.), who received $26,503 from electricutilities, $17,000 from telcos.  Former Telecom Subcommittee Chmn.Markey (D-Mass.) got $23,000 from media/entertainment entities,$6,700 from telcos.  Former Commerce Committee Chmn. Dingell(D-Mich.) received $15,000 from media/entertainment concerns,$15,750 from "lobbyists," $14,500 from lawyers and law firms(interests unspecified).  Commerce Committee member Oxley (R-O.)received $7,500 from telcos, Rep. Tauzin (R-La.) $16,000 fromtelcos, Rep. Boucher (D-Va.) $14,500 from media/entertainmentgroups, $8,000 from telcos, $5,000 from electric utilities. Judiciary Committee Chmn. Hyde (R-Ill.) got $15,000 from telcos,$9,000 from media/entertainment, $11,200 from lawyers and lawfirms.  Overall, report said, House members received more than $40million, with Republicans leading Democrats by $10 million. Leading sector was finance, insurance and real estate with $7million.  Communications/electronics sector donated more than $2million.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Rep. Tauzin (R-La.) said he won't run for Senate, as once     Rep. Tauzin (R-La.) said he won't run for Senate, as onceexpected.  Spokesman said Tauzin has "handshake agreement" withCommerce Committee Chmn. Bliley (R-Va.) about Tauzin's future rolebut stopped short of saying deal involved his taking overchairmanship of Telecom Subcommittee now held by Chmn. Fields(R-Tex.) who is retiring from Congress.  Rep. Oxley (R-O.) iscurrent subcommittee vice chmn. and would like to take overchairmanship.  Technically, speaker doesn't appoint subcommitteechmn. -- committee members vote on recommendations by chairman offull committee.  Tauzin, who switched from Democratic Party earlierthis year, has more seniority than Oxley, but he also has moreseniority than Commerce Committee Chmn. Bliley (R-Va.) and wasn'tgiven Bliley's job when he changed parties.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Ameritech gave $1.4 million to Wis. Advanced     Ameritech gave $1.4 million to Wis. AdvancedTelecommunications Foundation to underwrite grants for statetechnology projects in education and health care.  Ameritech willprovide $13.5 million over 7 years for foundation projects. Foundation was created in 1994 to support technology projects withfunding from telecom carriers.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Ameritech and U S West said their customers are first in     Ameritech and U S West said their customers are first incountry to get name as well as number identification when receivinglong distance calls.  Service, result of agreement betweencompanies, is available only on calls between their territories andonly for Caller ID customers.  Both said they expected to negotiateagreements to share name information with other telcos.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Brooks Fiber Communications said it plans to spend more than     Brooks Fiber Communications said it plans to spend more than$20 million to build and operate fiber networks in Stockton, Cal.,and Jackson, Miss., to compete with Pacific Bell and BellSouth. Construction will begin on both "within weeks" and will becompleted in first quarter of 1996, company said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     SCT Inc. received patent for tunable microwave devices that     SCT Inc. received patent for tunable microwave devices thatgive wireless service providers expanded cell coverage, moreflexibility in network planning, lower infrastructure deploymentcosts.  SCT said "tunable ferroelectric technology," developedjointly with U. of Colo., enables company to develophigh-performance filters that provide increased channel capacity,greater interference rejection, improved signal clarity.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     LCI International signed definitive agreements to buy long     LCI International signed definitive agreements to buy longdistance units of Teledial America, which operates as US SignalCorp., and ATS Network Communications, for $124 million cash.  Dealgives LCI access to Midwest and South Central U.S., company said. LCI also opened sales office near San Francisco to handle salesassociated with West Coast acquisition.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Telecom meetings:  USTA National Issues Conference, Jan. 29-31     Telecom meetings:  USTA National Issues Conference, Jan. 29-31in Washington -- 202-326-7300... Telecommunications ResellersAssn., 1996 Major Carrier Forum Jan. 31-Feb. 1 in Pasadena --202-429-6601... CompTel convention, Feb. 25-28 in Miami Beach --Linda Murray, 202-296-6650.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     FiveCom Inc. has started constructing New England fiber     FiveCom Inc. has started constructing New England fibercommunications network that piggybacks on utility facilities. First work is between Hartford, Conn., and Springfield, Mass., onproperty owned by Hartford-based Northeast Utilities.  Companyplans to lease network capacity to communications carriers.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Pacific Bell will offer emergency backup service for users of     Pacific Bell will offer emergency backup service for users ofcomputer networks in partnership with Network Recovery Services,San Ramon, Cal., company that provides emergency data processingfacilities for financial institutions.  Service is designed toprotect companies in event of disasters such as earthquakes orfires.  Users will be able to click on icons of damaged or missingfiles, and files will be replaced automatically, Pacific Bell said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     AirTouch Paging acquired assets of privately held Message     AirTouch Paging acquired assets of privately held MessageCenter Beepers and its 345,000 paging customers in Conn., Mass.,N.J., N.Y. and Pa., boosting national total to 2.2 million.  Termsweren't disclosed.  AirTouch Paging Pres.-CEO Charles Jackson saidpurchase is first major acquisition for unit, and places it amongtop 5 in U.S.  Arch Communications earlier bought Westlink and500,000 pagers, becoming 3rd largest in nation with 2.5 millionunits.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     AT&T issued prepaid calling cards worth $20 to U.S. Army     AT&T issued prepaid calling cards worth $20 to U.S. Armytroops in Bosnia peacekeeping mission for holiday phone callsduring weekend before Christmas, 5 min. to Germany and Italy, 9min. to U.S.  AT&T also provided free ship-to-shore calls for Navyvessels through New Year's Day.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     U S West sold 32 rural Minn. exchanges to Pacific Telecom (PT)     U S West sold 32 rural Minn. exchanges to Pacific Telecom (PT)of Vancouver, Wash., after HTC Group consortium that includesHickory Tech, Alpine Communications and others backed out ofpreviously approved deal.  Transaction includes 26,000 access linesand will expand PT presence in Midwest to 146,000 lines in Ia.,Minn., Wis.  Company earlier bought 94 USW exchanges in Colo.,Ore., Wash.  It said officials of HTC Group informed RHC that 2 of3 partners had decided to buy properties in Ia. rather than Minn.,and withdrew plans for Minn. and Neb. purchase.  USW said HTC Groupsubmitted new bid for Minn. lines only, but was outbid by PT.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Ameritech said it had begun arbitration against Poland,     Ameritech said it had begun arbitration against Poland,charging Warsaw govt. with refusing to grant cellular license toCentertel joint venture of RHC, France Telecom and Polish operatorTPSA.  Venture signed letter of intent in 1991, but govt. so farhas refused to award license, claiming tender wasn't binding andit's rewriting laws to launch new tenders for 2 cellular licenses.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     U.S. and Mexico will look into allegations by Telephone     U.S. and Mexico will look into allegations by TelephoneWorkers Union of Mexico that Sprint closed La Conexion Familiarsubsidiary in San Francisco to harm union, U.S. Dept. of Labor(DoL) officials said.  Examination will focus on how plant closingsaffect union organizing, DoL said.  However, it won't lead to anypenalties because only NLRB has jurisdiction, said Jack Otero,deputy undersecretary for international affairs.  NLRB judge inAug. ruled that San Francisco unit was closed primarily because itwas losing money, although 50 job-related violations were noted. Sprint made shutdown decision 8 days before scheduled employee voteon joining CWA.  Study will be conducted by Labor Secretariat,organization of U.S., Mexican and Canadian officials set up toreview labor conditions under NAFTA.  CWA and Sprint said case wasunlikely to cause Sprint regulatory problems in Mexico.  Mexicangovt. officials had complained about closing, saying U.S. wasn'tenforcing its labor laws.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Ameritech and Deutsche Telekom consortium acquired majority     Ameritech and Deutsche Telekom consortium acquired majoritycontrol of privatized Hungarian telecom operator Matav for $850million, boosting stake to 67% from 30%.  Officials said dramaticimprovement in Matav since first investment prompted increase ininvestment.  Walter Catlow, pres.-Ameritech International BusinessDevelopment, said:  "Additional investment will enable even morerapid creation of value as we accelerate the application of ouroperation and marketing skills."  Matav has 1.8 million lines andpenetration of 24%, with 524,050 requests for service pending. "Rarely do you have this kind of suppressed demand," Catlow said. Ameritech week ago led consortium in acquiring 49.9% of Belgacomfor $2.39 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Italian-owned Stet has pulled out of plan to buy 25% of     Italian-owned Stet has pulled out of plan to buy 25% ofRussian telecom company Svyazinvest, Reuters reported, with reasonnot announced.  Russian Privatization Center said deal would havebeen Russia's biggest privatization involving foreign company.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Alcatel joined AT&T cable unit to promote, design, build and     Alcatel joined AT&T cable unit to promote, design, build andoperate $2.6-billion Africa One cable to ring continent with fiberand build telecom circuits onto continent.  "It's a very positivedevelopment," AT&T executive told us.  AT&T, which has been workingon project since April 1994, said Alcatel will join immediately infund-raising for cable, on which construction is scheduled to beginlate in 1996, official said.  Commercial service is expected tobegin in 1999, AT&T said.  AT&T continues to seek support from 53telecom operators on continent that will be chief customers. Service will provide first international link for many countriesusing 24,875-mile cable.  AT&T said it's negotiating with 40 posts& telecom operators out of nearly 53, has signed memorandum ofunderstanding with some.  Discussions were held recently withinland operators considering terrestrial link since they don't haveshore landing site.  Negotiations are scheduled to wrap up earlythis year.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Australian govt. approved MCI's planned $2-billion investment     Australian govt. approved MCI's planned $2-billion investmentin News Corp.  Deal will give MCI 9% ownership of News Corp. Rupert Murdoch owns 28%, rest held by outside stockholders.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Elcotel shipped first 100 pay phones to Chile last week under     Elcotel shipped first 100 pay phones to Chile last week undercontract with Telefonica del Sur and announced it has been chosenas main supplier for future contracts.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     AT&T and Indian partner Aditya V. Birla Group won 2 cellular     AT&T and Indian partner Aditya V. Birla Group won 2 cellularlicenses for Gujarat and Maharashtra states for $90 million, one ofmany licenses awarded by New Delhi govt.  Gujarat, 300 milessouthwest of New Delhi on Arabian Sea, covers 43 million pops, andMaharashtra, near Bombay, has 74 million pops, officials said. AT&T owns 49% of Birla Communications joint venture, which plans tobuild Global System for Mobile communications network in 2 regionsnext year beginning by year-end.  AirTouch also won franchise.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Cellular Communications International said it had waived its     Cellular Communications International said it had waived itsright to participate in ownership of cellular license in New Delhi. In return, company received $40 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     TeleDanmark and Telenor, Norwegian carrier, plan to seek 49%     TeleDanmark and Telenor, Norwegian carrier, plan to seek 49%stake in Czech Republic's Global System for Mobile (GSM) cellularnetwork when licenses are offered this year.  Ceske Radiokomunikacestate-run company will hold 51%.  France Telecom, Deutsche Telekomand Stet of Italy also are interested, officials said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Bangladesh plans $735-million, multiyear project to expand     Bangladesh plans $735-million, multiyear project to expandtelecom services by year 2000, adding 300,000 lines to current500,000 and installing 150,000 fiber circuits, govt. officialssaid.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     MicroCell Telecommunications and Clearnet Communications each     MicroCell Telecommunications and Clearnet Communications eachwon nationwide 30-MHz PCS license issued by Canada last week. Robert Simmonds, Clearnet chmn.-vp-regulatory & technology, saidlicense will allow company to create 4,800 jobs in decade.  Govt.also awarded 10-MHz licenses to Rogers Cantel Mobile and regionalshareholders of Mobility Personacom Canada Ltd.  Industry MinisterJohn Manley said 8,500 new jobs should be created over 5 years,with investments near $2 billion, from construction of 4 networks.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Panama expects to offer cellular license for service in Panama     Panama expects to offer cellular license for service in PanamaCity and Colon.  Govt. qualified BellSouth, Grupo Iusacell,Southwestern Bell, Telecomunicacion de Puerto Rico, Telefonica deEspana, Telia of Sweden to bid.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     AT&T Network Systems said it won $10-million contract from     AT&T Network Systems said it won $10-million contract fromDeutsche Telekom to supply fiber mostly to upgrade E. Germansystem.  Deliveries will begin this month and be completed by endof year.  Fiber will be made at AT&T plant in Augsburg, Germany.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Ameritech boosted quarterly dividend 6% to 53 cents -- $2.12     Ameritech boosted quarterly dividend 6% to 53 cents -- $2.12on annual basis -- largest increase in 5 years for any RHC, companysaid.  "By giving our investors the largest dividend increase since1991, we're sending the message loud and clear:  Ameritech's targetof double-digit growth is being sustained," Chmn.-CEO RichardNotebaert said.  In 1991, Ameritech raised dividend 7.6%, BellAtlantic 6.9%, rest of RHCs less than 5%.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Telecom Financials:  Tel-Save Holdings estimated that     Telecom Financials:  Tel-Save Holdings estimated that4th-quarter net income would be 11-24% higher than analysts'expectations of 17 cents per share, and full-year earnings would be7-9% above estimates of 90 cents... Tekelec announced that4th-quarter would be lower than expected because market fordomestic diagnostic systems had softened.  Company, which suppliesequipment for communications networks, expects 4th-quarter revenuesin $16-$17 million range, with earnings at breakeven... DigitalMicrowave said per-share losses for 3rd quarter ending Dec. 31 willbe greater than expected, citing costs of recent restructuring. Company manufactures microwave radios for PCS and other mobileservices.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Citizens Utilities plans to make $175-million convertible     Citizens Utilities plans to make $175-million convertiblepreferred security offering in early 1996 -- 3.5 million shares at$50.  Proceeds will fund last stage of $1.4-billion acquisition ofphone lines from GTE.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Mobile Telecommunications Technologies said SkyTel subsidiary     Mobile Telecommunications Technologies said SkyTel subsidiaryobtained $250-million secured revolving credit facility fromsyndicate led by Chemical Bank.  Money will be used for capitalexpenditure, working capital, other purposes.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Ericsson said recent stock market turbulence won't alter     Ericsson said recent stock market turbulence won't alterforecast for continued pretax income growth and improved 1995results.  Company said earlier it expected income to develop"favorably" during year, "if not at the same [rate] of growth asduring the first quarter."  Karin Almqvist Liwendahl, mgr.,investor relations, said final quarter is expected to be betterthan same period year ago.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Bell Atlantic (BA) submitted price cap plan to Md. PSC that     Bell Atlantic (BA) submitted price cap plan to Md. PSC thatproposes 5 categories:  (1) "Access," covering long distanceconnections.  (2) "Basic-Residential" for nonbusiness lines.  (3)"Basic-Other" for business lines.  (4) Discretionary, coveringoptional services such as call waiting and call forwarding.  (5)Competitive, for services offered by other providers such asCentrex and speed dialing.  BA said it will cap access andbasic-residential rates for 2 years, basic-other for one year. After that, it said, it would adjust services based on GrossDomestic Product price index minus 1.5%.  Discretionary serviceswouldn't rise more than 25% per year, BA said, but competitiveservices would be unregulated.  It also said plan would preserveexisting quality-of-service standards.  MCI submitted its own pricecap plan for BA last month that it claimed would shave $72 millionoff intrastate toll rates.  However, BA has criticized thatproposal as "rate-of-return in sheep's clothing," saying itunderestimated universal service costs by $47 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Ohio PUC should intervene in interconnection negotiations     Ohio PUC should intervene in interconnection negotiationsbetween Time Warner (TW) and Ameritech because telco wants tocharge "excessive" rates for "some key services" and hasn'tprovided cost justifications, TW said in letter to PUC Chmn. CraigGlazer.  TW also charged that although it has reached deals on alltechnical issues, it "has not been negotiating directly with thoseindividuals in Ameritech who can finally explain, modify andconclude interconnection agreements."Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Fla. PSC approved 2-year interconnection agreement involving     Fla. PSC approved 2-year interconnection agreement involvingcompetitive access provider Intermedia Communications andBellSouth.  Deal, which expires Jan. 1, 1998, sets terms for rates,reciprocal compensation, temporary number portability, unbundlingand universal service mechanism, Intermedia said.  Company saidit's also in discussions with GTE and Sprint/United Telephone onsame sort of deal, with results expected "in the near future."Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Ida. PUC said it's seeking comments on proposal to allow GTE     Ida. PUC said it's seeking comments on proposal to allow GTEto offer customers in northern portion of state 4 local tolloptions to call exchanges within 23-mile radius.  Customers wouldhave 4 options:  (1) Basic Calling with lowest rate but per-min.billing on other local calls.  (2) Community Calling with higherrate but measured usage billing on other calls.  (3) Community Pluswith still higher rate and some access to other local exchanges butmeasured usage billing on most local calls.  (4) Premium Callingwith highest rate but unlimited local calling.  Comments are dueJan. 14.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Cable & Wireless announced UniLink service in N.Y.C. area to     Cable & Wireless announced UniLink service in N.Y.C. area tooffer bundled local-long distance package to businesses.  Companysaid it will provide UniLink Dedicated for large businesses orUniLink Business Lines for small- and medium-sized companies.  Italso said it had received approval from Conn. to enter localexchange markets there.  It already has local exchange applicationspending in Cal., Ill. and Tex., company said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Ill. Commerce Commission (ICC) should require Ameritech to     Ill. Commerce Commission (ICC) should require Ameritech tolower its proposed resale rates to "prices and terms that allowcompetitors to be successful in the marketplace," AT&T said infiling.  It alleged that Ameritech could provide discounts of35-56% but wants entrants to "make do" with 6-8%.  ICC isevaluating conditions under which it should open local exchange inChicago area.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     AT&T praised Dane County (Wis.) Circuit Court decision     AT&T praised Dane County (Wis.) Circuit Court decisionupholding Wis. PSC order that Ameritech provide dialing paritywithin intraLATA toll markets and allow presubscription to otherproviders.  Ameritech had asked court to stay PSC order.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     AT&T said it filed application with Md. PSC to enter local     AT&T said it filed application with Md. PSC to enter localexchange markets through resale of Bell Atlantic services, which itwould purchase at "reasonable wholesale prices."Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     MFS Communications said it applied to Va. Corp. Commission for     MFS Communications said it applied to Va. Corp. Commission forcertificate to offer local exchange service in northeastern Va. nowserved by Bell Atlantic and GTE.  Region includes Richmond andWashington areas, MFS said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Ill. Commerce Commission (ICC) approved Southwestern Bell     Ill. Commerce Commission (ICC) approved Southwestern BellMobile Systems (SBMS) application to become LEC in 6-county Chicagoarea.  SBMS said it will file tariffs in early 1996.  Company alsosaid it plans to offer cellular-landline package under Cellular Onebrand name, which operates in several Ill. cities, includingChicago, as cellular service.  ICC spokeswoman said it's first timecellular provider has received local exchange certificate in state.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Ariz. Corp. Commission (ACC) approved AT&T and MCI     Ariz. Corp. Commission (ACC) approved AT&T and MCIapplications to provide intraLATA toll service in competition withincumbent local exchange carriers (LEC).  Sprint application ispending, ACC said, and others are expected.  ACC also approvedrules to expand universal service fund to increase support tohigh-cost rural areas, and implement intraLATA equal access, whichrequires LECs to provide one-plus dialing by April 20 so customerscan use entrants services without dialing 5-digit access code. Entrants have said that discourages customers from switching fromincumbent carrier.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Conn. Dept. of Public Utility Control (DPUC) finalized rules     Conn. Dept. of Public Utility Control (DPUC) finalized rulesopening local telephone loop to competition, leaving intact mostprovisions in draft decision released earlier in Dec.  Among "minorchanges" since adopted, DPUC spokeswoman said, was that SouthernNew England Telephone (SNET) must submit proposed volume discountplan for resellers by March 1.  All resale rates in draft orderremain same in final version, she said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMON CARRIER WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996     Ga. PSC order that BellSouth offer discounted basic rates to     Ga. PSC order that BellSouth offer discounted basic rates tostate, regional and public libraries went into effect.  Company isoffering per-line rates of $5.60, $6.50, $6.78 and $8.08 per monthwith 30 free calls and 12 cents per min. after that, PSCspokeswoman said.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-3IA086-000622-B035-82http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te143.html 205.156.212.5 19970122044624 text/html 41462HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:43:57 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:28 GMTContent-length: 41275Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te143.html Sample Issue Copyright COMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNet February 23, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FCC Clarifies Rules on Use of BNA Information (845 words) CTIA's Cibernet Adapting to New Wireless Billing Requirements (1015 words) Kenan's Arbor B/P To Support Prodigy (290 words) Building a Blueprint for Convergence (1699 words) Convergence Demands Holistic 'Revenue Stream' Approach to Billing (1239 words) CSG Goes Public Amid Market Uncertainty (266 words) CYBERCASH IPO (96 words) STERLING APPOINTMENT (55 words) ELECTRONIC CONFERENCES SCHEDULED (209 words) CSC CONTRACT (32 words) CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996FCC Clarifies Rules on Use of BNA Information     The FCC on Feb 1. adopted a third order for reconsideration inCommon Carrier docket no. 91-115 in which it upheld a series ofearlier rulings that require local exchange carriers (LECs) toprovide billing name and address (BNA) information totelecommunications service providers (TSPs) under tariff. TheCommission also clarified its rules regarding the use anddisclosure of BNA information.  The third reconsideration order isthe latest in a long-running docket proceeding.       That docket has produced numerous orders, clarifications, andreconsiderations stemming from a 1989 petition by Capital NetworkSystems, Inc., and the Competitive Telecommunications Associationasking that the FCC require LECs to provide BNA information to longdistance carriers and competitive access providers so that theycould properly bill for their services.       This latest order for reconsideration responds to twopetitions from U S WEST Communications, Inc., which it filed in1993 asking the Commission to reconsider its second report andorder of that year covering the use and disclosure of BNAinformation ("BNA order").  The third reconsideration order alsoaddresses concerns raised by other carriers, including operatorservice providers.       U S WEST asked the Commission to reconsider again rules thatrequire LECs to notify customers that their billing informationwill be made available to TSPs under certain conditions.       The order also set out a series of deadlines for notification,which generated a series of petitions from LECs and the UnitedStates Telephone Association asking for more time.  In subsequentorders, the FCC extended the deadlines for those disclosures.       All the deadlines have now passed, and like other LECs, U SWEST has completed its notification process but asked the FCC toconsider that the process was harmful to the carrier.  Throughoutthe docket proceeding, the FCC has upheld its original conclusionthat providing BNA information for third-party, calling card, andcollect calls, is "a common carrier service which must be offeredunder tariff."     Petitions for reconsideration by U S WEST and others arguingagainst this judgment were repeatedly denied.     The FCC's third reconsideration order, released Feb. 9,  dealswith issues raised by U S WEST in two separate petitions that theFCC reconsider its first and second orders for reconsideration.  Inits first petition, U S WEST argued that its First Amendment rightto remain silent was violated by the BNA rules and that it had beendone "irreparable harm" by Commission requirements that it notifyits customers of the status of their billing information.       The Commission denied that petition on the grounds that thecarrier had already made that argument in earlier proceedings. (The Commission found in 1986 that BNA information falls into acategory of "legal notifications" that are excepted from FirstAmendment protection.)  In its second petition, U S WEST claimedthat the FCC had earlier misjudged the carrier's argument on FirstAmendment grounds and that in the course of the FCC's orders forreconsideration U S WEST had been denied due process.  TheCommission found that the carrier's rights to due process had "notbeen abridged" by its earlier orders.       Further, the Commission ruled that privacy protections thatprohibit disclosure of BNA information on calling card,third-party, and collect calls apply only when a customer"affirmatively withholds consent for BNA disclosures."  In itsoriginal BNA orders, the FCC required LECs to notify customers thattheir BNA information would be disclosed to TSPs for these types ofcalls.  The notification process included an option for customersto request that such information not be disclosed.       The BNA orders also set out rules restricting the use of BNAinformation for marketing purposes.  The prohibitions were opposedby several carriers and operator service providers, such as Oncor,Inc., that rely on that information for their targeted marketingactivities.  In the third order for reconsideration, the Commissionupheld its earlier finding that direct marketing activities, suchas those that might involve the use of BNA information, can be a"nuisance" to consumers.       The Commission also clarified that the prohibition on usage ofBNA information is applicable to all types of calls, even thoughrequirements for providing BNA information on a tariff basis applyonly to third-party, calling card, and collect calls.     Acting on additional U S WEST arguments, the Commission saidBNA information on calls that do not involve calling cards, thirdparties, or collect charges could be supplied to TSPs under tariffor contract "to the extent [that] provision. . .is not prohibitedby our rules."      Specifically, the Commission clarified that BNA informationmay be provided to interexchange carriers in association with"10XXX 1+" calls--those in which an alternative long distanceprovider is chosen by the customer.  The use of such dialing codeswas not in evidence at the time of the original BNA order, thecommission said, but it found that calls requiring dialing codeshave similar billing requirements to calling card and other tollcalls.  Further, the Commission said LECs are not required tonotify customers of the disclosure of BNA information when dialingcodes are used.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996CTIA's Cibernet Adapting to New Wireless Billing Requirements     As wireless carriers continue to increase their callingtraffic and the diversity of their services both in the U.S. andabroad, it is becoming increasingly necessary to devise newer,flexible billing systems to accommodate their needs, according toCibernet Corp.'s Dawn M. Brodman, Manager-industry standards, andJennifer Nowak, Product Manager-CORD.  Cibernet is a subsidiary ofthe Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association, thestandard-setting body for the U.S. wireless industry.       The Cibernet subsidiary grew out of the CTIA's RoamerCommittee, which was "commissioned to support network settlementagreement standards," among wireless carriers, said Ms. Nowak.  Inthe mid-1980s that group developed the CIBER (cellular information,billing, exchange, and roaming) standard, now in use throughoutU.S. cellular networks.  Cibernet was created in 1988 to administerthe CIBER standard and to provide network settlement services tocellular carriers.     CIBER is based on CTIA's IS-124 standards for wireless calldata, said Ms. Brodman.  "We dynamically update our standard basedon technology requirements, among other things."  CIBER is abatch-oriented standard, designed to aggregate information over aset period of time.  Under the batch system, Ms. Brodman explained,"There are time provisions [within the transmission protocol] thatautomatically kick out a message that is over 30 days old.  Butthere may be times when a cellular customer won't see a roamingbill for 45 to 60 days."       Analysts have noted that such delays in bill reporting lead toneedless expenses for the service provider and confusion for thecustomer (CBR, Nov. 17, 1995).  The proliferation of personalcommunications service (PCS), advanced cellular services, andinternational transmission protocols--all of which require moreflexible and responsive billing systems--has led Cibernet toreplace the CIBER standard.     "Consider CIBER to be our legacy standard," said Ms. Brodman. Cibernet has formed working groups to develop two new standards,one for billing and support functions and another for frauddetection systems.  "The goal is to get down to a 60-secondturnaround time" between the time a roaming call is made and thetime it is recorded in the service provider's billing system, shenoted, adding, "This isn't real-time billing, but it's close.  Weexpect most carriers will still retrieve their billing informationin some kind of batch form."  But, she said, carriers couldretrieve information in batch form several times a day, rather thanweekly or monthly, which is more common now.CORD Project Aims for Paperless Management      Another effort to streamline wireless carrier billinginteroperations is the CORD (Cibernet Online Roaming Database)project.  CORD is an automated, shared database for the exchangeand maintenance of billing information and roaming data amongwireless carriers.  Ms. Nowak told CBR the system is due to bereleased this year and that Cibernet expects it to become thestandard platform for interoperator roaming agreements.     When wireless carriers enter into roaming agreements today,they must record the details of the agreement on paper anddistribute them to all the parties involved for entry intoproprietary billing systems.  This leads to a lag time between theconclusion of the agreement and its actual implementation withinthe wireless networks, said Ms. Nowak.     CORD stores the details of roaming agreements worked outindependently between carriers with adjoining cellular coverageareas.  Parties that have formed a roaming agreement enter relevantdata (e.g., interconnection rates) jointly into the CORD system. Only the original carriers, or others that they jointly designate,have access to the information.  Access is controlled by a systemof user identification profiles and verification procedures,explained Ms. Nowak.  The carriers are then able to connect theirin-house billing platforms to CORD in order to update vendor tablesand other records used to track calling data.     In addition, authorized carriers can make modifications to anagreement at any time. The changes are automatically reflected inthe database and in the systems of all the parties that have accessto the agreement.  Ms. Nowak said this eliminates the need forsystem operators repeatedly to "key in" the details of the roamingagreement (at each vendor location).       This reduces the time to market for new services and the riskof human error in the billing systems.  CORD's database andcommunications protocols are based  on the CIBER standard for thesharing of billing information--a standard already in use by mostthe wireless carriers in the U.S. said Ms. Brodman.  When otherstandards are adopted, Cibernet will change CORD to accommodatethem, she said.       "CORD is not commercially available yet," said Ms. Nowak.  Butshe expects it to be released this year after beta testing iscompleted.  CORD will be organized as a subscription service,similar to the network settlement agreement services Cibernetcurrently offers.       Cibernet maintains itself as an "independent neutral body,"not only as a back office go-between for CTIA members and clients,but also in its support of competing technologies.  Both Ms. Nowakand Ms. Brodman said they expect that the need for an independentparty only will increase as the proliferation of technologies andwireless companies continues.MCI, AMEX Offer Consolidated Billing     In another move to capture shares in the business telephonymarket, MCI Telecommunications Corp. announced an agreement withAmerican Express Travel Management Services, Inc., to consolidateout-of-office long distance calling charges on American Expresscorporate card billing statements.       The service works in conjunction with MCI's virtual privatenetwork offering, "V-Net," and American Express corporate cardaccounts.  For each call placed from a designated "V-Net" location(e.g., a home office) to any other "on-net" location, MCI willtransfer call detail records to American Express, which matches theoriginating location with the proper credit account--actingessentially as a rebiller for MCI, according to an MCI spokesman.  In addition, long distance calls placed from cellular phones(pointed to the MCI network) and credit card calls from pay phonesalso are billed through AMEX.       All calls are priced based on the customer's prearranged VPNrate, regardless of the originating location, the spokesman said. The AMEX bill will include detail reporting such as call duration,origination, termination, and cost per minute.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Kenan's Arbor B/P To Support Prodigy      Kenan Technologies, a unit of Kenan Systems Corp., announcedthat online service Prodigy will be the first customer for Arbor/BP4.0, the latest version of its UNIX-based distributed billing andcustomer care platform released last fall (CBR, Nov. 3, 1995). According to Kurt Silverman, Kenan Technology ExecutiveDirector-product development, Prodigy's "highly distributed"network architecture is complimentary to Arbor's client/serverconfiguration.  Unlike other installations, he said, "We did nothave to customize our platform at all to meet Prodigy's needs." Kenan expects to turn on service with Prodigy by March.     Arbor B/P is a "customer-centric" billing and customer caresystem, said Mr. Silverman.  It employs an SQL database andcustomizable bill formats allowing bill generation in any language. The system also includes an online image server that delivers areproduction of billing statements to customer servicerepresentatives.  The images also can be compressed andtransmitted, an application that looks forward to customer accessto bills over the Internet.     The Prodigy installation does not include functions forInternet-based billing, said Mr. Silverman, but he said some of itsfunctions "are not incompatible" with electronic billingactivities.  "Kenan is looking forward to the Internet as the nextplatform for electronic transactions," he said.  Possibleapplications for Arbor B/P include connecting a retailer's orservice provider's Internet site to clearinghouses for real-timeprocessing of credit card payments.      Kenan has created a developer environment for Arbor thatallows Prodigy and others to create application program interfacesfor customized functions.  Combined with the SQL database, Mr.Silverman said, Arbor can be "optimized" for specific data queries. Prodigy, for example, will be able to identify which users areusing specific services, rather than having transaction datasupplied only on a "volume and number" basis.  Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Building a Blueprint for ConvergenceBy Rick Brown     The recent passage and signing of the new telecommunicationslaw by President Clinton is expected to accelerate the demand forconvergence billing and customer care capabilities in the telecomindustry, as organizations implement offensive strategies for newmarkets to enter, and develop defensive tactics for combatingencroachment on their turf.     Convergence billing and customer care capabilities helpcompetitors "brand, bond, and bundle," in the words of oneorganization with a major convergence effort under way.  Brandingestablishes, or leverages, a single brand name for all of theservices a company offers.  Bonding builds strong ties withcustomers by offering them "frequent talker" and other incentiveprograms that cross lines of business.  Finally, bundling allowsthe packaging of multiple services into compelling offerings orspecial promotions.     Convergence billing and customer care provides the capabilityof offering combined bills, a single view of the customer, andproduct and service offerings that cross lines of business (e.g.,offering a free pay-per-view movie if a customer makes more than$25 per month in long distance calls).     It is by no means clear that convergence billing and customercare are for every organization--or every customer.  It is part ofthe folklore of convergence billing, for example, that consumersmay rebel when confronted with a large bill that includes costs ofseveral services, rather than several smaller ones.  It may be thatcustomer care with multiple bills is the best strategy for consumermarketing, allowing branding and some amount of bonding andbundling.     On the other hand, one of the best things about convergencebilling is that, potentially at least, only one bill is beingmailed and only one payment is processed.  With low-revenueconsumer bills, mailing four or five remittances every month canbecome expensive quickly.     For business customers, convergence capabilities can providea significant advantage for competitors that offer them.  To date,local exchange carriers and wireless carriers have, in many cases,fallen far from meeting the billing needs of business customers,particularly large ones with operations in multiple states.       The inevitable emergence of increased competition in thesemarkets will make billing capabilities a key differentiator, muchas it now is in the long distance market.  Business customers willfind favor also with competitors that can offer discounts forbundling all their local, long distance and wireless service intoa single arrangement.     Building or integrating a convergence billing and customercare capability can be an arduous and expensive undertaking for anorganization, and it has a number of traps and pitfalls.  Theseissues should be addressed when an organization is planning thetransition to convergence billing and customer care.     Each organization will have its own set of business goals andobjectives for convergence; its own timetable for achieving them;and its own set of current hardware, software, and data that mustbe transitioned.  For these reasons building a detailed plan isessential.1.  Work Out the Business Issues First     Convergence billing and customer care open up a whole raft ofbusiness issues that should be dealt with before technical issuesare approached.  If the plan is to issue RFPs to vendors, havingsome idea of how the converged businesses will be run will helpgreatly in specifying what the vendors need to provide in itssolution.  If applications will be built or modified internally,answers to the issues will aid internal information systemsorganizations in the same way.  Some examples of common businessissues include the following:     *    What organizational changes will be needed?     *    How will sales, order processing, and customer support behandled across the lines of business?     *    Who will have ownership of the customer relationshipacross the multiple lines of business?     *    How will revenue be allocated in situations wheremultiple lines of business are bundled under a single price to theend customer?  How will the profitability of individual services beassessed?     Ideally, this should be a time when an organization canexplore new ideas about sales and support, like customerself-provisioning and self-maintenance over the Internet, or theelimination of billing altogether by offering fixed-price itemsthat are purchased at retail outlets or by credit card.  Increasedcompetition likely will lead to increased creativity in theseareas.2.  Assess the Current Situation     Once a set of working requirements for the convergence billingand customer care environment have been developed, an organizationcan evaluate the current system's ability to fulfill therequirements or be modified to meet them.  "System" in this senseis more than just software, it's also the people, organizations,and procedures that surround the software.  Common items to assessinclude the following:     n  Do the current software applications and platforms meritfurther investment, even if they are capable of being modified tomeet the requirements?  Since applications tend to bed in a widevariety of states, this is unlikely to be a black-and-white issue. In fact, no large organization should expect to replace multiple,large legacy applications in a short period of time, nor expect tobe able to replace them all at once.     *    If the application is provided by a vendor, can thevendor assess the ability to modify the package to meet therequirements?  Issuing a convergence RFI is guaranteed to get theincumbent vendor's attention, and it is useful in determining howother packages might meet an organization's specific needs.     *    Does the support infrastructure need to be addressed? For example, if the organization operates call centers, are theyequipped to meet the needs of the converged business?  Do they needdesktop PCs and wide-area network access?  Do they need moresophisticated automated call handling systems?  For a largeorganization, the cost of the support infrastructure can easily bea substantial portion of the cost of a convergence project.     *    Are there issues related to the location and staffing ofsupport centers?  For example, organizations that currently rununionized call centers may not want to integrate new lines ofbusiness into the current centers in order to keep the newbusinesses non-unionized.  If the organization is entering marketsoutside its traditional operating areas, the internal network mayneed to be expanded to new areas and new support centers andoffices established.  If new lines of business will be integratedinto existing operations, how much training will be required forcurrent employees?     *    If current lines of business will be converged, what arethe major issues related to merging customer information into acommon data store?  How are customers identified across lines ofbusiness?3.  Build the Blueprint     The key items to building a detailed plan for implementingconvergence capabilities are the overall business plan, therequirements for new capabilities, and the assessment of thecurrent situation.  If the business plan is extremely aggressive,it is likely the same significant amount of the new capabilitiesrequired will not be achievable on "opening day" for the new linesof business.  In these cases, either the business plan must bechanged to match the reality of what is deliverable, or thecapabilities must be delivered in stages.     Typically, a short-term strategy is devised to handle thelaunch while minimizing risk and cost.  This may include putting aproven existing application in place, with no convergencecapabilities initially, then integrating the billing and customercare at a later date when the line of business has been establishedand requirements have been better defined.     If the addition of convergence capabilities is the main pointof the plan (for example, integrating the billing and customer carefor existing wireless and wireline lines of business), acombination of short-term and long-term strategies may still makesense.       A single customer data repository may be the highest priority,or the production of a combined bill.  A short-term strategy wouldfocus on the highest priority items, while delivering thelonger-term solution in stages.4.  Don't Promise the Impossible     It is somewhat ironic that while business plans fortelecommunications often recognize the amount of time needed to runfiber optic cable to every neighborhood in a city, or buildwireless cells to cover a region, software is often treated assomething that is simply expected to be ready on an arbitrary date. A few years ago one EDS customer announced internally that it wouldcompletely reengineer its billing and customer care businessprocesses and systems within 18 months.       This carrier had taken more than five years to implement itslatest mainline billing application and hadn't yet fullyimplemented it at the time it was making plans for the new systemsand processes.  Why were they sure it would be done in 18 months? Because they were told it had to be.  Within a year the effort hadbeen largely abandoned, a victim of a schedule with no connectionto reality.     A common variation on this theme is to get a vendor to promiseto meet the arbitrary date, then blame it when the project fails. (Vendors sometimes have a pathological aversion to tellingcustomers no.)  Unrealistic schedules not only play havoc withbusiness plans, they prevent organizations from taking a fresh lookat how problems can be solved short term, while longer-termsolutions are put in place.  If the ideal solution can't be put inplace in six months, it's better to say that at the beginning, thenmake plans to support the business that recognizes that fact.5.  Keep Your Eyes on the Prize     Customers do not care what kind of software generates theirbills or keeps track of their names and addresses, as long as itworks.  There should be some notion of proportionality to theexpenditures made for billing new services; it doesn't make senseto spend tens of millions on changes to current applications tosupport small amounts of revenue.  The objectives of convergencebilling and customer care initiatives should be to meet the needsof the business and to do so cost-effectively.  Having a realisticplan in place from the beginning that addresses the business issueswill help ensure both.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996Convergence Demands Holistic 'Revenue Stream' Approach to BillingBy Vince D. Shaw, Deloitte & Touche     An understanding of the importance of convergence issues onbilling and customer service is rapidly sweeping through thetelecom industry.  A new mindset, however, will be required to viewa customer's bill as the product of a series of systems andprocesses that depend on many things not commonly understood to bepart of the billing process.  To understand billing effectively ina world of telecom convergence, the revenue stream infrastructuremust be viewed as an integrated, interrelated whole.  Included areprocesses to do the following:     *    Establish service,     *    Provide bills, and     *    Collect revenues.       This concept has some important implications that are rarelyrecognized.  Traditionally telcos have used the term billing systemto refer to message processing, rating, and bill assembly. Although this never was an accurate definition--even in the POTS(plain old telephone service) environment--the damage was not toosevere since there were only a few, relatively simple products forwhich to bill.     This traditional definition, however, is no longer viable forthe array of products and services that even low-end customers nowexpect to receive.  Nevertheless, the connotation persists that thebilling system is predominantly responsible for the bill itself. This perspective leads to misdirected efforts, confusion, andfrustration for customers and service providers alike.     To realize the strategic potential of the billing system'sdirect link to the customer, telcos must design their billingcapabilities with an eye toward numerous systems and proceduresoutside the traditional billing process.       In fact, many of the things that determine whether a billreflects what the customer actually ordered--and whether thecustomer's expectations are consistent with the bill--are linked toinformation that the billing system assembles but does not create. Billing system designers, for example, must work very closely withfront-line customer service staff in order to appreciate theaspects of billing that generate customer inquiries.What is the 'Revenue Stream Infrastructure'?     The revenue stream infrastructure includes not only thetraditional elements of billing but also the systems and processesthat support the following:     *    Order entry and customer management,     *    Accounts receivable,      *    Collections, and      *    Decision support and data warehouse functions derivedfrom the data contained in these systems.       Additionally, the infrastructure may include some elements ofprovisioning and sales support, depending on the preference of theprovider and the degree to which these functions are integratedwith order entry.       The common thread among core functions is that they share acommon data model that describes the customer account structure aswell as all products and services.  The revenue stream processesand systems, therefore, encompass the actions necessary to provideservices, bill for services, and collect revenues.How Is the Revenue Stream Infrastructure Different?     As billing issues become substantially more complex andinseparable from overall customer service issues, telecom providersmust adopt a holistic revenue stream perspective in order tosurvive.  This must be manifested both in terminology (e.g., don'trefer to "billing systems") and in organization (e.g.,responsibility for billing quality must be assigned to someone atthe revenue systems level).     "Billing" systems always have been dependent on the dataprovided by order-entry and other related systems.  But the rapidincrease in the complexity of telecom products and services, andthe growing interdependence of the customer service and billingfunctions, have made billing an inseparable part of the revenuestream infrastructure.     Reengineering of the billing function alone is unlikely tosucceed.  Any notion of reengineering that includes radicalredesign and major process improvements requires a broader focusthan that embodied in a billing-only scope.  While incrementalimprovement can be achieved, radical improvement is unlikely.  Thatis because billing systems traditionally are not a substantialenough part of the revenue stream infrastructure.       Nevertheless, the cry, "We're reengineering our billingprocess!" continues to be heard without a corresponding focus onthe wide range of issues that affect billing.  (Other impacts ofthe revenue stream "perspective" are summarized in the table titled"Interpreting the Revenue Stream," p. 10.)What Specific Actions Are Dictated for Providers?     Management responsibility must reflect the integrated natureof the revenue stream.  If possible, a process "owner" must bedefined who has control across all of the revenue stream process. Designating separate managers for the systems that support billingand order entry, for example, is virtually guaranteed to produce alow-quality bill because there is no single point of accountabilityfor the various functions necessary to create the bill.     A customer-driven focus to defining billing requirements isneeded.  While significant lip service is given to responding tocustomer needs, the necessary actions often regress to thetraditional "We already know what the customer wants" approach.  Arecurring, objective process for monitoring customer requirementsis needed.       This means understanding  customer concerns and how billingcharacteristics affect them.  For example, systems must be designedto give customer service representatives a complete view across thespectrum of available products.  The ability to quickly andaccurately answer a question is part of the overall billinginteraction in the customer's mind.     Also, meaningful incentives should be offered for accuratelyassessing customer expectations during the marketing and salesprocess.  Sales people must understand that a bill is part of theproduct being purchased; expectations regarding the bill must be asclear as those regarding the rest of the product.     Billing systems are a convenient target of criticism thatoften is more appropriately directed at confusing policiesregarding pricing, proration, information display, or other thingsthat may generate customer queries.  Customer dissatisfaction withsuch policies should not be confused with dissatisfaction about thebilling system.     Service providers also must develop a core competency inanalyzing new billing requirements.  The bewildering array ofpotential requirements often leads to the conclusion thatflexibility is the single necessary characteristic of a billingsystem.      While system flexibility is critical, there is a practicallimit to the amount of flexibility that can be achieved.     Flexibility should be supported in other ways, however, bybetter preparing to handle the inevitable stream of new systemrequirements.  This may entail establishing a formal process foridentifying new billing features that will provide a competitiveadvantage.       Or if a company plans to outsource revenue stream processing,it should focus on the degree to which the outsourcing contractfacilitates rapid, cost-effective response to new requirements asit does on initial capabilities and costs.     Finally, confusion about the underlying business reason for abilling feature is, in our experience, the most common reasonimplementation of billing requirements breaks down.       Therefore, focus on the process of correctly translatingbusiness requirements into system requirements.  This is equally asimportant as investing in flexible systems.  Prototyping, extensiveend-user involvement in design reviews, and early user involvementin test planning will benefit this process.  Only by focusing oncomplete revenue stream systems, rather than on traditional billingsystems, can companies resolve the billing issues raised by telecomconvergence.     (Mr. Shaw is a Senior Manager in the Telecommunications andElectronic Services industry practice of Deloitte & ToucheConsulting Group.  He is based in Washington, D.C., and specializesin the implementation of information technology to supporttelecommunications revenue stream functions.  He can be reached at202/955-4173.  Mark Bishof, AnnaMarie Kluzak, and Robert Mayer alsocontributed to this article.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996CSG Goes Public Amid Market Uncertainty     Billing services vendor CSG Systems International, Inc., willoffer 2.9 million shares of its stock in an initial public offeringfor $13 per share.  The shares represent about 11.5 percent of thecompany, which is valued at $382 million.  In 1994 the company waspurchased from First Data Corp. by its executive employees for $137million.     CSG is a leading provider of billing services for the cable TVindustry, with clients serving more than 16 million subscribers. It is facing the loss of major clients, however, as cable companiesincreasingly opt to perform their own billing functions.  Amongthese is CSG's second-largest customer, Tele-Communications, Inc.(TCI).       The drive among cable TV companies to pull billing servicesin-house is being driven by the desire to offer telephony and newinteractive services over coaxial cable networks, analysts havenoted.  These services require incremental billing and ratingcapabilities that current billing platforms for cable TV cannothandle.       In addition, large-scale billing outsourcers are facingincreasing completion from smaller processors that are much easierfor service providers to manage.       To counter the loss of outsourcing business, CSG has developed"Phoenix."  The company had said the system is the first majorbilling system based on client/server architecture and openstandards (CBR, Jan. 12).       Phoenix's first customer is Continental Cablevision, based inBoston, which is also building an in-house billing and customercare system dubbed "Concert."  Phoenix will be a major component ofthe new system, but CSG will not finish installation until sometimein the second quarter, and service is not scheduled to begin untilfall. Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996CYBERCASH IPO      CyberCash, Inc., a Reston, Va.-based maker of electroniccommerce software, conducted an initial public offering of commonstock last week.  On the first day of trading, Feb. 15, CyberCashstock (symbol: CYCH) rose 60 percent to $28.25 on the Nasdaq stockexchange.      At CBR's news deadline this week, CyberCash stock continued torise, closing at $30.75 on Feb. 20.  The company is vying toprovide a viable secure transaction method for electronic commerceover the Internet.       It offers "Cyber Wallet" software, which creates a system of"virtual money" to be used for online transactions.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996STERLING APPOINTMENT     Mark J. Havlik has been named Marketing Director-electroniccommerce products for the Banking Systems division of SterlingSoftware, Inc.  Mr. Havlik is a cash management and electronic datainterchange (EDI) expert formerly with Shawmut Bank and ChaseManhattan Bank.  He will oversee the application of EDI andelectronic funds transfer technology to the banking industry.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996ELECTRONIC CONFERENCES SCHEDULED     IMA:  The Interactive Multimedia Association (IMA) hasrescheduled its "Electronic Commerce for Content" forum for March7 in Crystal City, Va.  (The original event was cancelled inJanuary because of inclement weather.)  The forum will focus onpreserving intellectual property rights on the Internet. Presenters include the Association of American Publishers, theElectronic Rights Management Group, the European Commission, andthe U.S. Copyright Office, which is co-sponsoring the event.  Formore information, contact Martin Gerich at 410/626-1380 or browsethe IMA World Wide Web site at http://www.ima.org/forums/ip/ip--meet.html.     DISA:  The Data Interchange Standards Association, Inc. (DISA)will hold its ninth annual conference April 1-3 in New Orleans. Seminar topics will include the Internet and the consumermarketplace, corporate case histories, electronic commerce in thenext century, vertical market applications for electronic commerce,and "the coming of the global electronic commerce age."  Forreservations and information, call Steve Cook at 202/289-0133 orCarmella Baccari at 703/548-7005, extension 188.     IDG:  International Data Group (IDG) will launch the "InternetCommerce Expo" Sept. 9-12 at the Anaheim Convention Center.  Theconvention will include a vendor exposition and a conferencefocusing on the use of Internet technologies for communications andelectronic commerce within companies.  For registrationinformation, contact Ronald Milton at 508/820-8661.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BILLING REPORT via NewsNetFebruary 23, 1996CSC CONTRACT      Computer Sciences Corp. of El Segundo, Calif., has won a $20million contract to supply CommNet Cellular, Inc., withcustomer-care and billing services.  The contract renews a previousagreement between the companies.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-4IA086-000622-B035-130http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te126.html 205.156.212.5 19970122044658 text/html 65441HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:44:58 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:32 GMTContent-length: 65254Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te126.html Sample Issue Copyright COMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNet January 22, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES Loral Chief Taking Globalstar Reigns; Move Seen as Plus for $2 Billion Project (1139 words) Intelsat Will Consider Restructuring Plan This Year (182 words) Sterling Software To Spin Off Electronic Commerce Group (352 words) Analysts Cite Antitrust, Market Issues For Possible Bell Atlantic-NYNEX Merger (1142 words) The Telecom IPO Scoreboard: How Did They Fare on Wall Street? (155 words) Impact of Legislation on Bell Companies Depends on Regulatory Constraints (1591 words) UBS Analysts Tout Geoworks For 'Concept-Oriented' Investors (1808 words) The Year Ahead: Merrill Lynch Still Likes AirTouch Stock (1036 words) BCI, INDIA's TATA GROUP IN TELECOM SERVICE PACTS (170 words) GLOBALSTAR STAKE (101 words) ABLE TELECOM DEAL (80 words) SPRINT VENTURE PARTNERS COMMIT $4.4 BILLION (107 words) BROOKS FIBER ACQUIRES ENGINEERING, CONSULTING COMPANY (157 words) 5 MILLION LCI SHARES DISTRIBUTED (72 words) S.C. COMMISSION ORDERS BellSouth's PRICE CAPS (161 words) U S WEST EXCHANGE (107 words) AT&T TO SELL CIRCUIT BOARD PLANT IN RESTRUCTURING (401 words) ANALYSTS PRAISE PACIFIC BELL's NEW 'PRODUCTIVITY FACTOR' (194 words) CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Loral Chief Taking Globalstar Reigns;Move Seen as Plus for $2 Billion Project     As part of Lockheed Martin Corp.'s $10 billion deal toacquire most of Loral Corp., Globalstar L.P. will get a respectedindustry leader to champion it in the "Big LEO" (low earth-orbit)mobile satellite services market.  Bernard Schwartz, Chairman ofLoral, will become Chairman and CEO of Loral Space andCommunications Corp., a new company to be formed in connectionwith the Lockheed Martin/Loral deal.  Loral Space will be themanaging general partner of Globalstar, inheriting Loral's 31%stake in Globalstar as well as other assets.     Mr. Schwartz is widely credited with building Loral from anunprofitable company two decades ago into a multibillion-dollarindustry leader today through a series of strategic acquisitions. The addition of Mr. Schwartz to the Globalstar management teamdiminishes a major criticism of the $2 billion project, saidRobert Kaimowitz, a satellite communications analyst at UnterbergHarris in New York.  Globalstar has been criticized for lacking afocused management team, Mr. Kaimowitz noted.     Mr. Schwartz said at a press conference announcing the dealthat he plans to focus most of his time on Globalstar.  HavingMr. Schwartz champion Globalstar "strengthens" the globalcommunications project, Mr. Kaimowitz said, adding that Mr.Schwartz's involvement "ensures that the system will be built."     He expressed doubts that the competing global satellitesystems of Iridium, Inc. (led by Motorola, Inc.) and Odyssey (ledby TRW, Inc.) both would make it to the market.  In a researchreport on Globalstar, analysts at Unterberg Harris recentlywrote:  "We do not believe that Iridium will present realcompetition because of its complex [satellite] architecture,expensive pricing, and murky marketing plan.  Although Odysseyhas proposed what many experts believe is the best systemarchitecture, we have yet to see signs that TRW/Teleglobe [ofCanada] is close to raising the money necessary to build thesystem. . .Our view is that Globalstar's real competition will beICO Global Communications (Inmarsat-P), possibly resulting inonly two players in a potentially large market."     Globalstar spokesman Tom Ross echoed similar commentsregarding Mr. Schwartz, noting that the executive's track recordis "very, very good."  In addition to his duties as Chairman andCEO of Loral Space, Mr. Schwartz will become a Director and ViceChairman of Lockheed Martin.  Globalstar investors applauded thenews, sending its shares up $6.375 to close at $40.50 on the dayof the announcement.Lockheed Martin To Buy Most of Loral     In a deal valued at more than $10 billion, Lockheed Martinwill buy Loral's defense electronics and system integrationbusinesses for $9.1 billion, including $2.1 billion of assumeddebt.  It also will invest $344 million for a 20% equity positionin Loral Space at an effective price of $7.50 per share. Lockheed Martin will pay $38 in cash per share to Loralshareholders through a tender offer that was scheduled to beginJan. 12.  Loral shareholders also will receive one share of LoralSpace for each share of Loral.  The transaction is expected toclose by the end of February.     Loral Space will begin business with more than $700 millionin cash and no debt, the companies said.  Lockheed Martin willprovide Loral Space with support in key technologies whileremaining a major maker of military and commercial satellites. In addition to the 31% stake in Globalstar, Loral Space willreceive Loral's 33% interest in Space Systems/Loral, a commercialsatellite manufacturer, and its 22% interest in K&F Industries,Inc., an aircraft brake company.     Other assets of the new company will include all of Loral'sGlobalstar service provider franchises in Canada, Mexico, andBrazil and Loral's interest in proposed projects involvingdomestic and international direct broadcast satellite (DBS) andbroadband data services.  Mr. Schwartz said Monday, Jan. 8, thatLoral Space will use its Space Systems/Loral holdings to expandthe new company's DBS business.     Mr. Kaimowitz said Loral Space has a book value of $1.8billion or $7.80 per share.  After backing out cash, Globalstarrepresents 83% of the assets of Loral Space, he noted.  LoralSpace's book value is broken down as follows:     *    The 31% interest in Globalstar ($650 million),     *    The 33% interest in Space Systems/Loral ($150 million),     *    The 22% interest in K&F ($50 million),     *    2.8% in management fees from Globalstar ($250 million),     *    $700 million in cash, and     *    An undetermined value for the service providerfranchises.Schwartz Holds Out for Higher Globalstar Value     Mr. Schwartz said one reason Lockheed Martin did not acquireall of Loral was the high price he placed on Loral's 31% interestin Globalstar.  Seeing value in the creation of a globalcommunications network of 48 satellites, Mr. Schwartz pointed outthat globally, more than 3.9 billion people lack telephoneservice, and 30 million people currently are waiting for a phone. If Globalstar begins service as scheduled in 1998, Mr. Schwartzpredicted that the company would have three million customers and$2.7 billion in annual revenue by the year 2002.     Globalstar's current capital structure consists of $300million of equity from its 11 partners and $200 million of equityfrom its initial public offering in February 1995.  Loral Spaceis the largest Globalstar shareholder, followed by publicshareholders as a group and then Qualcomm, Inc., with an 8%stake.  Vendor financing adds another $300 million, and a newbank financing agreement chips in $250 million.  Additionalinternal financing--payments from exclusive service providers(the local telephone companies) in 73 countries--will contributeanother $350 million over the next few years.     The $2 billion project still requires $600 million inadditional external financing.  Mr. Schwartz said that Globalstarwould try to raise the money in the debt markets or would turn toLoral Space and Globalstar's other investors for the funds. Globalstar pulled a $400 million high-yield debt offering fromthe market in October.  Mr. Kaimowitz said this happened notbecause of a lack of investor interest, as widely believed, butbecause Globalstar could get "debt at a cheaper price" from thebanks.     He noted that Loral Space's $700 million in cash and no debtprovides "a vast opportunity to finance the Globalstar project invery creative ways, with less need for traditional financingmethods."       The Lockheed Martin/Loral deal is subject to U.S. andEuropean antitrust and other approvals.  It also requires atleast two-thirds of Loral's shares to be tendered.     Lockheed Martin Chairman Daniel Tellep and Mr. Schwartz saidthey do not expect antitrust concerns to stymie the transaction,especially since Loral's space business will remain a separatecompany.  Mr. Kaimowitz agreed, noting that the businessesLockheed Martin is acquiring from Loral have very little overlapwith its existing operations.  A $10 billion credit agreement forLockheed Martin is being led by Morgan Guaranty Trust Co., Bankof America, and Citicorp USA.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Intelsat Will ConsiderRestructuring Plan This Year     By September, Intelsat's Board of Governors expects to have"a better idea of the future structure" of the internationalsatellite consortium, reports Maury J. Mechanick,VP-international and regulatory affairs for U.S. signatory ComsatCorp.  Intelsat has a "restructuring work plan in place," he saidduring a public briefing on actions taken at the board's year-endmeeting in Washington.  A special Intelsat "working party" and aspecial board committee are exploring the future structure of theconsortium, he explained.     As part of Intelsat's ongoing effort to improve customerservice, the board decided at its December meeting to establishfour regional service support centers.  Intelsat also willrestructure its sales and marketing division and establish newinternal accounting processes.     Commenting on financial matters, Mr. Mechanick said theboard approved Intelsat's 1996 budget, which projects $876million in total revenues and $496 million in capitalexpenditures.  Those figures represent a 10.8% increase inrevenues and a 25% decrease in capital expenditures from the 1995budget.  He said preliminary figures show actual 1995 revenuestotaling $800 million, while operating expenses were $75,000under budget.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Sterling Software To Spin OffElectronic Commerce Group     One of the world's largest software development firms,Sterling Software, Inc., will spin off its lucrative ElectronicCommerce group this year to create a wholly owned subsidiary,Sterling Commerce, Inc.  According to Dawn Wheeler, who willdirect investor relations for the new company, an initial publicoffering is scheduled for the first quarter of this year.  TheIPO will comprise 16% of Sterling's common stock.     The company filed an S1 registration document with theSecurities and Exchange Commission on Dec. 20, 1995, and expectsapproval within 60 days.  Once the IPO is complete, the companywill begin a tax-free spin-off by Sept. 30, the end of Sterling'sfiscal year.      The Electronic Commerce group experienced growth of 35% in1994--about 5% above the growth rate of the electronic commercemarket in that period, according to company figures.  This recordcontinued into 1995:  The group had revenues of $217.8 millionfor the year, an increase of 31% over the previous year's figure. Operating profit increased 33% in the same period.     The group's success is due, in large part, to its recentfocus on developing software for small and midsize businesses, aswell as its strong position in the electronic data interchange(EDI) market.  In 1994, Sterling acquired American BusinessComputer Company, Inc., a leading provider of EDI translationsoftware for the UNIX platform.     But the most visible--and possibly the most important--movefor the Electronic Commerce group was its work last year withVisa International, Inc., to develop the E-Pay system.  E-Pay isa "fully electronic system for processing consumer-initiatedbills," the companies said.  It relies on a collection of EDIstandards that allow electronically generated bills and billpayments to be processed by banks, billers, and other financialinstitutions.  Sterling provides the key EDI-based software thattranslates Visa account and customer information into astandardized format and reconciles payee lists between billersand their banks.  Currently, about 70% of electronic payments arefirst converted to paper before being processed.  E-Pay, which isdesigned to eliminate that step, will be a major building blockof Internet-based billing platforms of the future.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Analysts Cite Antitrust, Market IssuesFor Possible Bell Atlantic-NYNEX Merger     Although it would make "a lot of sense" for Bell AtlanticCorp. and NYNEX Corp. to merge their local exchange or futureinterexchange operations, antitrust and other issues could dampenenthusiasm for pursuing a deal, industry analysts say.  Few weresurprised by recent press reports that executives of the twocompanies have had preliminary merger discussions.  They notethat the "Northeast Corridor" market that a combined NYNEX-BellAtlantic could serve would provide substantial revenues iffederal legislation allows Bell companies to provide interLATA(local access and transport area) services.     "The synergy between NYNEX and Bell Atlantic is apparentwhen you view their market," one interexchange industry observeremphasizes.  The combined Boston, New York, Philadelphia, andWashington areas would constitute "perhaps the most lucrativesingle market in the U.S."  But some analysts caution thatincreasing competition could erode the companies' local exchangemarket shares.  They also warn that potential clashes over toppositions in the combined companies and layoffs could temperenthusiasm for merger talks.     Believing that the compromise on federal telecom legislationis "very positive from a NYNEX perspective," analysts William D.Vogel and Alexandra E. Kairis of NatWest Securities Corp. suggestthat a further combination of specific NYNEX-Bell Atlanticbusinesses (not a full-blown merger) may make sense:       "The facilities-based test for local telephone company entryinto long distance does not specify any market share requirementor percentage of lines passed by a second local carrier.  Webelieve Congress understands that the long distance industry isan overpriced cartel with excess capacity, and that morecompetitors will result in lower prices and more meaningfulchoices for residential and business customers. . .     "NYNEX has fewer hurdles than any other Bell company.  Withthe competitive environment fostered by the regulators in NewYork and Massachusetts, NYNEX has already got facilities-basedcompetition as well as substantial unbundling of network elementsalready under way.  We believe they will be fully compliant by1997 if the present language passes.  This is great news forcustomers because of the buying power NYNEX will have as it shopsfor long distance minutes from AT&T, MCI, and Sprint on behalf ofits residential and business clients."     They say "a case could be made that aggregating NYNEX andBell Atlantic's customer base to combine their buying power forlong distance minutes, as well as sharing marketing andback-office costs, could make sense.  However, a full-blownmerger of the two companies at this time while the two firms arealready in the process of undertaking tremendous restructuringprograms seems provocative but unrealistic."     A recent study Probe Research, Inc., explores the combinedperformance of the NYNEX and Bell Atlantic telephone companiesbetween 1988 and 1994.  "The telephone side of the business forthese two companies is just not generating enormous returns,"says Allan Tumolillo, Probe's Chief Operating Officer.  Asmeasured by revenues and assets per line, the performance of thetelcos has been "relatively flat," he notes.  Data for bothcompanies shows that per-line revenues and assets have increasedby less than 0.5% annually, according to The Telephone Book IV, areport based on the study.  Similarly, measurements show thatrevenues and assets increased about 7.5% per employee at bothcompanies during the period from 1988 to 1994.     "They've achieved that because [Bell Atlantic and NYNEX]have gotten rid of employees," Mr. Tumolillo explains.  "All thecash flow has been generated through employee reductions."  Thecombined number of employees dropped from about 143,600 in 1988to about 105,400 at the end of 1994.  If the companies merge, Mr.Tumolillo predicts they would eliminate duplicative positions andreduce the payroll by about 10,000 more employees over the next18 to 24 months, generating more cash flow.     He suggests that a combined company "hunker down and becomea primarily urban company."  NYNEX has "no strategic reason" tobe in Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire (except for the outlyingBoston suburbs), and some parts of central and upstate New York,he says.  Independent telcos could purchase those exchanges,pursuing a "clustering" strategy similar to that pursued by thecable TV industry.     Any merger discussions between NYNEX and Bell Atlanticprobably would not resemble the negotiations that preceded BellAtlantic's abortive attempt to merge with cable giantTele-Communications, Inc.  NYNEX and Bell Atlantic "know eachother's business very well," Mr. Tumolillo points out, citing thecompanies' combined cellular operations.  Nevertheless,leadership issues could arise.  Neither Bell AtlanticChairman/CEO Raymond W. Smith nor NYNEX Chairman/CEO Ivan G.Seidenberg is nearing retirement age.Relationship Already Exists Based on Cellular Deal     Robert H. Mayer, Senior Manager-telecommunicationsconsulting for Deloitte & Touche Consulting Group, suggests thata NYNEX-Bell Atlantic deal might come together smoothly becausethe companies "already have a relationship through the cellularbusiness."  The CEOs "get along and have a vision" for theircompanies, he says.  He also predicts substantial corporate"downsizing" if a merger takes place, particularly in "corporateservices" units overseeing human relations, legal, and externalaffairs functions.     Commenting that the field is increasingly becoming a "marketfor big players," Mr. Mayer expects any Bell company merger totrigger a new flurry of deals between other telecom giants.  Butwhether Bell company mergers can pass antitrust muster couldbecome the "$64,000 question," some observers believe.  TheClinton administration "hasn't been very aggressive" in bringingantitrust cases, Mr. Mayer notes.  "If the Democrats haven't been[aggressive], Republicans probably would be even less so."  Whilethe Justice Department may not "put [Bell company mergers] undera microscope," it will take action if it finds that predatorypricing is being used to stifle competition, he says.     Some analysts believe that Pacific Telesis Group could be apotential Bell Atlantic-NYNEX partner, creating a "hugeenterprise" carrying traffic between the coasts--"the mostsizable and lucrative single chunk of the interexchange market,"one observer says.  The three companies combined also could carryhalf of the international traffic in the country, says RichardKlugman, First Vice President at PaineWebber.     Philip J. Sirlin, a telecom analyst at Schroder Wertheim &Co., Inc., says a merged Bell Atlantic-NYNEX could have moredifficulty defending local exchange markets.  He also questionswhether any merger deal could satisfy both Messrs. Smith andSeidenberg.  "This is never a trivial issue in a merger," hesays.  "And when you have two roughly equivalent companies,you've got a particular problem. . .That alone reduces some ofthe likelihood" that a merger deal will be concluded, hesuggests.     Meanwhile, interexchange carriers are the new focus ofmerger and acquisition discussions at Bell companies, Mr. Sirlinsays.  By acquiring an interexchange carrier such as LDDSWorldCom, a Bell company could acquire a national networkrelatively quickly.  "I wouldn't be surprised if every [Bellcompany] is studying the feasibility of acquiring WorldCom rightnow," he comments.  "And they should be."Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996The Telecom IPO Scoreboard:How Did They Fare on Wall Street?     This issue contains CBF's quarterly Telecom IPO Scoreboardand related charts tracking upcoming initial public offerings. Every quarter, we report on companies poised to go public in thenext 30 to 60 days, those that have filed initial paperwork withthe Securities and Exchange Commission to go public in thefuture, and the progress of companies that recently began tradingon the stock exchanges.       Readers can track the number of IPOs in telecom-relatedsectors, how these IPOs are performing relative to the overallmarket, and how one company's pubic offering fared on Wall Streetcompared with that of others.       An increasing number of offerings (a larger pipeline ofmoney being fed into IPOs) would indicate greater venture capitaland entrepreneur interest in this sector.  A decrease in IPOactivity could indicate that interest is dampening or that themarket is reflecting information it has impounded about previousofferings and is taking a "breather." Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996Impact of Legislation on Bell CompaniesDepends on Regulatory ConstraintsBy Larry F. Darby     Previous articles have discussed the probable effects ofregulatory reform legislation on various telecommunicationscommunities of interest--the broad public interest, consumers,large users, the cable TV companies, and the long distancecarriers.  Such legislation is long overdue, and depending on thefinal details to emerge from conference, the bills promise to addconsiderably to development of the telecom infrastructure whilespurring economic growth and employment.     The legislation will give users greater choice and lowerrates, both of which will accompany new market entry andintensified competition among large, well-capitalized companieswhose markets now are protected from competition by statutory,regulatory, and judicial barriers to market entry.     The major threat to the enactment of legislation is thatsome key lawmakers may succeed in imposing their view thatcompetition is too important to be left to the marketplace andthat our national welfare is best served by pervasive regulatoryinterventions.  There still is considerable pressure frominterest groups to protect regulatory prerogatives and to havemajor market conflicts resolved in administrative proceedingsrather than in the marketplace.  So, what else is new?Bell Companies Are at a Turning Point     We have deferred discussing the impact of legislation on theBell regional holding companies because much of the controversyamong House and Senate conferees centers on that issue.  Itremains to be determined whether, how, and to what extent thefinal bill will permit RHCs to enter new markets and compete,thereby compensating for the increased competition they will facefrom long distance carriers and cable TV system operators intheir own core markets.     The RHCs have evolved in very different directions, andthose differences will become more pronounced over time.  Afterdivestiture they shared some common goals:     *    Become less reliant on regulated lines of business forearnings,     *    Reduce reliance on outside funding for networkconstruction and business expansion,     *    Gradually finesse the line-of-business constraintsembodied in the Modified Final Judgment, and     *    Meet shareholders' general requirements for growth andearnings (in large measure by escaping the strictures ofrate-base, rate-of-return regulation).     The RHCs generally have succeeded in meeting these broadobjectives, some more than others.  All have diversified theirearnings streams and growth opportunities.  Two of them --SBCCommunications, Inc., and U S WEST, Inc.--are generating abouthalf the basis for their total market capitalization outside theregulated telephone business.  Wireless services and investmentsin telecom assets in other countries make up the bulk of theseoutside sources of market value.     Most of the companies are able to fund their constructionrequirements from depreciation accruals.  In recent quarters, thesum of net income and depreciation charges has been about 15%greater than the cash required to pay dividends and to fund theconstruction budget.  (For context, we note that AT&T generatesabout 50% more cash than is required for dividends andconstruction, while the average for carriers in Europe is about25% greater.)     The companies have been quite successful in escaping theconfines of traditional earnings regulation that effectivelystripped them of the benefits of efficiency gains andopportunities for earnings growth.  Price cap regulation offederal access charges and a variety of incentive and price capplans in the states have almost completely supplantedrate-of-return regulation as the dominant form of earningscontrol.  These regulatory changes, more than any others, haveaccounted for increased market valuation of these stocks inrecent years.     Notwithstanding these successes, the Bell companies stillare trapped in the slowly growing, increasingly risky domesticlocal wireline markets.  Market penetration is in the 95% range,and new installations of primary lines are limited to the rate ofnew housing starts.  Revenue growth from usage growth is stymiedin many jurisdictions by the imposition of flat-rate,unlimited-use tariff structures.  In fact, usage-sensitivepricing of local telephone services is unconstitutional in somestates.       The companies have been growing revenue by adding vertical,value-added services made possible by software-controlled digitalswitches.  Call waiting and forwarding and related services haveadded handsomely to local revenues, but more ambitious foraysinto broadband distribution--video dial tone, for example--havenot been too successful.  The RHCs still are burdened with ratestructures that do not match underlying cost structures, and theresulting high-margin services have attracted considerableinterest from competitors.  New competition and the prospect ofeven more entry (from long distance carriers and cable TVsystems) increases market risk substantially in the localexchange.Legislative Impact on Bells Depends on Regulatory Restraints     The Bell companies look to the legislation (1) to permitthem to pursue new opportunities for growth and (2) for the meansto offset increases in market risk.  And when all is said anddone, the impact of the legislation on the RHCs depends ondetails still being worked out.  Under any legislative outcome,the Bells will be handicapped by their lack of experience incompeting openly in the marketplace.  J.B. Clark noted nearly acentury ago that "The greatest of all monopoly profits is thequiet life."  So it is here.  Competition to date in the localmarket is but a vague hint of what is about to come.     Though the ultimate fate of Bell companies in themarketplace will be determined by their ability to adjust fromthe comfort of monopoly to the rigors of competition, thelegislation may either handicap them or accommodate theirtransition.  Two elements of the legislation--and the way inwhich regulators follow them up--are key to the Bells' success inthe new competitive environment.  The first is the timing ofcompetitive market entry; and second is the extent to which thelegislation imposes regulatory constraints on "competitiveadjustments" by the Bells and by their competitors.     Time is money.  The timing of new competitive entry intolocal and long distance markets is critical to the financialvaluation of both classes of carrier.  There has been much debatein the conference committee about delaying RHC entry into thelong distance business until a date certain, or until specificstatutory requirements are met.  Frankly, I am a little puzzledby that debate:  It is unclear how the public interest is servedby delaying RHC entry into the long distance market.      The argument that competition should be suppressed in thatmarket until it is more vigorous in the local exchange market isnot compelling.  The argument seems ultimately to turn on theassumption that regulation is ineffective in prohibitinganticompetitive market behavior.  Be that as it may, anydifferences in the timing of lowering local and long distancemarket entry barriers will be damaging to the Bells.  The battleover customer control and the outcome of competing "one-stopshopping" offers largely will be prejudged if the final billhandicaps RHC entry into the long distance marketplace.     A casual reading of the various "competitive checklists"that have been advanced as necessary conditions precedent forBell company entry into the long distance market read like a"communications lawyers' full employment act."        They are a sure blueprint for protracted market uncertaintyand regulatory/judicial delay.  Competitive safeguards in thehands of clever legal advocates can be transformed intoregulatory barriers to entry.     The second determinant of the impact that legislation willhave on the Bells has to do with competitive responses andobligations.  AT&T and other long distance carriers havesupported language that will force the Bells to make bulkcapacity available to them for resale at "out-of-pocket" or"avoidable" costs.       Despite economic efficiency arguments for such arequirement, this pricing rule would permit long distancecarriers to avoid contributing to the fixed costs of the network,thereby shifting that burden to other users.  In any event, sucha pricing rule would favor the long distance carriers to thedetriment of the local Bells.  Such a requirement, combined withlags on the ability of the Bells to enter the long distancemarket, would cause the RHCs to lose the accounts of large andprofitable customers to long distance carriers.  The RHCs'ability to respond to new entrants and to defend their markets isalso critical.  In this regard, history is not very encouraging. AT&T was saddled with the regulatory baggage associated with itsdesignation by the FCC as a "dominant" carrier, long after themarket was regarded by most observers as workably competitive. The practical effect of such regulation has been, and will be,"cartel management" by the regulators.     The means of managing the allocation of market shares hasbeen the tariffing process--delays in the introduction of newservices and minimum rate restrictions on competitive services. New entrants' success in arguing that rate responses byincumbents are predatory or embody cross-subsidies will becritical to incumbents and new entrants alike.     If legislators and regulators regard themselves asinstruments of market reallocation from incumbents to newentrants, and if they adopt "fully distributed cost" allocationrules for competitive services and "marginal cost" principles forpricing resold bulk local capacity, the Bells will surely be biglosers.     (Mr. Darby is an economic and financial consultant on issuesrelated to broadcasting, cable TV, domestic and foreigntelephony, trade, technology, and domestic common carrierregulation.  He previously was a senior economist in the WhiteHouse Office of Telecommunications Policy, FCC Chief Economistand Chief of the FCC's Common Carrier Bureau, and Vice Presidentof Lehman Brothers' Telecommunications Investment Banking group. He can be reached at Darby Associates, 5335 Nebraska Ave., N.W.,Washington, D.C. 20015, telephone 202/362-9061.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996UBS Analysts Tout GeoworksFor 'Concept-Oriented' Investors     The pieces are "finally in place for the CCD (consumercomputing device) market to begin its long-awaited ramp,"according to analysts Jeffrey A. Schelsinger and Scott W. Searleat UBS Securities.  They view Geoworks, Inc.'s GEOS operatingsystem as "an enabling technology that will play an importantrole in the development of this market.     Given the "huge market opportunity for these devices, thepositioning of the company with leading consumer electronicmanufacturers, and the tremendous degree of operating leverage,we believe Geoworks (GWRX) represents an excellent opportunityfor concept-oriented investors to play the convergence of networkcomputing and mobile communications."  Their investment thesisfollows:     Over the last 20 years the binary world of ones and zeroshas driven tremendous change in the computer and communicationsindustries.  Maturing digital technology has facilitated markettransitions in these sectors, where companies with truly enablingtechnology--technology that reduces cost and/or increasesfunctionality--have emerged to become industry leaders.     When positioned on the right side of changes in technology,investors have benefited from these market transitions. Centralized computing gave way to distributed processing anddesktop PCs (Compaq, Intel, Microsoft); stand-alone PCS wereconnected into local area networks (Novell, Cisco, Bay Networks);and now the promise of inter-networking and the Internet itself(Spyglass, Netscape, UUNet) is creating very interestinginvestment opportunities.     Although much less mature, the wireless communicationsindustry also is undergoing significant change.  Analogvoice-centric networks are giving way to new digital systemscapable of efficient data communications.  Service markets oncecharacterized as monopolies/duopolies are becoming highlycompetitive, as proliferation of wireless networks is occurring. Market focus and distribution channels for wireless products aremigrating from expensive verticals to low-cost mass consumermarkets.     This is all well and good, but for the most part, the ponyis already out of the barn.  Where then is the next greatundiscovered opportunity?  Convergence.  The combination ofnetwork computing and wireless communications will "untether"users from enterprise networks and desktop PCs, thereby enhancingthe sharing and processing of information.     As internetworking proliferates and the computing platformbecomes more hierarchical--the intelligence resides in thenetwork, not at the node--new consumer-oriented mobile computingdevices will emerge.  Online, as opposed to on-site, computingplaces the "cost of computing" on the network and, therefore,requires significantly less functionality in end-user devices. Less functionality means lower costs, which drives marketpenetration.     These next-generation devices will, however, have sufficientcomputing resources to easily communicate with enterprisenetworks, the Internet, and desktop PCS.  They will be packagedin a truly mobile form factor (organizer/mobile telephone) andhave a cost structure consistent with other consumer electronicdevices.  All this is essential if the goal of indispensableutility is to be reached (i.e., integrated into our daily lives).     These new CCDs will start out as extensions of existingconsumer electronic product lines such as electronic organizers,mobile companions, cellular telephones, and pagers.  In additionto being interoperable with desktop PCs and enterprise networks,these mobile devices will also support numerous wireless dataapplications for messaging (e-mail, fax, and paging), informationdelivery, remote access, and of course, the Internet.     CCDs will utilize many existing digital technologies. Low-cost memory chips, fast and efficient microprocessors, andhigh-resolution graphics displays all will be required.  Theidiosyncrasies of mobility and wireless communications, however, require new technology that will have to (1) becommunications-centric (wired and wireless), (2) be interoperablewith enterprise networks (the Internet and desktop PCs), and (3)compensate for the limited bandwidth of wireless communications. The constraints of size, cost, and battery life are significantin the world of mobility.     With a focused strategy to deliver software products thatmeet the price/performance demands of mobile computing, Geoworksis well positioned to become a leading provider of operatingsystem and application software to the emerging CCD markets.  Thecompany's GEOS operating system offers a level of functionalityand efficiency that enables manufacturers of CCD devices(electronic organizers and cellular telephones) to provide thefeatures and cost structure (less than $500 to the end-user)necessary to penetrate the mass consumer market.     Admittedly, the CCD market is in the early stages ofdeveloping.  However, the adoption of the company's GEOSoperating system by several leading consumer electronicmanufacturers (Hewlett Packard, Nokia, and Toshiba) leavesGeoworks very well positioned to capitalize on the convergence ofcomputing and wireless communications.The Market:  Despite Failed Attempts, Huge Opportunity Exists     The ability to tap into the vast organizer and mobiletelephone markets with value-added features will ultimatelyignite explosive unit volume growth.  We estimate that the totalCCD market will grow to $13 billion by 1998, with operatingsystem revenues accounting for approximately $250 million.     First organizers & PDAs -- The organizer/PDA (personaldigital assistant) segment of the CCD market--devices priced atmore than $250--will drive early demand, as next-generationmobile telephones ("smart phones") are not expected to beintroduced in Europe and Asia until late 1996.  The U.S. will beat least another year behind because of a lack of digitalcellular/PCS infrastructure.  The organizer/PDA market segment isforecast to grow from 4.4 million units in 1995 to 18.6 millionunits in 1998.  Whereas low-end electronic organizers areexpected to grow only 6% per annum, PDAs with higherfunctionality are forecast to grow 150% annually through 1998.     The result:  a combined end-user market of $10.5 billion,with PDAs representing 80% of the market.  Assuming royalties of$10-$15 per unit, the organizer/PDA operating system market wouldbe valued at $186 million (based on $10 per unit) by 1998.  Aroyalty of $10 per unit equates to less than 35% of the end-usercost ($350) of a typical organizer/PDA CCD device.     Then smart phones:  The worldwide market for digital mobilephones is forecast to grow from 7 million handsets in 1995 to 20million handsets in 1998, representing a $25 billion market. . .An increasing percentage of these handsets is expected torepresent digital mobile phones with intelligent capabilities forprocessing, storing, and communicating data information ("smartphones").     The installed base of smart phones is expected to reach 4million by 1998, or approximately 20% of the digital phonemarket. . .Assuming the smart phone market captures 10% of thedigital phone market, operating system revenues from this CCDsegment could exceed $75 million by 1998.     Additionally, we believe the add-on product market couldrepresent an $80 million market by 1998, assuming one in twopurchasers of an organizer/PDA buys an add-on application for$20.  We view this as conservative, in that Microsoft reportsadd-on sales of 1:1 or better for applications relative tooperating system sales.The Geoworks Solution     Geoworks develops and markets operating systems andapplications for the emerging CCD market.  Geoworks' principalsystem software, GEOS, is designed to meeting the constraints ofthe mobile environment--limited microprocessor, memory, andstorage capacity.  GEOS provides a combination of functionalityand efficiency required by CCD hardware vendors in providing thefeatures and cost structure necessary for this market to followthe explosive growth pattern of other successful consumerelectronics products.     Strategy is simple:  Establish the GEOS operating system asthe de facto standard in the mobile CCD market.  Success at theoperating system level opens up the opportunity to sellhigh-margin add-on software applications into the installed baseof users.  Initially, the target markets will be handheldelectronic organizers/PDAs (data-centric users) and smart phones(voice-centric users).  Over time, higher-level informationappliances and interactive TV may be added.     Strategic relationships --  Geoworks has entered intostrategic relationships with leading OEMs in the electronicorganizer and mobile telephone markets.  Several partners havetaken an equity interest in GWRX.     *    Nokia -- The second leading provider of digital GSMphones in Europe intends to incorporate GEOS in its first smartphone, expected to be released next year.     *    Hewlett-Packard -- It will incorporate the GEOSoperating system into a number of product lines, starting withits sub-$350 electronic organizer, the Omnigo 100, which wassuccessfully introduced into European and U.S. markets this pastOctober.n  Toshiba Corp. -- This leading consumer electronic manufacturerplans to use GEOS in its development of smart phone products forAsian markets.n  Novell -- A leading provider of network operating systems, ithas authorized Geoworks to include Netware client software in itsGEOS system software for seamless integration with Novellnetworks.     Each of these companies has made a significant equityinvestment in Geoworks for a combined ownership of approximately18%.  Recognizing that wireless communications will driveexplosive growth in the CCD market, Geoworks has recentlyannounced a number of additional strategic alliances in thisarea:4  Notable Technologies -- provider of add-on software forinformation delivery over paging networks;4  Skytel -- leading provider of nationwide one-way and two-waypaging services;4  Wynd Communications -- provider of wireless two-way messagingservices including e-mail via the Internet, fax, alpha paging,and phone messages.Leveraging the Model     Geoworks' financial model maintains a tremendous amount ofoperating leverage.  Unit volume growth in a royalty-drivenrevenue model ($10-$15 per unit) drives contribution and earningsas operating costs remain relatively fixed.  With increasing unitvolume shipments, we believe fully taxed net margins could exceed20% in 1998.  This is reflected in our fiscal 1998 EPS estimateof $0.50.     Near term, the revenue stream will likely be lumpy,reflecting the recognition of deferred revenues pertaining toterminated projects.  In fiscal 1997 we project ships ofGEOS-based organizers/PDAs and smart phones to exceed 450,000 and150,000 units, respectively.  This would represent royaltyrevenues of approximately $7.5 million.  In addition, deferredcontract revenues of $3.5 to $4.0 million and add-on products'sales bring total revenue in fiscal 1997 up to $13.3 million.     For fiscal 1998, we anticipate total revenues of $38 million($18.5 million in royalties plus $10.5 million from add-onproducts).  In terms of operating expenses, we forecast healthygrowth in R&D expenses (25%-30%) to further develop GEOS andadd-on applications.  With sales and marketing provided by OEMdistribution channels, marketing and G&A expenses are expected togrow modestly (15%-20%).  We believe positive operating leveragecan expand operating margins above 30% in fiscal 1998.     Assuming the story unfolds as we think it will, and unitvolumes begin to ramp significantly in fiscal 1998, GWRX couldeasily generate after-tax EPS in excess of $1.00 in fiscal 1999. Because of the high degree of operating leverage, this would onlyrequire a 64% increase in revenues, year over year.  Furthermore,if the company's existing OEM partners maintain their currentmarket share with respect to these next-generation products, ourfiscal 1999 numbers could prove conservative.     Consequently, we have set our 18- to 24-month price targetat $30, or 30 times our tentative fiscal 1999 full-taxed EPSestimate of $1.00.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996The Year Ahead:  Merrill LynchStill Likes AirTouch Stock     Analyst Linda J. Runyon at Merrill Lynch & Co. notes thatone of her firm's themes in 1995 was "to go international withregard to cellular" holdings, and AirTouch Communications, Inc.(ATI) "certainly fits this profile."  ATI is the sixth-largestU.S. cellular company with 38 million population equivalents("pops"), and the third-largest U.S. paging company with morethan 1.9 million pagers in service.  The company tops heryear-end list of recommended telecom/cellular stocks.  Ms.Runyon's comments follow:     ATI's international exposure continues to grow in both sizeand importance.  In fact, the company now has more than 69million "pops" through interests in licenses in Germany,Portugal, Sweden, Belgium, South Korea, Italy, India, Spain, andJapan.  For 1995, we estimate that ATI's proportional interestsin its international ventures will represent approximately 31% ofproportional revenues and 17% of proportional operating cashflow.  By the year 2000 we believe that these numbers could growto as much as 46% and 44%, respectively.     Moreover, we think that ATI's valuation is compelling atthese levels--especially given the 22% pullback in the sharessince mid-September.  On a valuation basis, we have a 12- to18-month price objective of $35 per share, or 27% above currentlevels.What Has Changed?  Competition, from Within and Without     *    First, we now have AT&T and MCI gearing up to gohead-to-head in wireless.  AT&T has recently gone nationwide withits AT&T Wireless brand name, while MCI has chosen to go thereseller route.  If MCI's experience with the resale of paging isany indication of things to come in cellular, it could prove tobe an interesting year.     *    Second, we now have more consumer packages beingintroduced into the market.  We've got TeleGo from GTE and TalkAlong from Bell Atlantic/NYNEX.  Basically, we're starting to seezone-sensitive packages, priced to attract the lower-usagesubscriber.  Nevertheless, revenue/subscriber/month continues todecline faster than originally estimated.     *    And third, personal communications services (PCS) arecoming, there's no doubt in our minds.  The first round ofauctions ended in March, and the second round of auctions is setto begin shortly.  We've now got Sprint Spectrum PCS service inWashington/Baltimore.  The question remains:  When does PCSarrive on a widescale basis?  We think it's at least 1997-1998.Current View:  Go Small or Go International?     There's really no way around it.  Frankly, 1995 was adifficult year for cellular equities. On average, the stocks inour group are flat year-to-date and down over 30% relative to theS&P 400.  As one portfolio manager pointed out, it was difficultto perform that badly in 1995.  So, why did the stocks perform sobadly, and what does that mean for 1996?     During 1995 the downward leg began with the PCS auctions,continued with the LIN Broadcasting private market valuationprocess, and gained new momentum this fall with concerns over therate of subscriber growth during 3Q 95.     We understand the concerns over PCS.  We understand theconcerns over the LIN valuation.  So let's look at subscribers. During 3Q 95, subscribers included in our matrix of 19 companiesgrew 42.4%, revenues grew 31.5%, and operating cash flow grew42.3% versus 3Q 94--somewhat surprising given the stockperformance.  So, what is going on?     Currently, the issue on everyone's mind is handset growth. Given comments by some of the equipment manufacturers regardingU.S. analog handset revenue growth, the perception seems to bethat everyone who ever wanted a phone already has one, and thatgrowth as we know it has come to an end.  We don't happen toagree, but it's interesting.     In fact, over the course of the year, we have raised our1995 ending subscriber estimate from 32.5 million to 34 million,for 40.8% growth over 1994.  This implies a penetration rate forthe industry of more than 13.0%.  For 1996 we are estimatingending subscribers of 44.4 million, up 30% over 1995, for apenetration rate of 16.9%.  We'd like to point out that everyyear so far--without exception--we have underestimated subscribergrowth.  But the question still remains, will 4Q 95 subscribergrowth be on target?  It's still too early to tell given that50%-60% of the growth during the quarter comes in December.     So, why go small or go international?  We recognize thatthis is a repeat of our theme last year, and although it's smallconsolation given the overall performance of the sector, smallermarket operators did outperform larger market operators during1995.  We think that this trend could continue, given our beliefthat competition will come to the smaller markets later and thatconsolidation of smaller operators will continue over time.  Withregard to international, we see significant potential growthopportunities, especially in some of the more underpenetratedmarkets.  In many cases, we see international growth occurring ata faster rate than growth here in the U.S.1996 -- KEY ISSUES     1.    Is subscriber growth slowing or not?  We think thatultimately growth in net additions has to slow given the sheersize of the wireless business.  However, we think that endingsubscriber numbers will continue to be strong in 1996, especiallygiven the added distribution power that AT&T and MCI will bringto the table.     2.    What exactly does PCS mean for the cellular business? When will PCS really enter the market?  How will it be priced? How will it affect growth?  How will it affect margins?  In othermarkets, such as the U.K., the introduction of PCS has helped toaccelerate growth of the overall wireless market.  We expect thatthis could ultimately occur in the U.S.  However, we don'tanticipate seeing widespread PCS until 1997-1998.     3.    How is PCS going to be financed?  We think this couldbe the single most important issue during 1996, as many of thePCS operators look to raise financing within a similar timeframe.     4.    And lastly, when will commercial CDMA (Code DivisionMultiple Access) technology really be available, both forcellular and for PCS?  We believe that ongoing uncertainty aboutthis issue will continue to cloud the competitive picture forthose cellular and PCS operators who have opted for CDMA.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996BCI, INDIA's TATA GROUP IN TELECOM SERVICE PACTS     Bell Canada International (BCI) and India's Tata Group haveformed a consortium to provide telecom services in the Indianstate of Andhra Pradesh, where the companies have won one of twocellular telephone licenses.  The consortium also was found tohave submitted the only acceptable bid in the Jan. 1 bidding fora basic telephone service license in Andhra Pradesh, BCI said.       Tata will hold 51% of the equity in the basic phone serviceand cellular service companies, and BCI will own 39%.  Theremaining 10% will be held by American International Group, aU.S. insurance firm.     BCI said it could invest $35 million for the cellularventure and about $100 million for the basic telephone serviceventure.  Derek H. Burney, BCI's Chairman, President, and CEO,said that "with cellular and basic service licenses in India,cellular operations in Colombia and China, and cable [TV]licenses in Brazil --each with strong local partners--BCI isstrategically positioned in some of the most attractive emergingtelecommunications markets in the world."Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996GLOBALSTAR STAKE     New York-based investment firm Cumberland Associates has cutits stake in Globalstar Telecommunications Ltd., the publicequity portion of Globalstar L.P., to 6.2%.     It now owns 621,400 shares of Globalstar, according to aSchedule 13D amendment filed with the Securities and ExchangeCommission Jan. 11.       Cumberland Associates said it sold 115,000 shares betweenNov. 17, 1995, and Dec. 22, 1995, at prices ranging from $25.90to $36.00 per share.       The firm purchased 5,000 shares Nov. 27, 1995, at $24.81each.  Schedule 13D filings are required of "aggressive"institutional investors who own more than 5% of a particularissue.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996ABLE TELECOM DEAL     Able Telecom Holding Corp. of West Palm Beach, Fla., hascompleted its acquisition of H.C. Connell, Inc., a Leesburg,Fla.-based provider of outside plant services to phone companies,utilities, and municipalities.       The purchase price was about $2.3 million.  Connell, whichcompleted fiscal year 1995 with more than $12 million inrevenues, has 225 employees and will operate as part of Able'sTelecommunications Services Division.  Its founder, H.C. Connell,will remain with the company as a consultant for three years.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996SPRINT VENTURE PARTNERS COMMIT $4.4 BILLION     Comcast Corp.'s third quarter report notes that the SprintTelecommunications Venture (STV) partners will contribute $4.4billion in cash to the venture over the next three years,"subject to agreement upon an initial business plan."  Comcastsaid its share--$660 million--could be reduced because of "themethod of crediting in-kind contributions to STV by thepartners."       Through Sept. 30, 1995, Comcast made cash capitalcontributions of $338.8 million to WirelessCo, STV's plannednationwide wireless communications network.  The other jointventure partners are Sprint Corp., Tele-Communications, Inc., andCox Cable Communications, Inc.  They plan to offer a package oflocal exchange, long distance, wireless, and cable TV services.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996BROOKS FIBER ACQUIRES ENGINEERING, CONSULTING COMPANY     Competitive local exchange carrier Brooks Fiber Properties,Inc., has acquired the domestic consulting and engineeringbusiness of its affiliate, Brooks Telecommunications, Inc.  Theinternational operations of Brooks Telecom will be spun off intoa new company, Brooks Telecommunications International, Inc.  Thetransaction will make Brooks Fiber a "full-service" telecomprovider, the company said.  Brooks Telecommunications had owned15% of Brooks Fiber.     The move will give Brooks Fiber engineering and softwareexpertise, allowing it to offer customers a "new depth ofconsultative support," according to CEO James C. Allen. Acquiring the domestic consulting unit--dubbed GLA International,Inc.--will give Brooks Fiber more management information systems(MIS) capabilities, improving its ability to meet interexchangecarrier (IXC) customers' service requirements, Mr. Allen said. IXCs have "voiced perpetual disappointment with MIS shortcomingsof the older [local exchange carriers]," he added.  Brooks Fibernow will have about 300 employees and could have revenues of morethan $40 million in 1996, it said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 19965 MILLION LCI SHARES DISTRIBUTED     LCI International, Inc.'s largest shareholder, Warburg,Pincus Capital Co. L.P., has distributed 5 million shares or 5%of LCI's fully diluted outstanding shares to its limitedpartners.  Warburg remains LCI's largest shareholder after thedistribution, holding 26 million shares or 28% of the totaloutstanding amount.  Two Warburg executives will remain on LCI'sBoard.  LCI said it "views the distribution as an opportunity forLCI to broaden its base of shareholder ownership." Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996S.C. COMMISSION ORDERS BellSouth's PRICE CAPS     In adopting a price cap plan for BellSouthTelecommunications, Inc., the South Carolina Public ServiceCommission properly has "recognized the need" for alternativeregulation of local exchange carriers, BellSouth says.  GregMorton, Director-corporate and external affairs in SouthCarolina, told CBF, however, that a five-year "freeze" on basiclocal service rates "is too long in a competitive environment." BellSouth had proposed a freeze for only three years.       Mr. Morton said BellSouth is "disappointed" that the PSCincluded a 2.1% "productivity factor" in its recently adoptedprice cap formula.  After the plan's fifth year, BellSouth willbe allowed to increase basic service rates by an amount equal tothe rate of inflation, minus the 2.1% productivity factor.  Itsintrastate switched access rates are capped for three years.  For"nonbasic" (competitive and "discretionary," or optional)services, BellSouth has pricing flexibility, subject to a 10%annual limit on rate increases.  The PSC will maintain oversightauthority and can refuse to allow rate increases.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996U S WEST EXCHANGE     Pacific Telecom, Inc., has agreed to purchase 32 ruralMinnesota exchanges from U S WEST Communications, Inc., whichpreviously had announced that it would sell the exchanges toanother company, HTC Group.       That deal collapsed because of "a change of investmentpriority on the part of HTC Group partners," according to astatement issued jointly by all three companies.     HTC still plans to acquire U S WEST exchanges in Iowa, andthe Bell company is negotiating with two or three other companiesto sell Nebraska exchanges, a U S WEST spokesman said.  Federaland state regulatory approvals are needed before the exchangescan be transferred.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996AT&T TO SELL CIRCUIT BOARD PLANT IN RESTRUCTURING     A retired AT&T Corp. executive has assembled an investmentteam that plans to bid on the AT&T Microelectronics factory inRichmond, Va., which is slated to be sold as part of thecompany's streamlining and restructuring plan.  Hobart A. Weaver,who helped start the Richmond Works printed circuit board factorymore than 20 years ago, told CBF Jan. 16 that he expects toreceive a sales proposal from AT&T within 60 days.  Mr. Weaversaid he has lined up New York investment bankers Peter Dixon andWilmer Thomas, with whom he has participated in several pastventures, for bidding to acquire the plant.  He said he alsohopes to include the factory's almost 2,000 employees aspart-owners of a new public company.     He said he informed AT&T last April that he was interestedin purchasing the plant.  Mr. Weaver, who retired from AT&T in1982 as head of manufacturing operations in North Carolina, wasGM of the plant when it opened in 1973.  He said he has contactedthe Communications Workers of America local representing theRichmond Works employees and expects the plant to remain a unionshop.  An AT&T spokesman declined to comment on Mr. Weaver'splan, saying only that the company is "talking to severalpotential buyers."     The Richmond plant, which manufactures printed circuitboards and "backplanes," has about 1,950 employees.  "We plan toinitiate discussions with potential buyers in the next fewweeks," said the unit's President, Curtis J. Crawford.  He saidthe largest customer of the plant's products, AT&T NetworkSystems, "expects to continue to depend upon the Richmond Worksas a major supplier after the sale."  CWA, which representsnonmanagement employees at the plant, said, "We had just turnedthe corner on making the plant profitable for the first time in along time, and this is the thanks we get."     AT&T Microelectronics will become part of the systems andtechnology company to be spun off from AT&T on Jan. 1, 1997.  Aspokesman for the unit said company planners see "no strategicadvantage in owning the factory. . .We find it makes more senseto invest in some of our other businesses. . .Historically (we)tended to make everything we needed," he said.  "But over theyears, we've reevaluated and asked whether we really need to bemaking these [products] ourselves.  In the case of these circuitboards, we decided we didn't."Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS BUSINESS & FINANCE via NewsNetJanuary 22, 1996ANALYSTS PRAISE PACIFIC BELL's NEW 'PRODUCTIVITY FACTOR'     Rejecting requests to eliminate price cap regulation, theCalifornia regulators have told Pacific Bell to freeze basiclocal rates for at least three years.  They also adjusted PacificBell's price cap "productivity factor."  Pacific Bell previouslywas subject to a 5% factor.  The new factor is keyed to the rateof inflation.     John Gueldner, Pacific Bell VP-regulatory, said the action"sends the right signal to companies based in California as wellas those considering investing here.  It will allow us tocontinue investing in our California infrastructure and willencourage economic growth and jobs throughout the state." Analysts at Merrill Lynch & Co. viewed the PUC's decision as"positive" for Pacific Telesis Group.  The analysts kept their1996 earnings-per-share estimate of $2.55.     "Had the 5% productivity factor been maintained, therequired rate reductions in 1996 would have been about $63million (net of miscellaneous price increases)," they noted. Because of increasing local exchange service competition, PacificBell likely will use its "downward pricing flexibility" to reducerates "for those services likely to be most targeted bycompetitors," offsetting "much of the $63 million cushion"provided by the PUC's recent decision, they added.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-5IA086-000622-B035-151http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te01.html 205.156.212.5 19970122044723 text/html 29484HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:45:28 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:10 GMTContent-length: 29297Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te01.html Sample Issue Copyright COMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNet January 2, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * TODAY'S NEWS * WARREN PUBLISHING ACQUIRES WASHINGTON TELECOM NEWSWIRE (194 words) FCC SHUTDOWN MAKES IT DOUBTFUL JAN. 18 AGENDA MEETING WILL BE HELD (777 words) HILL SAYS BROADCASTERS WON'T GET 'GIVEAWAY' (669 words) CELLULAR MARKET GROWS 71.4% WITH ACCELERATED EXPANSION IN SOME NATIONS (438 words) * COMMUNICATIONS PERSONALS * Ken Hughes, former dir.-operations & technical services, U.S. (78 words) * TELEPHONY * City of Baltimore has complained to American Personal (192 words) CompuServe Pres. Robert Massey said Fri. he doesn't expect to (168 words) Police Telephones and Microwave agreed to acquire Telereunion (32 words) APAC Telecommunications signed joint venture agreement for (65 words) Pacific Telecommunications Council meeting Jan. 14-18 in (53 words) N.C. Utilities Commission (NCUC) staff recommended that it (47 words) Ameritech cut Ind. monthly basic monthly rates 42 cents per (60 words) * MASS MEDIA * Board of CBS parent Westinghouse Electric Fri. adopted "poison (103 words) Galaxy Telecom said it completed 2 cable acquisitions, which (74 words) City of Laredo and Time Warner (TW) were ordered to start (112 words) Mass Media Financials: Silver King Communications lost $3.3 (49 words) USA Today Publisher Thomas Curley and General Motors Chmn. (44 words) * SATELLITE AND INTERNATIONAL * Auction of Advanced Communications' former DBS permit to (80 words) Honeywell Space Systems won contract to provide attitude and (24 words) CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996WARREN PUBLISHING ACQUIRES WASHINGTON TELECOM NEWSWIRE     We're very proud to announce that Warren Publishing haspurchased Washington Telecom Newswire, a unique daily news servicecovering the telecommunications industry.  As a wide variety ofCommunications Daily subscribers already know, Washington TelecomNewswire can be a very powerful complement to the Daily.     Newswire subscribers receive, via fax or e-mail,Washington-based telephone industry news stories throughout thebusiness day, usually within an hour of the event.  FCC andcongressional hearings, corporate press conferences and majortelephone industry developments are reported in Washington TelecomNewswire before they appear anywhere else -- including "on theInternet."     The Newswire was purchased from Editor and Publisher ChristineValmassei, who began the service in 1993 and will continue aseditor and publisher.  The Newswire will remain separate from CommDaily, with a separate editorial staff.     Beginning in 1945, Warren Publishing pioneered first inweekly, then daily and now almost hourly coverage ofcommunications.  As the pace continues to pick up in the industry,we're ready for the next 50 years.     We eagerly invite you to sample Washington Telecom Newswire atno cost or obligation.  Simply call Warren Publishing CirculationManager Betty Alvine at 202-872-9200.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FCC SHUTDOWN MAKES IT DOUBTFUL JAN. 18 AGENDA MEETING WILL BE HELD     Scheduled FCC agenda meeting on Jan. 18 now is very much indoubt because of extended govt. shutdown over budget fight betweenAdministration and congressional Republicans.  It's Commissionpolicy that staff items to be considered at open meetings be sentto commissioners by bureaus and offices involved 21 days beforemeeting (CD Oct 23 p4), although that deadline can be waived bycommissioners.  Jan. 18 date hasn't been canceled formally, but FCCsources told us it surely will be.  Other Commission matters alsowill be delayed when govt. returns to work, they said, because noone has been around to work on issues, digest comments, etc.     Agency had scheduled Jan. 30 en banc session on spectrumissues to be chaired by Comr. Ness because of her special interest.At that meeting, new ways to allocate spectrum were to be discussedby invited witnesses.  Commission is required by law to meet atleast once each month and there's now talk that Jan. 30 sessionwill be considered as meeting for month.  However, since agencylegally can't put out notices or news releases duringbudget-mandated shutdown, any decisions must await its formalreturn to work, according to sources.     Among hardest hit by shutdown have been contractors, such asmaintenance, security, vending, transcription services.  MartinClark, pres. of ITS Inc. document service, said he's losing $20,000daily and has laid off all but 10 of his work force of 45.  A feware on board because auctions generated small amount of business,he said.  Clark said he kept his employees on payroll duringweek-long shutdown in Nov. but couldn't afford it in Dec. layoff.He said he doesn't expect to recoup losses because experience hasshown his average daily revenues of $20,000 "don't change" aftersnow days and other shutdowns.  ITS paid employees for ChristmasDay because "I just had to," Clark said.  "I'm angry, very angryabout this.  Millions of people across the United States that dowork for the government are hurt by this shutdown."     Although most FCC employees were sent home because of lack offunds, some were permitted to continue working on such things asauctions, court arguments and international matters (CD Dec 19 p2).FCC's Block C PCS auction began Dec. 18, first day of shutdown, andran through Dec. 21, when it took holiday recess.  SpecializedMobile Radio (SMR) auction also continued week of Dec. 18.  SMRauction resumes Jan. 2, Block C auction Jan. 5.  Auction staffcontinued to work last week.  Call to Auction Div. Fri. revealed "7or 8" employees were on board along with Wireless Bureau ChiefMichele Farquhar and Assoc. Bureau Chief Rosalind Allen in frontoffice.     We're told couple of staffers from Office of Legislative &Intergovernmental Affairs were in briefly Thurs. but were were gonenext day.  Gen. Counsel's office was staffed week of Dec. 18because 2 court arguments were held that week.  Common CarrierBureau now is nearly empty, with only one employee classified asessential to oversee network reliability;  same is case with MassMedia Bureau.  "I am literally the only person on this floor," saidFCC employee on 8th floor Fri.     Some commissioners have been seen entering and leavingbuilding from time to time during 2-week shutdown, not stayinglong, but according to law their personal staffs aren't permittedto work.  However, during Nov. shutdown, commissioners' stafferscontinued to work by telephone, mostly from their homes, and in atleast one case met in Va. home of Jane Mago, senior legal adviserto Comr. Chong, on children's issue in approval of Westinghousetakeover of CBS (CD Nov 20 p1).     Likely to be delayed by shutdown is approval of Disney Co.'s$19-billion purchase of Cap/ABC, which had been expected to be onagenda for Jan. 18 meeting.  Numerous deadlines for filing commentshave passed while Commission has been closed, including on AT&Trequest to be reclassified as nondominant carrier for internationalservices, Southwestern Bell request to be classified as nondominantprovider of interstate services and Ameritech request to assessend-user common line charges to resellers.  In addition tocomments, FCC will be hit with avalanche of petitions, complaintsand applications once agency reopens.  One lawyer said stacks ofpetitions cover table in his firm's conference room, all waiting tobe filed.  "I can't imagine the long lines that will form" at FCCfiling rooms once shutdown is over, PCIA Regulatory Dir. RobertHoggarth said.     Meanwhile, on Fri. President Clinton resumed meetings withSenate Majority Leader Dole (R-Kan.) and House Speaker Gingrich(R-Ga.) in effort to resolve budget issues.  Meetings were expectedto continue through New Year's weekend.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996HILL SAYS BROADCASTERS WON'T GET 'GIVEAWAY'     Republican congressional sources close to negotiations onbudget and telecom bills said Fri. that staff-level negotiationshave rejected White House proposal for broadcasters' early returnof analog spectrum in exchange for digital spectrum.  Sources saidno deal has been reached on spectrum issues as high-level talkscontinued at White House.  They also said that there would be "nogiveaways" to broadcasters as part of final budget deal.  Statementcontradicted assertion by Senate Majority Leader Dole (R-Kan.), whowas reported by Reuters Thurs. as objecting to what he called"giveaway" of spectrum to broadcasters.  Dole also said there wereproblems with telecom bill, but he wouldn't elaborate.     Sources said some published estimates of value of analogspectrum to be given back after conversion of broadcasting servicesto digital technology have been wildly exaggerated.  While somereports have put value of spectrum as high as $70 billion, sourcessaid figure is more in neighborhood of $6 billion.  That amount,they said, wouldn't include costs to society of having industry andconsumers convert to new technologies before either is ready.Negotiators also rejected White House proposal for $1-billionsubsidy to consumers to help them adjust to conversion throughpurchase of set-top boxes.  Forcing consumers and industry in shortterm to use technology that market hasn't found to be ready couldshort-circuit development of advanced TV (ATV) services, Hillsources said, adding that FCC has wide discretion to determinewhether ATV licenses should be awarded and what conditions shouldbe attached, including disposition of analog spectrum.     Dole's assertion that there were "3, 4 or 5 provisions" inbill that needed fixing also raised intriguing situation of havinghim contradict rest of Senate leadership, including CommerceCommittee Chmn. Pressler (R-S.D.) and senior committee DemocratHollings (D-S.C.), who said deal is in final form.  HouseRepublicans haven't accepted that, and still were working to makechanges, principally in sections that had been removed from billand that they wanted restored.     For example, House sources said that Senate wanted removal ofprovision that would preclude FCC from regulating Internet,provision that was in House bill but not in Senate's.  Housemeasure, sponsored by Reps. Cox (R-Cal.), Wyden (D-Ore.) and White(R-Wash.), passed by 420-4 as part of wider piece of bill alsoaimed at combating cyberporn.  Republican sources said debate onregulation provision revolved around argument that there's notelling what services Internet would carry in future, whether it becommon carrier, mass media or video now regulated by separatetitles of Communications Act.  It didn't make sense to "preemptregulation in perpetuity," sources said.  Sponsors were working tohave clauses restored.     Similarly, Rep. Oxley (R-O.) would like language revived thatwould lift restrictions on foreign ownership of common carrierlicenses.  Sources said there was no agreement between House andSenate on measure, so it was dropped because Senate language thatwould allow FCC to revoke licenses of foreign owners of U.S.businesses was "worse than nothing."  Conferees will begin toreceive conference report this week after returning from break.But some senators not only received it, but signed it, beforeleaving for Christmas.  It will be up to parliamentary experts todetermine status of conference report if lawmakers have signed,believing it to be final version, while others say it's still openfor discussion.  House sources said bill isn't final until majorityof conferees have voted for it, but at same time they don't expectmajor changes.     House sources said that bill "substantially reflects the workof the House" in conference, noting particularly requirement forfacilities-based competition pushed by Commerce Committee Chmn.Bliley (R-Va.), and checklist concept of Telecom Subcommittee Chmn.Fields (R-Tex.).  Other parts, however, were "watered down by theSenate," sources said, although Bliley believed that final productshould be supported.  Sources said House Speaker Gingrich (R-Ga.)hasn't directed that specific changes be made, although meetingsthis week may cover those subjects.  Gingrich and Majority LeaderArmey (R-Tex.) have said that problems with bill need to beresolved.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996CELLULAR MARKET GROWS 71.4% WITH ACCELERATED EXPANSION IN SOMENATIONS     Worldwide cellular market expanded 71.4% to 71.1 million frommid-1994 to middle of last year, fueled by triple-digit gains inemerging markets and healthy growth in industrial nations ofEurope, Asia, U.S. Commerce Dept. said in annual survey.  Through6 months, growth was 35.6% globally, up from 52.4 million at end of1994.  U.S. accounted for 43% of subscribers, followed by Japanwith 7.5%.  Scandinavian countries accounted for highestpenetration rates, in excess of 10%.     "Midyear worldwide cellular subscribers reveal that the marketis still growing at an incredible rate," said Stephanie McCullough,telecom analyst in Commerce's International Trade Administration(ITA).  "There are developments on the horizon which will surelyaccelerate that growth in several countries."     Competition in Japan and Israel spurred double-digit growth --122% in Japan and 110% in Israel, she said, as 2nd networksaccelerated subscriber base.  Similar trends are likely whenBelgium, Ireland, Korea, Taiwan and Poland introduce competitionthis year, she said in report.  Indonesia ended 25% import duty oncellular phones, which should cut prices from current $800-$2,500range and accelerate growth, McCullough said.     Small countries posted phenomenal growth "where theintroduction of wireless service is one way to meet the vastpent-up demand for telephones," she said.  Colombia (1,666%),Lebanon (1,100%), Bulgaria (723%), Ukraine (542%) and Belarus(500%) led world, but markets of Greece (162%), Spain (93%), Norway(76%) and Sweden (71%) also boomed, she said.     Million-user group includes U.S. (31 million), Japan (5.3million), U.K. (4.5 million), Germany (2.93 million), Italy (2.86million), China (2.5 million), Australia (2.4 million), Korea (1.4million) and France (1.1 million) as of mid-1994.  Poised to join:Thailand (983,000), Norway (800,000), Brazil (750,000), McCulloughsaid in report, available only on Internet on ITA homepage(http://www.ita.doc.gov).     Latest survey, issued as govt. shutdown began, said Chinesemarket could be most interesting this year, with UniCom buildingout Global System for Mobile network to compete with provincialnetworks.  Country will offer analysts opportunity to test dynamicof 2 govt.-owned systems in competition.  "China, too, holds hugepotential for cellular growth," McCullough said.  Delays inawarding licenses in India retard access to huge market, and use ofGSM technology could limit U.S. exports somewhat, she said.     National breakdown showed govt. delays in Haiti have pushedback award of national cellular license from late Sept. until earlythis year, and in Austria collapse of ruling govt. threatened delayin GSM tender offer.  In Australia, Spectrum Management Authorityis phasing out analog network with conversion to all-digitaltechnology by Jan. 2000, report showed, with users encouraged toshift to Telstra, Optus and Vodaphone GSM networks.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996     Ken Hughes, former dir.-operations & technical services, U.S.     Ken Hughes, former dir.-operations & technical services, U.S.Intelco Networks, joins Midcom Communications as vp-informationservices... Roland Arrington, dir.-benefits & trust fundadministration, Services Management Corp., unit of NTCA, promotedto vp-benefits & trust fund administration... David Ward, ex-LondonDaily Mail, joins Warren Publishing Inc. (WPI) as assoc. editor inN.Y. Bureau;  Tony Seideman, interim editor of WPI's ConsumerMultimedia Report, becomes consultant and contributing editor...Mike Grebb, ex-asst. editor of Communications Daily, named assoc.editor, Telecommunications Reports.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996     City of Baltimore has complained to American Personal     City of Baltimore has complained to American PersonalCommunications (APC) about interference from company's new PCSservice.  In Dec. 27 letter that also was sent to FCC, Md. AttorneyGeneral's office said APC's PCS service is harming communicationsservice that supports Baltimore's mass transit system.  UtilitiesTelecom Council (UTC), trade association that represents microwaveincumbents, said letter "validates the concerns that incumbentshave long expressed over the potential interference and severeservice disruption" that PCS could cause to microwave operators.City said that on at least 2 occasions, APC created such seriousinterference that Baltimore's communications links had to bererouted to telephone lines.  In both cases, it said, APCtransmitter was tuned improperly to interfering frequency.  Citysaid communications interruptions "posed a grave threat to publicsafety," particularly since police communications also werethreatened.  Letter comes as APC is negotiating with Baltimore torelocate city's communication system.  City said in letter that itwants reimbursement for costs it incurred "as the result of APC'snegligent failure to properly tune and operate its transmitter."Reimbursement can be either condition of future relocation orseparate payment if relocation agreement isn't reached, city said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996     CompuServe Pres. Robert Massey said Fri. he doesn't expect to     CompuServe Pres. Robert Massey said Fri. he doesn't expect toencounter opposition from other on-line services as result ofcompany's decision to block access to 200 Internet-based bulletinboards at request of German prosecutors.  In interview on CNBC,Massey said:  "CompuServe will comply with the law.  You will getno argument from other on-line service providers over that.  Thisis a major issue we are all wrestling with.  It's a verycontroversial issue."  Massey said that although some members haveposted comments critical of CompuServe's actions, he hasn't heardof any subscribers' dropping service.  He said CompuServe was inunique position compared with other on-line services because halfof its subscribers are outside of U.S.  List of banned sitescirculating on Internet included several containing pornographicphotos but appeared to be based on words in their title rather thancontent.  Some of banned areas include:  (1)Alt.sex.bestiality.barney, reference to children's programcharacter.  (2) Alt.sexy.bald.captains, homage to Star Trekcharacter Capt. Jean-Luc Picard.  Several have discussions of gayissues.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996     Police Telephones and Microwave agreed to acquire Telereunion     Police Telephones and Microwave agreed to acquire Telereunionfor $3.5 million in stock, nonvoting preferred stock worth $380,000and warrants, 2.6 million additional shares.  Telereunion operatesequipment and service business in Mexico.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996     APAC Telecommunications signed joint venture agreement for     APAC Telecommunications signed joint venture agreement forcellular system in Kaili City, Guizhou province in China, and willconstruct system using funding previously allocated to build inHubei province.  Company said it shifted funds at request ofGuizhou govt., which urged expansion of Kaili project.  Action onHubei system, which had been delayed by govt., will be reconsideredearly this year, officials said last week.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996     Pacific Telecommunications Council meeting Jan. 14-18 in     Pacific Telecommunications Council meeting Jan. 14-18 inHonolulu is expected to attract 1,400 participants from 60countries, including Pacific Rim nations, to discuss Internet andtelecom strategies.  U.S. Ambassador Vonya McCann, SingaporeTelecommunications Authority Dir. Gen. Lim Chuan Poh and India'sCenter for Development of Telematics Exec. Dir. Bishnu Pradhan areamong speakers.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996     N.C. Utilities Commission (NCUC) staff recommended that it     N.C. Utilities Commission (NCUC) staff recommended that itgrant certificates to SNET America and Time Warner Communicationsto become IXCs in state.  SNET's certificate would cover resale ofinterLATA long distance and Time Warner's would involve intraLATAlong distance services.  Comments on recommendation are due Jan. 8.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996     Ameritech cut Ind. monthly basic monthly rates 42 cents per     Ameritech cut Ind. monthly basic monthly rates 42 cents perline, reducing average residential bills $29.40 per year andbusiness bills $44.40 annually, company said.  Monthly charges willdrop $2.86 for most customers, average of 16% for residentialusers.  Ind. Utility Regulatory Commission approved Ameritechprogram in June 1994 and rates were cut upon approval and againlast Jan. 1.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996     Board of CBS parent Westinghouse Electric Fri. adopted "poison     Board of CBS parent Westinghouse Electric Fri. adopted "poisonpill" plan to be triggered in case of unfriendly takeover attempt.CEO Michael Jordan said move "is designed to enable the company andall of its shareholders to realize the potential from our recentacquisition of CBS and the other changes management has made toincrease shareholder value."  Shareholder rights under plan becomeeffective, with certain exceptions, when "acquiring entity"accumulates 15% or more of Westinghouse voting stock or announcesoffer to acquire more than 30%.  Holders then will be entitled topurchase Westinghouse stock or shares in "acquiring entity" at 1/2market value.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996     Galaxy Telecom said it completed 2 cable acquisitions, which     Galaxy Telecom said it completed 2 cable acquisitions, whichalong with 3 previous deals added 79,000 subscribers in 30 days.Latest deals are:  (1) Acquisition of systems with 18,000subscribers in Fla., Ga. and S.C. from Friendship Cable for $21million.  (2) Purchase of systems with 6,100 subscribers in Ala.,La., Miss. and Tenn. from Vista L.P.I. for $16.4 million.  Galaxyalso said it sold system with 2,000 subscribers in Me. for $2.7million.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996     City of Laredo and Time Warner (TW) were ordered to start     City of Laredo and Time Warner (TW) were ordered to startmediation proceedings in early Jan. by Texas state judge.  Citysued TW in dispute over transfer of its franchise to TW fromKBLCom, even though city refused to approve transfer (CD July 10p6).  Nicholas Miller, Washington attorney for Laredo, said partieshad agreed on temporary injunction to block transfer until TWoffered motion to dissolve injunction.  City offered countermotionto find receiver for system, but judge quashed both motions andturned injunction into preliminary injunction.  He said in orderthat city was likely to succeed on merits of case and setpreliminary court date in spring if mediation isn't successful.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996     Mass Media Financials:  Silver King Communications lost $3.3     Mass Media Financials:  Silver King Communications lost $3.3million in first quarter ended Nov. 30, vs. $31,000 loss year ago,largely because of $3.4-million restructuring charges.  Revenue wasflat at $11.6 million... Times Mirror said it will repurchase 3.475million shares of preferred stock, reducing 4th-quarter earnings$17.4 million.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996     USA Today Publisher Thomas Curley and General Motors Chmn.     USA Today Publisher Thomas Curley and General Motors Chmn.John Smale will keynote March 11-13 Advertising Research Foundation60th anniversary conference and research expo, N.Y. Hilton Hotel.Other speakers include CBS correspondent Lesley Stahl, Ad CouncilPres. Ruth Wooden, Hearst Magazines Pres. Claeys Bahrenburg.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996     Auction of Advanced Communications' former DBS permit to     Auction of Advanced Communications' former DBS permit tooperate 28 channels at 110 degrees W will be held at FCC auctionsite, 2 Mass. Ave. NW, Washington, 9 a.m., Jan. 24, FCC WirelessBureau said.  Immediately following that auction, Bureau will holdanother for 24-channel permit at 148 degrees W.  Applications andup-front payments ($10 million for 110 degrees slot and $2 millionfor 148 degrees slot) are due Jan. 19.  Bureau said payments willbe returned to unsuccessful bidders.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS DAILY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996     Honeywell Space Systems won contract to provide attitude and     Honeywell Space Systems won contract to provide attitude andorbit control components to Dornier, which manufactures Spacebussatellites with Aerospatiale.  Terms weren't disclosed.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-6IA086-000622-B035-178http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te133.html 205.156.212.5 19970122044746 text/html 11687HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:45:56 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:29 GMTContent-length: 11500Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te133.html Sample Issue Copyright COMMUNICATIONS TODAY via NewsNet January 2, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TODAY IN TELECOM (EXPANDED FEATURES) COMMUNICATIONS TODAY'S TOP STORIES OF THE YEAR (19 words) 1. TELECOM REFORM LEGISLATION (64 words) 2. THE PCS AUCTIONS (80 words) 3. AT&T RESTRUCTURING (46 words) 4. SPRINT/DEUTSCHE TELEKOM/FRANCE TELECOM ALLIANCE (105 words) 5. MCCAW PLUNKS MONEY INTO NEXTEL (34 words) 6. FRONTIER AND ALC MERGE (30 words) 7. DISNEY AND BELLS CREATE INTERACTIVE VENTURE (64 words) 8. ROCHESTER BECOMES LABORATORY FOR LOCAL COMPETITION (66 words) 9. MCI ALLIES WITH NEWS CORP. (92 words) 10. PAGING INDUSTRY MARKS YEAR OF CONSOLIDATION (55 words) COMMUNICATIONS TODAY'S FOCUS ON WORLD TELECOM NEWS FOCUS ON WORLD TELECOM NEWS (496 words) CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996COMMUNICATIONS TODAY'S TOP STORIES OF THE YEAR     Here are some of the top-10 stories from the past year, asdetermined by the editors of COMMUNICATIONS TODAY:Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 19961.   TELECOM REFORM LEGISLATION     It is not quite a done deal yet, but it certainly has dominatedthe headlines during the past 12 months.  The Senate passed itstelecom bill (S. 652) in June, and the House followed suit in August(H.R. 1555).  A 45-member conference committee now is trying to workout--once and for all--sticky issues such as foreign ownership andpublic utility company entry into telecom.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 19962.   THE PCS AUCTIONS     The FCC's auction of 99 broadband PCS licenses (the "A"- and "B"-blocks), which ended March 13 after 112 rounds of bidding, depositedmore than $7 billion into the government's coffers.  The next round--the "C"-block auction--was scheduled to begin 75 days later, but dueto a series of long, drawn-out court challenges, the auctions didn'tactually get underway until Dec. 18, more than nine months later. Four rounds were completed before the holiday recess, with bidsreaching $1.2 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 19963.   AT&T RESTRUCTURING     The long-distance giant stunned Wall Street in late Septemberwith the news that it was restructuring its single corporation intothree separate entities:  communications services, communicationsequipment and transaction-intensive computing.  Chairman Robert Allensaid the move is the "next logical turn in AT&T's journey sincedivestiture."Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 19964.   SPRINT/DEUTSCHE TELEKOM/FRANCE TELECOM ALLIANCE     The FCC approved the sale of 20 percent of Sprint Corp. toDeutsche Telekom and France Telecom last month, nearly a year and ahalf after the deal was originally announced.  The foreign telcos eachwill acquire 10 percent interests in Sprint as part of the Phoenixalliance that will offer global telecom services.  Sprint also isexpected to earmark part of the funds for its broadband personalcommunications services (PCS) venture.  Sprint also announced in 1995that it was spinning off its cellular unit.  Analysts said thecellular company, which has more than 1.2 million customers, is worthbetween $3.6 billion and $5 billion.  Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 19965.   MCCAW PLUNKS MONEY INTO NEXTEL     Cellular pioneer Craig McCaw shocked the telecommunications worldwhen he announced that he and his family would invest more than $1billion in Nextel Communications Inc., the Rutherford, N.J.-basedspecialized mobile radio (SMR) provider.  Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 19966.   FRONTIER AND ALC MERGE     Frontier Corp. and ALC Communications announced in April thatthey were merging to create the fifth largest interexchange carrier(IXC) in the country.  Frontier paid approximately $1.8 billion forALC.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 19967.   DISNEY AND BELLS CREATE INTERACTIVE VENTURE     The Walt Disney Co., Ameritech Corp., BellSouth Corp. and SBCCommunications announced in April that they were sinking $500 millionduring the next five years into a venture that will create programmingto be played via the three regional holding companies' (RHCs) videodialtone (VDT) networks.  The venture will rival the Tele-TV ventureformed by Pacific Telesis Group, Bell Atlantic Corp. and NYNEX Corp..Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 19968.   ROCHESTER BECOMES LABORATORY FOR LOCAL COMPETITION     Rochester, N.Y., became the site for the first true test ofcompetition in the local telephone service marketplace.  AT&T and TimeWarner Inc. jumped into the city's local marketplace to challengeincumbent provider Frontier Corp..  While Frontier declared the test asuccess, AT&T and Time Warner complained that they could not turn aprofit by reselling Frontier's local service for 95 percent of theretail price.  Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 19969.   MCI ALLIES WITH NEWS CORP.     MCI Communications Corp. and Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. launchedan alliance that will mesh the strengths of the two companies tocreate information, education and entertainment services forbusinesses and consumers worldwide.  The companies each will invest$200 million into the as-yet-unnamed venture.   The nation's secondlargest long-distance company certainly had a busy 1995, acquiring SHLSystemhouse Inc. [SHKIF], a Canadian-based information technologyservices provider, for about $1 billion, and Nationwide CellularService Inc. [NCEL] for $190 million.  MCI also plans to buy an equitystake in News Corp. for $2 billion.  Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 199610.  PAGING INDUSTRY MARKS YEAR OF CONSOLIDATION     Mergers and acquisitions highlighted 1995 for the pagingindustry.  The biggest-ever merger in the industry occurred inSeptember, when MobileMedia Corp. bought BellSouth Corp.'s MobileCommfor $945 million to become the second-largest paging provider in thecountry.  Arch Communications Group purchased USA MobileCommunications for more than $450 million and Westlink Paging for $340million.  Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS TODAY via NewsNetJanuary 2, 1996FOCUS ON WORLD TELECOM NEWS     A Hong Kong-based investment company has become the latestforeign player to step into China's tightly restricted telecom market,with plans to develop a $20 million global system for mobilecommunications (GSM) for second national carrier Lian TongTelecommunications Corp.      CNK Telecommunications Services (CTS) is forming an equity jointventure with Zhong Shan Group and China Unicom Equipment Co to financeand build the network in Nanjing. The system, which will have aninitial capacity of 20,000 subscribers, will be operated by Lian Tong. However, the agreement provides for consultancy and maintenanceservices to allow CTS to monitor the disbursement of project finance.      China currently prohibits foreign direct investment in telecomnetworks as well as participation in the operation and management oftelecom services on the Mainland.      Like other similar Lian Tong projects, the CTS joint venture hasnot yet been approved by the government nor has it been formallyincorporated.  To date, the government only has approved similarinvestments by Nextel Communications Inc. in the Lian Tong ShanghaiGSM network and another GSM project in Suzhou involving SingaporeTelecom.  Other projects involving players such as Ameritech Corp.,Telstra and Hongkong Telecom still are waiting approval. CTS was setup by a private independent investment company, EK Investment Group,to invest in telecom projects in China.  CTS will have an 80 percentstake in the Lian Tong venture, with the remainder held by the Chinesepartners. BroadVision Lands Hong Kong Deal     On-line software company BroadVision Inc. plans aggressiveexpansion into Asia this year, following its selection by HongkongTelecom as a strategic supplier for a $1.28 billion interactivemultimedia services network.  The system, which is scheduled to go online in July, will deliver video on demand, home shopping and otherinteractive on-line services to 80 percent of Hong Kong's 1.61 millionTV households within five years.      The Los Altos, Calif.-based company hopes Asian business willaccount for more than 30 percent of its revenues by the end of 1996. As part of that effort, it plans to announce local partnershipsagreements and "significant" expansion plans into China in the comingweeks, according to CEO Pehong Chen.    BroadVision is providing thebusiness operational support system for the Hongkong Telecom project.Chen declined to comment on the progress of contract negotiations withHongkong Telecom.   However, William Lo, managing director of HongkongTelecom IMS Ltd., said negotiations over "minor" details have delayedfinal agreement on most of the supplier contracts. Lo did note thatwork is continuing despite the ongoing contract discussions.     Contracts have yet to be signed with Hongkong Telecom's other keysuppliers: Fujitsu Ltd and Iwatani International Corp., which areproviding the asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) and access networksystems; Hewlett Packard Asia Pacific Ltd., which is supplying thegateways and media servers; Sybase Inc., which beat out Oracle Corp.for the middleware contract; and NEC Corp., which is supplying set topboxes.  Lo hopes these contracts will be signed early next year. Back to Headline List WT03-B12-7IA086-000622-B035-238http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te23.html 205.156.212.5 19970122044826 text/html 189203HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:46:07 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:06 GMTContent-length: 189015Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te23.html Sample Issue Copyright COMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNet January 1, 1996 Issue 590 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TOP OF THE NEWS DMTF Alters Mgm't Course (866 words) SCO Unix to Get New Kernel (1004 words) TECH TRENDS: WEB INTERGRATION: CALL CENTERS GO ON-LINE (892 words) Frame-Relay Bargain Hunt (924 words) Buying Into Objects -- Illustra will give Informix key database technology (794 words) Study Critiques New Mail Systems (422 words) Banyan Banking on Back-to-Basics Strategy (736 words) Interview: Directing IBM's Server Strategy (1100 words) ATM Gear to Support SVC -- StrataCom to emphasize extemporaneous connections, security for ATM switches (544 words) Congress Continues To Tinker With Bill (416 words) New Year Ushers In More Urgent Role for Nets (1296 words) Blending Tech Into OpenDoc (585 words) WorldCom Extends Frame-Relay Services (242 words) In Brief: TELCO MEGA-MERGERS IN STORE? (54 words) In Brief: THE BALL DROPS WITHOUT NEW NOTES (89 words) In Brief: CISCO KILLS BUG (91 words) In Brief: OSF RELEASES JAVA FOR UNIXWARE (73 words) In Brief: NOVELL UPDATES WIN 95 CLIENT (60 words) In Brief: NLM GIVES WEB ACCESS (70 words) In Brief: APPLE TAKES BITE OUT OF UNIX (63 words) In Brief: PROBING FDDI (58 words) PRODUCT TESTING -- HANDS ON MICROSOFT STRIKES BACK -- Besieged by Netscape, BackOffice delivers a powerful and reliable NT-based Web server (947 words) NETWORK APPLICATIONS CrossWind Multithreads (216 words) Sybase Previews App Upgrade (242 words) EDA/SQL Gets Messaging Middleware (164 words) In Brief: REMOTEWARE IN SFA APPLICATION (40 words) In Brief: BETTER VIDEO ON TCP/IP NETWORKS (40 words) In Brief: WIN 95 API FOR FAXING (55 words) In Brief: OPTIX RUNS DIGITAL ALPHA (54 words) LOCAL AREA NETWORKS Banyan's New TCP/IP Backs Win 95 (459 words) New UnixWare on Tap (554 words) IBM Support Uncertain for Warp Connect (288 words) In Brief: LEGATO ACQUIRES STORAGE WARES (49 words) In Brief: MICROPLEX ADDS NEST SUPPORT (62 words) In Brief: NEC CUTS PRICES, ON READERS (70 words) In Brief: GROUPE BULL NAMES U.S. CEO (47 words) INTERNETWORKING Microsoft Hones In on IP (391 words) Translation Feature on Its Way -- Hypercom to bundle legacy TCP gateway into routers and FRADs (214 words) SMC Unveils Hub, Switch (212 words) In Brief: SWITCH OFFERS FAST ETHERNET (48 words) In Brief: REMOTE-ACCESS KIT UNVEILED (55 words) In Brief: MCGILL DEBUTS PC-TO-HOST PACK (78 words) In Brief: ATM TEST DRIVE FROM CROSSCOMM (30 words) WAN SERVICES & EQUIPMENT FCC OKs Sprint's European Plans (404 words) Alliance to Extend Data Services to Users (248 words) Deal Targets Desktop Services (202 words) In Brief: NETWORK NOTES FOR COMMERCE (54 words) In Brief: BELLSOUTH INKS AGREEMENT (48 words) In Brief: SPRINT TO BEGIN PAGING SERVICE (45 words) In Brief: LCI INTERNATIONAL EXPANDS ITS TURF (72 words) THE INTERNET Internet Scanner Ported to Win NT (499 words) Hummingbird Enhances Columbus Software (299 words) In Brief: DELRINA OFFERS BROWSER WARE (95 words) In Brief: NETWARE WEB SERVER SHIPS (51 words) In Brief: VRML BUNDLED INTO CHAMELEON (88 words) NETWORKING MANAGEMENT Ganymede Lets Its Chariot Ride (293 words) Clientele Boosts Wares -- Help-desk features enhance suite of automation tools (274 words) Trellis Debuts Services Suite (173 words) In Brief: AXON SHIPS WAN MGM'T PROBE (51 words) In Brief: ELIMINATING BOTTLENECKS (64 words) In Brief: MICRO DESIGN'S STORAGE SOLUTION (46 words) In Brief: CHARGEBACK TOOL SET (49 words) Management Insight: RESOLUTIONS? BAH, HUMBUG! HERE'S AN ENTERPRISE MGM'T WISH LIST INSTEAD (529 words) OPINION Editorial: MIDDLEWARE TO BOOST APP SMARTS IN '96 (360 words) Inside Perspective: NETWORK MANAGERS FACE A CHALLENGING YEAR (519 words) Letters to the Editor: ISDN EVERYWHERE (193 words) Letters to the Editor: BEHIND THE TIMES (123 words) Letters to the Editor: GETTING THE MESSAGE OUT (243 words) Letters to the Editor: MISSING THE MARK (352 words) CLOSEUP -- MANAGEMENT THE CHANGING ROLE OF THE NETWORK MANAGER -- As networks become strategic corporate assets, business savvy becomes key to most managers' success (2011 words) TECHNOLOGY: WHAT'S ON THEIR MINDS? (396 words) HE'S IN THE DRIVER'S SEAT (330 words) NETWORKING BUSINESS Industry Insight: Understanding the 'Net's Business Model (473 words) Xylan Moves on Fast Track (361 words) Troops Benefit From Key Software (316 words) Scopus Builds Help-Desk Operations (326 words) In Brief: FINANCING (155 words) TOP OF THE NEWS Ward Off Virus Invasions -- Central House's MimeSweeper helps isolate infected documents (301 words) LOGOUT Case Ventura, Net Detective: Buyouts & Binges In the New Year (440 words) Rash's Judgement: MY EDITOR MADE ME DO IT: GUESSING WHAT'S HOT IN NETWORKING THIS YEAR (638 words) CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590DMTF Alters Mgm't CourseBy:BETH DAVISIn a move that will delay the management of remote desktops,the Desktop Management Task Force has scrapped its work ona pivotal specification, opting instead for a standards-basedapproach.The group last week said it has stopped working on its RemoteDesktop Management Interface, slated for completion by thenew year.Instead, the task force is now advocating the use of remoteprocedure calls as the best approach for sending and accessinginformation about the desktop across distributed networks.The change of heart has slowed the DMTF's progress on a remotespecification, and network managers were divided on whetherthe move will prove advantageous."I think it's a positive move to go with standards that arealready out there,'' said Arnold Howard, a senior PC LAN analystat a large financial institution in Boston. "Why reinvent thewheel? Even if it doesn't have all the bells and whistles,you end up with a broader base of customers and products."Others see potential pitfalls. A single specification-like theoriginal RDMI-would ensure that the industry follows one setof guidelines and applications vendors would have to writecode for only one method of communications.Allowing use of different RPCs as the pipeline between the clientand server will force third-party vendors to either choosewhich RPC they want to support or include code for all theRPCs in their applications, said Glen Farrell, LAN system coordinatorat Firestone Textiles Co., Woodstock, Ontario."When it's multiple choice, it is not a standard. And RPCs areproprietary solutions, even if they are widely implemented,''said Rick Sturm, a principal at the Enterprise Management Institute,San Francisco, and a network manager at one of the Bell companies."From a user's perspective, as long as the functionality isthere and you are able to exchange information even if youare using more than one management application, it shouldn'tmatter," said Ki Wilson, a senior microcomputer analyst atStone Container Corp., Chicago. "But since there is not a dominantRPC on the market, that leaves an open-ended question for thevendors as to which one to support."DMTF chairman Ed Arrington said the switch keeps pace with theorganization's goals and objectives. "It is kind of a stepback, but we really want the market to make the decision here.We don't want to be in the business of telling people whatto do," he said. "We're not a standards-forcer.''In fact, that was the reason DMTF initially hesitated on a specificationthat outlined a common way to access or send DMI informationacross the network. The group had hoped the industry wouldsettle on a de facto standard.Without a remoting specification, however, users must rely onproprietary mechanisms to pass the management information thatis gathered by DMI across the network. When the industry failedto rally around a single method, DMTF decided to develop itsown.Since work began on the RDMI, several DMTF members have proposedalternatives.Last September, two proposals were presented: Distributed ComputingEnvironment, an IBM- and Microsoft Corp.-backed RPC; and theCommon Agent technology developed by IBM, Sun MicrosystemsInc. and several other companies.After considering all options, DMTF decided on a ProceduralInterface, which Arrington said is "an easily remotable interfacethat uses standard RPCs.''Although the interface requires use of an RPC, it does not specifywhich RPC to use. DMTF likely will allow the use of at leastthree different RPCs, including DCE, Sun's Open Network Computingand Novell Inc.'s Transport Independent RPC, Arrington said.The interface enables an RPC to set up a pipeline between themanagement application and the managed desktop. Like the originalRDMI, it will work with any connection, whether it is a LAN,WAN or telephone link.And though the work is several months behind DMTF's originaltarget of December 1995, using RPCs as the remoting technologycould mean products come to market faster. Many applicationsship with RPCs already embedded in them; for example, MicrosoftWindows 95 includes support for DCE.The interface document has been drafted and is now undergoinga second revision. It is expected to be completed in the nextfew months, Arrington said.In addition to the RPC remoting method, DMTF is completing itswork on the Simple Network Management Protocol-to-DMI mappingagent. The technology will let SNMP applications manage DMIcompliant systems.Although both the Procedural Interface and the SNMP-to-DMI mappingagent are expected to be completed before the second half of1996, Arrington said, they will be published with DMI 2.0,which is slated to be introduced in March."Rolling those up into DMI 2.0 is going to provide a tight,fully integrated, really powerful architecture,'' Arringtonsaid.The next version of DMI includes several clarifications andimprovements, such as enhanced mapping technology and the additionof an event model.In addition, the DMTF this month will publish a formal productregistry that lists products that have undergone and passedDMI-compliance tests.The DMTF can be reached at http://www.dmtf.org or 503-264-9300.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590SCO Unix to Get New KernelBy:EVAN SCHUMANAiming to combine the best of two worlds for PC Unix users,The Santa Cruz Operation Inc. is preparing a version of Unixthat will blend its popular OpenServer user interface and developertools with the guts of Novell Inc.'s UnixWare.And though the project has the same code name-Gemini-as Novell'sformer plan to merge UnixWare with NetWare at the microkernel,SCO's strategy will abandon the so-called "SuperNOS" idea infavor of a purer Unix approach, with NetWare technologies addedonly for networking support.Analysts and Unix OEMs said SCO's plan makes sense, and couldproduce a server platform that carries with it a substantialinstalled base and user familiarity, strong weapons in SCO'sbattle with Microsoft Windows NT, the foremost competitor toUnix in the Intel-based application server arena.Tim Sheppard, PLC operating systems product manager in the serversystem division at U.K.-based ICL, said he found the proposeddivision of technologies for the merged Unix to be an idealcombination."In terms of APIs [application programming interfaces] and interms of the user interface, I think it is a very logical wayof doing it," he said. "If it's done correctly, there is greatpotential to get the best use of both."Ever since the announcement last September that Novell wouldsell Unix to Santa Cruz, Calif.-based SCO, technical managersfrom both companies have been meeting to hammer out which elementsof their respective operating systems would survive in theultimate merged release, a product SCO plans to ship in early1997.The ultimate overriding concern was retaining existing independentsoftware vendor support, an area where SCO claimed a substantialedge over Novell. SCO estimates that OpenServer has been outsellingUnixWare 2-to-1, with 12,000 applications shipping for OpenServer, compared with 850 for UnixWare, according to Jeff Ait,SCO's vice president in charge of transition.The strength of Novell's (and now SCO's) UnixWare is that itis based on more advanced technology-namely, Unix System VRelease 4.2 (SVR4.2). SCO's OpenServer line was based on aprevious version of Unix, SVR3.2. So what SCO will combinein the Gemini version of Unix, according to discussions withSCO executives and Unix OEMs, are more advanced capabilitiesof UnixWare. These include the SVR4.2-based kernel, as wellas its device drivers and multiprocessing support, securityand kernel-level threads, along with the attributes of OpenServerthat most attracted ISVs, such as its graphical user interfaceand its systems administration tools. For years, SCO has optednot to license any version of SVR4, preferring to stay withthe older license and replicating most of the SVR4 capabilitieswith its own code. But the Novell deal changed all that, analystssaid."It sounds like they are really delivering on what they committedto," said Tracy Corbo, a senior research analyst at InternationalData Corp., Framingham, Mass. "They are actually taking thisto the next stage."The rules have changed. The whole game has changed," Corbosaid. SCO "now owns Unix" and the battle will be MicrosoftWindows NT versus Unix, rather than OpenServer versus UnixWare.With Microsoft as a clear competitor, SCO's decision to go withUnixWare's multiprocessor implementation is significant. NThas been having difficulty scaling cleanly, as has NetWare,while UnixWare has proven itself much more stable in high-endIntel multiprocessor systems.The lead SCO's OpenServer enjoys in third-party applicationssupport made the choice of an interface an easy one. "As aplatform, SCO was outselling UnixWare, so it would absolutelymake sense that they went with OpenServer as a GUI," said DavidWatson, marketing manager at Informix Software Inc., one ofthe largest UnixWare and OpenServer ISVs.The change that SCO executives endorse most is the death ofNovell's SuperNOS concept. SuperNOS was a Novell proposal essentiallyto merge UnixWare and NetWare using a microkernel approach.SCO chief technical officer Doug Michels criticized the NovellSuperNOS concept, saying Novell announced it before it figuredout how the concept would work. "They had a plan, which reallywasn't a plan: It was a goal," he said.Although the next version of UnixWare integrates many of the morepopular features of NetWare-such as file, print and NetWareDirectory Services support, which also will be included in theGemini version of Unix-it falls far short of SuperNOS.One of the reasons SCO is going out of its way to distance itselffrom SuperNOS is because OEMs have told SCO that talk of SuperNOSprompted several ISVs to hesitate to embrace the next versionof UnixWare.Gerald Kerr, software product marketing manager at Unisys Corp.'sPersonal Computer division, a leading Unix OEM, said when Novellfirst started talking up SuperNOS, "Unix users saw this tunnel.And when these Unix users looked down the tunnel, they sawthese great big words: NetWare."Kerr said users felt as if Novell was treating UnixWare as littlemore than a migration for Unix users to move to NetWare.With SCO, which has been championing Unix since its inception,it is different, Kerr said. "Now those Unix users are startingto look into the tunnel and they're seeing the word 'Unix,'not 'UnixWare' or 'Unix Something Else.' "Scott McGregor, SCO's senior vice president for products, saidalthough SCO will continue to use many NetWare capabilities,the company is stopping short of claiming that one operatingsystem can handle everything equally well. "We're not sayingwe're going to be as good at file and print," he said.Compatibility ToolsSCO is also preparing a set of compatibility tools designedto move users from the next UnixWare and OpenServer productsto Gemini. But the move won't be effortless."There's no way around the fact that OpenServer folks will haveto do some level of work" to port their applications to theGemini-merged Unix release, said Bob Sprowls, director of servermarketing at Unisys Corp., headquartered in Blue Bell, Pa.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590TECH TRENDS: WEB INTERGRATION: CALL CENTERS GO ON-LINEBy:MARGIE SEMILOFA few network managers are looking to bring the same "page-pop"principles used in computer-telephony applications to the Web.Although industry pundits agree this is not a technology thatwill take hold overnight, some managers of large call centersbelieve they can extend their service offerings by giving online customers a way to speak directly to a service representative.Robert MacRae at First Union Corp., a Charlotte, N.C., bank,is one such manager. He wants to use Edify Corp.'s ElectronicWorkforce application-development software to build Web applicationsthat give Individual Retirement Account customers a live agentcallback in response to a query from the Web.First Union already operates a call center for 400,000 IRA customers,as well as a Web site that posts information on the bank'sIRA services. It is looking for a way to bridge the two."Customers on the Internet get more information than those callingin" on the voice-response unit, MacRae says. "But if someoneon the Web server has a question or a problem, we want themto be able to click on a button and have their call transferredto a representative, who can read from the same Web page."Other managers also say they are interested in integrating callcenters with Web servers, though most aren't as far along inplans."We are looking at ways to use live call-center reps to supportthe provision of financial services on the Web," says RichardGraham, vice president of telebanking administration at SignetBanking Corp., Richmond, Va. "As to how that is done, we willexperiment. This [Edify] may be part of the answer, or ouranswer may be as simple as a fax back or E-mail in responseto a question.""We are just now looking into making our products availableto the public on the Internet," says Greg Johnston, managerof integrated networks at Household Credit Services, Salinas,Calif. "This Web call-center idea does pose interesting possibilities."Edify's SolutionEdify, a Santa Clara, Calif., software developer, is doing itsbest to make it as intriguing as possible. The company patentedan element to its Electronic Workforce application developmentsoftware last November that delivers what it calls "Web telephonyintegration.""In the long term, I think, this has a chance to redefine callcenters,'' says Charles Jolissant, Edify's chief technologyofficer.Electronic Workforce uses smart software agents to build interactiveresponse systems. Electronic Workforce sits on an IBM OS/2server. The server sits on the network between phones and aWeb server. Edify officials say versions for additional platformsalso are in the works.The telephony-integration software creates a Web session forthe call-center agent, giving the agent access to the sameinformation as the customer. Edify is also looking at waysfor the customer and agent to share information on-line.Target applications include anywhere users browsing a Web pagemay want additional information. For example, catalog shopperslogged into a Web server may see an interesting item, but theymay find that the Web page does not answer all of their questions.Developers can place a "call-me" button on the page that, onceclicked, alerts an agent from the catalog company's call center.Moments later the agent can call the customer to help closethe sale.Linking MechanismsThere are two basic technical components that make it possibleto link a Web server to a PBX. The first is telephone control,which is handled through computer-telephony-integration softwaresuch as Northern Telecom Inc.'s Meridian Link or AT&T's ASAIsoftware-on the PBX.But there also must be a way to get transaction informationto the call-center agent's desktop. One way is to develop acustom application. Another is to use a Web browser to go throughthe Electronic Workforce for the transaction information.Despite this early enthusiasm for linking Web sites to callcenters, analysts said they are skeptical about the approach'sviability any time soon. They cite numerous unresolved technicalproblems, Internet-related and otherwise."One issue is how do you establish a phone call and live linkto the screen, since the target customer is probably a consumerwith one phone line," says David Goodtree, an analyst at ForresterResearch Inc., a Cambridge, Mass.-based consulting company.The Internet itself poses several problems, says Bart Stuck,president of Business Strategies, a Westport, Conn., consultingcompany."The Internet is an unmanaged network and callback times arelikely to be unpredictable," he says. "Can the Web providethe quality of service someone with a customer-service applicationis looking for, or are you better off with something that isprivate and dedicated?"Some users with sophisticated call centers are also skeptical.At Holiday Inn Worldwide, Atlanta, customers can reserve hotelrooms via the Holiday Inn Web site. Les Ottolinghi, directorof emerging technologies at the hotel chain, says giving customersaccess to an on-line chat room is a better way to answer theirquestions than having them switch to a telephone."Using intelligent agents to search a database is more important,"Ottolinghi says. "If for some reason a customer has to talkto a person, they are better off going right to the call centerin the first place."Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Frame-Relay Bargain HuntBy:JOHN RENDLEMANLooking for a frame-relay bargain? Now may be the best timefor some shrewd negotiating, industry experts say.That's because it's still unclear whether an FCC mandate forcarriers to file tariffs for frame-relay services, startingnext month, will crimp their ability to cut good deals.Already fierce competition among long-distance carriers hasput users in the driver's seat. But with service providersoffering complicated incentives, discounts and special offers,users must carefully consider frame-relay service contracts,industry experts said.For frame-relay service "customers are knowledgeable enoughto get a good deal, but the shopping process is so complexthat getting the best deal is difficult,'' according to StevenTaylor, president of Distributed Networking Associates, a Greensboro,N.C., consulting company.GAB Robins North America Inc. got a favorable frame-relay dealfrom Sprint a year ago, after carefully renegotiating the ratesand terms of Sprint's standard frame-relay contract, said CarlLongo, director of telecommunications at the Parsippany, N.J.based insurance company."Since then, when I've talked to other potential Sprint framerelay customers, they hadn't thought of a lot of things I toldthem to think about,'' Longo said. "They don't look at theterms of the contract very closely. They just look at the standardagreement and sign on the bottom line.''Customers who use competition to their advantage can negotiateup-front financial credits, substantial discounts off carriers'standard rates, initial waivers of minimum volume commitments,free installation and free service for an initial month ormore, according to attorneys at Levine, Blaszak, Block & Boothby,a Washington law firm that helps large companies negotiatetelecommunications-service contracts."If I had to give potential frame-relay customers one pieceof advice, it would be to use the market,'' said James Blaszak,a partner at the law firm. "The only way to figure out whereframe-relay prices bottom out is to use competitive bids.''As an example of the competitive environment, MCI CommunicationsCorp. often gives users with small-to-medium-sized networksfree installation and volume and term discounts ranging from4 percent to 30 percent, said William Callahan, senior managerof broadband data marketing at MCI.A second level of higher but unspecified discounts offered byMCI on a customer-specific basis kicks in if a customer spendsanywhere from around $15,000 a month or more on frame-relayor if the customer has a substantial amount of other trafficon MCI's network, according to Callahan.Three Months' Free ServiceIn addition, MCI offers up to three months of free service forcustomers who want to try frame-relay service or who want tocompare MCI's frame-relay service in a side-by-side test againstanother carrier's, according to Callahan.Sprint has a different approach, trying to avoid promotionalrates, said Brad Hokamp, director of advanced data servicesat Sprint, although he added that "in specific cases, therewill be times when we are pressed to do that.''Sprint's volume and term discounts, which range from 5 percentto 30 percent, are part of its standard frame-relay rates andwill be included in Sprint's frame-relay tariff once the FCC'stariff rules take effect, Hokamp said."The price level overall in the [frame-relay] marketplace willdecline a certain percentage in the next one to two years,''Hokamp said. Once the tariff rules are in place, however, "therewill be a decline in the number of special deals that you willsee, but it won't be significant,'' he said.Although officials at AT&T and LDDS WorldCom, the network-servicesdivision of Worldcom Inc., Jackson, Miss., declined to commenton their frame-relay incentives, evidence suggests that they,too, offer lower prices to compete for specific customers.'Very Aggressive'"AT&T was very aggressive in their pricing strategy with us,''said Bob Beck, director of enabling technology services atInacom Corp., an Omaha, Neb.-based provider of computer andcommunications systems and services.Inacom received "a very agreeable discount'' on AT&T's standardrates, Beck said. Although Beck declined to provide an exactfigure, "the number is very competitive with the numbers wereceived from their competitors,'' he said.Today's environment of secrecy about frame-relay rates is expectedto end next month, when service providers will tariff theirframe-relay transport services to comply with a recent FCCdecision classifying frame-relay as a basic service that mustbe tariffed.Public RecordAlthough industry analysts differ on whether tariffing willhelp or hurt frame-relay customers, they agree it will providea public record of the carriers' standard rates. And thoughcarriers still will be able to make special deals, the ratescontained in those deals will have to be tariffed individually,the analysts said.That could either hurt customers, by making the providers reluctantto lower their rates beyond a certain level, or help customers,by letting them compare rates paid by other customers in similarsituations.For now, Levine, Blaszak, Block & Boothby advises clients todisregard carriers' quoted rates for frame-relay service becausesavvy customers, especially those with larger networks, cansave substantially by negotiating individual deals.Limited-time promotions are also of questionable value, becausethey don't reduce the rates a customer pays for the life ofa contract, attorneys at the firm said.Looking to the bottom line, the law firm advises potential framerelay customers to seek bids from numerous providers, compareactual rates and keep contract terms to a minimum in case framerelay rates continue to decrease.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Buying Into Objects -- Illustra will give Informix key databasetechnologyBy:MARTIN MARSHALLWith its acquisition of Illustra Information Technologies Inc.,Informix Software Inc. could leapfrog giants Oracle Corp.,IBM and Sybase Inc. in the race to integrate management ofmultimedia data objects in networked environments.Through the acquisition, announced late last month and valuedat more than $400 million, Informix gained technology thatlets users create, store, manage and analyze complex data types,such as images, audio, video and World Wide Web documents intraditional relational database management systems.Although the user base of such data is somewhat specialized,the potential market has spurred other leading database vendorsto claim they, too, will be able to support similar functionalityin the near future.Oracle, Redwood Shores, Calif., has already committed itselfto an object-relational model with its next-generation database,Oracle8 (CommWeek, Aug. 21), while IBM is working on addingnew data types to DB2.And Sybase Inc., Emeryville, Calif., has been quietly researchingadding object management to RDBMS server technology for fouryears, according to company insiders.Officials at Informix and Illustra said the Universal Server,a merged object-relational database combining the technologiesof the two companies, would be delivered by the end of 1996.Sanjeev Barma, research director for the Gartner Group Inc.in Stamford, Conn., sees the ability to customize data typesand processes as the most important part of the object-relationalparadigm."Object-relational technology is going to be for 'Type A' companiesvery aggressive ones that do much of their own programming,"he said.What Illustra lacks is what Informix has: on-line transactionprocessing capabilities, multithreading, scalability to multipleparallel-processing servers, enterprise-level reliability andabout 25 percent of the existing Unix-based relational databasemarket.'Good Complement'"Informix is a good complement to Illustra in that [Informix]is highly scalable, reliability-tuned and massively parallel,"said Linda Dozier, chief technologist at America Online Inc.'sNaviSoft Inc. division in Santa Barbara, Calif. NaviSoft isIllustra's biggest customer, using the Illustra Server as thedriving engine for AOL's Naviserver Web server."With AOL's on-line users growing at 30 percent per month, weneed that scalability," Dozier said.The particular segments of the market that Oakland, Calif.-basedIllustra may add to Informix include the image and multimediamanagement sectors. Illustra extends the search capabilitiesto include the contents of images, rather than just the textkeys that have been entered along with images."From what I've read of Oracle8, it can't search within the[multimedia] data types," said Steve Sommer, vice presidentof marketing at Informix, Menlo Park, Calif. "We will be ableto search for images similar to a given image, with searchesbased upon color, form and text."Another Illustra user, Larry White, publisher of Hyperzine,a World Wide Web-based magazine for professional photographers,uses both Illustra's Web Data Blade and fuzzy search enginein his implementation of Hyperzine."People can do a fuzzy search on the word camcorder and comeup with a review of a palmcorder, even though the review didnot contain the word camcorder," White said. White is not yetusing the image-form search capabilities of the Illustra database.A Question of MeshingIn bringing these capabilities to an Informix product, the underlyingquestion for Informix and Illustra engineers may be one ofhow readily the two companies' technologies will mesh."Before the acquisition, engineers from both of our companiesdid a great deal of work to validate that our code bases couldbe married together," said Bruce Gordon, vice president ofmarketing at Illustra. "We feel very confident that we'll beable to bring in the combined product by the end of the year.""It's not a slam dunk," said Herb Edelstein, a partner at EuclidAssociates in Potomac, Md. "Each of these products has lotsof details and lots of events that must occur over the nextyear before a merged product can come out." When it does, hesaid, it will be "way ahead of Oracle8."Oracle's Ken Jacobs, vice president of product strategies forserver products, would not give a time frame on the deliveryof Oracle8, but said "development is going along very well."He also said Oracle is working on ways for the user to createnew data types in a way that is less intrusive than Illustra'scurrent methods."We don't consider it very robust to have to bring down a databasein order to add a new data type, as you have to do with Illustra,"he said. "We feel the user should just be able to create anew data type with a 'create-data-type' statement, the sameway they currently do to create a new table."Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Study Critiques New Mail SystemsBy:JEFFREY SCHWARTZAs many network managers choose new electronic-mail platformsthis year, they likely will discover that next-generation systemsfrom IBM, Microsoft Corp. and Novell Inc. are far from idealas enterprise-messaging backbones, according to a report publishedlate last month.IBM's Lotus Notes Server, the Microsoft Exchange Server andNovell's GroupWise XTD Server are new client/server-based-platformsthat provide marked improvements over aging earlier LAN-basedmessaging systems, the "Decision 96" report from Rapport CommunicationInc. said. Rapport is a Washington consultancy specializingin messaging systems.Microsoft, Novell and IBM, through its acquisition of LotusDevelopment Corp., sell the lion's share of LAN-based E-mailsystems. But although they supportindustry standards and offerworkgroup-computing features,all three emerging platforms willvary and all have room for improvement, analysts said.For instance, all three are weak when used in heterogeneousmessaging environments, said Rapport analysts, who gatheredtheir data from briefings with vendors and beta users.Client and server directory structures on all platforms workfine until connected to other E-mail platforms, said Gary Rowea Rapport principal. But none of the three products supportstrue X.500 directory services at a protocol level.IBM Scores HigherAlthough Microsoft's and Novell's support for X.500 directoryservices were considered insufficient, IBM received bettermarks because of Lotus' expected support for native X.500 protocolsin its forthcoming Lotus Message Switch, said Dan Blum, a Rapportconsultant.Officials from IBM and Microsoft could not be reached for commentlast week, but a Novell spokesman said the information aboutGroupWise appeared to be accurate. Rapport analysts advisednetwork managers to run exhaustive pilots on more than onesystem."I don't see a one-size-fits-all [solution] to messaging, butthe vendors that win out will be those that provide plug-andplay connectivity in heterogeneous shops," said Steve Cropper,director of messaging systems at Charles Schwab & Co., a SanFrancisco brokerage firm that is migrating 8,000 users offof a host-based messaging system.Most industry experts said they expect IBM, Microsoft and Novellto remain the dominant suppliers of LAN-based E-mail software,but there are competitive products from Banyan Systems Inc.,Digital Equipment Corp., Hewlett-Packard Co. and Netscape CommunicationsCorp. worthy of consideration.Lotus Notes 4.0 and Microsoft Exchange are expected to shipearly this year; Novell has said it expects to ship GroupWiseXTD in the second quarter.The 130-page report critically analyzes the three platformsand is available for $395.Rapport can be reached at 513-777-4529.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Banyan Banking on Back-to-Basics StrategyBy:SHARON FISHERUsers of Banyan Systems Inc.'s Vines say they are are hopingthe company's new "back-to-basics" approach will allow themto hang on to their Banyan networks and the advantages theyoffer.John Curtis, senior vice president of Banyan's enterprise networksdivision, said last week that this year the company will concentratemore on enhancing and supporting its current line of productsand will focus less on vision statements.Some users had been concerned about previous Banyan statementsthat had left them with the impression that the company wasnot committed to Vines, Curtis said."There'll be no more talk about 'Vines is dead' and there'llbe not as much talk, but more action," he said. "You won'tsee us pronouncing grand visions."As part of that plan, the company intends to release in thenext two or three quarters a new version of Vines will be easierto use and that is better integrated with Windows NT (CommWeek,Nov. 6, 1995)Mixed ReviewsAnalysts said Banyan's new strategy, which was outlined at newsmeetings last month, is a solid move."They're pedaling as fast as they can from a development standpoint,building on their core competency," said Glenn Gabriel BenYosef, president of Clear Thinking Research Inc., a Bostonconsultancy.Users said they hoped the reorganization would help Banyan becauseVines offers features that are not provided by any other networkoperating system. But the same users were not necessarily confidentabout the future."As it is right now, there is still only one choice for an enterprisenetwork, and unfortunately I don't think Banyan realizes it,"noted Gary Wescom, a computer systems engineer for PacificGas & Electric Co., San Francisco. PG&E has some 20,000 PCson its Vines network."There are some things that companies, like PG&E, can't do withoutthe services of a network operating system like Banyan's, andit doesn't appear that Microsoft is going to be able to provideit very quickly," Wescom said. "We were looking at a prettyscary time. Banyan had shown an interest in basically goingaway-that was all the signs we were seeing-and to have themstill out there trying to continue on at least gives us thefeeling that we'll be able to keep our Banyan network operatinguntil something else comes along."But," he continued, "it's hard to have a whole lot of confidenceof Banyan withstanding the Microsoft onslaught for very long,even if it is a superior product."Other Banyan users said they were preparing for a future whereVines would be integrated with other NOSs, such as Microsoft'sWindows NT.Clinging to Vines"I've invested in Vines, so I have a deep desire [that Banyansurvive], but at the same time we are doing everything we canto integrate other Windows NT networks in with Vines," saidEddie Albert, project manager of Banyan network operationsfor the U.S. Air Force at the Pentagon. He is responsible for251 Vines servers, and said he thinks the Air Force as a wholewhich is integratingits bases worldwide-has 500 to 1,000 Vinesservers."Windows NT is a very good LAN and a very good file server,but for the underlying backbone I would still use Banyan'sVines, and that's the way I'm setting my networks up," Albertsaid.Banyan's Curtis said the new strategy is an extension of a companywide reorganization last year that also included appointingJohn Paul to head a division focused on Internet services (CommWeek,Nov. 13, 1995)"We've got good technology, but we haven't been focused on bringingit into the modern world, on making Vines more friendly andbringing Windows NT into it," Curtis said. "We had a lot ofthings running at cross-purposes when it was a monolithic organization.What John Paul and his people are doing requires a turn ona dime; what we do is a consistent story and predictable path.We were getting to where we weren't doing either one very well."Keeping Customers HappyWill Banyan still be an independent company by the end of thisyear? "I can't disagree with that being a good question," Curtissaid. "If somebody big wants to acquire us, I think our customerswould say 'fine.' That's really my measure-are the customershappy?"Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Interview: Directing IBM's Server StrategyNicholas Donofrio is one of the most influential executivesin the server industry. Reporting directly to IBM chairmanand CEO Lou Gerstner, 29-year IBM veteran Donofrio overseesall server activity at IBM, including mainframes, the AS/400,the RS/6000 Unix workstations and a line of Intel-based PCservers.His current title is senior vice president and group executive,but Donofrio began his career at IBM as a designer of semiconductorchips.Recently, Communications-Week editor at large Evan Schuman metwith Donofrio at IBM's headquarters in Armonk, N.Y., for awide-ranging discussion of server issues. Here are some excerpts.CommWeek: The Internet and multimedia applications are placingunprecedented demands on hardware. How is this demand affectingIBM's development of Internet and video servers?Donofrio: In the final analysis, the power is in the bandwidth,the I/O capability and the storage of most of these servers,not necessarily in the processor. The exception is numericallyintensive processes, which need the processor to give all ofthe answers. But that's not what the rest of the world is drivenby. That's probably not what the Internet is driven by. That'snot what multimedia is really driven by. It's just driven bybandwidth and storage capability.All of these servers are trying to grow up-to go from megabytesto gigabytes to terabytes to petabytes. All of them need fasterchannel and I/O structure. All of them have to get multiplegigabit channel access to keep up with the demands-either multimediaor data-in all kinds of forms. And they need the ability tofeed thousands of people in this very, very far-flung thingwe call the Internet.Right now, people tolerate "server down, server busy, no access."In the future that'll be less tolerated.CommWeek: Are they tolerating it? Conventional wisdom todayhas many users not returning to sites where they get repeatedbusy signals.Donofrio: Well, that depends on how badly you need the answer,doesn't it? If you're browsing, I agree with you. Don't goback. But that's not going to work if it's a transaction youwant to complete; if we're putting real commerce on the Internet.Then it's not going to be "don't go back." You need to go back.You started the transaction. You want to complete it or youwant whatever those goods or services are at the other end.Not going back is not going to work as we get to electroniccommerce. We're going to need something more reliable, somethingmore predictable and something more deliverable. That's whatpeople are working on, trying to make these things more industrialstrength, along with security.CommWeek: A recent trend is the proliferation of specializedser-vers, for electronic mail and Internet and other applications.Do you see this continuing?Donofrio: Depending on your size and scale, maybe you can havefour or five servers in your business. But when four or fiveservers become 50 or 100 servers, that's a chore.People are consolidating. One very simple example is how SP2has gone into large businesses as a file or as a server consolidationsystem. People just collect 50, 60, 100 servers, put them insidean SP2 frame or two, and then manage them all from the samephysical point-all with the same system software. That's acost statement for a lot of our customers. They can't keepup with a server a month for this or for that. And I don'tthink a server a month is going to be in the future.CommWeek: So you don't think there's a trend toward more specializedservers?Donofrio: No.I think that during the last couple of years, that's what'shappened. But I think it is reversing now. Again, it dependson the business or a small business, maybe two or three specializedservers is all they need.CommWeek: What about replicated sites? Or small branch officeswhere users want an isolated E-mail server?Donofrio: That works for some period of time. But what happenswhen the server is the limiter? Suppose you have a server handling500 people. When you're above that limit, replication is theanswer and you can stick gateways between the two so that theycan communicate. That's fine as long as you just don't needmore than 500 people interacting at the same time. But thereare lots of applications where you need tens of thousands ofpeople to interact at the same time.The world can't just take what you've got and build replicationsand put gateways in place. Res-ervations systems will not workin that way. Large transaction, financial clearing systemswon't work that way. If the business has to close its booksevery night, it won't work that way.CommWeek: How would you describe the changed uses of mainframes?Donofrio: More people are trying to use them as a central server.We're trying to change our image and we're trying to changethe nomenclature, but we're not foolish. These 390 serversstill do the highest logical form of computing.More people are using them for repositories. Whether they arerepositories of data the way we understand it today, or whetherit's more complex forms of data such as multimedia mixed withregular data, they like the fact that it has all the bandwidth,all the interconnectivity. They like the fact that it has thesystems management abilities.CommWeek: Are there any mainframe applications that you've seendisappearing over the past couple of years?Donofrio: I think it's a matter of scale and some people canget the job done with something that's different, that's smaller.In some cases, they may be better serviced with a PC serveror an RS/6000 server. In a lot of cases, the applications aren'tavailable on a System 390.CommWeek: A lot of users say there's too much capability onthe desktop, with servers relatively underutilized. Do youagree?Donofrio: We see a lot of that and you're going to see evenmore of it. People are tired of trying to manage it. They'retired of the costs and the questionable return on the investment.And they know one size doesn't fit everybody in their business.Not everybody needs the world's most powerful desktop or workstation.We'll never go away from graphical user interface front endsand things of that nature. But people are trying to figureout what they're getting for the buck. There's always goingto be a balance.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590ATM Gear to Support SVC -- StrataCom to emphasize extemporaneousconnections, security for ATM switchesBy:ERIC LACHStrataCom Inc. will begin shipping software for its asynchronoustransfer mode switches next week to support switched virtualconnections.SVCs let users build up and tear down connections on demand,providing considerable savings over permanent virtual connections,the other common means of connection for ATM.Although StrataCom is not the first company to announce SVCsupport on its ATM switches, it is the first major switch vendorto do so. Analysts claim SVCs are key to ATM's long-term value."If ATM doesn't have the ability to support these casual collaborativerelationships, it is going to be tough to achieve the benefitswe think we will get out of ATM," said Tom Nolle, presidentof Cimi Corp., a Voorhees, N.J., consultancy.Other Selling PointsUsers are likely to welcome the economies that SVCs offer."Right now we are using only PVCs because that is the only thingwe can get from both our switch vendors and carrier," saidJohn Steedman, an electronics engineer in the NASA communicationsdivision at the Goddard Space Flight Center, located in Greenbelt,Md.Steedman said he has had problems with PVCs, particularly thevariable bit rate PVCs, because they steal resources whetheror not they are in use."SVCs would be a real advantage to us so that we could teardown some of these VBR PVCs when we do not need them,'' Steedmansaid.StrataCom officials confirmed that the announcement would bemade this week.Security AssurancesSources said the company will offer ATM signaling and securityfeatures to give users better control over SVCs on their ATMnetworks. One key feature is support for both source- and destinationaddress screening, which lets users specify port by port alist of ATM addresses for which they can receive or initiateSVC calls.StrataCom "is trying to address some of the security issuesthat come with SVCs, because an SVC is like an ATM telephonenumber-a dial-up call," Nolle said. "One problem with SVCsis that someone who knows your ATM calling ID could breachyour network security because you might be running applicationsthat don't know they are using SVCs, and don't protect againstintrusion."Some protection is considered mandatory for public networkswhere many different companies are connected to the same ATMservice, giving them access to each other's ATM connected devices.In addition to offering its own security safeguards, StrataCom,San Jose, Calif., has said it will add more ATM security mechanisms,such as those under consideration by the ATM Forum's new securityworking group, once those specifications are available.StrataCom's SVC software is available as a system upgrade. Itcomplies with the ATM User-to-Network Interface specification.The ATM SVC signaling scheme also conforms to both ATM UNI3.0 and 3.1 and provides a translation between these standards.The company also will support ATM SVC signaling for the ATMFrame UNI and ATM Inverse Multiplexed interfaces when theyare delivered early this year.StrataCom is also expected to announce support for the InterimInter-Switch Signaling Protocol, which provides interoperabilitybetween multiple vendors' ATM switches and the Interim LocalManagement Interface protocol for ATM connection management.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Congress Continues To Tinker With BillBy:MARK ROCKWELLLandmark telecommunications legislation was put on hold untilafter the budget crunch is resolved, but that didn't stop somefinal tinkering on the bill by legislators late last month.Although Congress adjourned at the end of December without actingon the legislation, lawmakers negotiated and crafted a billthat can be acted on quickly when it does comes up for a vote.In recent weeks, conference committee members managed to getthe long distance and local telephone industries' support forthe legislation by granting limited concessions on key issues.The recent alterations would increase government supervisionof Bell company entry into long distance and allow the Bellcompanies to jointly market local and long distance services.Legislators also decided to keep language that allows statesto continue their individual price-cap initiatives, accordingto Capitol Hill sources.Unresolved IssuesThe work puts the finishing touches on the telecommunicationsissues in the bill, but leaves more contentious broadcast issues,mainly foreign ownership of stations, to be addressed. Boththe long distance and local telephone lobbying forces havegiven a "grudging OK" to the bill, according to one long distancelobbyist.Initial language in the bill concerning the entry of the Bellcompanies into long distance gave the FCC the decision-makingrole in that process, but relegated the Department of Justiceto an advisory role (CommWeek, Dec. 18, 1995)Before adjournment, the committee put greater weight behindthe Justice Department's simple advisory role, indicating thatJustice's opinion should be given "substantial weight" in anydecision made by the FCC."It's very important that they're back in the picture. It couldcreate a situation where the FCC is embarrassed into doingsomething," said Jeffrey Kagan, president of Kagan TelecomAssociates, an Atlanta consulting company.The Bell companies got the OK to jointly market local and longdistance services, something that was precluded in the originallanguage of the joint bill."That got the Bell companies on board," the lobbyist said.Depending upon whom you talk to, the bill could either be passedearly this week or at the end of the month. A spokesman forthe Senate Commerce Committee said that if enough signaturescould be collected on the conference committee report, thebill could be approved by Tuesday.The House side holds the key to the bill, however, and observersthere said representatives are more guarded in their assessmentof the bill's timing.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590New Year Ushers In More Urgent Role for NetsBy:THE COMMWEEK STAFFWith the new year comes the promise of new products and technologiesthat will let corporate networks take on a more critical rolein how business is conducted.Key to this transformation of the corporate network from informationutility to strategic resource will be the Internet and Internetrelated technologies. But they certainly won't be the onlydriving force; corporate network managers will grapple witha variety of other technologies and industry issues, such asconsolidation and new levels of competition in the telecommunicationsmarket.First drawn to the Internet and World Wide Web by the hype surroundingit in 1995, network managers are expected to play a crucialrole in moving already established Internet connections toa new level, using several new classes of products."Today we have generic software tools with base-level functionality,"said Steve Franco, research analyst with the Yankee Group,Boston. "In 1996 we'll see tools that add value and improveexisting business processes, like increased groupware functionalityfor Internet software."By the end of the year, many of those applications will includeencryption and digital signature techniques, which will letusers secure their communications. Companies will be able torely on more than firewalls to provide point-to-point encryption,Franco said.Also of particular importance will be a means to secure corporatenetworks, especially those with an on-line presence. This likelywill induce businesses to use outside Web service bureaus,which now host 50 percent of all commercial Web pages.Web authoring and management tools will continue to gain momentum,as applications accessed over the Web become more interactive.As media buyers become accustomed to the Web, they increasinglywill seek to spread out expenditures to reach the specializedaudience segments that can be delivered reliably via the Web.About $12.4 million was spent on paid HyperText links betweenOctober and December alone, according to WebTrack Inc., a NewYork-based market research company.No doubt this amount will continue to grow at an exponentialrate as the pieces are put in place during 1996 to make electroniccommerce a reality.Also, look for third-party auditing services to hammer out waysto adequately track activity on a Web site.Like the Internet, electronic mail will continue to gain acceptance.Although Microsoft Exchange and the Lotus Message Switch willbe available this year, organizations will not make the moveovernight. Many are likely to pilot the new systems as wellas others, including Hewlett-Packard Co.'s Open Mail and NovellInc.'s GroupWise XTD.E-Mail PossibilitiesBecause of the distributed nature of organizations, many shopsare likely to use a variety of E-mail clients and servers."People are going to start to understand how badly they needdirectory services,'' said Terry McCarthy, president of NewYork-based systems integrator Neoterik.Also, as evidenced last year, messaging will become a core functionof collaborative computing systems and Web browsers, severalanalysts said.The Internet Engineering Task Force's newest version of theRemote Monitoring specification will help that cause. The nextversion, RMON2, expected to be completed this month, will boostRMON's capabilities, letting network managers gather informationabout network traffic at the application layer.Leading network management platform vendors also are expectedto deliver their next-generation platforms.Indeed, HP is aiming for the first half of 1996 for the rolloutof its fully distributed version of OpenView. The new versionenables the graphical user interfaces to be off-loaded ontoindividual workstations while main-taining one workstation as the Network Node Manager server.Sun Microsystems Inc. has promised that its fourth iterationof Solstice Enterprise Manager will ship this year; the commercialversion of the distributed management platform, which willinclude object-oriented capabilities, will be available inthe second half of 1996.Although some technologies will be regarded with skepticism,others, such as ISDN and frame-relay, will continue to be adopteden masse, according to experts."Frame-relay service is probably going to experience the sametremendous amount of growth that it did in the last year,"said Beth Gage, broadband consultant at TeleChoice Inc., aVerona, N.J., consultancy. "Remote-LAN connectivity is probablythe largest application for frame-relay networks and that probablywon't change for awhile."Slow Growth for ATMThe use of asynchronous transfer mode service for wide-areaconnections is not expected to grow dramatically in the comingyear, although the planned introduction during 1996 of framerelay-to-ATM service interworking by providers will let userswith frame-relay networks adopt ATM at high-speed sites, analystssaid."Interworking is a key issue for ATM," Gage said. "Interworkingwill help ATM get off the ground, although we don't think 1996is going to be the year for ATM."Also during the year, FCC rules that require service providersto tariff their frame-relay services probably will take effect,although it's difficult to predict what the impact of tariffingwill be on frame-relay rates, observers said.In the protocol arena, analysts said they expect to see moreconsolidation in the TCP/IP software vendor arena, as competitiongrows among companies that want to provide applications thatrun over operating systems' native stacks.More often than not, users will opt to use the stack that comeswith the operating system, and look for bells and whistleselsewhere.IBM is expected to make its proprietary operating systems moreopen by enhancing its TCP/IP offerings, including offeringupgraded versions of its TCP/IP for MVS. The company may alsosoup up its OS/2 Warp operating system with new TCP/IP features.In the network operating systems area, Novell's plan for theyear is to focus on networking, its core competency. It willalso continue to compete with Microsoft Corp.'s Windows NT,and, in particular, will encourage applications developersand users to look on its NetWare Directory Services as an enterprisewide, industry-standard directory."I think how [Novell's reorganization] plays out next year isNovell really focuses their attention on keeping their installedbase, and driving NDS and NetWare services to become de factostandards," said Jon Oltsik, an analyst at Forrester ResearchInc., a Cambridge, Mass., consultancy.For Banyan Systems Inc., the future is more problematic. "1996is the 'do-or-die' year in terms of continuing to permeatethis idea of enterprise network services, and leverage StreetTalkas an Internet directory or a corporate directory," said MikeRothman, vice president of the Meta Group Inc., a Reston, Va.,consultancy.Continued AcquisitionsAnalysts predict the consolidation frenzy will continue in 1996.In particular, they said, look for Cisco Systems Inc. to continuemaking acquisitions.3Com Corp.'s acquisitive mood may be diminished, however, becauseof the difficulties it has had bringing Chipcom into its fold,but Cabletron Systems Inc. and Bay Networks Inc. can be expectedto fill out their product lines or develop their customer baseor channels to market through small tactical purchases.Even more turmoil can be expected in the telecommunicationsmarket-with or without national telecommunications reform legislation.But if the pending bill is signed into law, the telecommunicationsindustry will begin anew.Getting ReadyAll parties with a stake in the telecom market have been makingquiet preparations to enter into an intense battle.For instance, AT&T's strategy is to use an existing structureto enter the local services market. It is anticipating enteringlocal telecom markets this year and has even assigned salesfigures to some of its executives for 1996 that go beyond Ameritech'sChicago and Grand Rapids, Mich., local competition trials.If the telecommunications bill doesn't make it past PresidentClinton's desk, state initiatives will carry the deregulatorytrend forward.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Blending Tech Into OpenDocBy:MARTIN MARSHALLThe melding of Taligent Inc.'s compound document framework intoIBM's OpenDoc cross-platform, object-development environmentshould give network managers wider access to more complex objects.The Taligent technology will start to appear in IBM's Open Classlibrary next month, giving developers the ability to use itto generate OpenDoc or Object Linking and Embedding parts,said Jon Slitz, vice president of object technology marketingat IBM.The company is looking at a variety of ways to weave the Taligenttechnology into the Open Class libraries and make it CORBA2.0 compliant, according to IBM executives.IBM took over Taligent as a wholly owned subsidiary last monthafter a four-year venture with Apple Computer Inc. and HewlettPackard Co. The three companies formed the Cupertino, Calif.based Taligent in 1991 to develop an object-oriented developmentenvironment and operating system for the next generation ofPCs and workstations.In addition to giving details about the role Taligent technologywill play in IBM's overall object strategy, IBM executivessaid IBM will use its System Object Model (SOM) to captureMicrosoft Corp.'s OLE custom-control (OCX) component technologyfor use in multiplatform environments. The company also outlinedfuture plans for its DB2 database.Users of IBM's object solutions expressed disappointment aboutthe failure of the Taligent initiative and wondered if integratingTaligent's compound-document framework was the right courseto take."I would have been more excited if IBM was defining a businessprocess engine rather than a compound-document engine," saidDavid Taylor, president of Enterprise Engines Inc., San Mateo,Calif. "IBM has brought objects to the mainframe, which takesthe MIS guys out of a terrible conflict, but they just haven'tdelivered on the [Taligent and OpenDoc] stuff," he said.Taylor is more enthusiastic about the prospects of IBM's SOMtechnology embracing OCX. "I heartily endorse that. OCXs arebrain-dead, in my opinion, and they will give the world a badimpression of object technology. But, within a SOM wrapper,they can become truly object-oriented, taking on polymorphismand inheritance, and that would be great."IBM's Slitz said, "You'll see from us a way to use OCXs in concertwith SOM, and they will be more robust in the sense that theywill be able to run in cross-platform environments. This ispart of IBM's continuing recognition that OLE exists in themarketplace. We will create high-value ways of integratingOLE into larger environments."Future PlansIBM also will bring its object technology to the World WideWeb, developing a common application programming interfaceto interface SOM objects with network middleware layers thatwill bond the Web to back-end and legacy applications. In 1996,IBM also will bring distributed naming and directory servicesto the Web and expand its compound document architecture tonew data types, including coded and non-coded information."You will also see Java-based applications from IBM this year,"Slitz said.DB2 ExpansionsIBM's plans for DB2 this year will include a growing numberof user-defined data types, according to Tim Negris, an IBMvice president."In 1996, we will add to DB2 something called Cubic Query, orquerying based upon the contents of an image," he said.For the real number crunchers, IBM will come out with a financialmodeling tool, called a Differential Equation Blaster.Negrissaid that IBM, along with consulting service partners, wouldintroduce several data-mining applications.IBM can be reached at http:// www.ibm.com or 800-426-3333.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590WorldCom Extends Frame-Relay ServicesBy:JOHN RENDLEMANLDDS WorldCom will expand its frame-relay network-to-networkinterface service to Europe through agreements with undisclosedEuropean service providers this quarter.The expansion will open another avenue for users to extend theirframe-relay networks globally.In addition, LDDS WorldCom has extended its domestic WilPakframe-relay network-to-network (NNI) capability to 10 additionalU.S. cities. During the first half of this year, the companyplans to continue an aggressive effort to extend its NNI reach,said Emily Hansen, frame-relay product manager at LDDS WorldCom,the network service division of WorldCom Inc., Jackson, Miss.This will be an easy way for LDDS WorldCom "to expand its internationalframe-relay coverage," said Tim Burke, an analyst at the YankeeGroup, a Boston consulting company.For overseas connections, "NNI allows us to partner with anothercompany whose deployment of switches is denser than our own,"Hansen said.With LDDS WorldCom's NNI offering, customers connect localizedor regional sites using short-haul frame-relay circuits providedby their local service providers. They connect the regionalframe-relay network to more distant sites through a physicalNNI connection to LDDS WorldCom's frame-relay network, thecompany said.Domestically, customers of LDDS WorldCom's NNI service pay standardrates for the long distance portion of their networks, plusthe tariffed rate charged by the local provider for regionalframe-relay connections and a monthly fee for each 64 kilobitper-second increment of capacity on the NNI connection.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: TELCO MEGA-MERGERS IN STORE?Merger rumors continued late last week as Congress inched closerto agreeing on the telecommunications bill that would allowlong distance, local telephone and cable companies to compete.Rumors of AT&T's buying out GTE Corp. and of Bell AtlanticCorp.'s acquiring Nynex Corp. topped the list. None of thecompanies would comment.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: THE BALL DROPS WITHOUT NEW NOTESIBM's Lotus Development Corp. would not confirm late last weekwhether it met its year-end deadline to ship its new versionof Notes. But even if the vendor had Notes 4.0 out the doorbefore the ball dropped at New York's Times Square, analystssaid the company effectively missed the deadline because userswere unable to install the final commercial Notes 4.0 releasein 1995. Most users doubted Lotus would meet its promised deadline,according to Dale Johnson, president of Johnson ConsultingInc., a Woburn, Mass., consultancy.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: CISCO KILLS BUGCisco Systems Inc., San Jose, Calif., last week said that asoftware bug temporarily shut down some of its Grand Junctionworkgroup switches, knocking out about 300 LANs worldwide.A glitch in the internal clocks of some FastSwitch 2100 and2800 switches caused them to shut down at 12:01 a.m. on Wednesday,Dec. 27, and then restart at 12:01 a.m. on Sunday, Dec. 31.The problem was not a virus but a system software error, Ciscosaid last week. Engineers corrected the problem and do notexpect a recurrence.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: OSF RELEASES JAVA FOR UNIXWAREThe Open Software Foundation has released an alpha version ofthe Java programming language for The Santa Cruz OperationInc.'s UnixWare implementation of the Unix operating system.It can be downloaded free from http://www.osf.org/mall/. NovellInc. helped fund development of the OSF version. But becauseNovell has sold UnixWare to SCO, which was not involved inthe OSF project, it is not clear if the product will be developedany further.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: NOVELL UPDATES WIN 95 CLIENTNovell Inc. has released an updated version of its NetWare Client32 for Windows 95 open beta software. The software lets usersrunning Microsoft Corp.'s Windows 95 operating system communicatewith a LAN running Novell's NetWare network operating system,including NetWare Directory Services. Users can download thesoftware free from CompuServe or from the Web. (http://netwire.novell.comor 800-873-2831.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: NLM GIVES WEB ACCESSNovell Inc. has begun shipping NetWare Web Server, a NetWareLoadable Module that gives NetWare users access to the WorldWide Web, as expected (CommWeek, Nov. 6, 1995). The companyalso shipped a new version of its LAN Workgroup for MicrosoftWindows and DOS. The software, for servers running Novell'sNetWare 4 network operating system, gives users access to TCPIP applications and networks. (http://www.novell.com or 800873-2831.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: APPLE TAKES BITE OUT OF UNIXApple Computer Inc. is close to pulling the plug officiallyon its long-ailing A/UX, Apple's version of the Unix operatingsystem, according to sources. Sources said the company hascut a deal with its sometimes partner IBM to use AIX for Macintoshcustomers who insist on using Unix. Details are slated to beworked out within the next several weeks.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: PROBING FDDIArmon Networking Inc. is expected to announce next week a newRemote Monitoring-based Fiber Distributed Data Interface probe.The probe, along with the Santa Barbara, Calif., company'sline of token-ring and Ethernet RMON probes, will give networkmanagers additional tools to monitor their distributed enterprisenetworks, including fiber segments. Pricing has not yet beenreleased. (800-499-7666.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590MICROSOFT STRIKES BACK -- Besieged by Netscape, BackOffice deliversa powerful and reliable NT-based Web serverBy:WAYNE RASH JR.Microsoft Corp.'s Internet Information Server is clearly aimedat the high end. Available only as a free beta download, there'sa good chance that you've already seen this product, sinceit's the platform that's been running Microsoft's site on theWorld Wide Web since last summer. As a result, Microsoft hasgained a great deal of experience at designing and implementinga Windows NT-based Web server designed for heavy volumes andhigh performance. The company has used this experience in creatingthe commercial version of its Internet server.In addition, when Microsoft ships the final version (availableeither as a free download or for $99 in shrink-wrap), it willbundle the ability to work with its SQL Server database. Thismeans that users who want to progress beyond "brochureware"have an easy way to provide information to the Net. In fact,the SQL Server database does not need to be located on theInternet server, but instead can be located elsewhere on thecompany network, which can ease the administration load andreduce the requirement to duplicate data. Of course, if youhave a machine with enough capacity, you can locate SQL Serveron the Windows NT server that's running the Internet InformationServer.The Microsoft Internet Information Server must run on a WindowsNT Server, version 3.51. In addition, it requires that ServicePack 2 be applied before you attempt to install the serversoftware. Server Pack 2 was included on the CD-ROM that alsoincluded the Internet Server, but it still requires an extrastep. Specifically, you must first apply the update software(which is essentially an automatic process), reboot the computerand load the Internet Server.Installing the Internet Information Server is a nearly handsoff process. Once you make some basic choices, the installertakes over and handles the rest. Adding to the ease of useis a set of well-designed management and access tools. Forexample, the server management package can run either on theWindows NT machine itself or on a workstation elsewhere onthe network. In addition, the package can manage several InternetInformation Servers at a time, which can reduce workload andmake large sites much more practical to administer.As you'd expect from a server aimed at high-end users, Microsoft'sInternet Information Server ships with effective managementtools. Able to run either on the server platform itself oron a remote workstation, these tools manage server functionon any attached Internet Information Server. Although the natureof Internet servers is such that the vast majority of suchmanagement involves monitoring status, you can use Microsoft'snow-familiar tabbed notebook metaphor to change a variety ofoperational and security settings.In addition to its own management service, Microsoft includesa Simple Network Management Protocol agent so you can keeptabs on the Internet server as a part of a larger managementsolution.What Microsoft doesn't include, at least in this beta version,is a World Wide Web authoring tool. Although such a tool isavailable from Microsoft for use with Microsoft Word, it wasn'tshippedin the Internet Information Server box. On the other hand,Microsoft includes its Internet Explorer Web browser for Windows3.1, Windows 95 and Windows NT. Unlike the vendors of someWorld Wide Web-browser software, the versions included by Microsoftcan be distributed by network managers without additional fees.Microsoft says that its server also will work with browsersfrom other manufacturers, which we confirmed via Net-scapeCommunications Corp.'s Netscape Navigator.Another factor that makes the Microsoft Internet InformationServer easier to absorb into an organization is that it runson any hardware platform that supports Windows NT. This meansyou can start running it on an Intel computer, but can moveto a PowerPC, MIPS or Alpha machine as your needs change.Microsoft puts a lot of stock in its feature set, and with somejustification. Although it's not clear that most users willneed all the features included with the Internet InformationServer, at least if you do need them, they're there. Some ofthe most useful features include an FTP service and a Gopherservice. Although these services are readily available fromthird parties, it's convenient to have them bundled insteadof needing to purchase new software.Likewise, Microsoft takes advantage of Windows NT Server's excellentsecurity to provide a server that can handle both passwordand data encryption. You can disable anonymous log-ins, forexample.Whether you should wait for the Internet Information Serverto ship or choose to move ahead now with Netscape Netsite orO'Reilly & Associates Inc.'s WebSite depends on your levelof experience and needs. Netscape, for example, has shown anadmirable dedication to making sure its products are secure,even to the extent of offering rewards to people who can breakits security. O'Reilly has long promised easy setup of a siteon the World Wide Web. Microsoft appears to offer both capabilities.The fact that Microsoft has developed its Internet InformationServer for its own use in an extremely busy environment isencouraging. Of course, the same can be said for Netscape'sproducts, so though Microsoft ranks with the leaders here,it's not unique.We found the process of installing and using Microsoft's InternetInformation Server to be anticlimactic. Unlike a number ofbeta products we've been reviewing, this one works. If it shipswith complete documentation and competent support, Microsoft'sInternet Information Server could be an excellent solutionfor businesses and organizations both small and large, especiallyif valuable database content will be provided along with prettypictures.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590CrossWind MultithreadsBy:RON COPELANDCrossWind Technologies Inc. will announce next week a new versionof its real-time, enterprise-wide collaboration software, whichfeatures a new multithreaded architecture to improve applicationperformance and extend application scalability to more than50,000 users.Synchronize 2.0 does this by taking advantage of the multi-threadedcapabilities of Microsoft Windows NT server and other Unixenvironments. Multithreading, which optimizes the interactionof the software with the underlying server hardware, is administratorconfigurable. Client requests, inter-server communicationsand disk I/O also can be optimized.Synchronize is a platform- and electronic-mail-independent calendaringand scheduling application that supports users and resourcesacross an enterprise network. The software lets users easilyschedule meetings and resources, distribute agendas and memos,assign and track tasks and issue reminders, the company said.The Synchronize software communicates directly across the TCPIP network at network transport speeds to provide real-timescheduling, task and resource management, said David Wellington,president and CEO of CrossWind, Santa Cruz, Calif.Synchronize 2.0 adds an Apple Macintosh client to the currentlyavailable Window 3.x, Windows NT, X11/Motif and ASCII environments.LAN-based and remote access are supported.Synchronize 2.0 will be available in mid-February and will sellfor $100 per client.CrossWind Technologies can be reached at http://www.crosswind.comor 408-469-1780.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Sybase Previews App UpgradeBy:MARTIN MARSHALLSybase Inc.'s PowerSoft Corp. subsidiary has begun showing selectedcorporate users a beta version of its next-generation PowerBuilder5.0.PowerSoft's new offering maintains the drag-and-drop simplicityof previous versions and a 16-bit capability for MicrosoftWindows 3.1, but adds the 32-bit capabilities of Windows 95,Windows NT, Unix and Apple Macintosh environments. Only PowerBuilderfor Windows 95 and Windows NT beta copies were shown to users.Observers said they expect to see released copies of the Windowsversions in March, with Macintosh and Unix versions appearinglater this year."We're going to use it to solve maintenance and management problemsacross thousands of clients," said Tom Cervenka, senior researchprogrammer for the University of Illinois university system,in Urbana.The new version of PowerBuilder performs practical applicationpartitioning across the network and offers an object managementfacility, new data windows, the look and feel of Windows 95and support for extended Object Linking and Embedding 2.0 automation.In a future release PowerBuilder will offer "a World Wide Webobject inside it that would allow the creation of Web-enabledapplications and the recognition" of OLE Controls-based HyperTextMarkup Language components," said Robert Zurek, director ofresearch and development for Sybase's PowerSoft division.Depending upon the application, compiled code can run from twoto 10 times faster than the interpretive code of previous versions.Pricing for PowerBuilder 5.0 has not been set.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590EDA/SQL Gets Messaging MiddlewareBy:MARTIN MARSHALLThe next generation of Information Builders Inc.'s EDA/SQL willoffer corporate users both synchronous and asynchronous replicationoptions and the benefits of messaging middleware.The New York middleware vendor announced last month it has licensedmessage-oriented middleware technology from Mo- mentum SoftwareCorp. and will incorporate it into EDA/ SQL 4.0, which is expectedin March.The incorporation of Momentum's X*IPC messaging middleware willenable IBI's replication and gateway facilities to connectremote servers in an asynchronous fashion."One of the advantages of the asynchronous aspect that Momentumbrings is performance. Users can fire off four queries or sowithout having to wait for the first query results to comeback," said Alan Tonnesen, executive vice president of InsyncSoftware Corp., Ronkonkoma, N.Y.EDA/SQL 4.0 can replicate data bidirectionally to roaming, heterogeneousenvironments.Pricing for the new version of EDA has yet to be determined.IBI can be reached at http://www.ibi.com or 212-736-4433.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: REMOTEWARE IN SFA APPLICATIONIBM has added XcelleNet Inc.'s RemoteWare application to itslist of client/server-based sales-force-automation package.IBM will provide consulting, development and deployment ofRemoteWare, a widely used platform for large-scale applicationswith a large number of remote clients. (770-804-8100.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: BETTER VIDEO ON TCP/IP NETWORKSFTP Software Inc. and PictureTel Corp. last week announced thatPictureTel's LAN-based videoconferencing software will nowsupport FTP's OnNet TCP/IP protocol stack. OnNet for Windows2.0 is available for $249. PictureTel's LiveLAN-V for videoconferencingsells for $1,195. (508-685-4000.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: WIN 95 API FOR FAXINGBrooktrout Technology Inc., Newton, Mass., will ship this montha new application-development environment for fax- and voicecommunications programs. The new application programming interfaceswill let programmers build Microsoft Windows 95-based applications.Brooktrout's TR Series API version 3.7 is intended for developersbuilding applications for the TR114 Universal Port or TruVoiceproducts. (617-449-4100.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: OPTIX RUNS DIGITAL ALPHABlueridge Technologies Inc.'s Optix document management serverhas been ported to Digital Equipment Corp.'s Alpha-based serverplatform running the Open Software Foundation/1 version 3.2of Unix, according to the Flint Hill, Va., company. Optix isa large-scale document management system. It's starting priceis $100,000, according to Blueridge officials. (http://www.blueridge.comor 703-675-3015.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Banyan's New TCP/IP Backs Win 95By:Sharon FisherBanyan Systems Inc. has introduced a version of its TCP/IP applicationssuite that supports Microsoft Windows 95 and includes a Webbrowser.Banyan TCP/IP Applications Suite 2.0 is an enhancement of softwarelicensed from Ipswitch Inc., Lexington, Mass. Originally, usersof Banyan's Vines network operating system obtained TCP/IPaccess from FTP Software Inc., but Banyan, Westborough, Mass.,switched to Ipswitch last year (CommWeek, Jan. 23, 1995)"I like it so far," said John Herzog, network and informationcenter coordinator for Silicorp Ltd., Toronto. The companyis in the process of migrating directly from the FTP softwareto the Ipswitch software, and is running it on 20 workstations,planning to expand that to 300 this month, he said. "We'reabout to try it out on the Internet. Corporately, it's solvingall of our needs."The software has been rewritten to offer a 32-bit kernel, TCPIP stack and applications, said Jeff Bernard, director of enterprisemarketing. This means that the software now works with Windows95, he said. But the software is backwards-compatible with16-bit applications, both from the previous version of theIpswitch product and with the FTP product, Bernard said.In addition, the TCP/IP applications can run on the TCP/IP stackbuilt into Windows 95, Bernard said. In the next three months,the company will release an Internet Protocol client that willlet network administrators integrate the Vines desktop withTCP/IP services so only TCP/IP leaves the desktop, he said.Ordinarily, Vines communications use Vines/IP, which is basedon TCP/IP, but is not compatible with it.Other new features include IMosaic, a World Wide Web browser,he said. "It is integrated, which makes it very easy for peopleto get a well-supported product from us that leverages theInternet."The software now includes support for the Dynamic Host ConfigurationProtocol, which lets organizations share TCP/IP addresses throughdynamic configuration.In addition, the software's VT320 emulation has been enhancedto support The Santa Cruz Operation Inc.'s American NationalStandards Institute terminal emulation, Bernard said. The softwareis compatible with the industry-standard Winsock 1.1 applicationprogramming interfaces, giving developers a standard way tocommunicate with TCP/IP protocol stacks from Windows applications.Winsock 2.0 will be supported when that specification is final,Bernard said.The software also is easier for network administrators to installon multiple PCs, he said. Previously, the applications neededto be installed individually on each PC from a floppy disk.With the new version, the software can be installed from aCD on the server to all the PCs simultaneously.The software is available now. Prices start at $4,995 for a50-user pack.Banyan can be reached at http://www. banyan.com or 508-898-1000.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590New UnixWare on TapBy:Evan SchumanAs officials of Unix's new owners-The Santa Cruz Operation Inc.prepare for their first merged version of the operating system,two new versions of UnixWare, formerly owned by Novell Inc.,and SCO's OpenServer are in the wings and will start shippingin volume in a matter of weeks.The main attribute of the new version of UnixWare, code-named"Eiger," which Novell had been calling UnixWare 2.1, is thatit will start integrating NetWare features, such as nativeNetWare 4.1 file, print and directory services. This is meantto let NetWare clients access files and printers via a UnixWareserver as if that server were running NetWare.Gianfranco Enrico, the chief architect and architecture directorfor Ing. C. Olivetti and Co. SpA, a Unix OEM, said he consideredthe inclusion of the NetWare features to be essential. "Weexpect it really will become standard for any Unix offeringto have NetWare services," he said.Bob Sprowls, Unix OEM Unisys Corp.'s director of server marketing,said his company's priorities were different from Novell's,and the resultant release shows it. Novell's "goal was notUnix, but was bringing in the NetWare stuff," he said. "Ourinterest was more in enhancing the overall Unix environment."Speedier VersionOther than NetWare features, the new version of UnixWare willbe slightly faster. Michael DeFazio, Novell's senior vice presidentof development for the company's operating systems division,estimated that the new version would be about 5 percent to10 percent faster. Scott McGregor, SCO's senior vice presidentfor products, agreed with DeFazio's estimate for likely enduser impact but said the enhancements will be more dramaticfor OEMs performing benchmarking.The next version of the operating system also supports someof the newer disk drives and graphics cards and has a new C++compiler.A traditional sore spot with Unix licensees historically hasbeen pricing and licensing terms. Although OEMs generally sayNovell has done a far better job with licensing than its predecessor,AT&T, SCO has nonetheless established a different pricing structurewith next month's release of Eiger.The pricing change is "to make it more in line with OpenServerpricing," said SCO's Jeff Ait, a vice president in charge ofthe transition. Asked why Santa Cruz, Calif.-based SCO didn'twait for the merged release to change pricing details, he saidthe changes made market sense, regardless of the operatingsystem's sale.SCO will be charging extra for various licensed capabilities,which have not been offered before.One OEM who was briefed said the changes involve moving awayfrom some of the unlimited number of user licenses Novell offersto pricing determined by the number of users. "There are situationswhere buying UnixWare will now be cheaper and situations whereit will now be more expensive," the OEM said.With OpenServer's new version-code-named "Comet" and likelyto ship about 30 to 60 days after Eiger ships-the most significantimprovement is an increase in the maximum amount of RAM supported,to 4 gigabytes from 512 megabytes."A lot of people who use large databases are concerned aboutthe amount of memory," McGregor said. "If you're a customer,you just really want to know that you're not going to run outof gas," he added.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590IBM Support Uncertain for Warp ConnectBy:MARCIA A. JACOBSIBM's commitment to the PowerPC version of its Warp Connectoperating system software is waning. The company missed itsyear-end "shipment" date and announced a complex ordering plan.The product's lateness and the uncertainty about exactly whichfeatures of Warp Connect made it into the PowerPC version haveusers and analysts questioning the need for it."I don't think the market cares anymore,'' said Tom Kurcharvy,an analyst at Summit Strategies Inc., Boston. "IBM did moreto destroy momentum for the PowerPC than any company ever did.''George Szatckowski, senior technical support specialist at theChicago railroad company Metra, agreed. "At the moment, wehave no PowerPCs. There are no specific plans for it.'' Thecompany uses Unix for its high-end graphics programs and doesn'tsee any reason to switch.Would-be Warp Connect PPC users must order custom machines fordesktops or servers from IBM.At least one user cited scalability as a need for Warp ConnectPPC. "I'm definitely interested from the perspective of havinga more scalable architecture,'' said Arlene Allen, assistantdirector of information systems at the University of Californiaat Santa Barbara.IBM said Microsoft Windows applications that run on Warp willrun on Warp Connect PPC, but Warp applications must be recompiledfirst. Kurcharvy said that if Warp Connect PPC only runs Windowsapplications, the need for buying Warp Connect PPC does notexist because Microsoft Windows NT already runs on the PowerPC(CommWeek, May 15)Warp Connect for the PowerPC will be priced the same as WarpConnect, which retails for $299 with Windows included, and$229 without the upgrade.IBM can be reached at http://www.ibm.com or 800-426-4968.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: LEGATO ACQUIRES STORAGE WARESLegato Systems Inc., Palo Alto, Calif., has acquired InnovusTechnologies Inc., Hamilton, Ontario. Innovus develops storagemanagement software for Hewlett-Packard Co.'s HP-UX implementationof the Unix operating system. The companies plan to close the$6.5 million deal sometime during the next 30 days. (http:/www.legato.com or 415-812-6000.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: MICROPLEX ADDS NEST SUPPORTMicroplex Systems Ltd., Burnaby, British Columbia, has agreedto add Novell Embedded Systems Technology to its line of printservers and hubs. Novell Inc.'s NEST lets manufacturers addNetWare features to devices that would not otherwise have theprocessing power or memory to run it. The company did not indicatewhen the NEST functionality would be available. (http://www.microplex.comor 800-665-7798.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: NEC CUTS PRICES, ON READERSNEC Technologies Inc. has sharply cut prices on two of its highend CD-ROM readers, the MultiSpin 6Xe and 6Xi. The MultiSpin6Xe had been selling for $599; that will drop 17 percent to$499. The MultiSpin 6Xi had been $499; that will drop 30 percentto $349. The MultiSpin 6X features a 900-kilobyte-per-seconddata-transfer rate, a 145-millisecond average access time anda 130-millisecond random seek time. (708-860-9500.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: GROUPE BULL NAMES U.S. CEOParis-based Groupe Bull has appointed a new president and CEOfor its Bull HN Information Systems U.S. subsidiary. RobertJ. Kelly, who had been executive vice president and chief financialofficer since 1992, replaces Axel Leblois, who left the companyat the end of December.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Microsoft Hones In on IPBy:AMY ROGERSIn hindsight, 1995 may be regarded as the year that TCP/IP hitthe big time.This is due in no small part to Microsoft Corp.'s bundling ofa TCP/IP protocol stack into its Windows 95, thus making theprotocols upon which the Internet operates widely available.Last year, many users opted to run Microsoft's less-sophisticatedInternet Protocol stack to save themselves the hassle of substitutinganother vendor's stack. The Windows 95 "stack is not elegant,but it works," said Doug McDonald, a technical services managerin the MIS department at Rogue Valley Medical Center, Medford,Ore.But, he added, "it doesn't have all the applications that NetManageor Frontier or WRQ has."Last year, traditional stack vendors, such as NetManage Inc.and WRQ, started focusing on creating value-added applicationsthat run equally well on their own stacks and over Microsoft's.For example, NetManage, Cupertino, Calif., said it would providesoftware to let users access extra bandwidth for running applications.Frontier Technologies Corp., Mequon, Wis., bundled a suite ofTCP/IP applications with its CyberJunction gateway, which convertsNovell Inc.'s Internetwork Packet Exchange protocol into TCPIP for running network utilities and for Internet access.TGV Software Inc., Santa Cruz, Calif., upgraded its MultiNetfor Windows by adding a feature that lets users choose amongvarious TCP/IP applications.In many cases, Internet access is not the primary reason networkmanagers are rushing to implement stacks and applications.In 1995, managers wanted stacks for file-sharing applications,to send and receive electronic mail and to access host datavia terminal emulation.As these managers turned elsewhere for TCP/IP applications,theyhad to integrate a mix of vendors' applications, whileother users have begun to sample Microsoft's own IP utilities.Jeff Matchan, a systems support specialist for the Los AngelesPhilharmonic Association, said he replaced Microsoft's InternetExplorer with Netscape Communications Corp.'s Net-scape CommerceServer for economic reasons. "We get [Commerce Server] freebecause we are a non-profit organization," he said. "With InternetExplorer, I'd have to buy a license for each workstation."Matchan said he could not access a Hewlett-Packard Co. Unixbased server with LAN WorkPlace for DOS, a TCP/IP package fromNovell Inc., with Windows 95 running. Instead, he used theTelnet application included in the Microsoft stackBack to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Translation Feature on Its Way -- Hypercom to bundle legacyTCP gateway into routers and FRADsBy:AMY ROGERSHypercom Network Systems Inc. is bundling a protocol-translationfeature into its routers and frame-relay access devices thismonth to help network managers trying to incorporate legacydata into a TCP/IP LAN.The feature, which is called Legacy/TCP gateway, will be bundledinto Hypercom's Integrated Enterprise Networking routers andFRADs. The gateway interprets legacy protocols such as bisynchronousor Systems Network Architecture in a TCP/IP format to giveusers access to the Internet and other TCP/IP services.Legacy interfaces correspond to their own TCP/IP sessions, eliminatingthe need to encapsulate data in a non-native format, accordingto officials at the Phoenix-based company. Thus, all legacybased data arrives at the server as TCP/IP traffic."Each side sees data in its native form," said Dave Matusow,lead SNA architect at Hypercom. "Routers take SNA data andthrow it into an IP frame and route it like any other traffic."He said the problem with that approach is network managers mayexperience TCP/IP session failures.Legacy/TCP Gateway takes care of distributing sessions throughthe enterprise to ensure that no node becomes overloaded. Consequently,network management traffic is reduced, he said.Legacy/TCP Gateway is already bundled into many Hypercom products.Hypercom can be reached at 602-866-5399.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590SMC Unveils Hub, SwitchBy:ERIC LACHStandard Microsystems Corp. has announced a hub aimed at smallwork groups and an Ethernet switch.The six-port switch, called the EZswitch-6x, is designed asa low-cost plug-and-play version of the company's TigerSwitch.The switch provides simultaneous wire-speed Ethernet connectionson all ports, delivering 60 megabits per second of throughputin half-duplex mode or 120 Mbps in full-duplex mode, said JimColantropo, senior product marketing manager at SMC, Hauppauge,N.Y.The switch uses a crossbar switching matrix, which allows simultaneoussupport of multiple packets across the switch. As many as sixswitching paths can be established at a time, with each pathcrossing two ports.Of the six ports, five are RJ-45 10Base-T ports; one is a combinationAUI/TP/BNC 10-Mbps port.SMC's new shared Ethernet hub, the EtherEZ Hub, comes in five, eight- and 16-port configurations and costs about $25 perport, said Mike Pellicone, SMC product marketing manager.The EZswitch-6x sells for $1,199 and ships immediately. TheEtherEZ Hub, also available now, comes with five RJ-45 portsfor $125; or eight RJ-45 ports and one BNC port for $239; or16 RJ-45 ports, one BNC and one AUI port for $499.SMC can be reached at http://www.smc.com/ or 800-762-4968.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: SWITCH OFFERS FAST ETHERNETLantronix, Irvine, Calif., has introduced an eight-port workgroupEthernet switch with optional Fast Ethernet features. The LSW8combines six 10-megabit-per-second Ethernet ports for linksto servers or other equipment. The switch ships immediately.Prices range from $2,995 to $5,485, depending on the configuration.(http://www.lantronix.com or 800-422-7055.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: REMOTE-ACCESS KIT UNVEILEDNiwot Networks Inc., Boulder, Colo., is shipping a remote-accessservices kit for Microsoft Windows NT. Called NiwRAS, the kitcontains a V.35 cable, an AT/SD board supporting data ratesof up to 7 megabits per second and an NDIS 3.0 WAN miniportdriver. The kit is priced at $995 per node. (303-444-7765.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: MCGILL DEBUTS PC-TO-HOST PACKMcGill Systems Inc., Montreal, has released version 3.0 of TCP3270,a PC-to-host connectivity product. The software, which letsusers access data via terminal emulation or through variousprogramming interfaces, also lets them run concurrent sessionsto mixed hosts. Editions for Microsoft Windows NT and Windows95 are shipping now, with an Apple Macintosh edition expectedto be released by the end of the month. Pricing is $99 perunit, with multiple-user packs available. (http://www.3270.mcgill.caor 514-398-4477.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: ATM TEST DRIVE FROM CROSSCOMMCrossComm Corp., Marlborough, Mass., is offering an asynchronoustransfer mode starter kit so customers can install and evaluatethe company's ATM technology. It sells for $31,900. (508-4814060.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590FCC OKs Sprint's European PlansBy:JOHN RENDLEMANThe FCC last month approved Sprint's alliance with France Telecomand Deutsche Telekom AG, clearing the way for Sprint and itsEuropean partners to begin offering business customers integratedinternational voice- and data-communications services.The FCC's approval of the venture eliminated the final U.S.regulatory barrier to Sprint's plan to sell each of its Europeanpartners a 10 percent equity stake in Sprint for a combinedtotal of between $3.5 billion to $4.2 billion and establisha separate international-services joint venture.Once established, the venture will benefit users by giving thema single source for seamless voice and data connections betweenthe United States and international locations, although hurdlesremain before the three partners will be able to make theirplans a reality, users and analysts said.Global Connectivity"Anywhere you could get global connectivity from your localprovider would be a good thing," said Scott Cervenka, managerof network services at Hartmarx Corp., a Chicago apparel maker.Sprint may have some initial difficulties working with itsnew partners, but "I'm sure that it's nothing that couldn'tbe worked out eventually," Cervenka said."Sprint is doing this to bring its service portfolio up to parwith what MCI and AT&T already offer through their global partnerships,"said Christine Heckart, director of broadband consulting atTeleChoice Inc., a consultancy in Verona, N.J.The Sprint venture resembles MCI Communications Corp.'s Concertalliance with BT and AT&T's WorldPartners cooperative agreementwith a number of European and Asian carriers. It is intendedto give customers one contact for international voice and datacircuits, Heckart said."There is a definite market need among multinational companiesthat want a single source provider of their communicationsneeds" to eliminate the cost of procuring and maintaining dissimilarcommunications services from different providers around theworld, Heckart said.The venture's first service offerings, expected to become availableto consumers early this year, will be integrated versions ofservices already offered separately by each of the three partners,said Stuart Mathison, assistant vice president of strategicplanning at Sprint International, Reston, Va.The three companies have begun the integration process. Theysaid they plan to launch the services and announce featuresand prices, as well as a name and logo for the venture, followinga Jan. 12 Sprint shareholder vote on the European partners'equity investment in Sprint, Mathison said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Alliance to Extend Data Services to UsersBy:MARK ROCKWELLAT&T subsidiary AT&T Network Systems Inc. and Hewlett-PackardCo. said they will develop software and hardware in a broadmarketing alliance that will help telephone and cable-televisionproviders extend broadband data services to users.The alliance is expected to boost the capabilities of each companyto provide broadband data services and equipment to cable andtelephone companies. Products resulting from the alliance willprimarily target the consumer market, though there will besome business applications.According to AT&T Network Systems, the alliance is expectedto provide products for Internet access, home shopping, telecommuting,interactive games, personal audio channel, distance learning,interactive advertising and telemedicine in wired and wirelessenvironments.The companies said they hope to develop a common network softwareplatform for interactive data networks, applications for thatplatform, interactive television technology, network elements,computing systems, test instruments, cable TV modems, networkmanagement and software technologies.Hardware, such as cable modems and high-speed network elements,will be rolled out in the next six months, said Carly Fiorina,president of AT&T Network Systems. In the next year, AT&T NetworkSystems and HP plan to deliver head-end equipment for cableand telephone companies that allows the two companies to managebroadband services to business and residential customers."This is a very good sign. AT&T and Hewlett-Packard are legitimizingthe effort to bring broadband services to the home,'' saidAmy Reiber, a broadband consultant at TeleChoice Inc., a Verona,N.J., consultancy.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Deal Targets Desktop ServicesBy:MARK ROCKWELLAiming to offer more desktop communications services to a burgeoningoutsourcing market, Ameritech and IBM have teamed up to selleach other's services to their existing customers.Together, the companies are vying for a piece of the estimated$33 billion global outsourcing market, especially in the areasof integrated voice and video services and support."There's a lack of voice and video integration,'' said Sam Pomazano,a vice president at IBM's subsidiary Integrated Systems SolutionsCorp. (ISSC)"Customers need convergence help,'' said Jack Wright, presidentof custom business services at Ameritech.The two companies formed an alliance recently to market integratedvoice, video and data services, providing customers with asingle point of contact for desktop-based communications. Theseven-year agreement will first extend the outsourcing capabilitiesto existing ISSC and Ameritech customers.A selection of equipment and services will be available to telecommunicationsmanagers through the alliance, such as PCs, software and videoconferencingequipment and service.IBM's ISSC subsidiary will work with Ameritech to manage Ameritech'sdesktop computing and LAN requirements. Ameritech will provideISSC with voice and video desktop-support services for sitesthroughout the country, Ameritech and ISSC officials said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: NETWORK NOTES FOR COMMERCEElekom Corp., a subsidiary of Egghead Inc., Spokane, Wash.,said it has developed an electronic commerce platform for largebusinesses. The service, called EleTrade, is based on AT&TNetwork Notes. It will ship this month and will provide a platformfor ordering products and managing orders, according to Elekom,Bellevue, Wash. (800-869-3447)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: BELLSOUTH INKS AGREEMENTBellSouth Corp. and competitive access provider Intermedia Communicationsof Florida Inc. have agreed to let Tampa, Fla.-based Intermediaoperate as a facilities-based local phone company in BellSouth'sterritory. The agreement is effective for two years and wasapproved by Florida regulators last month, the companies said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: SPRINT TO BEGIN PAGING SERVICESprint said it will begin providing paging services and sellingpagers directly to end users. The company early this monthwill begin leasing Motorola Inc. pagers to businesses and consumersfor an undisclosed monthly fee that will include unlimitedpages, according to Sprint.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: LCI INTERNATIONAL EXPANDS ITS TURFLCI International Inc. last month announced definitive plansto buy two affiliated regional long-distance companies forabout $124 million. The companies-Teledial America Inc., whichoperates as US Signal Corp., Grand Rapids, Mich.; and ATS NetworkCommunications Inc., Memphis, Tenn.-will give LCI greater reachin the Midwest and the South, LCI said. Also last month, McLean,Va.-based LCI said it expanded its California operations witha new San Francisco sales office.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Internet Scanner Ported to Win NTBy:Karen RodriguezInternet Security Systems Inc. has announced plans to ship aversion of its Internet Scanner software for systems runningMicrosoft Windows NT, providing users with a tool to detectweak security links in their Internet-connected networks.Employing the same techniques used by hackers to penetrate largecorporate networks, ISS' Internet Scanner will detect up to130 network vulnerabilities, including those found on PCs runningMicrosoft Windows NT and Windows 95.ISS said it plans to provide in mid-1996 a version of its softwarethat runs on Windows NT servers. Scanner runs on major Unixplatforms and the Linux operating system, and is priced accordingto the number of devices in the network. It ranges from $800for a small network to $80,000 for 10,000 devices.The currently shipping version 3.2 of Internet Scanner givesnetwork administrators more control over all local and remotePCs. Such nodes are often the sites in a network from whichhackers gain access to corporate network resources, said ChrisKlaus, founder and CEO of ISS, Norcross, Ga."Our focus on Microsoft holes stems from our understanding thatthe weakest link on a network is often the common PC," Klaussaid.Scanner SpecificsScanner is a diagnostic tool that simulates Internet hackerattacks, similar to the highly publicized Security AdministratorTool for Analyzing Networks software that is available freeon the Net. But, as a commercial product, Scanner is supportedand regularly updated with detections for newfound vulnerabilities.Scanner directly tests for Internet Protocol spoofing; firewallchecks, such as source porting; and other risks to Web servers.It also tests for mail security holes and vulnerabilities inX-Windows, as well as access to Network File System and bruteforce break-in attempts.The tool automatically tests a network and generates a reportthat can be viewed by a Web browser with links to patches andreferences to Computer Emergency Response Team advisories andother software solutions."We use Scanner as a diagnostic tool," said George Kurtz, datasecurity consultant at Price Waterhouse's Management ConsultingGroup in Morristown, N.J. "It's been a real big help. It'scomprehensive and Chris Klaus is always looking for the latestvulnerabilities and immediately building them into the product.There is no lag time between discovery and update."Scanner can be used in tandem with firewalls and other packetfiltering devices to ensure they are configured correctly andremain current with the latest security measures."As a sanity check, administrators should be running these toolsagainst their firewalls for an overall security check. If thereare any holes, you can bet a hacker will find out," Kurtz said.He added that in their zeal to connect to the Net, many companiesneglect to define a security policy or firewall implementation,which can lead to break-ins despite efforts to put the bestsecurity measures in place.ISS can be reached at http:// iss.net or 404-441-2531.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Hummingbird Enhances Columbus SoftwareBy:KAREN RODRIGUEZHummingbird Communications Ltd. will broaden its intranet strategyby integrating advanced portable document technologies intoits Columbus suite of Internet/intranet software.By adding Common Ground Software Inc.'s suite of document authoring,management and collaborative documentation-development technologies,acquired in late December with its $6 million purchase of CommonGround, Hummingbird will be better positioned to help its usersbuild their internal distributed networks using the Internet."Common Ground's electronic-document technology offers morethan just document authoring and archiving tools-it providesorganizations with a highly functional platform for informationmanagement and workplace collaboration," said Fred Sorkin,chairman, president and CEO of Hummingbird, Toronto.Hummingbird had licensed Common Ground's technology for inclusionin Columbus, Hummingbird's intranet/Internet desktop suitefor PCs. Common Ground 2.0, which will be integrated into Columbusand ship Jan. 15, includes a platform-independent, electronicportable document technology that competes with Adobe SystemsInc.'s Acrobat. It also contains a collaborative document-authoringenvironment, intranet/World Wide Web publishing and archivaltools, and utilities that enable legacy documentation to beconverted easily to a portable electronic-document format forenterprise-wide distribution.Columbus is expected to cost between $150 and $300 per desktop.Initial versions will run on Microsoft Windows 3.11 clients;versions for Win 95 and Win NT will follow later in the year.A personal Web server has been built into Columbus to let usersin the intranet create their own home pages, as well as anintelligent agent that automatically collects information withinthe company.Additional technologies available include Common Ground's Webpublishing system that includes a batch-file-format converterfor moving legacy documents onto the Web.Common Ground, Belmont,Calif., pioneered the electronic-documenttechnology market with the release of Common Ground 1.0 in1993.Hummingbird can be reached at 416-496-2200.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: DELRINA OFFERS BROWSER WAREDelrina Corp., Toronto, is shipping Internet software for MicrosoftWindows 95. The software includes a Web browser; UseNet Newsreader; File Transfer Protocol file transfer; Internet chatsessions; electronic mail; and search capabilities. Cyberjack7.0 also includes the Cyberjack Guidebook, which helps userssave, sort and categorize Internet sites. The product includestwo update capabilities, one for accessing new content andthe other for automatically receiving program upgrades andmaintenance releases. The list price of Cyberjack is $129,but Delrina is offering Cyberjack at a promotional price of$49 through Feb. 29. (800-268-6082.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: NETWARE WEB SERVER SHIPSNovell Inc. has announced shipment of its NetWare Web Server,Internet-server software for networks running NetWare 4.1.NetWare Web Server includes support for Novell's NetWare DirectoryServices, the directory service in NetWare 4.1. The suggestedretail price for the server software is $995 per copy. (http//www.novell.com or 800-873-2831.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: VRML BUNDLED INTO CHAMELEONNetManage Inc., Cupertino, Calif., has said it plans to bundleVirtual Reality Modeling Language technology into its Chameleondesktop connectivity software for Microsoft Windows NT andWindows 95 desktops. The VRML software, called VR Scout, wasdeveloped by Chaco Communication Inc. According to NetManage,Chaco's technology lets users view interactive 3-D virtualreality scenes and objects. NetManage's WebSurfer softwareis available free from the company's Web site. Chameleon forWindows NT at $495 per copy. Chameleon for Windows 95 willship this month. (http://www.netmanage.com or 408-973-7171.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Ganymede Lets Its Chariot RideBy:RUTRELL YASINNetwork managers looking for a way to determine how their clientserver applications will have an impact on network performanceshould find what they are seeking with a product from GanymedeSoftware Inc.The start-up has launched Chariot, a software tool that letsnetwork operators simulate application data traffic on theirnetworks, letting them gauge the effect an application willhave on the network before deploying it.The emergence of such technologies as frame-relay and asynchronoustransfer mode (ATM) have prompted network managers to searchfor tools that can handle a variety of performance- analysisduties, the Research Triangle Park, N.C., company said. Networkmanagers and vendors are using a combination of products-modelingtools, Remote Monitoring software and frame generators-to testperformance, said Steve Joyce, vice president of marketingat Ganymede.Beta testers said Chariot will complement their traditionaltesting and analyzer tools because it gives them a way to measurethe end-to-end performance of complex networks.Performance EvaluationNorth Carolina's Microelectronics, Communications and NetworkingCenter, an interoperability testing lab in Research TrianglePark, is using Chariot to evaluate the performance of its ATMnetwork. With its ATM infrastructure, MCNC is providing a wayfor customers and vendors to evaluate high-speed networkingtechnology and applications."We're trying to see what happens to applications running inan ATM" network that typically has voice, video and data runningacross it, said Nancy Agosta, director of MCNC's Center forNetwork Testing Services.Chariot consists of an IBM OS/2-based console and end pointsthat reside on OS/2 or Microsoft Windows 95-based client workstations.Chariot will be available at the end of the month. Pricing startsat $11,000.Ganymede can be reached at 919-558-1138.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Clientele Boosts Wares -- Help-desk features enhance suite ofautomation toolsBy:BETH DAVISClientele Software Inc. expanded its suite of automation toolsby adding help-desk capabilities.The company, formerly known as AnswerSet Corp., has added ClienteleIS, a software package that builds on its flagship product,Clientele, combining asset management and problem resolutionwith Clientele's call-tracking and management capabilities,the Tualatin, Ore., company said.Kevin Roberts, MIS director at Clark, Klein and Beaumont plc,a Detroit law firm, said he originally bought Clientele a yearago "because of its flexibility and ability to be molded intoyour environment.''Because Clientele was designed to support external customers,Roberts tweaked it to fit his internal IS department. In thepast month, however, Roberts said he has been impressed withthe new software. "I think they did a better job than I did,''he said.Dale Wetzelberger, operations manager for Baltimore-based AerotechInc., said he chose Clientele/IS to support the approximately1,500 employees working for the personnel and temporary placementfirm because it's easy to customize.The software maintains a list of preferred products, servicesand vendors. It also processes and tracks new equipment ordersand converts received orders to registered inventory. Assetscan be identified by pre-defined categories, such as serialnumber, asset number or user.Call-tracking features enable incoming calls to be assignedto specific support representatives or user-defined groups,which can represent physical location or other attributes.Running under Microsoft Windows on a PC platform, the softwarecosts $3,495 and includes three concurrent user licenses, trainingand one year of support and maintenance. It is available now.Clientele Software can be reached at 503-598-4500.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Trellis Debuts Services SuiteBy:BETH DAVISTrellis Network Services Inc. has released a new suite of servicesaimed at helping network managers predict problems and planfor future growth.The outsource service, dubbed Advanced Technical OperationsCenter (ATOC), is designed to help companies maximize networkproductivity and minimize costs, said the Princeton, N.J.,provider of systems management and training services.Network diagnostics, network monitoring and management, andnetwork administration are service offerings included.ATOC Network Diagnostics uses support tools to assess networkperformance and response times.ATOC Network Monitoring and Management includes several modules.One analyzes network trends and provides a warning system forthresholds.Another module lets Trellis engineers correct network problemswhen they are discovered by the alerting system.ATOC Network Administration uses Computer Associates InternationalInc.'s Unicenter and other tools for local and remote networkadministration.ATOC is available now; pricing depends on network configurationand is based on a per- user, per-month structure.Trellis can be reached at http://www.trellisnet.com or 609-9870660.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: AXON SHIPS WAN MGM'T PROBEAxon Networks Inc., Newton, Mass., has released WANServant Managerand WANServant Probe, giving network operators a detailed pictureof WAN bandwidth utilization and confirmation of frame-relayservice levels. The WANServant Probe is available now. Pricingstarts at $6,400 for the WANServant Probe with 8 megabytesof memory. (617-630-9600.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: ELIMINATING BOTTLENECKSExecutive Software International Inc., Glendale, Calif., hasrolled out a new version of I/O Express, which has been redesignedto take advantage of Digital Equipment Corp.'s Alpha CPU byeliminating disk I/O bottlenecks. I/O Express 4.0 speeds systemresponse time by using excess host memory to store frequentlyused data blocks from disks. Available now, prices range from$480 to $19,800. (800-829-4357.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: MICRO DESIGN'S STORAGE SOLUTIONMicro Design International Inc. has announced a new storagemanagement solution, SCSI Express 2.5 for NetWare, that includesan on-disk directory, advanced administrator setup functions,icon representations and an improved graphical user interface.SCSI Express 2.5 for NetWare is priced at $595. (407-677-8333.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: CHARGEBACK TOOL SETPlatinum Technology Inc., Oakbrook Terrace, Ill., is broadeningits systems management portfolio by acquiring BMS ComputerInc.'s integrated chargeback system for distributed environments.The Computer Installation Management System application suiteconsists of tools for job accounting, chargeback, cost analysis,resource-utilization reporting, capacity planning and resourcemonitoring. (708-620-5000.)Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Management Insight: RESOLUTIONS? BAH, HUMBUG! HERE'S AN ENTERPRISE MGM'T WISH LIST INSTEADBy:Rick SturmNow that the holiday season is behind us, most of us are lookingforward to the new year. It's the time to set goals and makeresolutions. I won't make my New Year's resolution here, butI do submit a wish list for things I would like to see happenin the world of management in 1996.First, as many people are thinking about peace, I add a muchmore modest wish. The acrimony and divisiveness that emergedlast year around the SNMPv2 issue has been appalling and incrediblydestructive. Not only have friendships been ruined, but manyother Simple Network Management Protocol-related efforts havebeen stalled pending resolution of this issue, and the effectivenessof the entire Internet Engineering Task Force standards processhas been called into question. So, the first item on my wishlist is for peace within the SNMP community.The second item is very closely related to the first. I wouldlike to have a secure, effective way to control and configuredevices remotely on a network. I don't care if you call thissolution SNMPv2. All I care about is getting this ability assoon as possible.Next, I'd like to see the major vendors of management softwaredeclare a moratorium on the acquisition of independent companies.The current trend in the industry is for larger companies towait for someone to develop a new product and then buy it.This approach carries far less risk than attempting to developsomething new. On the other hand, it seems a little like cheatingon an exam in school.I would also like to see the platform vendors agree on a commonset of application progamming interfaces for their products.This would allow third-party developers to develop and introduceproducts more quickly and at a lower cost.My fifth wish is that all of the major platform vendors participatein the Enterprise Management Shoot-Out at the Enterprise ManagementSummit. This is the one concrete way in which they can allowusers to compare their products in an objective environment.Finally, I want people to understand better the issues of networkand systems management. First, I'd like to have the end usersunderstand it, so they can be more realistic in the demandsthey place on operations. Second, I'd like for middle and uppermanagement to raise their levels of awareness so they can makehigher-quality decisions about funding network and systemsmanagement.I do not limit this just to users. I would like to see peopleon the vendor side have a better grasp of these issues, too.Each area is important and each of us can have an impact onthem. I plan to do all that I can in those areas and hope thatyou will as well.Rick Sturm is a principal at San Francisco's Enterprise ManagementInstitute Inc., dedicated to advancing enterprise managementthrough education and research. He also has been extensivelyinvolved in network and systems planning at one of the Belloperating companies. The opinions expressed are his own. Hecan be reached at rick@emi-summit.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Editorial: MIDDLEWARE TO BOOST APP SMARTS IN '96There's ample evidence to support the contention that 1996 maybe the year network applications finally get some needed smarts.And middleware will be the magic pill that's going to boostapplication intelligence. Middleware is the first incarnationof component software-the application model the industry isslowly moving toward.Middleware solutions will provide the glue companies will needto design and build applications that are integral to a newdynamic computing model.Over the course of last year we saw such vendors as Sun, IBMand Microsoft lay out their middleware and object strategies.Last fall, Sun began shipping its Network Enterprise Objects.NEO relies on Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA),the industry-standard way for objects to communicate acrossthe network. The NEO platform includes OpenStep, an objectoriented development environment to build clients that canaccess CORBA services or CORBA objects running on the server;and Java, which can provide a client front end for NEO/CORBAbusiness objects running on the server.IBM is a member of the Object Management Group, which promisesto support CORBA with its system object model and future distributedsystem object model products.IBM has also detailed plans to integrate its own asynchronousmessaging product, MQSeries, with several of its products.Microsoft's approach centers on Object Linking and Embedding(OLE), which has had a desktop-centric view of the world. NetworkOLE, however, which is Microsoft's version of the Open SoftwareFoundation's DCE RPC, is expected sometime in 1997. It willprovide distributed features to OLE.There's also ample evidence that distributed applications willchange the way we do business. We're beginning to see a glimpseof this in the way access to corporate networks has been affectedby the Internet.With asynchronous, store-and-forward technologies and distributedobjects, the need for expensive, full-time server-to-serverconnections has diminished and the move toward smarter applicationsis a given. Increasingly, the presence of middleware on enterprisenetworks is becoming the norm.With its adoption, the structure of the network will undergoa healthy change, one that will allow it to mirror the waypeople work.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Inside Perspective: NETWORK MANAGERS FACE A CHALLENGING YEARBy:Chris RoecklLike me, many of you probably spent the past couple of weekscleaning up your office, preparing for the new year. Afterall, the end of December seems to be the only time in the networkingbusiness when things slow down.You also may have spent some time contemplating what this yearwill bring in terms of new products and services that willhelp make designing, implementing and managing your enterprisenetwork and the network applications that ride on that networkeasier.Certainly, many products will be delivered. We'll play our rolein helping you find them, as well as track the trends thataffect your business.For example, the lines separating many technologies continueto blur. There's been talk about the convergence of networkingand computing technology for years, where industry nirvanaamounts to the networked multimedia desktop. In the past coupleof years, major progress has been made to bring these technologiestogether.Such developments necessitate that companies take a team approachwhen buying technologies. No longer can a network manager beisolated from client/server applications developers or viceversa.Further, technologies within the enterprise network infrastructureitself continue to become muddled. Thus, the decision aboutwhom to partner with for an array of networking equipment becomesmore difficult.Layer on top of this trend the Internet and things really startto get confusing. The Internet is changing the way companiesthink about how they conduct their businesses. And beyond thefrenzy of preparing for electronic commerce, smart companiesare realizing that the structure of the Internet is suitableto their business models; hence, the rise of the corporate"intranet."The Internet also stands to turn the telecommunications marketupside down, as companies begin to view the Internet as a viablevehicle for handling network traffic that had been the soledomain of traditional telephone companies using private leasedlines.This comes at a time when the telecom industry is going throughsignificant change. While Congress tries to break up the remainingmonopoly of the local loop, the phone companies and local regulatorsare working at the state level to bring competition into thelocal services market.These are just a few of the major areas that are reshaping theworld we work in today. So, if you were expecting your jobto get a little easier in 1996, it won't. Indeed, it will probablybe more difficult than ever.What's different from years past, though, is that corporatemanagement is now fully cognizant of the importance of theenterprise network. This puts the corporate network managerin the spotlight.We're aware that critical decisions can make or break the careerof a corporate network manager. That's why we take our jobof helping you make the right choices so seriously.I wish you the best of luck in 1996.Chris Roeckl is CommunicationsWeek's executive editor. Lettersto the editor in reaction can be sent via MCI Mail or the Internetto 678-7017@MCIMAIL.COM or by fax to 516-562-5055.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Letters to the Editor: ISDN EVERYWHEREYour article "ISDN Links Get Coded" has shed a glimmer of hopeon our efforts to make ISDN as "easy" to use as possible [CommWeek,Dec. 4]We are an Internet-service provider in the process of testingISDN connectivity in hopes of being able to offer this servicewithin the first quarter of 1996.We are going to be performing many tests on installation procedures,equipment configuration, software configuration and the wholeprocess of ordering ISDN. It is our hope that the lessons learnedthrough this exercise will let us set up a template and guidelinesfor our clients interested in Internet connectivity via ISDN.This has not been an easy task. Fortunately, our phone company(Nynex) has changed its ISDN division management and is nowactively supporting ISDN requests and installations in itsservice area. It has been very forthcoming in helping us establisha test platform for its service.I am confident that with Nynex's help, we will be able to jumpthe ISDN hurdle and get this service up and running.Michael Wil SwierczGeneral ManagerBorg Internet Services Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Letters to the Editor: BEHIND THE TIMESI read with interest your story about Infonet Software SolutionsInc.'s Messenger 400 and its ability to support message archiving["MTA Archives Mail Messages," CommWeek, Dec. 11]In fact, Messenger 400 is far down the power curve in its supportof archiving. Innosoft International Inc.'s PMDF message-transferagent has included message archiving for several years andseveral of my consulting clients, including CGnet Servicesand the Executive Office of the President, have used this featurewith great success. The latter, in fact, is using message archivingspecifically to support the requirements of the National Archivesand Records Administration mandate-since they were the agencythat originally brought this issue to the public eye.Joel M. SnyderTucson, Ariz.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Letters to the Editor: GETTING THE MESSAGE OUTI just read the excellent editorial in CommunicationsWeek [Perspective,"The Internet Phone Is Poised to Conquer," CommWeek, Dec. 11].I could not agree with you more.I wish this piece would somehow get into the "old media" towake up the rest of the world. The Internet has given the commonperson the "fire of the gods" and I hope it will indeed changethe world for the better.Joe Zuccarovia the Internetzuccaroj@psi.comI found your article interesting. I had thought Howard Bubb[CEO and president of Dialogic Corp.] or Mitel Corp. wouldhave led the way and made the concept and market mature. Isee that Micom Communications Corp. has the closest thing tosomething practical along these lines. The stuff you talk aboutwill happen.Fortunately, Microsoft Network, America Online, CompuServe andProdigy will still have to compete with the small POP.Charles Daringervia the Internet73573.174@compuserve.comThe column begs the question of whether you are aware of the"Free World Dialup Project" which is already under way by somein the iphone user community.Check the World Wide Web page http://www.pulver.com:80/ fwd if you are not familiar with this.I am not sure what the outcome will be, but it is an interestingconcept along the lines of what you were writing about.Robert E. Spivackvia the Internetspiv@netcom.comBack to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Letters to the Editor: MISSING THE MARKYou have missed the point [Rash's Judgment, "The World Accordingto Gates: Universal Access and the Benefits of the Internet,"CommWeek, Dec. 4]. The reason there is no detail is that upuntil now, Microsoft was pursuing a proprietary (again) solutionto Internet business, the Microsoft Network. Not until theyrealized they missed the mark by a long shot did the tone changeat Big Blue, er, Redmond.Gates has been hammered lately by those who fail to bow to hisRedmondship and their "steal-anything-at-all-cost" philosophy.Faced with an Internet marketplace where innovation is king,Microsoft has a lot of catching up to do.Gates impresses people with his power and money, especiallymedia types. Just take a look at the millions of dollars offree publicity he got for that sophomoric fiasco called theWindows 95 launch. The media ate that up like candy. Too badmost of them know nothing about what Microsoft technology reallydoes and doesn't do.This mail is being sent from a Windows 95 workstation. In spiteof the horsepower I have (100-megahertz Pentium), it is dogslow. The interface is clumsy, and in no way comparable tomy other computer, my Apple Macintosh Quadra. If I had to sendyou an attached document from this mail station, the non-MultipurposeInternet Mail Extension-compliant Microsoft Mail would automatically"un-encode" the software, forcing you to run it through a binaryconverter so you could read it. I have no options to turn thatnonsense off.Thank heaven they don't force me to go through the MicrosoftNetwork to get to the Internet. I would quit.Microsoft is good at selling to the masses. I would guess theyspend more as a percentage on marketing than on research anddevelopment. It's too bad their products are second-rate, clearacross the board.Bill Gates is definitely not the person to lead us boldly forward.He misguessed the Internet and is back-filling. This industryis driven by demand and competition, not by self-appointedpundits.Larry Hewittvia the Internetlarryh@dis.wa.govBack to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590THE CHANGING ROLE OF THE NETWORK MANAGER -- As networks becomestrategic corporate assets, business savvy becomes key to mostmanagers' successBy:MARGIE SEMILOFSure, the network is still what matters most. But traditionalnetwork managers are learning that business acumen, not technicalknow-how, now holds the key to their future success.Almost overnight, the information industry's computer fixationhas shifted from the desktop to the network. Along with thismetamorphosis comes a number of major changes for those chargedwith developing the corporate computing infrastructure."I come from the days when Mr. Fixit was all anyone needed,"says Anthony Iorio, director of telecommunications at ITT Corp.,New York. "Today, my technical expertise is not as importantas knowing how to negotiate or whom to call if I need someoutside help."Iorio's new role reflects the business changes taking placeat his company. As ITT splits into three companies this month,Iorio's job will be transformed as well. In the past, Ioriowas responsible for hands-on development for a corporate telecommunicationsnetwork that incorporated the ITT Hartford insurance company,the ITT Industries defense contractor and the corporate headquartersowner of the Sheraton Hotels and Caesar's World casinos.Wheeling and DealingIncreasingly, Iorio is more of a deal maker, managing and negotiatingcorporate contracts for the parent company. He also evaluatesnew technologies before they are introduced into the corporatearchitecture, and he's not alone in his new responsibilities.As in the past, Iorio and other network managers still mustdeliver 100 percent uptime, but their bigger challenge is marryingapplications to business processes when the technology itselfis a fast-moving target.In addition, managers must explain the vast amount of technologyinnovation to senior managers, who read about networking injust about every magazine and hear about it every time theyturn on the television.It's not easy to make a business case for, say, Lotus Notes,when executives read that these technologies could be obliteratedby something called the World Wide Web.Despite the upheaval, network managers are making their markon business. In an October 1995 study conducted by Valley ForgeInformation Services, a Langhorne, Pa., market research firm,80 out of 100 corporate network managers said they have a directinfluence on the business strategy of an organization.The same study puts about 18 percent of network managers inthe executive tier of management in their companies.And with the cost of failure higher than ever, change managementmeans balancing interest in new products and services withthe need to make firm decisions about technology directions."We need to be shrewd about what we choose to go with and whatis a passing fancy," says Colin Crook, senior technology officerat Citicorp, New York.For nearly four years, Crook has developed a global bankingnetwork that makes increasingly intelligent devices availableto the bank's customers.Although a rigid organizational model might be more comfortingto handle internal technology changes, the continually shiftingcomputer-industry landscape makes this nearly impossible. "TheWorld Wide Web didn't exist for us five years ago, and nowit's the hottest thing since sliced bread," Crook says.Even though the full story of the Internet has yet to be told,this late-blooming technology is largely responsible for showingcorporations new ways of connecting to internal users and externalcustomers.Companies, such as Xerox Corp., are building Web sites as inexpensiveand easy ways to connect the company's far-flung employeesto a single, common bulletin board.Other factors-most notably, the advent of truly distributedcomputing-also are contributing to the network's ascent. Andthough the actual price of technology stays about the same,what $2,000 can deliver on a desktop keeps increasing."We have become indifferent to forms of computing, but we needa network to help us put an application anywhere in the world,"says John Hammit, a former CIO at United Technologies Corp.in Hartford, Conn., and president of J. Hammit Group Inc.,a Hartford consulting company.Managers say they must nurture different skill sets comparedto what was required at the beginning of the decade. Businessplanning once proceeded without technology input in most companiesbut no more. Today, though network infrastructure experts maynot have moved any farther up the company flow chart, theyare deeply involved in the business-planning process.What makes today's managers tick? Compared to five years ago,there's added emphasis on working with multinational networks,says Beverly Lieberman, president of Halbrecht Lieberman Associates,a Stamford, Conn., search firm that specializes in hiring seniorinformation technology executives."This isn't just about working with others, culturally speaking,"Lieberman says. "It's about getting work done-working withcarriers and overseas vendors." The nature of the job is morecomplex than in the past.Network managers typically have a degree or two in engineeringor computer science, but fewer than 10 percent have a master'sdegree in business administration. But this may change as seniorexecutives demand their network staff become more businessfocused-the MBA holds higher value.Top managers are paid aggressively, Lieberman says. In a Fortune200-size company, a top person in charge of the corporate networkinfrastructure can earn $200,000 to $275,000, with a salarybonus and stock options. Small-to-medium-size businesses willpay about $100,000 to $150,000.Although the network manager's position in the company hierarchyhasn't changed much, the job has certainly ratcheted up inimportance."The infrastructure person is viewed as more front and center,not back office," Lieberman says.Though business skills are more highly prized than ever, technologyinnovations over the past few years have altered the courseof career paths as well. Consider, for example, network outsourcing,one of the biggest concepts in the 1980s that flip-floppedin the 1990s.A network manager five years ago would have made a buying decisionbased purely on its cost benefit, choosing not to outsource,even though vendors might have positioned it as a money-savingmeasure.Now, even if outsourcing turns out to cost more, a network manageris just as likely to go for it.A study conducted six years ago by Cimi Corp., a Voorhees, N.J.,consulting company, polled 267 CIOs and found that only fourhad outsourced some aspects of their information technology.An updated survey this year revealed 121 out of the 267 CIOsare now outsourcing.What fuels this trend? No company will tolerate a network crash.It was a shock to many managers when, in the mid-1980s, largecompanies such as Merrill Lynch & Co. Inc. handed over allof their telecommunications management to a carrier. Now outsourcingis commonplace.Outsourcing keeps staff sizes small, and though it may costmore, the network manager can hold the outside party contractuallyresponsible for a certain degree of performance.Bob Galovic, managing director of information resources at thenational headquarters of the Automobile Association of America,Heathrow, Fla., was ahead of his time on this trend. He saysthat for years, he preferred Centrex service to owning a PBX.It was worth it to offload the daily grind of running an internalphone system to someone else.ITT's Iorio says he outsources most of his corporation's networkmanagement functions. And John Hodge, CIO at NAC ReinsuranceCo., a Hartford insurer, says he outsources the managementof his legacy computing systems. Hodge also has taken stepsto compartmentalize network services, so, if necessary, hecan change a carrier or buy some specialized service, suchas fax or electronic mail, without a major restructuring. "Thisjob becomes a management of those services," Hodge says.To Outsource or Not to OutsourceOf course, there is outsourcing, and then there is outsourcing.Even where managers retain network control, outsourcing canexist within a technology, like frame-relay, saving managersthe trouble of building a private multiplexed network.In these cases, "you are essentially letting the carrier dothe multiplexing for you," says Thomas Nolle, president ofCimi. "The corporate network is smaller, even though servicecosts go up."Network sustainability isn't the only thing dictating the buyinghabits of network managers. Network spending also solves immediatebusiness requirements, Nolle says. In the past, spending onthe technical infrastructure tended to be more in anticipationof future business needs.If senior managers want to see a return on their investments,technologies, such as asynchronous transfer mode, will be harderto justify, unless the senior executive has a strong knowledgeof what ATM does. Network managers must provide that expertise.And although network managers and CIOs in traditional informationsystem hierarchies balance technical innovation with businessneed, in some industries there's a growing shift in politicalpower that can't be ignored.Rebel ArmiesWorkgroup knowledge workers-historically leery of central technologyorganizations, which they view as tyrannical and expensiveare seizing control of their own technologies."Populist technology is flourishing in an unprecedented manner,"Nolle says. "One of the little-heralded effects in the shifttoward personal computing is that first-line managers havepurchase authority over computers without needing anyone tosign off."Today, many end-user organizations want to buy and roll theirown applications. A CIO or network manager is often not ina good position to set technical policy if numerous departmentsin a multinational company are running their own show."We see the CIO as holding the coalition together," Nolle says."It's very Eisenhower-esque."Local efforts are less likely to happen in industries with highlevels of transaction processing, such as retail, transportationand utilities, says David Passmore, president of Decisys Inc.,a Sterling, Va., consulting company."These companies still control networking from the top down.Bank tellers don't aspire to be LAN managers," Passmore says.Telecom's RoleAnother consequence of the past five years is that in many companies,the uproar over voice- and data-integration issues appearsto have subsided. Telecommunications and data communicationsmanagers in the post-divestiture world assumed they would mergeunder one collective umbrella.But, again, the populist effect of downsizing technology makesconsolidation irrelevant in some cases. Since the evaluationof new technology is often determined by budget, local departmentscan easily afford a powerful PC that can do a number of complexcomputing and networking tasks.Carriers can sell services, such as AT&T's Network Notes, forexample, that take on the administration of Lotus Notes, orthey can buy Sprint's InfoXchange, which lets network managerslink their E-mail to a WAN without using a premises switch.These products are a boon to local business departments, whichcan-at least in theory-solve networking problems on their ownterms.Although some product ideas have been hits, there are missesas well. Local management of networks in many cases was moresuccessful than managing a network from a single console. Fiveyears ago, networking vendors were hawking a concept calledthe "manager of managers," which included products, such asAT&T's Accumaster Integrator, as a means of overseeing devicesthroughout the enterprise.These technologies were based on the assumption of a hierarchicalsupport structure that would require central management. Today,line departments are buying LAN hubs for local activity andmanaged by the department.Some analysts and CIOs lament the fact that a decentralizedorganization has less purchasing power and lacks a cohesiveplan. But there's an optimistic side to this scenario. Localbranches may spur innovation that could benefit the entirecorporation.According to AAA's Galovic, his office sets a technical coursefor 113 national clubs. But it's possible that a regional clubmay choose to build something on its own."Our organization does not discourage a local club from doingsomething different, but they need to know we have a core direction,"Galovic says."If they fail at what they do, that's the risk they took. Ifthey succeed, maybe we have to jump on their bandwagon."With this outlook, the network manager is surely entering anew era.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590TECHNOLOGY: WHAT'S ON THEIR MINDS?By:Margie SemilofAsk 10 network managers their top technology picks for the nextthree years and expect to get just as many answers.There is some agreement, however. The Internet, asynchronoustransfer mode, multimedia, computer-telephony integration (CTI)and mobile and wireless computing top most lists. Additionally,truly distributed, object-based computing that goes beyondthe creation of a mere client/server architecture is on theirminds, as well.And, they say, don't write off so-called "old" technology. Fiveyears ago the World Wide Web held little appeal and everyonepredicted the demise of the mainframe. Now, the mainframe stillendures and technologies like the Internet are taking off.In no particular order, here is a sampling of technologies networkmanagers consider their priority over the next three years.- The Internet-more specifically, the World Wide Web. Managersof corporate infrastructure all agree that the Internet isimportant, but are not yet sure how it can help them. In thesame breath, network managers say they want quantum improvementsto network security.- High-speed networks. These are needed to support faster, lowcost multimedia on the desktop. The convergence of voice, dataand video will be assisted by the simultaneous introductionof high-speed networks. Anthony Iorio, director of telecommunicationsat ITT Corp., New York, says CTI and multimedia are key toproviding personalized services to guests at ITT's hotel andcasino operations."Today, if a guest calls in to a hotel 100 times we will haveno prior information about that person," Iorio says. "Usingone basic CTI application, if that guest calls in, a screencan pop up and we will have all we need to know about thatperson: what type of room they like, what type of servicesthey prefer."- Object-based systems. Object technology lets corporationsspeed the time it takes to build applications and thereforerespond quickly to market changes. Network managers will continueto distribute computing-storing information where it can dothe most good-rather than consolidating information in onehost repository.- Mobile communications. Mobile networks will serve thousandsof sales forces and telecommuting users, as well as those atremote sites. The Automobile Association of America, Heathrow,Fla., says it considers mobile and wireless technology to bethe basis for developing a vehicle locator and a primary meansof member-club communications.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590HE'S IN THE DRIVER'S SEATBy:Margie SemilofNot long ago pundits predicted the demise of telecommunicationsmanagers. Word was that IS shops would absorb corporate telecommunicationsand those who ran the voice networks would report to computernetwork gurus.Bob Galovic disproves the theory. The Automobile Associationof America's director of information resources crossed theboundary from manager of voice services to corporate informationsystems administrator, and now he's steering the course.Galovic is a nine-year veteran of AAA, based in Heathrow, Fla.,with previous telecommunications management experience at Procter& Gamble Co., Cincinnati.The reason for his success has to do with AAA's long-held viewthat telecommunications is central to its internetworking strategy.Before Galovic was hired, the nationwide AAA had not yet tiedtogether its 113 member clubs-an effort that began in the late1980s when Galovic took an active role in building LANs using10Base-T Ethernet.Today Galovic oversees management of all PCs, software and datacenter support, including legacy systems, voice systems anddata networking. The information systems staff now numbers70people."I don't claim to be a PC guru," says Galovic, who has a degreein mathematics. "I just need to know enough to understand it."In the next few years, based on the changing needs of AAA,our next round of activity will be looking at delivering corebusiness products and services to external customers," he says.Technologies such as the Internet and new call-distributiontechniques will alter the way AAA communicates with its customers,he says. The biggest challenge does not center on any one technology,however. Rather, it's the management of change-knowing whattechnologies to adopt and what roads to bypass."You need to keep creativity high but still adhere to some basicprinciples," Galovic says. "We want to remain cost-effectiveand present ourselves as a unified organization with consistenthigh-quality products."So far, it seems, he's driving AAA down the right road.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Industry Insight: Understanding the 'Net's Business ModelBy:Don GoodingAt Venture Market East, in the shadow of Harvard University,dozens of entrepreneurs recently had an opportunity to telltheir stories to crowds of eager but skeptical financiers.At each presentation the same question was raised by the suitand-tie crowd: "What's your business model?"Now, for any self-respecting MBA, this is practically questionNo. 1.The business model is the qualitative and quantitative answerto a set of important, basic questions: Who are your customers?How expensive and time-consuming is customer acquisition? Howmuch do they pay you? What are the profit margins?In the brave new world of the Internet, however, the answersare not easy.Internet business models are different from models of most existingbusinesses, different this quarter from last quarter-and probablynext quarter.For example, between Microsoft and Netscape, the traditionaldesktop-software model has been trashed. Microsoft doesn'tsell desktop software-it is in the desktop-software upgradesbusiness, which is why Windows 95 was a seminal marketing eventfor it. Netscape, too, is in the software-upgrades business,and now is facing its first major test with Navigator 2.0.Netscape also is in the server/client business: give away clientsto drive server sales. And Netscape, in its short life, hasmoved quickly from being Internet-driven to being "intranet"driven.The Netscape business model is at least understandable. Moreproblematic for analytic types are Internet content companies.Many entrepreneurs at the conference were in the "spaghettistrategy" mode-throw a lot at the wall and see what sticks.From the audience, the suits ask: "Will you get your revenuefrom advertising, transaction fees, subscription fees, merchandising,software sales, systems integration or custom development?"Jane Webpreneur responds: "Yes."These are not businesses that fit nicely onto a spreadsheet,or at least a spreadsheet that converges on a single numberfor internal rate of return (MBAese for investment profit)Though content models are vexing today, the Internet ServiceProvider (ISP) model was not altogether clear when we investedin Uunet. It took a lot of experimenting and strategizing bymanagement and investors to reach the point where the companycould make a profit. Many ISPs are still refining their models.All of the early Internet winners are led by management thatmoves fast, is flexible, willing to experiment and can quicklyspot winning strategies and rapidly focus resources on what'sworking.Very few large companies are run on this people model. That'swhy entrepreneurs will continue to dominate the Internet untilthe business models settle down.Don Gooding is a research partner at Accel Partners, a San Franciscobased venture-capital firm. He can be reached at DGOODING@ACCEL.COMon the Internet; Accel can be reached at HTTP://WWW.ACCEL.COMon the Internet. The opinions expressed here are his own.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Xylan Moves on Fast TrackBy:JOHN T. MULQUEENThe local-area switching market is hot. Just look at the successof Xylan Corp. over the past 12 months.The Calabasas, Calif.-based company only began shipping itsswitching product early in 1995. To help bring it to market,the vendor sold 10 percent of its stock to an OEM partner,Alcatel Data Networks, Reston, Va., in March 1995 for $10 million.Xylan followed up that distribution deal with OEM contractswith Networks Systems Corp., Hitachi Inc. and Digital EquipmentCorp. as well as the rapid expansion of its own operations.The result has been explosive growth for Xylan, which reported$14 million in sales through the first nine months of 1995but expects to close out its books for the year with almost$28 million in sales, said Douglas Hill, director of marketingand a Xylan founder.Just as important, Hill said, Xylan will be profitable for thefourth quarter, after running in the red for the first ninemonths.A few good profitable quarters built on top of rapid revenuegrowth usually precedes an initial stock offering. For itspart, Xylan reportedly is talking with several top investmentbanking firms about an initial public offering sometime earlythis year.William Becklean, a securities analyst at Hanover InstitutionalSecurities Inc., a Boston investment firm, said Xylan can becompared with San Jose, Calif.-based Alantec Inc., anotherswitch vendor, to estimate Xylan's market value. For the yearended Dec. 31, the publicly traded Alantec is expected to haveestimated earnings of $10.5 million on revenue of $52.5 million.The company recently had a market valuation of 8.4 times revenue.On that basis, Xylan might command a market valuation of about8.5 times revenue, or about $240 million, Becklean said.Another analyst, who asked to remain anonymous, said $240 millionwould be a good starting point, but Xylan would probably wanta higher valuation.During the last round of venture capital financing, Xylan wasvalued at about $200 million and the company would probablywant "to kick up'' the valuation to more than $240 million,the analyst said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Troops Benefit From Key SoftwareBy:JOHN T. MULQUEENA small Pittsburgh company is supplying the U.S. Army with akey piece of software and professional services to providesupport to American soldiers in Bosnia.Carnegie Group Inc. has installed its Knowledge-Based LogisticsPlanning Shell (KBLPS) at three U.S. Army sites in Germanyto analyze and recommend solutions for military supply problemsin Bosnia. KBLPS uses a Unix 2.4 operating system running onSun Microsystem Inc. Sparcstations connected primarily to EthernetLANs, a Carnegie spokesman said.Carnegie, a 12-year-old systems integration and software-developmentcompany, specializes in developing client/ser-ver-based applications that work with existing computer systems.Carnegie derives more than 90 percent of its revenue from providingservices. Carnegie also licenses a small amount of software,which accounts for less than 10 percent of its revenue.For the nine months ended Sept. 30, 1995, revenue was up 52percent, to $19.1 million, compared with the same nine monthsin 1994, largely because of an increase in software services,which jumped 56 percent, to $17.9 million.Most revenue from services came from an extension on a logisticscontract with the Defense Department and a contract with US West Communications Inc.Carnegie has focused on the telecommunications, financial services,manufacturing and defense markets. Its largest customers includeU S West, BellSouth Telecommunications Inc., Ford Motor Co.,First USA Bank and the U.S. Army.Ford is the largest shareholder in the company. Its 560,000shares of common stock represent 9 percent of Carnegie's stock.U S West owns 6.5 percent; Digital Equipment Corp. owns 5.6percent and Texas Instruments Inc. owns 5.4 percent.In November Carnegie raised $10.6 million in its initial publicoffering, consisting of 2 million shares. The company sold1.5 million of the shares and officers and other investorssold the remaining 500,000 shares. The offering share pricewas $8.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Scopus Builds Help-Desk OperationsBy:JOHN T. MULQUEENScopus Technology Inc. has rapidly built a business of sellingsoftware that can be used for enterprise-wide help-desk operations,to support sales and marketing operations and to automate productdesign.Revenue more than doubled to $12 million from $5.4 million forthe six months ended Sept. 30, compared with the same periodin 1994, which is close to the $15.25 million revenue Scopusreported for all of fiscal 1994.Scopus' product line consists of three applications packages SupportTeam, to handle customer support; Quality Team, forproduct design; and SalesTeam, to handle marketing and salesautomation. Other modules and tools are responsible for communications,data replication or customization of applications.Prices of the application packages range from $12,000 to $120,000per server and from $3,000 to $3,500 per user. Other modulesand tools are priced from $3,000 to $20,000.Scopus, Emeryville, Calif., is developing HelpDesk for internalhelp-desk applications and as an extension to SalesTeam tohandle field sales forces. Both are due out the first halfof 1996.Scopus' products run on standard networking operating systemsand relational database management systems, except for InformixSoftware Inc.'s Informix. Support for Informix will be addedearly this year, a spokeswoman said.But Scopus faces increasing competition from various vendorsand has had to call on outside systems integrators and consultantsto help it with larger projects.Outside contractors are expensive and Scopus was unable to passalong all the costs to its customers. Gross margins on serviceand maintenance revenue fell to 7 percent from 42 percent forthe six months ended Sept. 30, compared with the same periodthe year before.Overall, net income for the six months ended Sept. 30 was down42 percent to $227,000 from the $388,000 reported in 1994.Scopus has hired Joan Beardsley as senior director of professionalservices to manage those outside contracts, a spokesman said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590In Brief: FINANCINGMichael Dell, founder and CEO of Dell Computer Corp., is a memberof an investment group that paid $7.4 million for a minoritystake in Edify Corp., a Santa Clara, Calif.-based supplierof interactive software. Goldman Sachs & Co., the New Yorkinvestment firm, led the group. Vixel Corp., Broomfield, Colo.,said it has raised $11.2 million in equity financing and willuse the funds to finance its manufacturing operations. Vixelmakes fiber-optic products for interconnecting switches, routers,hubs, file servers and supercomputers. Commence Corp., in Shrewsbury,N.J., said that Edison Venture Fund, Lawrenceville, N.J., hasinvested an undisclosed amount of money in the supplier ofworkgroup information management software to finance the expansionof its sales and marketing efforts. Commence recently changedits name from Jensen-Jones Inc. Tollgrade Communications Inc.,Cheswick, Pa., sold 1.7 million shares at $12 each in its initialpublic offering. The company supplies diagnostics softwarefor telephone networks.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Ward Off Virus Invasions -- Central House's MimeSweeper helpsisolate infected documentsBy:JEFFREY SCHWARTZCentral House Technologies Inc. this week will unveil softwareto help administrators prevent viruses from invading theirnetworks from the Internet and from external electronic-mailservices.MimeSweeper scans message attachments for viruses and isolatesany E-mail with files believed to contain infected documents,said Joe Rohde, president of Central House, Plymouth, Calif.The company initially will ship MimeSweeper for Lotus cc:Mailnetworks or any Internet E-mail system based on the SimpleMail Transport Protocol.Later releases of MimeSweeper will support Microsoft Corp.'sMicrosoft Mail and Novell Inc.'s GroupWise office-automationsoftware, according to Rohde. MimeSweeper runs on a WindowsNT server and is connected to an incoming message gateway byscanning all attachments prior to routing E-mail within thecorporate network."If the message is OK it is routed to the post office, but ifit's infected the message is quarantined and the administratoris alerted,'' Rohde said.The software interfaces with most anti-virus scanning applications;multiple programs can be invoked, he added.E-mail networks are susceptible to network viruses and networkmanagers often hesitate to implement defensive measures intheir networks until after they are hit by a virus, said MarkLevitt, an analyst at International Data Corp., a Framingham,Mass., consulting company. Levitt said one drawback to usingMimeSweeper is that it does not support encrypted messages."If you and I use encryption, MimeSweeper will consider it asuspect message,'' Levitt said. "Encryption is not widespreadtoday, but as more companies start using encryption, this couldbe an issue.''Rohde said Central House plans to support encryption in futurereleases.Available now, MimeSweeper is priced at $2,850 for the first100 users and $650 for an additional 100 users.Central House can be reached at 209-245-5900.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Case Ventura, Net Detective: Buyouts & Binges In the New YearNoon was just a few minutes away when I reached my office. Ipaused at the door and my eye fell upon a small brown parcelleft lying on the walk. As I bent to pick it up, I heard heelsclicking behind me on the sidewalk. Rita Telco and Belle Nomourwheeled up to me, their faces distraught."You don't want to go in there.''They were trembling like network managers with massive investmentsin Vines. What's the problem, I wondered?I already had had a lousy week. I hate New Year's because itmeans I am another year older. Plus, I ate too much duringthe holidays and my stomach was as shaky as Lotus' ship datesfor Notes 4.0.There are other things on my mind. For instance, I heard thatHewlett-Packard was finally bringing its NetServer managementtools up to snuff for OpenView. Today, a user can set performancethresholds, but the system won't say anything is wrong unlessit is specifically asked about it. So what was the point ofhaving performance thresholds? The new version sends an alertto the administrator, just as in the current Windows version.And Oracle is expecting a mid-January release of Oracle Lite,a database for mobile users. It will sell for only $99 andbe a preview of Oracle8 with its handling of new data types.Oracle built this object/relational hybrid database from theground up.My secretary, Lotta Memory, also said Novell will partner withAurora Systems to bring telephony features to Novell's GroupWiseoffice-automation software. It's likely that the software couldbe one of the biggest hits at the Computer Telephony Expo inMarch.Aurora makes FastCall, a middleware platform used by most telecommunicationscompanies to bring telephony features to Windows applications.At the same show, Applied Voice Technology, a company thatmakes LAN-based messaging software, will release a slew ofunified messaging products.Then there are the year's first buyout rumors. From the desertedgin mills of Wall Street, Caseworkers said they overheard thatNetscape Communications wants to acquire FTP Software.Netscape would get a TCP stack, access to some major FTP customersand some substance to go with its $5 billion capitalization.I suddenly realized Rita had a bottle of my favorite scotchtucked under her arm. Belle took the brown package from myarms."You won't find a buyer for Novell in there, Case.''I put the key in the lock and turned it. My office door openedand I was shocked at what was on my desk.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 590Rash's Judgement: MY EDITOR MADE ME DO IT: GUESSING WHAT'S HOT IN NETWORKING THIS YEARBy:Wayne Rash Jr.Given the mind-boggling frenzy surrounding the Internet lastyear, I'm not sure if it's safe to predict what might cometo communications in 1996. I don't think anyone foresaw themagnitude of the Internet's impact. Yet one way or another,it's affected nearly everything in networking.On the other hand, one of the tasks we columnists are saddledwith by our editors is to predict the future accurately. Thisbeing my first column of the new year, I'm discharging thisawesome responsibility as quickly as possible. Besides, thatway, by the end of the year, no one will remember whether Iwas right or not.In any case, some trends are obvious, even if some of the moveshaven't been played out yet. For example, it's pretty clearthat the entertainment industry and the information industryare developing a real synergy. The deal between Microsoft andNBC Television is only one example, although it's probablyone of the more spectacular.By this time next year, you can expect to see a considerablecrossover between entertainment and the on-line world. Of course,that's already happened, as anyone can see when televisionprograms start flashing Uniform Resource Locators on the screenalong with the credits. What's going to change is that muchmore of the actual content will cross over, and it'll be muchmore substantial material than just being able to replay DavidLetterman's Top Ten list. In effect, both Cyberspace and televisionwill become adjuncts of the other, meaning that people willhave to access both to get the full range of information fromeither.This merging will continue in other areas as well, but not allof them will be positive. For example, cable-television companieswill start making a real push to provide access and bandwidthto the Internet. Ask yourself, though, if you're willing towait for long, undefined periods of time for the cable-repairtechnician to arrive when your Internet connection is down.I know that if I had to depend on the companies here in theWashington, D.C., area to provide access, I'd probably neverget on the Internet again.If the company you work for still doesn't have Internet access,expect that to change. The existence of the vast quantity ofinformation to be found on the Net will create its own demand.Many companies will find that such access is a competitivenecessity. Being cut off from this rapidly swelling pool ofknowledge will be like doing without a stock wire or a businessnews service. You can do it only in industries where informationand timeliness don't matter. Outside of the government, I can'tthink of any.Network managers will also be expected to contribute to thisrising tide of content. For example, if you run the networkat your company, you can expect to be asked to start supportinga server on the World Wide Web if you don't already. If youhave that job now, you can expect it to get bigger, bringingalong a new level of involvement to staffers working with everythingfrom router maintenance to security firewalls.Because of these pressures, few network managers will be ina position to resist the demands for greater connectivity.And those network managers who find ways to manage this connectivityeffectively will find their positions growing in importance.Many of those managers will be having a very good year, indeed,by the time 1997 gets here. Many of their suppliers-everyonefrom Internet service providers to on-line security specialistswill have a very good year, as well.Now, just promise me you won't go back and read this next Januaryand tell me how short- sighted I was. Remember, my editorsmade me do it.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-8IA086-000622-B035-290http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te28.html 205.156.212.5 19970122044949 text/html 203850HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:47:18 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:05 GMTContent-length: 203662Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te28.html Sample Issue Copyright COMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNet October 15, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES WORLD NEWS U.K., U.S. SLASH ACCOUNTING RATES -- Resale Era Begins (273 words) France Blazes Data Net Trail (259 words) SWIFT Sets New Agenda (336 words) Alcatel Hits Back -- Italian Merger To Counter AT&T (492 words) SOME FIBER SYSTEMS TO BE COMBINED -- Asian Cables Plotted (278 words) Shakeup At ETSI -- Users Lose Important Voice In Standards (542 words) RULES MAY FACILITATE PRIVATE NETS -- Germany Reregulating (444 words) CHOTS Delayed (45 words) Forum Entrant (68 words) Infonet Buy (50 words) DEC Tariff (49 words) OSI MAY NEVER OVERSHADOW SNA -- Is IBM Committed? (867 words) Foreign Carriers Vie For Teleport (113 words) Hermes Partners Lined Up (113 words) Hong Kong's CT2 Plans, Bidders (270 words) Fujitsu's Euro-Focus (425 words) CEPT Begets ECTRA (286 words) Germany Postponing Telepoint (136 words) Trading Tangled In Technology (106 words) The Underside Of French `Reform' (119 words) Competition Guidelines Debated (80 words) Argentine Network Deal Falls Apart (325 words) Shinto Sentenced (158 words) COMMISSION LAUNCHES COMPETITION INQUIRY -- Tariff Liberalization On Move (1301 words) DUOPOLY REVIEW Second Of A Series -- Cable Operators Take On BT (1267 words) FORUM EDITORIAL -- Lines Of Resistance (594 words) PERSPECTIVE -- Break Down Barriers (370 words) REGIONAL NEWS -- EUROPE FACILITIES MANAGEMENT COMPETITION ON RISE -- New Carrier-Industry Force (603 words) Merger Is Part Of Industry Trend (372 words) STC Deal (46 words) Locstar Gain (53 words) Greek Study (58 words) Switch Order (37 words) Germany Offers ISDN Incentives (230 words) French Look At Audiotex (233 words) REGIONAL NEWS -- ASIA HONG KONG OFFICIALS LOOK TO FUTURE -- Telecoms Views Mixed (1092 words) MPT Visit (55 words) Cellular Deals (126 words) VAN Extended (52 words) REGIONAL NEWS -- NORTH AMERICA Nynex Breakup Considered -- Agency Suggests Divesting Phone Company Unit (470 words) HIGH-SPEED AHEAD FOR US SPRINT, MCI -- Carriers Emphasize Data (602 words) PBX Melding (45 words) NCR Routers (54 words) Vitalink Trims (51 words) No Intervention (75 words) FCC Gets Input On PCN Proposals (464 words) Fujitsu Boosting U.S. Switch Effort (475 words) REGIONAL NEWS -- MEXICO First Telmex Bidders Step Forward (448 words) USER NETWORKING UNIVERSITY PLOTS BROADBAND NET -- Fiber To Cambridge (704 words) Stanford To Join Med Net (201 words) First Union Banks On VSATs (127 words) Forecast Calls For Ethernet (104 words) Developer Lures Business With Fiber (461 words) USER NETWORKING -- COMPUTER CONNECTIVITY Developing World Looks To OSI (498 words) Unisys Unveils Open Architecture (463 words) Novell Offers AS/400 Link (180 words) USER NETWORKING -- PRODUCT BRIEFS Product Briefs -- SmartView/UA, SmartView/UX and SmartView/UXG Networking Products PCP 4500, PCP 5500 Communications Processors (94 words) Product Briefs -- IBM Windows Connection Version 2 (123 words) Product Briefs -- EtherMate 8, EtherMate 8UTP, EtherMate Trio16 LAN Adapters (115 words) Product Briefs -- Novos Version 2.0 (106 words) Product Briefs -- LattisNet Model 2800, Model 2310 10Base-T Concentrators (88 words) Product Briefs -- XD88/700 Multiprocessor Servers (119 words) USER NETWORKING -- PRODUCTS & TECHNOLOGY Business Looks To Video (1214 words) Computer Deal Targets Operators (94 words) Northern To Add Frame Relay (68 words) PEOPLE IBM's European Mouthpiece (693 words) IN THE NEWS (223 words) PARIS-The Club Informatique des Grandes Enterprises Francaises, a (179 words) CALENDAR OCTOBER (246 words) NOVEMBER AND LATER (345 words) CLOSEUP: WAKING THE PTTS 1990 USER SURVEY International Users Take Command (1158 words) How This Users Survey Was Conducted (412 words) International Telecoms Needs -- Are Europe's Users Ready To Go Global? (817 words) Price The Missing Element In Europe's Mobile Market (1192 words) What Users Were Saying One Year Ago (905 words) Increasing User Anxiety Surrounds Data Security (775 words) A Look At The Human Side Of Telecommunications (822 words) CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990U.K., U.S. SLASH ACCOUNTING RATES -- Resale EraBegins    By DENIS GILHOOLY         LONDON   The economic tide has turned.   Experts may quibble over what precipitated the change in pricinginternational telecommunications services, but there is no turning back.      The recommendation by the U.K. Office of Telecommunications to allowsimple resale of capacity on international circuits lays the groundwork for anew bilateral agreement on international resale between the United States andthe United Kingdom, as well as for a web of such agreements betweencountries.   Resale promises to unleash a wave of price competition and choice ininternational telecoms.   Already, resale is exerting downward pressure on the accounting-ratesystem by which countries divide their income from international services.   In August, the decision to open the resale market between Canada and theUnited States was followed by an almost halving of the agreed accountingrate.   And earlier this month AT&T and MCI Communications Corp. filed with theFederal Communications Commission for substantial accounting-ratereductions over the next three years with British Telecom and MercuryCommunications Ltd.   Inevitably, the trend towardtotal market liberalization across the Atlanticis exposing the worst distortions in Europe.   Analysis to be released later this year by the European Commissiondocuments the disarray of intra-European tariffs.   In what the Commission terms the ``frontier effect,'' users are forcedto pay, on average, two-and-a-half times more for an international callthan for an equivalent domestic long distance call.   After conducting its own study, the Commission's competitiondirectorate decided further action is necessary. Directorate commissioner SirLeon Brittan said he will launch an investigation of international telecomspricing across Europe.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990France Blazes Data Net Trail    By ANDREAS EVAGORA         TOULOUSE, FRANCE-France Telecom is building a series ofhigh-speed, fiber optic networks that will provide data communications tospecific industries and other communities in France.   Having proven this custom-designed network concept with a backbonelinking research organizations in Sophia Antipolis, the operator is expectedto open its second such network this month, in Toulouse.   This network will serve Toulouse's sizable scientific and aerospaceindustries.   France Telecom will also soon build a network for the medical community inone French city and is looking to provide networks among banks and othercommercial enterprises.   The networks will deploy compatible but not necessarily identical broadbandtechnology.   The networks in Toulouse and Sophia Antipolis are likely to progress to thefiber distributed data interface local area network standard, for example, butthe operator has not ruled out using metropolitan area networking technologyfor subsequent networks.   Francois Croisille, a France Telecom custom design manager, said theoperator may install between 15 and 20 such networks by 1992.   The Toulouse network will be built with a fiber backbone and link eightorganizations' computer centers and LANs, initially at speeds of upto 2 megabits per second. The second phase of the project will increase speedsto 34 mbps.   Georges Sans, divisional manager for networks at Centre Nationald'Etudes Spatial, a user of the Toulouse network, said similarnetworks are planned near Paris-to link France's Atomic EnergyCommission and the National Institute for Information Research-and inMarseille and Grenoble, all next year.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990SWIFT Sets New Agenda    By DAWN HAYES         oBERLIN-SWIFT, the networking cooperative of 2,000 banksworldwide, will begin moving into new competitive service sectors this week asit claims a contract to network an emerging European foreign exchangesystem.   The contract is expected to be awarded by the Exchange Clearing HouseOrganization, a group of 25 European banks building a common clearing housefor European foreign exchange, SWIFT officials said.   ECHO would establish the first multilateral foreignexchange settlementsystem in the world, in 1992. The networked computer system wouldsubstantially reduce banks' administrative costs by replacing thebilateral arrangements through which they now settle foreign-exchangetransactions.   But the ECHO contract represents just one facet of SWIFT's broadmandate to generate new services to thwart mounting competition.   At their annual conference this month in Berlin, SWIFT officials also saidthey hope to draw the corporate customers of the society's bankmembers onto the SWIFT network, which would boost traffic.   SWIFT, the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications,also intends to move into the market for managed data network services.   And a recent decision by SWIFT to use the EDIFACT standard for electronicdata interchange is key to its entry into a broader range of value-addednetwork services, according to David Birch, director of marketing at HyperionSystems Ltd., a Guildford, England, consultancy.   With increasing competition in the financial services market, growth inmessage volumes for SWIFT slowed in 1989 to 15 percent, from an average of upto 20 percent in the previous five years.   And signs indicate that growth will continue to slip unless SWIFT harnessesa new competitive direction in the 1990s, a banking source said.    ``Innovation may not pay,'' said SWIFT chief executive Bessel Kok,``but non-innovation may lead to loss of markets.''   The ECHO project, along with others SWIFT is considering, will take the17-year-old not-for-profit organization beyond its corebusiness of interbank transfers for payments and statements transfers and intoa new commercial environment.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Alcatel Hits Back -- Italian Merger To CounterAT&T    By ANNE-MARIE ROUSSEL         MILAN-A merger of Alcatel's Italian subsidiary withthe telecoms unit of Italy's Fiat SpA would hit AT&T inthe European markets where it is making the most headway: Italy andSpain.   The deal, disclosed this month, calls for Alcatel-Face to merge withTelettra SpA.   It is ``a direct answer to everything that AT&T has done in Europe forthe past two years,'' said Didier Pouillot, an analyst with Frenchresearch house Idate.   By entering Italy through such a powerful player as Telettra, which has 33percent of the local transmission equipment market, Alcatel appears to beresponding to last year's deal between AT&T and Italianmanufacturer Italtel SpA.   In addition, Alcatel will inherit Telettra's 45 percent share ofthe transmission equipment market in Spain-another country AT&Tis starting to penetrate, through the sale of public switches. Just lastmonth, the U.S. manufacturer opened a new switching plant near Madrid.   On a more global level, Alcatel is now in a position to overtake AT&Tas the world's largest telecoms equipment manufacturer. As Pouillot noted,Alcatel's 15 percent annual growth rate is well above that of AT&T'sequipment business, which is close to zero.    ``I expect that Alcatel will be ahead of AT&T by the end of 1990,''Pouillot said.OPTIMISM TEMPERED   But such anticipated results are tempered by the potential of a politicalbacklash in Italy. The Alcatel-Telettra deal has dashed the hopes ofstate-run industrial group IRI, the holding company for Italtel. IRI hadlong been negotiating to merge Telettra with Italtel into an entity to becalled Telit.   The agreement between Compagnie Generale d'Electricite, Alcatel'sparent company, and Fiat has prompted sour comments from IRI presidentFranco Nobili. ``This agreement will make it more difficult to formnational industrial poles [in Italy],'' he was quoted in the Italianpress.   Italy, which in 1988 embarked on a five-year, $43.5 billionprogram to upgrade the country's telecoms infrastructure, wasexpected to award Telettra about one-third of the transmission equipmentcontracts.   But the Italian government could decide to pull back, following the sameroute the United States took recently when France's Groupe Bull SAbought the computer operations of Illinois-based Zenith Electronics Corp.Following the purchase, the U.S. government decided to renegotiate all itscontracts with Zenith.   The new Alcatel-Telettra entity-to be based in Milan and owned 75percent by Alcatel, 25 percent by Fiat-is to be formed by the end of nextmonth.   With the addition of Telettra, Alcatel must now expand into developingareas, particularly mobile communications, said Christopher Thomas, an analystwith London's Systems Dynamics Ltd.   Telettra's transmission specialty includes mobile communicationssystems. It supplied Italian operator SIP with a 900-megahertz analogsystem, and has contracts to supply part of the network infrastructure fortrials of the Italian, Spanish, Swiss and U.K. links of the planned GSMpan-European digital cellular system.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990SOME FIBER SYSTEMS TO BE COMBINED -- Asian CablesPlotted    By ROBERT POE         SINGAPORE-Network operators from 12 countries have signedagreements on construction and maintenance of the first three links of theplanned ASEAN optical fiber cable system.   An official also revealed that parts of the system will be combined withother cables planned for the Asia-Pacific region, to improve connectivityand save costs.   The US $320 million system, planned to link the six members of ASEAN(Association of Southeast Asian Nations) by 1995, will connect withother systems to provide fully fiber optic undersea routes to both Europe andNorth America.   Besides those from the ASEAN nations of Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, thePhilippines and Singapore, carriers from Australia, Canada, Japan, SouthKorea, Taiwan, the United Kingdom and the United States signed the ASEANsystem agreements.   Singapore Telecom president and chief executive officer Wong Hung Khim saidthe first link covered by the agreements, connecting Kuantan and Kota Kinabaluin different parts of Malaysia, is due to be completed in December. A linkbetween Brunei and Singapore is to begin service late next year. The cableconnecting Brunei, Malaysia and the Philippines will be commissioned in thefirst quarter of 1992, Wong said.   In addition, he said, the Malaysia-Singapore link of the ASEAN systemwill be part of the recently integrated Aspac-Kyutai system(CommunicationsWeek International, 3 September). Aspac-Kyutai,now called APC, will link Singapore, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Taiwan and twopoints in Japan starting in mid-1993.   The Indonesia-Singapore 2 link of the ASEAN system will be part of theSEA-ME-WE 2 cable planned to connect Southeast Asia, the Middle Eastand Europe. A Malaysia-Thailand cable will complete the system.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Shakeup At ETSI -- Users Lose Important Voice InStandards    By JENNIFER L. SCHENKER   SOPHIA ANTIPOLIS, FRANCE-Users appear to have lost the chairmanship ofa key technical committee at the European Telecommunications StandardsInstitute-a development that could have broad implications for userinvolvement in the European standards-making process.   At press time it appeared that Business Telecommunications CommitteeChairman Jan Thurmer would be replaced by either Benoit Gasztowtt fromFrance's Societe Anonyme de Telecommunications or by Bjorn Hansenfrom the Norwegian Telecommunications Administration. Gasztowtt was supportedby Alcatel, Siemens AG and other manufacturers; Hansen, by public networkoperators and L.M. Ericsson.   The Business Telecommunications Committee is charged with formulatingstandards for private and public networks and attached terminal equipment.   ETSI Technical Committee Director Stephen Temple asked Thurmer to resignhis position and instead head a new brainstorming group that will look at howto get users more involved in ETSI activities.   The immediate result of his new job, however, is that users are losingdirect involvement in standards.   Thurmer, the network manager at Nordsk Hydro AS, an Oslo-basedchemical, oil and retailing group, was the only user chosen to head one ofETSI's 12 standards committees. Representatives from telecomsadministrations or manufacturers run the other 11 ETSI technicalcommittees.   Manufacturer officials questioned whether users belong in the chairposition.   ``A user is not interested in what is inside a machine, he isinterested in what it can do,'' said Gerard Robin, who isresponsible for Alcatel's standards activities worldwide and vicechairman of ETSI's adhoc group on rules of procedure.   Robin said PBX manufacturers have supported their own candidate notbecause they want to promote a particular solution but because ``we don'twant to again go through the pains of having a chairman who is not in aposition to understand all the problems.''   He said a good compromise solution would be to appoint a user as vicechairman.ETSI EVOLUTION   ETSI, created in 1988, took over some of the work from the Conference ofEuropean Postal and Telecommunications administration (CEPT). UntilETSI was formed, users and manufacturers did not have decision-makingpower on standards, which were usually decided on in secret byadministrations.   A user serves as vice president of ETSI's general assembly, butsince the organization still remains heavily dominated by CEPT it was alsoconsidered important to have direct user influence on technical questions.   As in other ETSI committees, the Business Telecommunications Committeecomprises manufacturers and operators often favoring divergent approaches tocritical networking questions.   When ETSI selects the new chairman of the committee, ``I hope theperson who will get the job will try to be objective and concentrate on thetechnical job and not be steered by the administration or company he worksfor,'' Thurmer said.   Thurmer was nominated as a candidate for the Business Telecommunicationschairmanship by the International Telecommunications Users Group and has heldthe position since May 1989.   But his travel expenses between Norway and France and the time required bythe ETSI chairmanship put a strain on his company, he said.   INTUG proposed another candidate, the network manager of a major Dutchcorporation. That candidate's company is reportedly prepared to bearthe expenses involved.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990RULES MAY FACILITATE PRIVATE NETS -- GermanyReregulating    By JOHN BLAU AND KAREN LYNCH         BONN-Deutsche Bundespost minister Christian Schwarz-Schilling hasdrafted new regulations that could ease the establishment of privatenetworks and competitive services in Germany.   The regulations, to go into effect in July, would implement the policyinitiatives included in the German telecommunications reform law of lastyear.   While the law called for competition in all but basic telephone service,users and potential competitors have continued to complain that DeutscheBundespost Telekom, the German operator, has been blocking competition andrefusing to bring its tariffs in line with costs.   DBP Telekom was given two years from the signing of the reform bill toadjust its commercial terms to the new competitive market. But industrysources say Telekom has not been moving fast enough in this direction.   Now, Schwarz-Schilling has asked industry and users to comment on abroad range of regulatory proposals. The draft includes such competitiveconditions as a guarantee that all private operators would be assured the sametariffs and conditions as DBP Telekom when leasing lines for value-addednetwork services.   Schwarz-Schilling also proposes a removal of the limitations on voicechanneling and voice compression over data lines and a narrower definition ofthe network monopoly in terms of transmission and network termination, makingmany of the interfaces, such as X.21, competitive.   In a separate development, he also launched a debate to define whichmandatory services DBP Telekom must provide ``in the publicinterest, particularly on account of its obligation to make services andfacilities available to the general public.''   At issue is whether DBP Telekom would be obliged to continue to provideservices that are unprofitable.   Related issues include the means by which Telekom would be allowed to coverthe costs of unprofitable services, and the possible sharing of those costs bycompetitors.   Schwarz-Schilling is circulating a list of questions, seeking commentfrom national and international sources by mid-November.   While the debate now focuses on such services as telex and telegram,Schwarz-Schilling's questions pave the way for a larger debateon the obligation to provide telecoms services nationwide under uniform termsand conditions, rather than provide such services only where they areprofitable.   Among his questions:   o What should be the criteria for deciding whether a new service is ofan infrastructural nature, and thus has to be declared a mandatoryservice?   o What service features should be included in the regulation ofmandatory services (for example, nationwide coverage, uniform tariffsthroughout the service area, quality, compatible standards andrates)?   o What should happen to services that do not cover costs?Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990CHOTS Delayed    LONDON   The U.K. Ministry of Defense has postponed, until year's end,picking a contractor to build a $500 million secure computer networkfor the ministry.   Observers say ministry budget cuts may be the reason for the delay in theproject, codenamed CHOTS.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Forum Entrant    HILVERSUM, NETHERLANDS   NV Philips' business communications systems group has joined theforum formed last year to speed development of standard PBX signalingprotocols.   The IPNS (ISDN PBX networking specification) forum, which now hassix major vendors, was started by Alcatel and Siemens AG, which agreed tocooperate on the development of a single signaling protocol to connectintegrated service digital network PBXs over private networks.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Infonet Buy    PARIS   Global value-added services company Infonet will acquire a majoritystake in Paris-based OSIware International, a supplier of softwareproducts for X.400 messaging.   Infonet president Jose Collazo said OSIware will enable Infonet to performsystems integration in X.400-based systems, sell software to corporationsand provide turnkey systems.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990DEC Tariff    NEW YORK   AT&T has negotiated a discount tariff agreement with DigitalEquipment Corp. for DEC's entire domestic and international interalcommunications needs.   John Berndt, AT&T president of international services, said thatthe companies have agreed on ``a very large virtualtelecommunications network service'' for DEC.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990OSI MAY NEVER OVERSHADOW SNA -- Is IBMCommitted?    By MALCOLM LAWS         LA GAUDE, FRANCE   IBM's facility in La Gaude is one of only twomanufacturer-owned laboratories in Europe approved for testing whetherproducts conform to Open Systems Interconnection standards. Similar labs aretypically run by specialist, independent organizations.   IBM suggests the facility shows its commitment to open systems, not justits own Systems Network Architecture. But the company's position onstandards remains ambiguous, despite its recently stated commitment toimproved OSI support.   Opinions vary.   Laurent Halphen, secretary of SHARE, a European group of 506 IBM users,said at the organization's biannual conference in Paris last monththat it is significant that IBM now starts its announcements with talk of opensystems, evidence that it is listening to its customers.   But Peter Rigg, managing consultant at Logica plc, in London, said``OSI still comes second and quite a long way behindSNA.''   Once reluctant to embrace standards, IBM has had to change its stance inthe face of customer demand for open networks. Yet critics say that despitethe greater prominence IBM gives to open systems, its proprietary systems comefirst. They say that until big IBM users demand OSI-a prospect some yearsaway-it will remain in the background. It does not help that IBM has notproduced list prices for its OSI products.   IBM promises to offer wide-ranging support, not just for OSI and SNA,but also for Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol, widely seen as apractical interim step toward OSI.   Before long, IBM could well earn much of its money building networks thatlink its own computers with those from rivals like Digital Equipment Corp. andHewlett-Packard Co., using OSI protocols as well as SNA and TCP/IP.IBM'S OSI BATCH   Last month, IBM ushered in a new batch of OSI products(CommunicationsWeek International, 1 October). They are designed,for the first time, to run across all IBM's strategic SystemsApplication Architecture operating systems: MVS and VM on mainframes;OS/400; and OS/2 Extended Edition on the Personal System/2 workstation. Someof the OSI programs are available now, while the rest will be phased in overthe next 12 months.   SHARE's Halphen said the September announcements ``addressed thegreater part of what we asked for'' in OSI products.   IBM has replaced its original Open Systems Network Support and OpenSystems Transport and Session Support programs with its newOSI/Communications Subsystem. Over this runs the X.400 Open NetworkDistributed System-with gateways into the Professional Office System(Profs) and Distributed Office Support System (Disoss) and OSI FileServices, an implementation of the OSI File Transfer Access and Managementstandard.   Where previously IBM's OSI programs could access only X.25 widearea packet switching networks, the new OSI range will also have routes acrossintegrated services digital networks and standard token-ring, Ethernet,token bus and fiber distributed data interface LANs.   But IBM is not a convert to standards as a cure for all computing ills.Some manufacturers are moving to drop their own data communicationsarchitectures in favor of OSI, and others, notably DEC, say they will giveequal prominence to standard and proprietary architectures. IBM hasconsistently argued that it does not make sense to drop SNA, which remains,the company says, the best way to link IBM systems.    Jeff Hosier, a director of Xephon Ltd., a Newbury, England,consultancy that specializes in IBM, said ``any IBM user would be off histrolley to get too deep into OSI,'' because SNA is so much richer andreadily available.OSI RELUCTANCE   All IBM mainframe OSI programs run on the Virtual Telecommunications AccessMethod, the main SNA software subsystem that controls session and resourcemanagement across the network, for wide area communications. No native OSIimplementations are possible for remote links between IBM mainframe operatingsystems, at least as far as IBM is concerned.   Logica's Rigg said that although it is possible to bypass VTAM, it isnot worth the effort. VTAM is a stable, widely understood andsophisticated system, he said, although it is expensive and can slow downsessions where it has to process OSI protocols. ``VTAM offers a consistentprogramming interface and it is the last SNA component I would encourageusers to move away from,'' Rigg said.   Direct connection of IBM computers to LANs is through the 3172communications controller. Again, remote mainframe sessions must go via VTAMand IBM's Network Control Program's Packet SwitchingInterface for X.25, or the 7820 ISDN adapter.   John Westgate, an independent consultant who advises the U.K. Department ofIndustry and edits a guide to OSI products, said he is impressed withIBM's open systems efforts. And because governments have so muchbuying power, when it comes to open systems especially, what IBM does toplease them is important-not just for itself, but for supporters of theopen systems cause.   But continued differences from one country to another in the way OSI isimplemented also means that IBM can justify its continued support for SNA.Xephon's Hosier said SNA, as a communications standard, ``is as strong as,if not stronger than, OSI''-a point IBM is unlikely to contest.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Foreign Carriers Vie For Teleport    Foreign telecoms carriers have been vying for entry into the NorthAmerican carrier market by seeking a stake in Merrill Lynch &Co.'s Teleport Communications Group, based in Staten Island, NewYork.   The group, which operates metropolitan area networks in New York and otherU.S. cities, has been rumored to be up for sale for several months.   Sources close to the negotiations say Japan's Kokusai DenshinDenwa, France Telecom, British Telecom and Cable & Wireless plc haveall met with Merrill Lynch in an effort to work out a deal.   Most, however, have balked at Merrill's asking price, said to bein the $175 million to $200 million range.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Hermes Partners Lined Up    Final details have emerged about the consortium chosen to implementEuropean railway plans for an international fiber optic telecoms network.   Partners in what is known as the Hermes Consortium are RacalElectronics plc's Network Services subsidiary, Nynex Corp., SprintInternational, Daimler-Benz AG, France's Banque Indosuez and Switzerland'sTeleColumbus AG, owner of World Communications Inc. Deutsche Bank isinterested in financing the project and Italian automotive company FiatSpA wants to get involved.    Early on in the Hermes project the consortium will expand an existing X.25data network for railway use; later, if regulations permit, it will lay fiberoptic cables alongside rail lines and offer commercial services to businessusers.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Hong Kong's CT2 Plans, Bidders    Hong Kong Postmaster General Dominic Wong said he expects to selectthree or four of the six consortia that bid to operate CT2 service in theterritory. But on 28 September, the deadline for submitting bids, Wongsaid he hoped for ``imaginative'' proposals and that he is open topersuasion.   Most of the bids were from consortia with significant overseasparticipation. Most planned to spend HK $300 million to HK $400 million(US $38 million to US $51 million) on infrastructure over five years.   Hong Kong Telecom CSL, the value-added services arm of Hong KongTelecommunicatons Ltd., teamed with Star Paging (Holdings) Ltd. and SHKIndustries Ltd., a company backed by the territory's leading propertydevelopers. Hutchison Telecommunicatons Ltd. subsidiary Hutchison Pagingbid jointly with Motorola Inc. and Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corp. Agroup called Personal Communications Ltd. is backed by locally listedFirst Pacific Co. (with a 50 percent interest in one of the territory'sthree cellular operators), British Telecom, paging company ABCCommunications and Sun Hung Kai Properties Ltd.   Meta Communications combines interests controlled by local entrepreneurDickson Poon with Beijing-owned China Resources (Holdings)Ltd., Onwel Strategic Holdings and BellSouth Enterprises Inc. Chevalier(OA) International Ltd., a local conglomerate, formed a jointventure with OTC International of Australia. Singapore Telecom InternationalPte. Ltd., in partnership with Steamers Telecommunications Ltd., also ofSingapore, formed a Hong Kong joint-venture company called Halkis Ltd. topursue a CT2 license.    A seventh submission, made by GEC-Plessey Telecommunications Ltd.,was not an application but a series of observations on the application of CT2in Hong Kong.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Fujitsu's Euro-Focus    By ANDREAS EVAGORA         STOCKLEY PARK, ENGLAND-Fujitsu Ltd. is putting Europe at theforefront of its telecommunications strategy, forming its first Europeantelecoms research and development center to participate more in localstandards-setting and equipment development.   Fiber optics and mobile telephony will be the Japanese manufacturer'stwo main research focuses in Europe, said Sir Brian Tovey, chairman ofFujitsu Europe Telecom R&D Centre Ltd. The creation of FTRC, in StockleyPark, allows Fujitsu to ``build its telecoms strategy on a Europeanbase,'' he said.   In the area of standards-making, Fujitsu will apply to join theEuropean Telecommunications Standards Institute. It will likely beaccepted so long as it shows a ``legitimate interest in Europeantelecommunications,'' said Frede Ask, deputy director of ETSI. He saidJapanese suppliers NEC Corp. and Panasonic are already ETSI members.   FTRC, Fujitsu's seventh European subsidiary, will also developfor the European market equipment based on the international SynchronousDigital Hierarchy standard. SDH, also known as Synchronous Digital Network, orSonet, allows multiplexed data transmission over digital networks for localaccess systems.   Specifically, Fujitsu plans to develop its Fiber Loop Multiplexers, whichit now sells in Japan and the United States, for sale to large Europeannetwork operators, said Akira Miyata, general manager of thecompany's overseas transmission systems division. ``We arevery confident [of supplying SDH] if we can compete equally withlocal suppliers,'' Miyata said.   British Telecom, which recently pulled back on its strategy forpurchasing flexible access systems-an alternative to SDH-will be Fujitsu'sfirst target customer, Miyata said. Fujitsu's European drive into telecomscoincides with its pending purchase of International Computers Ltd. fromSTC plc-which itself was to have been BT's supplier of flexible accessequipment.   Fujitsu chairman Takuma Yamamoto, in a recent interview, said the Japanesecompany will likely expand in Europe through partnerships with locally basedmanufacturers.   Fujitsu is already active in Europen telecoms. Its contract to supplyundersea optical cables for a 500-kilometer link between England andGermany, due to be completed in July, marked the first such success in Europeby a Japanese manufacturer. Fujitsu also supplies transmission systems, andmakes facsimile machines and modems in Malaga, Spain, where it will alsoproduce small PBXs beginning next year.   Fujitsu spent $375,000 to set up FTRC. It plans to recruit up to 30researchers in the center's first year of operation, which beginslater this month.   Fujitsu has no plans to set up telecoms manufacturing facilities in theUnited Kingdom, said FTRC director Hachihei Kurematsu.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990CEPT Begets ECTRA    By JENNIFER L. SCHENKER         LONDON-A new group representing telecoms regulatory authoritiesfrom 31 countries is making European policy on licensing procedures forvalue-added services, international accounting principles and satelliteand mobile communications its top priorities.   The European Committee on Regulatory Affairs (ECTRA), a group createdas part of the radical structural reform of the Conference of EuropeanPostal and Telecommunications administrations, formally set its workingagenda for the next two years during an extraordinary meeting in Londonlate last month.   ECTRA was created under the reorganization of CEPT, which includes theseparation of operational and regulatory functions (CommunicationsWeekInternational, 12 March).   The idea is for ECTRA to be staffed by independent governmentrepresentatives. However, the majority of Europe's public networkoperators have yet to separate their own regulatory and operationalfunctions.   In the meantime, most of ECTRA's staff members are being drawn fromnational telecommunications ministries, with some ``wearing two hats,''said committee chairman John Rietbroek, who is director of policy affairsand deputy head of the department of telecommunications and post at theDutch Ministry of Transport and Public Works.ECTRA's new working agenda includes:   o drafting proposals for common harmonized licensing and declarationprocedures for private value-added network service operators before theend of 1991;   o studying whether European regulators could propose changes in theaccounting principles or international telephone calls set by theInternational Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee;   o evaluating the role of regulators in European equipment testing andcertification;   o participating in the consultation process that will follow therelease of the European Commission's draft Blue Paper on satellites;and   o harmonizing mobile communications regulatory policy acrossEurope.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Germany Postponing Telepoint    The Deutsche Bundespost has postponed until next year its issue of privatetelepoint licenses.   Wolf-Joachim Zeidel, director of mobile communications licensing atthe Bundespost, said that licensing procedures for paging and trunked radiocommunications must be completed before introducing telepoint.   Telepoint, a cordless personal communications technology, lets users makecalls outside their homes to base stations located in busy public places.Users near these stations are then linked to the public network.    DBP Telekom is conducting telepoint field trials to test the CT2 andCT1-plus cordless telephone systems. A third trial, for a combination ofthe technologies, was cancelled ``for scheduling reasons.'' It is thoughtthe incompatible analog CT1-plus system has little chance of being pickedfollowing DBP Telekom's decision to sign the memorandum of understandingon the CT2 common air interface.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Trading Tangled In Technology    Two U.S. agencies that oversee the nation's financial marketsshould update rules and merge to cope with the rising use of technology byfinancial institutions, says a report issued by a congressional agency.   Traditional trading methods are under increasing stress from risingvolume, the Office of Technology Assessment said in ``Electronic Bulls andBears: U.S. Securities Markets and Information Technology.'' Frequenttrading of large blocks of stock and ``program trading''-using computersto buy baskets of stocks-complicate the volatility.   The office recommended that the Securities and Exchange Commission andCommodity Futures Trading Commission merge or be replaced by one agency toalleviate conflicting policies.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990The Underside Of French `Reform'    A draft of France's new telecommunications ``reform'' containspotential stumbling blocks for service providers.   The draft, which the French Parliament is due to review this week, issupposed to open the markets for X.25 packet switching and ISDN services tocompetition by 1993. However, it proposes that tariff restraints be placed oncompetitors. It also says value-added services providers competing withFrance Telecom should ``make a contribution to education, trainingand research'' and raises the possiblity of access chargesfor interconnection to the public network.    Another provision says the amount of capital held in French VANS providersby a non-European Community investor cannot exceed 20 percent unless aninternational treaty or agreement exists to allow it.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Competition Guidelines Debated    The European Commission's competition guidelines will be a hottopic at an informal meeting of Europe's telecommunicationsministers in Rome on 18 October.   Member states are said to be upset by the competition guidelines, which areintended to set rules for commercial behavior in the sector and guard againstmonopoly abuses by the telecoms administrations. France filed a petition withalmost 100 objections at a meeting of the Commission's SeniorOfficials Group on Telecommunications earlier this month.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Argentine Network Deal Falls Apart    By DAVID ROCKS         BUENOS AIRES-After months of bickering and negotiating,Argentina's government finds itself in exactly the same place it started:operating one of the world's worst phone companies.   The country's Empresa Nacional de Telecommunications(ENTel) was to be split into two zones and handed over on 8 Octoberto private operating groups headed by Spain's Telefonica and BellAtlantic Corp.   But Manufacturers Hanover Trust Corp., the U.S. bank that spearheaded BellAtlantic's bid, did not come up with the financing by the Argentinegovernment's 4 October deadline.   So when the deadline arrived, the government forbade Bell Atlantic andManufacturers Hanover from taking control of the northern zone. Telefonicathen declined to assume management of the southern portion until northernownership is clarified.   The government has given a group headed by Italian telecoms holding companySTET and France Telecom unit France Cables et Radio a chance to run ENTelnorth in place of Bell Atlantic.   The European group, which includes Morgan Guaranty Trust Co., has until 1November to come up with financing and an operating plan.   The privatization of ENTel, a company perhaps best known for its poorservice, is a key to President Carlos Menem's economic plan. The twoportions were to have fetched a total of $214 million in cash and morethan $5 billion in debt.   The Bell Atlantic consortium was to have presented the Argentine governmentwith $100 million in cash and Argentine debt paper worth some$2.3 billion for a 60 percent stake in the northern zone.   But the bid started falling apart in September, when Manufacturers Hanovercould not line up enough bank support, U.S. bankers in Argentina said.   Carlos Agote, head of Manufacturers Hanover's Argentineoperations, and Bell Atlantic International president C. Hyde Tucker said theyremained hopeful that the Bell Atlantic group could be allowed back in.   Joe Goldman contributed to this story.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Shinto Sentenced    By Robert Poe         TOKYO-Hisashi Shinto, the 80-year-old former chairmanof Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corp., was convicted last week of bribery inthe insider-trading scandal that deposed a number of Japanesepoliticians.   He was given a two-year suspended sentence and fined about$175,000.   Shinto was arrested in March 1989 and charged with acceptinglow-priced stock of a subsidiary of information and publishingconglomerate Recruit Co. before it was released for public sale. He thenresold the stock at a profit. In return, Recruit received favors from NTT thatbenefited its leased-line resale business.   Although most of Japan's leading politicians at the time hadsimilar dealings with Recruit, which eventually ruined their careers, nonewere arrested. Observers said Shinto served as a scapegoat.   The scandal forced Shinto to resign in December 1988, several months beforehis arrest. NTT president Haruo Yamaguchi, Shinto's hand-pickedsuccessor, had to take over sooner than expected.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990COMMISSION LAUNCHES COMPETITION INQUIRY -- TariffLiberalization On Move    By DENIS GILHOOLY         LONDON   Reform of the pricing structure for international telecommunicationsservices has taken on a momentum of its own.   The proliferation of transoceanic fiber optic cables and growth rates of 15percent to 20 percent a year in cross-border traffic have driven theindustry toward new regulatory arrangements on tariffs, accounting rates andleased circuits far quicker than expected.   The ground rules are being rewritten daily and the old order, under whichcooperative agreements were conducted within an exclusive club of monopolyoperators, is under siege.   The proposed cuts in the accounting rate between the United States andUnited Kingdom, for example, mark a major break with tradition by involvingfour separate international carriers and two national regulatory agencies.   The present accounting-rate structure was sharply criticized last yearby the Paris-based Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development,which charged it inhibits the growth of information services and restrictsinternational trade (CommunicationsWeek International, 27 November1989).   The OECD found no stable relationship over time between the accounting rate(a negotiated sum split between the two carriers for each internationalcall), the prices charged to the customer, and the costs of providing theservice.   A lack of transparency in accounting procedures and artificially highrates, the OECD said, gives little incentive to lower tariffs.EXTRA-TERRITORIAL   In addition, it penalizes high traffic volume, growth in internationaltraffic, and low-cost operators, the organization said. As a result,AT&T, for example, is running a trade deficit of more than $2billion on its international telephone business, effectively subsidizing itsrival carriers. In 1988, the U.S. deficit with Mexico was $410 million;$153 million with West Germany.    The chronic U.S. deficit prompted the Federal Communications Commission toissue a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on the Regulation of InternationalAccounting Rates in August. The deadline for reply comments was Friday, andthough these may influence the final outcome, the FCC's statedposition remains controversial.   The ``reform'' package is designed to slice $1 billion of the deficit,leading to cuts in U.S. international calling prices by perhaps as much as50 percent.   The FCC asserts that, under the U.S. Communications Act of 1934, it has``broad authority to regulate international telecoms services,including international accounting rates.'' This posturehas led to charges of extra-territoriality.   Critics argue that by dictating accounting rates, the FCC would not onlyencroach on commercial decisions of telephone operators, but also be puttingunacceptable pressure on foreign countries.   ``We might test the powers of the Communications Act,'' said FCCChairman Alfred Sikes. ``This has not been done before, but the FCCintends to act aggressively in the area of accounting rates.''   Sikes said a major factor in ``undermining fictitious accountingrates'' would be to open the market for international simple resale oftelecoms services on a bilateral basis.   In March, the Canadian Radio-Television and TelecommunicationsCommission liberalized resale and shared use of private-line services.This meant that foreign callers using international private lines can accessthe U.S. domestic telephone network and pay only the U.S. domestic rate plusthe cost of the international private line.   AT&T subsequently complained to the FCC that this arrangementundermined the entire accounting-rate system, permitted foreign carriersto avoid settlement payments, and could result in one-way bypass.   In late August, the Canadian authorities agreed to allow thearrangement northbound as well as southbound. They also negotiated asignificantly lower accounting rate on all ``reduced'' and ``standard''voice traffic between the two countries.NO COINCIDENCE   Moves by U.K. and U.S. carriers to negotiate a new internationalaccounting rate coincide with a recent recommendation by Sir BryanCarsberg, director general of the U.K. Office of Telecommunications. Heproposed that international simple resale of telecoms services bepermitted with countries that also allow it for calls to and from theUnited Kingdom.   Carsberg intends resale to be one way of stimulating more competition oninternational calls. The other will be by capping British Telecom'srates for international calls and its charges for international privatecircuits. Both international resale and price capping will be considered aspart of the United Kingdom's forthcoming duopoly review.   Simple resale involves the hiring of a private circuit from a telephonecompany and using it to set up a competing service.   ``Resale has been on the cards for years,'' said Iain Vallance,chairman of BT. ``The worry would be if it was not done on a reciprocalbasis between countries. That would certainly be a bad deal for the U.K.''   Though BT, Mercury Communications Ltd., AT&T and MCI CommunicationsCorp. have been in discussions for a year, the timing of their proposalsfor a new accounting rate between the United Kingdom and the United Statesreflects both the Oftel announcement on resale and last week's replydeadline for the FCC inquiry.   However, major differences exist between the proposals. AT&T, MCIand Mercury have agreed to a single rate that will reduce the currentper-minute accounting rate from $1.06 to $0.76 by January1991, falling to $0.40 by January 1993. But Mercury intends to abolishits current off-peak rate.   By contrast, AT&T, MCI and BT have agreed on two rates. The fullrate will be reduced from the current $1.06 to $0.76 by January1991 and $0.44 by January 1993. The current off-peak rate will becut from $0.76 to $0.48 by January 1991 and $0.35 byJanuary 1993.   ``We think the Mercury proposal to have a single rate is retrograde andnot in the interests of customers,'' said Adam Scott, BT internationalaffairs director.   Mercury's low penetration of the residential market means it isdisadvantaged in offering very low off-peak rates.   In fact, second-tier carriers such as Mercury and MCI will probably bethe hardest hit by international resale. While AT&T and BT, forexample, can weather fierce price competition because of their market shares,the likes of Mercury and MCI have until now been winning market share byundercutting the dominant carriers.   A freer regulatory climate will also allow the larger carriers to be moreaggressive on price and in repackaging services for bulk discounts and virtualprivate networks. If global VPNs are to flourish, more flexible internationalaccounting rates are essential.   Just when telecoms resale between the United Kingdom and the United Stateswill begin depends on the outcome of the duopoly review, but discussions arealso underway between those countries and Japan and Sweden.EUROPE NEXT?   The pace of developments in the more liberalized markets is both exposinggross tariff distortions in mainland Europe and placing pressure on theEuropean Commission to act.   In March, the Conference of European Postal and Telecommunicationsadministrations withdrew a controversial recommendation on principles for theuse of leased lines and the establishment of private networks-after beingadvised by the Commission's competition directorate that the planamounted to a price agreement, restricted competition and breached Communitycompetition law.   This action established a powerful precedent for the way leased linesare priced and provided Europe-wide. And through tough new ``CompetitionGuidelines'' the Commission is expected to adopt this year, it ischallenging the anti-competitive implications of the D-seriesrecommendations of the International Telegraph and Telephone ConsultativeCommittee. The D-series currently sets pricing and supply conditions forinternational leased circuits.   Sir Leon Brittan, commissioner of competition, said theCommission's  preliminary examination confirmed gross internationaltariff distortions, but not necessarily evidence of a telephone company``cartel.''   ``There is prima face evidence, not of a conspiracy, but there issomething curious,'' Brittan said. ``So we arelaunching a more formal investigation on prices to see what causes theseirrational, inexplicable and disturbingdiscrepencies.''Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990DUOPOLY REVIEW Second Of A Series -- Cable OperatorsTake On BT    By DAWN HAYES         LONDON   Betting that the upcoming U.K. telecoms duopoly review will loosenrestrictions, cable TV operators at home and abroad are challenging BritishTelecom's domination of local-loop telephone service.   United Artists International, in partnership with U S West Inc., has beengranted approval by the Office of Telecommunications to run telephone serviceto U.K. homes and businesses within its franchise area. And Canadian telecomsholding company BCE Ltd. has applied to Oftel to initiate its first foray intolocal telephone service in the United Kingdom, in partnership with Canadiancable TV company Le Groupe Videotron.   Only four of 135 cable TV operators in the United Kingdom offer telephoneservice in what Oftel director general Sir Bryan Carsberg callsexperiments: Windsor Television Ltd., Cable Camden Ltd., East LondonTelecommunications Ltd., and now United Artists.   But more and more are expected to do so should Oftel ease local-looprestrictions in its duopoly review.   Cable companies already are allowed to provide all telecoms and datacomsservices; they must, however, be switched by either BT or MercuryCommunications Ltd.   The U.K. Cable Television Association contends that present regulationsmake it difficult for users to switch from one of the two main carriers tocable TV operator networks. Users must add new, separate phone numbers to makecalls through a cable provider and must buy new wiring to changeoperators.   Despite today's constrictions, United Artists, a $1.2 billion cabletelevision and cinema company based in Denver, Colorado, this monthlaunched limited integrated services to business customers in Croydon andto residential customers in Sutton.   But Peter Streames, marketing operations manager, said phase two willextend the service to many more customers in its franchise areas, depending,that is, on the outcome of the duopoly review.   In what observers interpret as the clearest indication yet of what hisposition on cable television will be in the forthcoming duopoly review,Carsberg last month pointed to cable TV as a key to unlocking the cozyBT-Mercury telecoms duopoly.    He said restrictions on cable TV companies must be reassessed but that inreturn they may have to accept some form of universal-service obligation,providing full service to residential customers and the more lucrativebusiness accounts.INDUSTRY PROPOSAL   Michael Storey, director of corporate strategy and public affairs atVideotron, said the industry has proposed that cable TV companies be able tolay their own networks free of BT or Mercury, interconnect with oneanother's networks, and opt not to provide service to everyone intheir franchise areas.   Still, the industry says it is willing to strike a balance to open thelocal network to competition.   There's incentive to compromise. So far cable television hasdisappointed regulators and investors alike.   Broadband cable television was first licensed in the United Kingdom in1983, but only 0.5 percent of U.K. homes are connected to broadband cable,according to London consultancy Enator Ltd.   Beyond regulatory constraints, the cable TV companies have encounteredcompetition from other television distributors, including direct broadcast bysatellite. In addition, the removal of favorable tax incentives in 1984 slowedthe rate of cable construction over the last decade.   Chris Akers, a London-based media analyst with Citicorp InvestmentBank Ltd., maintains that a shift in local-loop restrictions could boostcable industry profits 10 percent.   According to a recent Citicorp report, 90 percent of the United Kingdomwill have access to cable by December 2000, and 45 percent of homes will beconnected, assuming Oftel allows cable television companies to offer telephoneservice without consent from British Telecom or Mercury.FRESH BLOOD   The Broadcasting Bill, which goes through Parliament this month, could givethe industry an infusion of fresh blood. It is expected to further freerestrictions on ownership of cable companies, enabling U.S. companies to fullyown and operate U.K. cable subsidiaries for the first time.   Technology is a driving force behind the cable company push intotelecommunications. Fiber optics offers the high bandwidth needed forintegrated communications, thus blurring the boundary between broadcast andtelecoms.   Meanwhile, the combined revenues from cable TV and telecoms servicesstrengthens the economic incentive for replacing copper wire in the local loopwith fiber optics.    This was the conclusion of a government-sponsored study intotelevision funding in 1986. Called the Peacock Committee Report, itrecommended that British Telecom build and operate a national fiber optic gridnetwork, financed in part by the government.   However, the proposal was at odds with the Conservative government'sfree-market policy, which opposes public funding of large infrastructureprojects. The subsequent development of the mobile communications marketunder the government's competitive policy further weakened the PeacockReport's recommendations.    A follow-up report, called the MacDonald Report, recommended that thenational grid approach be abandoned in favor of competition in the localnetwork from cable and mobile communications, driven by market demand.BT MOVES   BT itself invested in the cable TV industry over the last seven years butplans to dispose of all those interests by the end of the year. BT says italready has a local network and does not need to duplicate it with a cable TVinfrastructure.   A BT spokesman said the move also relates to a drive to cut non-corebusinesses.   Kristen Hansen, with consultancy Enator, believes BT's goal is toget out of cable television as a bargaining chip to persuade the government toallow it to run entertainment services over its public network.   BT argues that if the cable TV operators are given carte blanche to competein telecoms, Oftel must allow the former monopoly to compete on a commercialbasis in entertainment services.   Currently, BT is permitted to carry broadcast television only so far as TVcompanies' transmitters.   This week, BT will launch a pilot integrated telephone/television servicein the Bishops Stortford area. The company has a special license to run theservice to test demand.   Carsberg said BT would be permitted to provide entertainment services, butemphasized that such a move would have to be timed to give cable televisioncompanies a head start.   While observers say this is a likely post-duopoly review scenario, thetiming remains in question.   For Mercury's part, cable television could be the answer to criticismthat it failed to penetrate the local telephone service market other thanover BT's network.   At the moment, to reach customers in areas not accessed by its fiber optictrunk system connecting the major U.K. cities, Mercury sends calls via the BTnetwork.   Mercury would like to see some restrictions on the cable companies freed,but it does not want them to operate independently of either U.K. telecomsoperator. This way, Mercury can extend its reach via the cable companynetworks.   The cable television association maintains, however, that using cable toextend Mercury's network amounts to extending the current duopoly.Mercury does not favor introduction of additional trunk carriers.OBSERVERS OPTIMISTIC   For all the back and forth, industry observers are optimistic about cabletelevision's foray into telephony.    Citicorp's Akers said he is confident that the duopoly reviewwill look favorably on cable television companies because there is presentlynext to no competition in the local loop.   ``They deserve some payback,'' Akers said.   Meanwhile, the cable companies can only mull over Carsberg'scryptic comment: ``Every referee knows there's nosuch thing as a level playing field, only one in which both teams are playinguphill.''Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990EDITORIAL -- Lines Of Resistance    The recommendation by the U.K. Office of Telecommunications to open themarket for international simple resale of telecoms services is awatershed.   Its true impact may not be seen for a decade, but, if adopted by the U.K.government, it would spell an end to the old order.   In essence, it would undermine the regime of cozy, cooperativerelationships between national telecoms carriers that has underpinned theindustry for more than a century. It would signal the beginning of the end ofthe accounting-rate mechanism between carriers that has propped up thatregime. And it would herald a new era of tariff arbitrage where the battlebetween service suppliers would be for the delivery of end-to-endtelecoms services, delivered door-to-door.   Equally important, international resale would allow large users to breakfree of existing supplier relationships and, if they choose, engage in networkbypass for the first time. All business users, meanwhile, would quickly reapthe benefits of increased price competition.   Everywhere, the cracks are beginning to show in the structure ofinternational telecoms tariffs. And the growing awareness that internationaltariffs are not even remotely related to the cost of providing service isreflected in a range of policy initiatives:   o In Europe, the European Commission's competition directorate isquestioning the legality of long-standing International Telegraph andTelephone Consultative Committee tariff recommendations under EuropeanCommunity competition law. Separately, its telecoms directorate isexpected to issue a communication on voice telephony, leased-line and datatariffs later this year.   o In the United States, the Federal Communications Commission lastFriday received comments on its proposals for reforming the internationalaccounting rate system, which sets the negotiated sum between two carriers foreach international call. AT&T has already negotiated a majoraccounting rate reduction with Canada. Both AT&T and MCICommunications Corp. have now proposed major reductions with British Telecomand Mercury Communications Ltd.   o In Japan, the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications'introduction of equal-access arrangements for competitive carriers hasled to a substantial loss of market for former monopoly Kokusai Denshin Denwa.   To some extent, these initiatives reflect different priorities. Theprincipal concern of the FCC is to reduce the telecoms portion of the U.S.trade deficit. The European Commission is attempting to foster aEurope-wide telecoms space before the opening of the single marketpost-1992. Oftel and Japan's MPT are looking to increasecompetition in their markets.   But behind them all is an economic dynamic that can no longer bedenied.   The dramatic growth in international telecoms traffic during the 1980s andthe impact of new technology are driving the industry toward new regulatoryarrangements on tariffs, accounting rates and leased lines.   Already, the line of resistance against sweeping price reductions oninternational tariffs is proving impossible to hold. And the expectedbilateral agreement between the United Kingdom and the United States oninternational resale would place intense pressure on Europe'smonopoly operators to follow the same course.   Overall, however, the present situation is inherently unstable and thebalance between an orderly transition and a market free-for-all islooking increasingly fragile.   On the one hand, it invites the abuse of monopoly power; on the other,price cutting and uneconomic entry by new competitors that may impairlong-term industry investment.   Multilateral reform of the present system, although preferable, will likelytake years. Meantime, the instability that has become the hallmark oftoday's telecoms industry will continue to hold sway and progresswill be made primarily through bilateral agreements.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990PERSPECTIVE -- Break Down Barriers    By COLIN LONG         Current national rules in all European countries other than theUnited Kingdom and Germany will usually serve to prevent value-addedservices from being retailed to end-users.   In an era when most of the talk is of liberalization and of EuropeanCommission initiatives to open up telecommunications markets, this might seemsurprising, but the reasons are simple.    Under the cloak of national rules and international recommendationspreventing the use of leased circuits for the simple transport of data, suchservices are treated as an infringement of the telecomsadministration's local monopoly and therefore are prohibited.   Only where a substantial value-added service element can bedemonstrated will the ban normally be avoided.   Even the Commission's recent directive on competition in telecomsservices may not get to grips with this problem. The Commission has acceptedthat leased lines should be treated as a special case and that telecomsadministrations should not be obliged to allow simple resale services until1993 at the earliest.   The Commission definition of ``simple resale'' is the provision of datatransmission over leased lines as a ``separate service,'' including suchswitching, data storage and protocol conversion as is necessary fortransmission in real time to and from the public switched network.   This rather vague definition begs the question as to the status of abundled value-added or managed data network service. It may also differmarkedly from the comparative approach in individual member states.   While messages may not currently be transmissible over privately operateddata communication networks with public connections, one message isclear: Anyone offering an international managed data network service andthe benefits of one-stop shopping will have to be prepared to take on themore recalcitrant telecoms administrations and use European treaty competitionrules and the European Commission to help break down the barriers.   The real effects of the Commission's service directive may besome years away. Meantime, these competition rules could acceleratederegulation.   In particular, once telecoms administrations begin to cooperate to provideone-stop managed services, it will be difficult to preventnon-telecoms administration service providers seeking the samearrangements.   COLIN LONG IS INTERNATIONAL ATTORNEY FOR COUDERT BROTHERS, IN LONDON.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990FACILITIES MANAGEMENT COMPETITION ON RISE -- NewCarrier-Industry Force    By JENNIFER L. SCHENKER         LOUVAIN-LA-NEUVE, BELGIUM-The French and Belgiantelecoms administrations and datacoms equipment manufacturer Groupe Telinfo SAhave formed a company to offer international facilities managementservices.   The company, called Eftel SA, underscores the developing competition forlucrative facilities management business between Europe'stelecommunications administrations and traditional value-added networkservice providers, such as Electronic Data Systems Corp. (EDS).   Facilities management embraces everything from purchasing all of acustomer's computing and networking operations, including the staffsthat run them, to monitoring the traffic on a customer's network tomake sure it is configured properly.   The main activities of Eftel, based in Louvain-la-Neuve, a suburbof Brussels, will be consultancy and engineering services and networkoperation in the form of facilities management or value-addednetworks.   Eftel partner France Cables et Radio, a unit of France Telecom, hasexperience in consultancy and engineering. Besides basic telephony,Belgium's Regie des Telegraphes et Telephones (RTT)provides communications services such as packet-switched data andintegrated services digital networks.   Studies show that 20 percent to 30 percent of European communications userswould consider letting a third party run their network.   ``I see battles looming between major players in facilities managementwithout a PTT member, and those PTTs who have taken the bit between theteeth directly or indirectly through a technically based company,'' saidRoger Barber, manager of the telecommunications forum at the Butler CoxFoundation, in London.   British Telecom recently announced its intention to offer global facilitiesmanagement services through its BT Tymnet Inc. unit, bringing it intocompetition with other European telecoms administration in their homemarkets.   In the case of Eftel, Barber said, ``a very powerful company hasbeen created which taps the resources of the PTTs and the resources of Telinfoitself.''   Telinfo, based in Brussels, was formed in August from the merger earlier inthe year of Telindus SA, a Brussels-based manufacturer of modems andmultiplexers, and Informabel, a Belgian systems integrator (seebox).   Telinfo general manager Jean-Marie Polet said Eftel gives his company,which already has a close supplier relationship with the RTT, immediate accessto the international customer base of the Belgian and French telecomsadministrations.CUSTOMERS LINED UP   The joint-venture company's first customers are CiticorpLuxembourg, which awarded Eftel a contract to upgrade its existing networks,and the Belgian National Bank, which has asked Eftel to evaluate tenders for alocal area network installation in the bank's offices.   Eftel's current business is mostly in Belgium but the company ishoping to expand internationally.   Eftel general manager Daniel Brismee said the company wants to build anorganization like SWIFT, the Society for Worldwide Interbank FinancialTelecommunications, a consortium that links banks and other financialinstitutions worldwide. Eftel wants to work with industry-specific groupsto build up specialized international VANs, he said.   If Eftel concentrates on specialized business sectors, ButlerCox's Barber said, it should be better positioned than other VANSproviders, such as EDS. The alliance of public network operators withequipment suppliers puts them in a position of strength, he said.   ``This is an important marketing tool in the armory of the PTTmarketeers,'' Barber said. ``Now they can say, `We can provide you withthe lines and the services and run them for you.' But this implies agreater understanding of business requirements than PTTs have classicallydemonstrated.''   But because public network operators generally have difficulty gettingclose to user needs, Barber said, Eftel could turn out to be a``technically sound company without a great deal of businessacumen.''Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Merger Is Part Of Industry Trend    By Jennifer L. Schenker         The merger in Belgium of modem and multiplexer manufacturer TelindusSA with information technology company Informabel SA reflects the Europeantrend toward computer-communications alliances.   The merger of Telindus and Informabel formed Groupe Telinfo SA, whichoffers data communications and computer applications products and develops andmanages network solutions, said Jean-Marie Polet, Telinfo generalmanager.   He said the company's strength over competing software houses andtelecoms equipment manufacturers is its ability to offer customers completecomputer and communications solutions.   Such user demand has led to similar mergers, said Richard Mitchell, anindustry analyst at Dataquest Ltd., of Denham, England.   For example, London-based Psion plc, a maker of hand-held computerterminals, formally merged with London communications company DacomSystems Ltd. and became Psion Dacom plc last month. Similarly, theChippenham, England, information technology division of diversifiedaerospace company Dowty Group plc acquired the Danish local area networksystems company Dataco AS in June of this year.   ``I think corporate users expect to see and like to have one-stopshopping,'' Mitchell said. Invitations to tender cover modems, X.25 packetswitches and a host of computer-related items, meaning the pressure is oncompanies to offer expertise in many areas.   ``If a company can provide only 70 percent of the contract andsomebody else can do all of it, and take into account maintenance of the wholething, it is obvious who is going to come out ahead,''Mitchell said.   Telindus, which has expertise in wide area networks, local area networksand message handling systems, has subsidiaries throughout Europe and ispresent in both the Asia-Pacific region and the United States.   Informabel, a software provider with competence centers for differentcomputer environments and for specialized business sectors such as banking andindustry, has subsidiaries in France, Switzerland, Greece, Turkey, Morocco andTunisia. It is setting up subsidiaries in four more European countries, aswell as Zaire and Brazil.   The merged company, Telinfo, is concentrating on business opportunities inthe Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.   It is also vying for contracts to provide the Portuguese telecommunicationsadministration with multiplexers and controlling software for a new digitalnetwork, general manager Polet said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990STC Deal    LONDON   Mercury Communications Ltd. has placed an order valued at $7.2million with STC plc for equipment to increase the capacity of its U.K. publicswitched network.    The deal is for 565-megabit-per-second transmission equipment andhigh-capacity multiplexers, to be installed by year's end.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Locstar Gain    PARIS   Locstar, the proposed European satellite system for land mobile services,has secured three more shareholders-two French insurance companies and aFrench bank.   Locstar now has 90 percent of the investment needed for two satellites andterrestrial infrastructure. Shareholders include Alcatel, France Telecom,British Aerospace plc, Telefonica and Daimler-Benz AG.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Greek Study    ATHENS   The Greek government and the European Commission have formed a study groupto prepare a report on how to quickly modernize the Greek telecomsnetwork.   Commission vice president Filippo Pandolfi and Greece's telecomsvice minister, Apostolos Kratsas, called the present network ``aserious obstacle to the full participation of Greece in the CommonMarket.''Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Switch Order    LONDON   British Telecom has agreed to buy System X exchange switches from GECPlessey Telecommunications Ltd., a deal valued at as much as $1.9billion.   GPT was already BT's main public switch supplier.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Germany Offers ISDN Incentives    By John Blau         BONN-Deutsche Bundespost Telekom, looking to stimulate demandfor its nationwide ISDN, has launched an incentive program that includesbonuses for first-time users.   From 1 October to 31 December, the German network operator is offering thefollowing bonuses:   o DM 444 ($300) for basic rate access with call-transfer and at leastone ISDN telephone;   o DM 888 ($600) for basic rate access with call-transfer, an ISDNtelephone, in addition to access to the analog cellular telephone orpaging networks and a videotex connection;   o DM 888 for basic rate access with four ISDN telephones and oneterminal adapter or an ISDN teletex terminal; and   o DM 2,000 for users of existing or new ISDN-capable PBX unitswith one or more interfaces.   The four-part program comes on the heels of DBP Telekom'spromotion of ISDN PC adapter cards, aimed at achieving mass-marketpenetration of ISDN services.   Since April, those in Germany that sign up for basic rate access and alsobuy a PC card are given a DM 888 credit on their phone bill.   The German network operator retreated from its plan to distribute freecards last year after drawing sharp criticism from the industry, which viewedthe free promotion as anti-competitive.   DBP Telekom has also been stimulating interest in ISDN by developingapplications with German companies.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990French Look At Audiotex    By Anne-Marie Roussel         PARIS-Responding to pressure from French audiotex phone-serviceproviders, France Telecom has created a new audiotex division, whosedirector, Jean-Paul Maury, will recommend changes in 18 months forpromoting the industry.   Maury is considered the father of France's Minitel videotexsystem.   Service providers have argued that France Telecom's tariff andaccess rules for audiotex hamper development of their phone services. Audiotexis most commonly used in France for banking, making reservations, placing betsand ordering goods from catalogs.   Basic audiotex services deliver taped messages, while more sophisticatedversions establish a dialog between a caller and a voice-activatedcomputer.   Aftel, the French association of audiotex providers, wants France Telecomto make its tariff structure more flexible and its policy for obtaining linesless bureaucratic.   In a recently published white paper, Aftel says the only two tariff optionsFrance Telecom makes available are toll-free numbers andsemi-toll-free numbers (whereby the cost is equally shared bythe caller and the service provider). Aftel would prefer moreoptions.   In addition, because the application process is bottlenecked, no new lineshave been made available, said Aftel president Jean-Luc Lenart.   France Telecom intends to develop audiotex cautiously, said Jean-ClaudeMailhan, director of commercial and telematic affairs. He said the Frenchoperator wants to avoid repeating its videotex experience-whose rapidgrowth spurred the proliferation of pornographic services over Minitel.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990HONG KONG OFFICIALS LOOK TO FUTURE -- Telecoms ViewsMixed    By ROBERT POE         HONG KONG   Telecoms officials and users in Hong Kong disagree sharply over theterritory's future as a regional communications hub.   Top-level officials with the territory's dominant telecommunicationsoperator and regulatory body say the prospects for Hong Kong continuing asAsia's main communications hub could not be brighter. But according to onemajor user, the British colony's return to Chinese control on 1 July 1997presents potentially enormous problems, and Hong Kong may already belosing its regional telecoms edge.   ``As far as we are concerned, it is just another date,'' said MikeGale, chief executive of Hong Kong Telecommunications Ltd. ``It shouldcontinue as it does today. It's a change of sovereignty, but in terms ofthe ability to come and go, of currency, of free trade and so on, it'llcontinue just as it is today.''   Although China International Trust & Investment Corp. owns 20percent of Hong Kong Telecom, the Chinese government institution does not takean active management role, Gale said.   Postmaster general Dominic Wong, who is in charge of both postal andtelecommunications regulation in the territory, agreed with Gale'sassessment. ``It [1997] is still a political date as such,'' he said. ``Interms of our planning and expectations, it has never featured in a verysignificant way.''   Users are not reassured, however. ``If you have a company thathas its telecoms hub in Hong Kong, if you've got everything runningout of Hong Kong, as a lot of companies have, then if the Chinese decide tomarch into Hong Kong and shut it down in 1997, the company would go out ofbusiness,'' said David Manion, communications manager forAsia at Reuters South East Asia Ltd., in Hong Kong.   Although few are convinced this will happen, Manion said, failing to guardagainst the possibility means ``gambling the whole of your Asianbusiness.''POLITICAL RISK   Manion, who is head of the Hong Kong Telecommunications Users Group, saidmost major communications users are giving at least some consideration tomoving facilities elsewhere.   The political risk is one reason Reuters moved a major telecomstechnical center to Tokyo. ``You can leave people here, because they canget on the next plane,'' Manion said, ``but as far as physical facilities,you have to look at diversifying.''   Another reason for the move was what Reuters perceived as a decline inHong Kong's competitive advantage as a strategic telecoms location-theresult, according to Manion, of modernization by other nations in theregion.   ``Hong Kong was until a few years ago without question thetelecommunications center of the Asia-Pacific,'' he said. ``But over thelast few years they haven't moved. The rest of the region has, and they'vestarted to catch up, and in some cases they've overtaken them. I thinkSingapore has overtaken Hong Kong. They're building up their advantage allthe time.''   Hong Kong Telecom's Gale disagrees, noting that 60 percent of thecompany's phone calls now go through digital exchanges. Allexchanges are to be digital by 1994. ``I don't think thereare many places that can match that,'' he said.   Gale said Hong Kong Telecom will spend about HK $3 billion (US$385 million) both this year and next to expand and modernize.   Furthermore, Hong Kong is ahead of Singapore in setting up internationalcommunications over undersea optical fiber cables, he said. ``Acustomer now who's looking for a fiber optic link to Europe or theUnited States can get it out of Hong Kong today,'' Galesaid. Singapore has no fiber optic cables operational for internationaltelecoms service, he said.   But this advantage will not last for long, Reuters' Manion noted. TheSEA-ME-WE-2 (Southeast Asia-Middle East-Western Europe) cable, stretchingfrom Singapore to Marseille, France, is expected to be operational by1994.   ``That's got to be important,'' Manion said. ``By then they will havethe whole network linked along the Pacific Rim. The ideal choice would beone route [in each direction]. Total diversity is the name of the game.''GEOGRAPHIC ADVANTAGE   Another Hong Kong advantage, according to Gale, is geographic. Besides itsposition as a gateway to China-``the great potential market ofthe future''-Hong Kong is also more central to theFar East as a whole, he said.   The advantages of location, however, are being eroded or perhaps evennegated by other developments in the region, according to Manion.``Before, when there was only one position used as a hub, Hong Kong wasalways very well positioned,'' he said. ``But now Tokyo is offering itselfas a hub, and it's got a lot going for it, because the first fiber cablesacross the Pacific are based in Tokyo, and because of prices.''   Prices on international routes out of Japan have dropped substantiallysince the introduction of competition in October 1989-Reuters' secondmajor reason, other than the politics of 1997, for moving its technicalcenter to Tokyo. ``We believe that where it exists, competition must makethe environment more friendly to the user,'' Manion said.   Tokyo's problem is its geographic position at the top end of theAsia-Pacific region, Manion said, the solution to which is to have asmaller hub farther down.   ``If you put it in Hong Kong, it's only one stop down the road,'' hesaid. ``But if it's in Singapore, it's very well positioned geographicallyto serve all of Southeast Asia. So if you go for this sort of diversehubs, Hong Kong seems to fall between them. It seems to be caught in atrap.''UNDENIABLE ADVANTAGE   But Manion added that the colony does have one undeniable advantage overboth Singapore and Tokyo: experience, which helps when it comes tosorting out problems on the other end of the network connection.   One of Reuters' major problems is getting the Japanese to dealinternationally rather than just looking after themselves. ``They haven'treally caught onto the game they're supposed to play,'' Manion said. ``Ifthere's a problem somewhere at the other end, they tend to report it tothe other end, and then sit back and say `that's my job done.' ''   Corporate telecoms managers can be certain, as they ponder Hong Kong'sfuture as a communications hub, that their decisions will not come easily.``Hong Kong's a great place,'' Manion said. ``Nobody wants to leave it.But you have to assess the risks and take reasonable precautions if you'rea responsible businessman.''Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990MPT Visit    TOKYO   Japan's Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications plans to sendofficials to other Asian nations this month to discuss the prospect ofJapanese participation in developing mobile communications systems there.   The officials will go in three groups to China and Singapore; India,Malaysia and Indonesia; and Thailand, Hong Kong and South Korea.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Cellular Deals    SINGAPORE   Singapore Telecom will spend S$74 million (US$42million) to build a second cellular telephone network, based on TACStechnology, to serve 30,000 subscribers by mid-1991. Sweden'sL.M. Ericsson will supply the network equipment.   Singapore's current AMPS network, serving 35,000 subscribers, isalso being expanded to increase its capacity to 50,000 subscriber circuits bythe end of the year.   In addition, the Mexican telecoms administration has awarded Ericsson a$70 million contract to expand its cellular phone service in MexicoCity and extend it to other cities. And in the United States, Ericsson GEMobile Communications Co.will supply cellular infrastrcture equipment thatMcCaw Cellular Communications Inc. and Lin Broadcasting Corp. will use toupgrade capacity and service quality in their key markets.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990VAN Extended    TOKYO   Infonet has signed an interconnection agreement with Japanese networkoperator U-net, to provide the Infonet menu of network services to 60Japanese cities.   Infonet, of El Segundo, California, operates a global value-addednetwork for data, electronic mail, facsimile and telex services. U-net isa public data network provider.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Nynex Breakup Considered -- Agency Suggests DivestingPhone Company Unit    By DAWN BUSHAUS         NEW YORK-The New York Public Service Commission, reacting toalleged business improprieties at Nynex Corp., is investigating the structureof the Bell company and the possibility of divesting its New York TelephoneCo. subsidiary.   The New York PSC is the first U.S. state regulatory commission to look atdivesting a Bell operating company from its regional holding companyparent.   The decision came at the suggestion of William Cowan, the commission'sgeneral counsel, in a report issued this month examining alleged Nynexbusiness improprieties in Florida.   Lawrence Friedman, former vice president of purchasing at Nynex MaterielEnterprises Co. (MECO), was fired in 1988 for his reported role inorganizing Florida parties at which officials allegedly brought prostitutesfor suppliers and took part in other questionable business practices.   In his report, Cowan said the alleged improprieties, combined with earlierallegations that MECO had overcharged Nynex's two operatingcompanies, are reasons to consider divesting New York Telephone.   Nynex chairman William Ferguson said the company will cooperate withthe PSC investigation, but said divestiture of New York Telephone ``is notan option.'' A company spokesman said Nynex would challenge a divestitureorder in court.   Most users said they do not believe a divestiture of New York Telephonefrom Nynex will solve any problems.   ``I think the whole situation-the regulated side buying from theunregulated side-needs closer auditing, but I don't necessarily believedivestiture is the answer,'' said Ronald Kopitowski, telecoms director atthe Metropolitan Transit Authority and president of the CommunicationsManagers Association.   ``The user community wants good service in a stable environment,'' saidHenry Levine, partner with Morrison & Foerster, a Washington law firm thatrepresents several large communications users in the financial-servicesindustry. ``If divestiture would advance that, then users would give ittheir support, but if it would retard that, they likely would not supportit.''   In a related matter, the U.S. Federal Communications Commission andNynex reached an agreement this month resolving FCC allegations thatNynex's unregulated MECO unit had excessively charged the regulated NewYork Telephone and New England Telephone & Telegraph Co. units forequipment and services. The overcharging was alleged to have occurred from1984 to 1988 as part of a scam to pad Nynex profits.   The two Nynex operating units have agreed to cut interstate access rates by$35.5 million and pay the U.S. Treasury $1.4 million. In return,the commission will drop a proceeding against the two companies withoutconcluding that they violated FCC rules.   Meanwhile, the Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities, whichregulates New England Telephone, will keep a close eye on the New York PSCinvestigation, said Susan Tierney, a DPU commissioner. The DPU has ordered anaudit of transactions between New England Telephone and MECO.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990HIGH-SPEED AHEAD FOR US SPRINT, MCI -- CarriersEmphasize Data    By ROBIN GAREISS         SAN DIEGO, CALIFORNIA-Communications users with applicationsthat demand high-speed data transmission welcomed this month'sannouncements by US Sprint Communications Co. and MCI Communications Corp.   US Sprint is the first U.S. long distance carrier to disclose plans toprovide a frame-relay service, aimed at satisfying growing user demandfor high-speed packet switching.   Meanwhile, rival MCI unveiled a family of high-speed data servicesthat initially will give users access to T1 and DS-3 circuits on anas-needed basis.   Both carriers made their announcements at the Tele-CommunicationsAssociation's conference in San Diego this month.   US Sprint said it will offer a frame-relay service late next year. Theinitial rollout will provide only data services.   Frame relay-a faster method of packet switching-can transmitinformation at the T1 speed of 1.544 megabits per second. But unlike X.25, itdoes not offer error correction, switched virtual connections or accesscontrol. X.25 switches at lower speeds, however.   As a public network operator, US Sprint will provide the link for userswho want to build hybrid private-public networks. US Sprint's frame-relaynetwork is intended to complement the SprintNet X.25 packet switching datanetwork. Ultimately, frame relay will provide access to broadband networkservices.   ``Overall, Sprint is setting itself up in this bandwidth-on-demandmarketplace as a leader,'' said Berge Ayvazian, an analyst at The YankeeGroup, in Boston. He said he expects MCI to announce a frame-relay servicebased on Northern Telecom Ltd. technology.   Although specific pricing is not yet available, it is expected that USSprint will charge users a fixed rate with usage-based charges for peakperiods.   US Sprint's fiber optic network and Telenet Processor/III 4900packet switches will support the system. US Sprint will use Integrated PacketExchange switches from StrataCom Inc. and market them as US Sprint'sTP7900 packet-based multiplexers for future voice, video and dataapplications.   US Sprint officials said users have not demanded frame-relay voiceservices, so the initial rollout will contain only data components. In laterphases of frame relay, US Sprint will offer voice and video services, saidFloyd Trogdon, senior vice president at US Sprint Data Group.      The frame-relay service initially will be available in the UnitedStates, Japan and the United Kingdom and later extended to other Europeancountries.MCI OFFERING   MCI's Initial Virtual Private Data Service offerings will letusers transmit data at switched T1 and DS-3 (45-mbps)speeds.   The service, which will not be generally available until mid-1991,marks the first time switched T1 and switched DS-3 are available througha high-speed, virtual private network, MCI officials said. MCI willdevote a portion of its public network to VPDS offerings.   AT&T has not dedicated a portion of its network to its virtualprivate data network, the Software Defined Data Network. And the highest speedAT&T has committed to with SDDN is 384 kilobits per second.   Many communications managers at the largest U.S. companies want switched T1services, especially for cases where they transmit heavy amounts of digitaltraffic on an irregular basis, such as for videoconferencing.   ``We cannot afford the dedicated facilities to handle full-motionvideo,'' said Ed Forhan, communications manager at The Walker Group, achain of retail stores based in Westminster, Colorado. ``Any service thatgives small companies the ability to have video service is a bigbenefit.''   MCI must still determine which switching and billing systems it will usewith the VPDS.   Some analysts questioned the timing of the announcement because MCI couldnot provide detailed plans for the service's implementation.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990PBX Melding    BOCA RATON, FLORIDA   Siemens AG has consolidated its PBX-related businesses in the UnitedStates under a new holding company-Boca Raton-based Siemens PrivateCommunication Systems Inc.   The new company, with 10,000 employees, represents one-third ofSiemens' worldwide private telecoms business, the company said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990NCR Routers    DAYTON, OHIO   NCR Corp. will unveil this week a line of multiprotocol bridge-routersdesigned to serve as building blocks for corporate networks.   Called Open Network Systems, the new line of bridge-routers will bebased on the System 3000 line of processors NCR recently introduced and willsupport three major protocol stacks.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Vitalink Trims    FREMONT, CALIFORNIA   Vitalink Communications Corp. last month completed a restructuring tomaintain profitability during a time of sluggish demand.   The local area network internetworking company trimmed its work force byabout 10 percent to reduce costs. At the same time it has placed more emphasison product development.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990No Intervention    WASHINGTON   The U.S. Department of Justice said this month it will not intervene in alawsuit for nearly $300 million against US Sprint CommunicationsCo.   Two former employees accuse the carrier of obtaining and using illegal bidinformation in its pursuit of the Federal Telecommunications System 2000contract.   The Justice Department said earlier this month that a Federal Bureau ofInvestigation inquiry into the matter found no evidence of wrongdoing.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990FCC Gets Input On PCN Proposals    By KATHLEEN KILLETTE         WASHINGTON-Personal communications services are naturalextensions of cellular technology and so the United States must let thecellular industry take the lead in introducing them, according to many of thecomments submitted this month to the U.S. Federal CommunicationsCommission.   The FCC began an inquiry in June into PCS-the American term forpersonal communications network (PCN) services. In its inquiry, theFCC sought comments on the amount of spectrum needed for PCS, the types oftechnologies that should be given priority, the technical standards thatshould govern PCS and the degree to which providers should be regulated.   The FCC also proposed excluding telephone companies and cellular mobileradio licensees from providing PCS in areas they already serve, to ensure thatthe fledgling market is open to entrepreneurs.   Telephone companies and mobile service providers disagreed with thatproposal. ``The exclusion of these qualified participants wouldneedlessly limit the availability of PCS,'' stated GTEService Corp.   The Cellular Telecommunications Industry Association said the cellularindustry already offers efficient, affordable, lightweight, two-waypersonal communications services via portable cellular phones, and thatseveral cellular companies are poised to initiate PCS trials.   Those experiments, the CTIA stated, should lay the groundwork for the FCCin measuring the need for PCS spectrum.`DISTINCTION ARTIFICIAL'   Nynex Corp. agreed, adding that the FCC ``should recognize thatany distinction between cellular and PCS would be highly artificial and thatthe success of the cellular operations in the 800- to 900-megahertzrange should not be `truncated' by allotting too many resourcesto PCS development.''   Nynex plans to introduce the first wireless Personal Telephone Serviceearly next year in New York City.   Telocator, a Washington-based association that represents paging andcellular companies, opposed the FCC's proposal to use spectrum nowreserved for advanced paging frequencies-in the 930- to 931-MHzrange-for PCS.   Manufacturers also weighed in on the PCS issue. Northern Telecom Inc.stated as top priorities the establishment of a common numbering plan,fostering network interoperability and efficient bandwidth utilization, andprevention of interference. It proposed an open standard-called personalcommunications interface (PCI)-for low-power, wirelessPCS.   PCI, based on the CT2 standards being considered in Canada, would rely ontwo-way communications channels and separate common channels for callsetup signaling. This approach would use bandwidth more efficiently, and giveusers faster call setups and longer battery life for portable cellular phones,Northern said.   Apple Computer Inc. noted that the PCS proposals presented to the FCC havefocused mainly on voice communications, and recommended the allocation ofspectrum to ``Data-PCS.''   Apple proposed allocating frequencies in the 1.7- to 2.3-gigahertz bandto be used exclusively for high-speed data communications within officebuildings, linking laptop computers via low-power transmitters.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Fujitsu Boosting U.S. Switch Effort    By ROBERT POE         RALEIGH, NORTH CAROLINA-Fujitsu Ltd. is boosting efforts toadapt its digital exchange to the U.S. network, in anticipation of the$40 billion public switch changeout expected to take place in theUnited States over the next 10 to 15 years.   Fujitsu plans to increase the number of U.S. staffers in charge of sellingand engineering the Fetex-150 switch to 600 by 1994 from the current 100,company officials in Tokyo said.   The increase will shift development of sophisticated switch features to theUnited States from Japan, said one observer familiar with theRaleigh-based subsidiary.   Officials at Fujitsu Network Switching of America Inc. disclosed fewdetails.   Most of the current staff there are working on testing the performance andnetwork conformance of software developed in Japan, the observer said. Withthe expansion, the subsidiary will take on responsibility for developingfunctions and capabilities required by U.S. customers.   The Fetex-150 is Fujitsu's export-model exchange switch, with more than8.8 million lines installed or on order in 17 countries. None have beensold in the United States, but the recently announced plans confirmlongstanding speculation that the Japanese manufacturer is planning amajor push into the U.S. market.   When Fujitsu won a major switch tender in Singapore last autumn,competitors complained the company was selling the equipment at cost to win aprestigious contract that would serve as a stepping stone to the U.S.market.   Fujitsu said its switch has passed Phase 1 and 2 evaluations by BellCommunications Research Inc., the research arm of the seven U.S. Bellcompanies.   Although the certification is considered essential to selling to theBells-which account for about 75 percent of U.S. telephone lines-itmay not be enough for Fujitsu to break into a market dominated byAT&T and Northern Telecom Inc.   The two manufacturers have more than 90 percent of the U.S. market. A sharelike that, coupled with Bell company inertia in changing to new suppliers,leaves foreign public switch manufacturers largely out in the cold, analystssay.   The U.S. subsidiaries of Siemens AG, L.M. Ericsson, NEC Corp. and GECPlessey Telecommunications Ltd. have found the U.S. market tough to crack,though each has had limited success and are further along than Fujitsu.   ``There's an inherent conservatism on the part of their [U.S.] customerbase,'' said Robert Rosenberg, director of analytical services at TheEastern Management Group, in Parsippany, New Jersey. ``These are hugecompanies with billions of dollars invested in their current equipment.   ``Even if Fujitsu comes up with a switch that has all the bellsand whistles that an engineer could ever want, if all the support systems haveto be rebuilt in order to fit that switch into the network, his managerwon't let him install it,'' according toRosenberg.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990First Telmex Bidders Step Forward    By DAVID ROCKS         MEXICO CITY-U.S. Bell company Nynex Corp. andCanada's BCE Inc. have teamed with a Mexican partner to bid foroperating control of Mexico's telephone network.   The two companies plan to join Casa de Bolsa Inverlat Associates, a Mexicaninvestment group, in their bid for Telefonos de Mexico SA.   The Mexican government plans to sell its 20.4 percent controlling interestin Telmex, with bids due 15 November. Although several groups are expected totender offers, the Nynex-BCE-Inverlat consortium is the first to gopublic with its intentions.   Telmex, with some 5.5 million access lines in a country of 88 millionpeople, is a highly profitable monopoly and is considered to have enormousgrowth potential.   The winning bidder will, however, face a daunting task in upgrading serviceand modernizing the network, much of which dates to the 1960s.   ``There is a lot of room for improvement in their service,'' saidEugene LaBorne, a Nynex International official working in Mexico City toput the bid together. For example, he said, some 1.2 million people arewaiting to have a telephone installed.   Forty percent of Telmex stock consists of voting shares. The Mexicangovernment now controls 51 percent of those shares, while the rest of thecompany is held by private investors.OWNERSHIP DETAILS   The government is seeking to sell its stake-20.4 percent of thetotal-to an investment group controlled by Mexicans.   Inverlat will control 51 percent of the consortium, while BCE and Nynexwill likely split the balance, LaBorne said.   Representatives of BCE, the Canadian telecoms holding company that includesBell Canada and Northern Telecom Ltd., and Nynex, which provides New York andNew England with phone service, are in Mexico working out the details of thebid, LaBorne said.   The market value of Telmex stock is about $7 billion, so the 20.4percent stake for sale should fetch about $1.4 billion.   Laborne said the government's selection will likely hinge as muchon each bidder's service and network-improvement plan as on thecash offered.   As a U.S. Bell company, Nynex will face regulatory impediments should itsconsortium be selected. The AT&T divestiture agreement prohibits theBells from carrying long distance phone traffic in the United States, whichmeans Nynex would not be allowed to handle U.S.-bound calls fromTelmex-the bulk of the company's international business.   Nynex believes the problem is surmountable, LaBorne said.   There is some precedent for a waiver of the rule. Bell Atlantic Corp. andAmeritech, Bell companies that recently bought a stake in Telecom Corp. of NewZealand, have been allowed to participate in Telecom'sU.S.-bound calling business.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990UNIVERSITY PLOTS BROADBAND NET -- Fiber ToCambridge    By MALCOLM LAWS         CAMBRIDGE, ENGLAND   Next summer the medieval architecture of Cambridge will be networked byone of Europe's most advanced broadband fiber optic communicationssystems, thanks to Cambridge University.   The 2.5 million ($4.7 million) Granta Backbone Network will offervoice, data, image and video transmission for staff and students at 79sites, most of which comprise the 31 semi-autonomous colleges that make upthe university.   Because the university is spread throughout the city, lacking a centralcampus, it was granted a special telecoms license by the Department of Tradeand Industry that allows it to lay its own lines for private voice and datacommunications.   A forthcoming government telecoms duopoly review could open the way forCambridge to sell commercial services, but the university would not speculateon what might be possible.   The GBN is part of Project Granta, a fourfold computing strategy approvedby the colleges in October 1987. The strategy comprises the UniversityNetwork, the mainframe, distributed computing and personal computersystems.   The colleges agreed on an outline for the backbone network in early 1989.Implementation will start next month and is due to be completed by June. STCplc's cable products division is to build the network.   The GBN has been designed with a mix of present and future industrial,social and educational needs in mind, according to the university.Although regulations limit GBN use to within the university and itsvarious agencies, such as the Cambridge University Press and the localschools examination board, ``if it were legal, decent and honest, we'd doanything,'' said David Hartley, director of the University ComputingService for 20 years.   In anticipation of new services GBN has ``sufficient sparecapacity for increased and new forms of communication traffic whereneeded,'' Hartley said.   A copper coaxial cable and three types of fiber-62.5-micron and50-micron multimode and a very-high-capacity 8-micronmonomode-will be laid in one duct and there are two more empty ducts.   The copper cable will replace the digital leased lines now used for theuniversity's private X.25 network, linking more than 100 Ethernetsegments and for the private PBX voice network. Hartley estimates the GBN willimmediately save the university 70,000 a year just in replacing the leasedlines used for data.   Uses for the various fibers have been left open. At first the 62.5micron U.S.-standard fiber may support the 100-megabit-per-second fiberdistributed data interface local network technology, shortly to beratified by the American National Standards Institute. The 50-micron fiberwill carry Ethernet.   Both may later support 140-mbps dual queue, dual bus metropolitan areanetworking, for voice, data and video, once the standard has been finalized.The 50-micron fiber, standard in Europe and Japan, has been chosen tosupport applications that are still being researched, at Cambridge andelsewhere.   The 10-gigahertz bandwidth of the 8-micron fiber is so great thateven high-quality video could not fill it, said Andy Lawrence, directorof project analysis at Cambridge consultancy Improcom Ltd., which helpeddesign GBN. It has been installed in anticipation of applications severalyears away.`ASKING FOR THE MOON'   In the short term the GBN could be used to carry satellite TV signalsreceived by the audio-visual services department.    Lawrence said that what the university wanted ``was a bit like askingfor the moon,'' since, in Hartley's words, it needed a ``low-tech,low-risk, long-term'' infrastructure. The dark fiber itself is seen as lowtechnology; it is the networking technology running over it that is hightech.   To save money, the bulk of which will be spent simply on laying cable, theuniversity's network will share duct space with the Cambridge cableTV company. However, regulations do not allow the two to share cables. As muchof the ducting as possible will run across university land.   Hartley emphasized that Project Granta is different from such ventures asProject Athena at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which aims todevelop computer systems themselves.   Instead, Granta is an exercise in how to manage corporate informationsystems. Its infrastructure will provide both general and specificapplications, from electronic mail to communications for advanced molecularbiology.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Stanford To Join Med Net    Stanford University, of Palo Alto, California, has signaled its intentionto participate in a medical school network that will link a group ofuniversities using the ISDN primary rate interface. Stanford joins DukeUniversity, Johns Hopkins Health Systems and Harvard University, which havebeen negotiating with a number of long distance companies to use ISDN to linkthe medical schools of each campus.   The North American primary rate interface specifies 23 bearer channels andone signaling channel, all operating at 64 kilobits per second. It providesbandwidth equivalent to the T1 speed of 1.544 megabits per second, giving theinstitutions the flexibility to transmit data, image and video. Imagetransmission appears to have the most potent application in the med schoolnetwork.   ``There's a great need internally and externally for each institutionto move radiographic images back and forth'' between offices and storage,said Norman Sefton, assistant business manager and director ofcommunications at Duke, in Durham, North Carolina.   Managing the X-ray database is a tremendous physical problem, Seftonsaid. ``It would be nice if we could handle them like a jukebox-just callthem up and share the stored image for consultations or other uses,'' hesaid.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990First Union Banks On VSATs    First Union Corp. has replaced its leased-line network with amultimillion-dollar Ku-band satellite network that the bank expectswill help it save $4 million in communications costs over the next fiveyears.   The very small aperture terminal network includes 646 earth stations thatlink 723 bank sites.   The company, based in Charlotte, North Carolina, has bank branches andbusiness offices in 36 U.S. states. The network will carry all thebank's data communications traffic, including that generated by itsautomated teller machines. First Union also runs its network security alarmson the VSAT network.   The bank's voice traffic will remain on virtual-networkcircuits provided by US Sprint Communications Co. and AT&T, saidGeorge Mattingly, vice president and director of telecommunications at FirstUnion.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Forecast Calls For Ethernet    The European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts, in Reading,England, is to install a high-capacity Ethernet local area network laterthis year to increase the accurancy of its daily forecasts.   The organization produces weather reports for 18 European countries, usinga numerical model of the atmosphere.   The new local area network, to be supplied by Untra Network Technologies,of San Jose, California, will add to the ECMWF's existing CrayResearch Inc. supercomputer and its IBM 3090 mainframe. The organization saidit needs 1-gigabit-per-second data traffic capacity to matchdata files of gigabyte size with giga-flop processor performance in adistributed environment.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Developer Lures Business With Fiber    By DAWN BUSHAUS         DAKOTA DUNES, SOUTH DAKOTA-A real estate developer is countingon a fiber optic communications network, coupled with a buyers'market and a scenic environment, to lure communications-intensivebusinesses to the self-contained city it is developing in DakotaDunes.   Many developers and telephone companies across the United States areexperimenting with deploying fiber to businesses and homes. Dozens offiber-to-the-home and fiber-to-the-curb trials are under way, andbusinesses are beginning to demand services, such as videoconferencing andhigh-speed data transmission, that are delivered best over the medium.   Dakota Dunes Development Co., a division of Midwest Capital Group Inc., ofSioux City, Iowa, is developing this 2,000-acre community at theconvergence of the Big Sioux and Missouri rivers, near Sioux City. It willfeature 1,600 residential units, a 216-acre business park, an18-hole golf course and a $1.8 million fiber network.   The Dakota Dunes project, which originated two years ago, is expected totake 15 years to complete. The developer is targeting credit card, insurance,computer and other communications-intensive companies as potential newbusinesses for the community, said Glenn Ivarsen, manager of economicdevelopment at Dakota Dunes Development. About 5,000 jobs can be created inthe business complex, he said.   U S West Inc., of Englewood, Colorado, soon will begin deploying the fiberoptic network that will provide telecommunications service to the businessesand residences in Dakota Dunes.FIBER IN EVERY BUILDING   ``We will be bringing fiber to every corporate hub site in eachnew building, and we will also be bringing fiber to the curb for theresidences,'' said Don Faber, service manager for largebusiness services at U S West. ``We'll be letting bidssoon because we have to have fiber in to serve the first businesscustomer.''   That first customer, Financial Reserve Corp., an East Haven,Connecticut-based credit card company that targets college markets, isexpected to set up shop early next year.   Keith Eaton, vice president of management information systems at FinancialReserve, said the fiber network, along with the tax breaks offered in SouthDakota, played a role in the company's decision to locate an officein Dakota Dunes.   The site will support customer-service and collection operations,which will require heavy use of both voice and data communications, Eatonsaid. The company has not yet signed up for any specific telecoms services,however.   U S West's Faber said he expects business customers to use thefiber network for high-speed data services, such as integrated servicesdigital networks, and for videoconferencing.   For residential customers, the company initially will offer only plain oldtelephone service, he said. Services such as remote meter-reading orsecurity monitoring may be offered to residential customers in thefuture.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Developing World Looks To OSI    By DAVID ROCKS         NEW YORK-Though behind in the drive for Open SystemsInterconnection, developing countries face fewer barriers to adopting theprotocols than their industrialized counterparts, some experts say.   Nearly 20 years after users first began clamoring for interoperability,products following OSI protocols are finally becoming widelyavailable-but not so much in the developing world.   ``OSI products will come, but how soon, we will see,'' said S.Ramakrishnam of India's Department of Electronics. ``It is important thatwe build up momentum with significant involvement by industry and users.''   Still, once they get around to adopting open systems, developing countriesmay face fewer barriers than developed countries, according to Ramakrishnamand others.   There may be more resistance to change in Europe, Japan and the UnitedStates, where businesses already have a substantial investment in systems,than in developing countries, which generally do not have an installedproprietary base, said Kathy Dally, an OSI consultant with Omnicom Inc., ofVienna, Virginia.   Developing countries ``don't have extensive networks,'' Dally said.``So instead of buying proprietary operations, they would be more likelyto buy the OSI solution.''CREATING BELIEVERS   Ramakrishnam said no vendors in his country sell OSI products, although oneof the 11 computer networks in India plans to use OSI protocols.   The system, called Ernet, is a national network using very small apertureterminals to link universities and researchers nationwide. Funded by theUnited Nations Development Program, one goal of the project was to spurdevelopment of OSI standards in India.   ``We want to clarify the environment to make it easier for peopleto become believers,'' Ramakrishnam said.    Lincoln Faurer, president of the Corporation for Open SystemsInternational, a not-for-profit group based in McLean, Virginia,that advocates OSI solutions, said developing countries-indeed allcountries-could gain more in terms of open systems if they were to putaside nationalistic goals in favor of internationalism.   ``Every country wants to spend the money at home to solve the problem[of interoperability], but they don't have the money to really put a dentin it,'' Faurer said. Instead of trying to develop indigenous standards,he said, nations should work with international agencies for a globalsolution.   Such a global solution is a key concern of developing countries,Ramakrishnam said. With different regions developing their own conceptionof OSI, countries that are not part of one region must make a decisionabout which regional standard to adopt.   ``We have to choose between the United States, Japan and Europe,and we don't like it, so harmonization is very important tous,'' he said.   Ironically, because of the untested nature of OSI, if developing countrieslag in its adoption, they might actually come out ahead, said John McConnell,a networking consultant based in Boulder, Colorado.   ``Whether OSI is going to work or ever be a commercial success issomething that we won't know for another severalyears,'' he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Unisys Unveils Open Architecture    By KELLY JACKSON         NEW YORK-Unisys Corp. has unveiled a computer architecture forbuilding distributed networks out of its own and othermanufacturers' products.   Unisys, of Blue Bell, Pennsylvania, assembled its top executives in NewYork earlier this month to announce its long-awaited blueprint forbuilding enterprise networks (CommunicationsWeek International, 17September).   The Unisys Architecture unifies the computer manufacturer'sdivergent product families and melds them with other vendors'products using international and de facto networking standards.   Users and industry analysts hailed the new direction as a milestone.   ``Unisys' architecture is a real solution. It's tangible and it's goingto prove to be the best option'' for many users, said Dean Sutton,president of CUBE Inc., of Detroit, a Unisys user group.   The Unisys Architecture, which includes the spectrum of technologies neededto construct a multivendor network, also addresses network management. Unisysofficials offered clues to the company's plans for that area.   James Murtaugh, vice president and general manager at thecompany's Information Networking Group, said Unisys has decided toadd Simple Network Management Protocol network management technology to itsfuture management software under the Unisys Architecture umbrella.   Next year the company will unveil its software based on the OSI CommonManagement Information Protocol, using OSI/Network Management Forumspecifications, he said.   Unisys officials said the company's architecture emphasizesstandards, not proprietary networking protocols and operating systems.   While IBM's Systems Application Architecture and DigitalEquipment Corp.'s Network Application Support rely on proprietarysystems as the core architecture, the Unisys architecture provides a clearmigration path from proprietary to open systems, analysts said.FINANCIAL WOES   Officials unveiled the architecture about a week after Unisys announcedit would eliminate its 25-cent-per-share dividend-news that sent thecompany's stock price plummeting.   James Unruh, Unisys president and chief executive officer, said the companywill likely show a loss in the third quarter, but return to profitability inthe fourth.   For the full year, however, Unruh was less sanguine about whether Unisyswill post a profit. He said the volatility of the economy, worsened by thetenuous situation in the Middle East, makes it impossible to forecast earningswith any degree of accuracy.   Financial analysts were wondering if the new architecture would be enoughto offset damage caused by the discontinuation of the company'sdividend.   Charles Rothchild, an analyst with Pershing & Co., in New York,said Wall Street greeted the elimination of the dividend with ``agreat deal of disappointment.''   ``This is a company that has paid a dividend for 95 years,'' he noted.One day after the 27 September announcement to eliminate dividend payment,Unisys stock tumbled some 23 percent, to $5.375 per share.   Candee Wilde contributed to this story.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Novell Offers AS/400 Link    By Kella Knack         PROVO, UTAH-Novell Inc. has introduced a token-ring connectivityoption for NetWare, its local area network operating system, that expandssupport for IBM Application System/400 midrange computers on NetWare LANs.   Novell is the first third-party vendor to offer a token-ringoption for IBM equipment. It is being provided in Version 1.3 of NetWare SNAGateway Server software and Version 1.2 of NetWare 3270 LAN Workstation clientsoftware.   Numerous users have asked Novell for connectivity options over the past twoyears, said Gerry Machi, director of product marketing at Novell. According toBruce Robertson, with Interconnect Network Consulting Group, of Santa Monica,California, ``people assumed if they had IBM they could not useNovell.''   The SNA gateway software turns an IBM Personal System/2 PC into a SystemsNetwork Architecture gateway server, letting users on a NetWare LAN share atoken-ring link with an IBM 2/3X or AS/400 host. It costs $2,995.The NetWare 3270 LAN software gives 64 LAN workstations access to up to 64concurrent terminal/printer sessions on an AS/400. It costs $995.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Product Briefs -- SmartView/UA, SmartView/UX andSmartView/UXG Networking Products PCP 4500, PCP 5500 CommunicationsProcessors   Telematics International Inc., Fort Lauderdale, Florida   o FEATURES: Runs under Unix and SmartView packages on IBMcompatible PCs. Supports 999 Access Communications Processors from oneworkstation. SmartView/UA accesses network via asynchronous connection.SmartView/UX features X.25 support. X-Window-based SmartView/UXGadds graphical user interface, provides topological network views. PCP 4500and PCP 5500 processors accomodate 480 communications lines using any protocoland switch up to 2000 packets per second. 16 megabytes of memory on onecard.   o PRICE: SmartView from $5,200. PCP 4500 from $56,700. PCP 5500 from$113,400.   o AVAILABILITY: Immediately.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Product Briefs -- IBM Windows Connection Version 2    IBM, Armonk, New York   o FEATURES: Gives users concurrent access to applicationsresiding on minicomputers and PCs, by integrating host session and workstationapplications running in Microsoft Corp.'s Windows 3 environment.Users can simultaneously view workstation Windows 3 applications and hostsessions running on Virtual Machine, Multiple Virtual Storage and OperatingSystem/400.   New features include support for Application System/400 (AS/400)minicomputer; ability to transfer multiple files simultaneously; a hostsession copy and paste feature for transferring information in one applicationinto a document created in another. Plus full Dynamic Data Exchange support,enabling users to exchange data directly between host applications andWindows-based workstation applications.   o PRICE: $300. Users of Windows Version 1.01 upgrade, $120.   o AVAILABILITY: Immediately.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Product Briefs -- EtherMate 8, EtherMate 8UTP,EtherMate Trio16 LAN Adapters    Hayes Microcomputer Products Norcross, Georgia   o FEATURES: EtherMate 8 is an 8-bit half-card for thick (10Base5) orthin (10Base2) Ethernet cables. 8UTP is a half-card, 8-bit adapter thatsupports thick and unshielded twisted-pair Ethernet cables. Trio16 is a16-bit card which supports all media on a single board by supportingthick, thin and unshielded twisted-pair Ethernet cables. All compatiblewith the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers' 802.3 standard,all packaged with software drivers for Novell NetWare, Microsoft LANManager, 3Com 3+, 3Com 3+Open, and NetBios compatible operating systems.   o PRICE: EtherMate 8, $249. EtherMate 8UTP, $329. EtherMate Trio16,$349.   o AVAILABILITY: EtherMate 8 and EtherMate 8UTP, immediately.EtherMate Trio16, midNovember.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Product Briefs -- Novos Version 2.0    Firefox Communications Ltd., Reading, England   o FEATURES: Open Systems Interconnection communications serverintegrated with Novell Inc.'s Advanced NetWare personal computerlocal area network operating system. Provides OSI-based access overEthernet LANs, X.25 wide area networks, to any host supporting OSI layer 4Transport protocols. Can be used on LANs with single or multiple NetWareservers, each of which can offer local or remote communications links.Programs that can use OSI services include terminal emulators, file transferpackages and distributed database systems.   o PRICE: Licensed per NetWare server: between $2,200and $5,600 depending on number of simultaneous host connectionsrequired.   o AVAILABILITY: Immediately.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Product Briefs -- LattisNet Model 2800, Model 231010Base-T Concentrators    SynOptics Communications Inc., Mountain View, Californiao FEATURES: Model 2800 supports networks with 25 to 100 nodes andoffers 12 unshielded twisted-pair ports for connecting small clusters ofusers in a common area. A single attachment unit interface (AUI)port enables connections to a variety of other cabling media to create largernetworks. Model 2310 provides platform of 36 unshielded twisted-pairports, an AUI port and network management for networks of between 36 and 200nodes.   o PRICE: Set by resellers.   o AVAILABILITY: Immediately.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Product Briefs -- XD88/700 MultiprocessorServers    Tektronix Inc., Beaverton, Oregon   o FEATURES: The XD88/700 is a reduced instruction set computingserver including up to four Motorola 88100 processors, 256 megabytes of memoryand 80 gigabytes of disk storage. Concurrently manages six LANs. Support forstandard protocols and interfaces includes FDDI, X-Windows and SunMicrosystems Inc.'s Network File System. Server is supplied in twobase configurations: the XD88/720 dual processor, with two 25 MHzMotorola 88100 processors, rated at 67 million instructions per second; andthe XD88/740, with four microprocessors and a 120 MIPS rating.   o PRICE: XD88/720, $99,000. XD88/740, $163,000.   o AVAILABLITY: November.   Send product news to CommunicationsWeek International, Product Briefs,66/68 Margaret St., London, W1N 7FL. Attention: Andreas Evagora.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Business Looks To Video    By ANDREAS EVAGORA         LONDON-Videoconferencing is becoming a more viable businesstool with developing international standards, breakthroughs in microchiptechnology and the prospect of falling prices.   Companies have used videoconferencing primarily for internal meetings.Products hit the market in the mid-1980s, and there are now about 2,000corporate studios worldwide, mostly in the United States.   Norman Gaut, president of videoconference equipment manufacturer PictureTelCorp., of Peabody, Massachusetts, said the industry has been U.S.-basedmainly because of the comparative price and quality of public networkselsewhere. But network improvements, including the more widespreadavailability of international ISDN, will make the market more global, hesaid.   Trans-Atlantic videoconferences cost several hundred dollars an hour.They are not even possible between many countries because of a lack ofinternational public circuit-switched64-kilobit-per-second services.   Market growth has also been impeded by a lack of equipment standards, thehigh cost of equipment and the large amount of bandwidth required to useit.   The transmission of broadcast-quality, full-motion televisionpictures in digital form requires bandwidth of about 5.5 megahertz fortransmission speeds of between 90 megabits per second and 100 mbps. Butordinary public telephone networks are designed to carry relativelylow-quality voice signals, which need only 10 kilobits per second, or abandwidth of 3.5 MHz. Therefore, video transmission requires compression.   Video signals are also analog, which means they must be converted to betransmitted over digital leased phone lines. The process of converting andthen compressing pictures is carried out by computers calledcoder-decoders, or codecs.   Codecs compress signals to as low as 64 kbps and to the T1 and E1 speeds of1.544 mbps and 2.048 mbps. As a rule, the greater the bandwidth, the betterthe picture quality. But more bandwidth also costs the end user moremoney.   George Newman, an analyst at International Data Corp., in Framingham,Massachusetts, expects an increasing number of products to operate at around384 kbps as a compromise between price and quality.STANDARDS MEAN ACCEPTANCE   Meanwhile, equipment manufacturers and users alike say standards will helpfurther the acceptance of products. Current systems are proprietary,preventing users of one product from communicating with those of another.   The first step toward standardization should take place in November, whenthe International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee is due toratify the H.261 video compression standard. GEC Plessey TelecommunicationsLtd. and Video Telecom Corp. say they already have compliant products; othersuppliers, such as PictureTel, Harris Video Communication Systems Inc. andCompression Labs Inc., plan to make their products compliant next year.   Standards will be applied only in part. H.261 is the video compressionelement of a broader Px64 standard, which recommends speech compression forvideo transmission at 64 kbps.   Using so much bandwidth for voice is a waste of bandwidth, and also impairsvideo quality. Consequently, many products will compress speech to 16 kbps,while adhering to the CCITT's video-compression standard.   Suppliers ultimately want videoconferencing products to be as convenient asusing a simple telephone. Widespread ISDN, which provides dial-up64-kbps speeds, would facilitate such connectivity, and allow users tomake a video call for the price of a normal phone call.VIDEOCONFERENCING OVER PC   Some observers say videoconferencing over personal computers will one daysupplant the need for expensive codecs. Instead of needing special screens andcameras, conferencing could take place in a PC built with videoconferencingchips, and a miniature camera mounted on top.   In August, PictureTel and chip maker Intel Corp. began developingmicroprocessors-which will be available to any PC manufacturer-toallow videoconferencing at the desktop.   Harris Corp. formed Harris Video Communications in July and rolled out itsPC-based Anamix Personal Communications system, which links to eightpeople in different locations. Users are able to simultaneously watchfull-motion images, listen to conversation and share graphics. The APCcosts $85,000 for three units and $200,000 for eight.   With the system, users need a PC, which can also be supplied by thecompany, a camera mounted on the PC, and a microphone/speaker attachment. Itcompresses to rates between 64 kbps and 1.544 mbps.   PictureTel's Gaut said before high-quality PC videoconferencing becomesa reality, a new generation of chips must be developed. Intel is workingon a chip capable of one billion operations per second, compared to 40million per second possible with current chips, he said.   IDC's Newman predicts a mass market for multimedia PCs, carryingdata, graphics, video and speech within five years. The market, he said, willbe spurred by increased PC memory capacity and the availability of morebandwidth, brought about by extensive deployment of optical fiber in thepublic network.   Video Telecom, of Austin, Texas, claims to have the only videoconferencingproduct that already carries graphics and data. Its Conference System, whichcosts about $45,000 per user, operates at between 112 kbps and 768 kbpsand can retrieve data from an on-board hard disk so that photographs,slides and documents can be used as part of a videoconference. VTC suppliestwo monitors, one for video, and the other for data, and a tablet that allowsnotes or changes to be made to a graphic, seen in real time on the other endof the videoconference.   Not all potential users are sold on the concept of videoconferencing overPCs. Deborah Scholl, assistant vice president of financial services companyFirst Chicago Corp., maintains that PC screens are too small for largebusiness meetings.CUTS TRAVEL EXPENSES    First Chicago has been using videoconferencing for a year between officesin Chicago, New York and London. Scholl said the company's 57conferences have saved it more than $17,500 in travel expenses over thelast five months.   First Chicago's conferences are transmitted over the publicnetwork at 112 kbps. PictureTel equipment accesses two 56-kbps circuits.Though most meetings are for internal business or training, the company hasregular conferences with one of its West Coast clients.   Scholl hopes public operators will offer bridging facilities to allow threemeetings to be linked, currently not possible with its PictureTel equipment.Conferences involving three or more rooms are possible, but the equipment ismore expensive.   Many telecoms operators already offer public booths. British Telecom, forinstance, has 11 public videoconferencing centers across the UnitedKingdom.   PictureTel's U.K. distributor held the first videoconferencebetween the United Kingdom and Australia last month. The video ISDN link wascarried by OTC Ltd., which has just begun international ISDN service to theUnited Kingdom.   Most European telephone operators offer videoconferencing. The first tooffer switched international video services was BT, in conjunction withTeleglobe Canada Inc. in 1984. BT now offers such services to 17 countries,and estimates that about 200 U.K. companies use videoconferencing on privatenetworks.   Videoconferencing is attracting more attention despite high entry costs forsuppliers, particularly for research. Six year-old PictureTel, forinstance, is a leader in low-bit rate systems but is still unprofitable.Before long, users will be able to choose from an increasing number of lessexpensive products.   What is unclear, however, is exactly how users will apply videoconferencing-whether with conventional codec-based products or a newgeneration of multi-media PCs.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Computer Deal Targets Operators    NEC Corp. and Stratus Computer Inc. have signed an agreement givingNEC non-exclusive rights to sell Stratus' Unix XA2000 ContinuousProcessing System. NEC's targets for the system-which uses reducedinstruction set computing and runs Stratus' FTX version of Unix SystemV-are public telephone operators around the world.   NEC will link the Stratus system with its NEAX61 public exchange,offering toll-free and 900 (specialty service) numbers, calling cardverification and private virtual network services. It will supplySignaling System 7 software and integrated services digital networks, andadd proprietary features to the NEAX61/XA2000.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Northern To Add Frame Relay    Northern Telecom Inc. will incorporate frame-relay specificationsinto its DPN-100 digital data network product line.   The move follows an agreement among Cisco Systems Inc., DigitalEquipment Corp., StrataCom Inc. and Northern on a common frame relayspecification they say will ``enhance'' frame-relay standards recommendedby the American National Standards Institute and the InternationalTelegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee. Northern's packet switcheswill conform to this spec.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990IBM's European Mouthpiece    By ANNE-MARIE ROUSSEL         Corporate lobbying of European Commission representatives was anactivity limited to a handful of players only a few years ago-and, atthat time, IBM's Olivier de la Fouchardiere was already a member ofthe club.   Since then, the practice has widened. But because of cultural differences,professional lobbying is still not as well received in Europe as it is in theUnited States.   ``Lobbying still has a negative connotation in Europe,'' laFouchardiere says. Whereas lobbyists are registered professionals inWashington, they have a more nebulous status in Europe, where thepolitical clout of special-interest groups or corporations is notappreciated.   La Fouchardiere, however, combats the European attitude with bravado:``I love being called a lobbyist, it's the fun part of my job,'' he says,adding he likes to use the power behind Big Blue to help shape the courseof politics in Europe.   ``Coming from IBM, I never had problems getting appointments with topofficials,'' he says. Such influence seems particularly useful, now thatthere are signs that the European ways are changing, he says. These days,when he goes to Brussels to present IBM's viewpoint, ``there are severalhundred lobbyists representing interest groups or corporations waiting tosee officials, where there was no one before.''   La Fouchardiere has a long history of representing IBM-in variouscapacities. After joining the computer manufacturer 25 years ago, the50-year-old engineer alternated for years between thecompany's French subsidiary and IBM Europe, both based in Paris.   Since last year he has overseen IBM France's standards programsand its external relations.   In the standards area, la Fouchardiere directs IBM's research anddevelopment team, located in the southern French town of La Gaude, which workswith such bodies as the European Telecommunications Standards Institute(ETSI) to develop Europe-wide telecommunications products.   As director of external relations, he oversees IBM France'srelationship with the French government and the European Community. Hekeeps abreast of laws or directives that may affect IBM's business in theregion, and tries to influence the law-making process by lobbying theright people.   His current crusade is with the French regulatory body, the Direction a laReglementation Generale. The DRG has prepared a draft legislation-to bedebated by the French Parliament this month-to reform the telecoms marketin France (CommunicationsWeek International, 17 September).   As a potential supplier to possible service providers, IBM would prefer themarket to be as wide-open as possible, la Fouchardiere says.    But as he sees it, the DRG's proposal needs more work, so hewould like Parliament to amend it.   ``It's too complicated,'' he says. ``It creates categories of servicesthat don't exist.''   These categories, identified in the proposal as ``support services,''include certain data communication services, such as those offered bypacket-switched network Transpac or the integrated services digitalnetwork. These data services are grouped by the licensing procedure theyrequire-an arbitrary process, said la Fouchardiere.   ``There is no objective determination of where the category starts orends,'' he says, ``so potential service providers can't know whether theyare within the limits or not.''   In addition, private datacom operators-which he says shouldtheoretically compete on equal footing with France Telecom-are actuallynot considered on par with the national operator. While the law clearlydefines what private operators can or cannot do, there is no such definitionfor France Telecom, giving the impression that France Telecom faces norestrictions.   ``If I were a private operator, I would very much like to know whatFrance Telecom can do to gobble me up,'' la Fouchardiere says. ``If FranceTelecom wants to be a competitive market, then it should be submitted tothe same rules as anybody else.''   Another shortfall of the DRG's law proposal, he argues, is thereis no provision for service providers to be included in thedecision-making process.-    If la Fouchardiere could achieve one goal in Europe, it would bethis: that pan-European voice and data communications networkswould no longer be subject to geographical barriers.   ``National frontiers get in my way,'' he says.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990IN THE NEWS    By Malcolm Laws         3Com Corp. has named Richard Joyce, former managing director of itsU.K. subsidiary, as the company's first European president of 3ComEurope.   Effective last week, the new job means the 34-year-old Joyce willwork from the Paris headquarters of 3Com Europe. The first day in his new rolewas spent at a networking exhibition in the Soviet Union.   Joyce, who helped set up the U.K. arm of Bridge Communications Inc. beforeit merged with 3Com in 1987, takes over from senior international vicepresident John Marman.   Marman has returned to 3Com corporate headquarters in Santa Clara,California, after a year spent overseeing the shift in the company'sEuropean organization.   The European reshuffle got under way in 1989, when a group of 3Com'sGeneral Europe Area management left to form their own company. Soonafterward, responsibility for the smaller European territories, Africa andparts of the Middle East-all previously in GEA-passed to the two majorsubsidiaries, the United Kingdom and France.   The non-European countries now come under 3Com Intercontinental andthe smaller European territories have become independent.   Joyce says one of his next tasks is to open Eastern Europe to3Com's networking products, hence the early Soviet visit. TomPlymouth, recently hired from Digital Equipment Corp., will become the newU.K. managing director.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990       PARIS-The Club Informatique des Grandes Enterprises Francaises, a       PARIS-The Club Informatique des Grandes Enterprises Francaises, aFrench user group, has elected Alain Brodelle, Air France's directorof information systems and telecommunications, its new president. He replacesClaude Porcheot, secretary general of the Banque National de Paris. MarcStrechinsky, technical director at Matra Group and Alain Dion, director ofinformation systems and telecoms at Usinor-Sacilor, were elected vicepresidents.   PARIS-Alcatel's chief financial officer, Pierre Le Roux hasbeen appointed to the company's board of management. He will replaceJacques Ronze, who stepped down of his own volition, the company said. Ronzewill remain chairman of Alcatel's Paris headquarters.Alcatel's board of management is composed of two othermembers: Pierre Suard, chairman and chief executive officer, and JosefCornu, executive vice-president for business development, technical andoperations.   PARIS-Barry Landy, head of the mainframe system division of CambridgeLaboratory's computing services, has been elected president of ShareEurope, an IBM users group comprised of about 560 companies in Europe. Hereplaces Iain Stinson. The announcements came at Share Europe'sannual meeting, which ended 5 October in Paris.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990OCTOBER    EUUG Autumn 1990 This technical conference and exhibition for the EuropeanUnix systems user group will cover standards, network administration, programgenerators for commercial applications and many other topics. Nice, Paris,22-26 October - Contact: 44 763 73039, U.K.   Signal Processing Courses Digital Signal Processing, Filtering andEstimation and Multirate Digital Signal Processing and Applications, twocourses offered by CEI-Europe. Buxton, United Kingdom, 22-25 October- Contact: 46 122 17570, Sweden.   Inter Comm 90 With the theme ``Global Development And Integration,''this congress and exhibition concentrates on worldwide telecoms issues.Produced by the province of British Columbia. Vancouver, Canada, 23-26October - Contact: 1 604 669 1090, Canada.   SatelComm '90 Speakers and delegates from Eastern and WesternEurope will be present at this exhibition focusing on the services, users andtechnology. Organized by the European Space Agency and Eutelsat. Bucharest,Roumania, 24-26 October - Contact: 352 45 84 74,Luxembourg.   Orgatec 1990 The International Office Trade Fair covers computer-aidedtechnologies, office culture and communication. Organized by Koln Messe.Cologne, West Germany, 25-30 October - Contact: 49 221 8 210,Cologne.   CrossTrade Europe '90 A conference on the application of technology andelectronic interchange in trade and commerce, in the production andmonitoring of dangerous goods and waste. Milan, Italy, 25-26 October -Contact: 39 2 9522102, Italy.   EDI 90 The U.K. National Conference on Paperless Trade updates delegates.London, 30 October-1 November - Contact: 44 81 742 2828,U.K.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990NOVEMBER AND LATER    The Telecommunications Duopoly Policy Review This meeting ofsenior-level decision makers will be addressing the impact of theimpending British Telecom and Mercury Communications Ltd. duopoly in GreatBritain. London, 1-2 November - Contact: 44 71 236 4080,U.K.   Liberalization of European Telecommunications A discussion on how differentnations will implement European Commission directives, and how networks mustbe changed for a single European market. A conference will be held two dayslater on Video Conferencing Systems. Offered by IBC Technical Services.London, November 5, 7 - Contact: 44 71 2364080, U.K.   ICCC 90 The tenth Conference on Computer Communication about Telematics forDevelopment. Sponsored by the International Council for ComputerCommunication. New Delhi, 5-8 November - Contact: 91 116830087, India.   Open Systems Exhibition and conference, sponsored by UniForum UK, whichpromotes the adoption of international standards-based computing andcommunications. London, 7-9 November - Contact: 44 081 3320446, U.K.   European Type Approvals Conference on recognition of telecoms apparatusconformity, with speakers from DG XIII, DRG, and CNET, as well as others,sponsored by Attis Communications. Paris, 8-9 November -Contact: 33 1 49 60 90 03, France.   Expo Comm China 90 China's international telecoms and computerexposition and conference is held every two years. Managed by E.J. Krause& Associates Inc. Beijing, 8-13 November - Contact:81 3 584-1548, Tokyo; 44 727 33291, U.K.   12th IDATE Conference The Institute of Audiovisuals and Telecommunicationsin Europe focuses on key technologies, experiences and concepts at thismeeting. Montpellier, France, 14-16 November - Contact:Tel.: 33 67 65 48 48, France.   The IBM Token Ring Network This seminar discusses a plan for the 1990s,covering costs and benefits, essential terms and concepts, planning a networkstrategy. Sponsored by Frost & Sullivan. London, 19-21 November- Contact: 44 71 730 3438, U.K.   Send announcements of events to CommunicationsWeek International, Calendar,600 Community Drive, Manhasset, New York, 11030. Or fax them to us at(1-516) 562-5474.   Items of interest to our readers will be used as space permits.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990International Users Take Command    By David Gillick And Denis Gilhooly         Europe's telecommunications administrations remainoblivious to the fundamental needs of national and internationaltelecommunications users.      Inadequate standards, low quality of service, over-regulation,limited product offerings, inadequate network management, and poor customerrelations are stifling business development across industry sectors, accordingto the 1990 CommunicationsWeek International/PA Consulting Group InternationalUser Survey.   But evidence is mounting that the balance of power is finally shifting infavor of the customer.   Not surprisingly, the survey finds that users want basic, reliable andaffordable services at competitive prices. What is surprising, however, isthat, increasingly, users regard electronic information exchange-and theeffective inter-networking to allow the exchange to occur-vital tomany of their operations.   They expect the basics, but they want more.   Users can no longer afford to be held captive by monopolies reinforced byoutmoded regulatory regimes. To be competitive in a global marketplace theirneeds must come first. Otherwise, like users in the United States 10 yearsago, those in Europe will seek alternatives.   Telecommunications is now the central nervous system of aservice-based global economy based increasingly on the exchange ofelectronic information. Electronic information exchange is the commodity thatwill fuel economic growth into the 21st century.INCREASING CHOICE   Today, the spread of competition in Europe's most liberalizedmarkets has resulted in increasing choice in equipment and service offerings.This new-found freedom is leading users to articulate their needs andshape the development of a free marketplace.   The lumbering telecoms administrations, slow to wake to the realities ofthe marketplace, are responding in piecemeal fashion. Offerings such asone-stop shopping are emerging.   But these are not enough.   The regulatory impediments against pan-European networking and tariffsthat are too high are forcing users to implement alternative solutions.   One such alternative is very small aperture terminal (VSAT)satellite operations which are a proven means of bypassing the fixed-linknetwork. Others may be emerging mobile radio services or even competitivefixed networks.ASTONISHING CHANGES   Since the 1989 International User Survey, astonishing changes have beenwitnessed. The Iron Curtain has collapsed: Germany has united; newEuropean institutions are emerging and old ones are forced to change;monopolies, cartels and trade barriers are crumbling; competition and foreigninvestment are being welcomed, not resisted; privatization of public holdingsis more commonplace; new international agreements, regulatory liberalizationand competition are exerting a forceful downward pressure on tariffs.   In short, there is no turning back.   These changes have helped users assume control of their own destiny. Nolonger will they accept having to adapt to the dictates of monopoly serviceproviders. Now it is the suppliers who must learn to adapt. They must offerreal choice in their product and service offerings at internationallycompetitive prices.   The 1990 Survey confirms that telecoms has finally entered the boardroom.An overwhelming number of telecoms managers now report to board members orinformation technology directors.   Users don't believe they are getting value for their money. Withthe exception of facsimile, the vast majority of respondents rated telecomsadministration services as mediocre, on a scale of 1 to 5.   For international communications, users' catalog of complaintsrange from the lack of international standards to the fact that their needswere being misunderstood.IMPLICATIONS UNKNOWN   However, while users recognize the potentially devastating effects ofnetwork failure, in almost all cases the survey shows the cost of networkfailure has not been calculated by users. Consequently, the full implicationsare not known.   At the grassroots level, and despite the European Commission'sterminal equipment directive, users in the United Kingdom, France, Belgium,Spain and Germany remain concerned that regulatory restrictions on modem usageare inhibiting their business.   Increasingly, regulation covering mobile radio and satellite terminalequipment is becoming a key concern.   In terms of regulatory controls on service offerings, the biggest area ofconcern among users is in the interconnection of private networks to thepublic switched telephone network, an issue that is pointedly not addressed bythe Commission's framework for Open Network Provision acrossEurope.   This is closely followed by a desire to see a relaxation in the rulesgoverning the resale of spare capacity and satellite usage. Rules governingcable television, mobile radio and electronic mail form a second tier ofconcern.   From the perspective of the service provider, the three areas that standout as being most affected by competition are mobile radio, leased circuits,and packet switched data communications.   In the burgeoning field of mobile communications, while almost 25 percentof users are represented by high-level management, the survey found thatup to 30 percent of users of mobile communications are now employed in directsales. Cost remains the crucial issue in the uptake of mobile technology.   Significantly, the survey revealed a decidedly low demand for internationalroaming capability as embodied in the forthcoming pan-European digitalcellular radio network. TARIFFS MUST FALL   Overall, though deregulation bodes well for a reduction in telecoms costsit may be bad news for telecoms managers.   The survey indicates an average salary level throughout Western Europe of$40,000 a year. Switzerland again tops the salary poll, followedclosely by Spain and France-evidence perhaps that telecoms managers incountries with a traditionally strong monopoly regime stand to gain themost.   In future, mobility and the ability to acquire new skills will be crucialin the post-1992 deregulated market.    The unmistakable message of the 1990 international user survey is thattelecoms tariffs must fall, and they must fall soon.   More than 70 percent of respondents believe the move toward cost-basedpricing would have a major impact on their businesses. For voice, theoverwhelming demand is for cheaper international and long-distance calls.For data, this criteria is matched only by the demand for lower usagecharges.   For leased circuits, cheaper international and long distance charges ismatched only by demand for lower fixed costs. And for satellites, the generaldesire is for cheaper tariffs and lower fixed costs.   With a mounting downward pressure on international and long-distancetariffs, what will determine the balance of power between the public telecomsoperators and users?   And will that balance favor the use of public or private networksolutions?   Clearly, the public/private network tradeoff for users will depend on thatuser's volume of traffic and the concentration of traffic by route.Increasingly, however, choice will be determined by the price of leasedcircuits, in particular, relative to the public network and also by the valueassigned by the user to proprietary control, security, reliability,availability, and response time.   With tariffs falling, and leased circuits an increasingly attractiveoption, the battlefield for the coming few years is therefore likely to beover a relaxation of regulatory controls both on VSAT networks and forprivate-to-public network interconnection.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990How This Users Survey Was Conducted    To compile the information for this study, CommunicationsWeekInternational and PA Consulting Group sent out more than 5,700 questionnaires.We received 317 responses, a healthy response rate of about 5 percent, uponwhich we based our stories.   Participants were asked to react to a series of questions by assigninga numerical value from one to five, with one representing `not important'and five representing `very important.'   Marks in the range of two to four were most common, while extremes wererare. In some cases, however, extreme marks came in waves as therespondent unleashed a long line of `ones' for poor service or `fives' forthe desirability of cheaper tariffs and competition.   The result, generally, is that users' desires appeared in shades ofgrey.   What we have tried to do is give meaning to those shades.HOW IT BREAKS DOWN   Generally, respondents used the questionnaire to comment on the things theyfelt most strongly about-in some cases leaving other questionsunanswered. There is a striking consistency from country to country in thecompletion rate for each major section in the questionnaire.   Completion patterns fell into three broad categories:   o People who tried to answer everything, failing only to evaluate thoseservices unavailable to them;   o People who only answered the section which interested themmost-international telecommunications, security, encouragement of mobileservices and public service tariffing;   o People who answered the minimum number of questions.   The typical completion rates for the various survey sections were asfollows:   o Management structure-60 percent;   o Telecoms administration service/quality-10-45 percent;   o International telecommunications-80 percent;   o Security-90 percent;   o Mobile services-55 percent;   o Impact of national regulation-50 percent;   o Telecoms administration concerns (telecoms administrationsonly)-10 percent;   o Impact of tariffs-55 percent;   o Other factors-70 percent.   THE PEOPLE BEHIND THE SURVEY   Working closely with the CommunicationsWeek International staff on thisproject was PA Consulting Group, a leading international management andtechnology consultancy based in London and with offices in 20 countries.    As was the case with last year's survey, London-based JohnBuckley, director, telecommunications, lead the PA team.   The writers and researchers were David Gillick, manager, policy andregulations, computers and telecommunications; Garry Garrard, manager, mobilecommunications; Peter Jenner, business manager, security consultancy centre;Michele Williamson, consultant, human resources; Michel Bensimhon, manager,computers and telecommunications (France); Karl Schreiner, manager,computers and telecommunications (Germany).Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990International Telecoms Needs -- Are Europe'sUsers Ready To Go Global?    By John Buckley         Telecoms administrations and suppliers have a long way to go beforemeeting European users' needs.   Despite their efforts to improve their services, and despite the attemptsby international bodies to re-shape the regulatory and competitiveenvironment in Europe, the results of this year's survey by PAConsulting Group, of London, and CommunicationsWeek International, like lastyear's, show that users aren't feeling enough of animpact.   With high international tariffs also becoming a greater concern this year,European users may find themselves losing out to competitors from other partsof the world, particularly North America, where telecoms regulations areflexible and the market is more competitive.   PICKING UP THE PACE      In the last 12 months, the member states of the European Community havepicked up the pace of establishing a truly pan-European market forgeneral goods and services.   Not only are they completing preparations for the planned 1992 launch oftheir internal market; they are also taking wider steps toward openingcross-border trade with Eastern Europe.   These moves, plus other developments in world trade, are extending thehorizons of European trading companies; many that had been content doingstrictly domestic business are now thinking of marketing on a globalbasis.   Not surprisingly, therefore, Europe's business community is findinginternational telecommunications more and more important. After all, acompany's ability to communicate efficiently with customers, distributorsor subsidiaries in other countries can be crucial to its marketpenetration, particularly in countries where it competes with local-basedcompanies enjoying shorter lines of communication.   But are the international telecoms needs of these growing companies beingmet?   If not, what problems are they experiencing?LACK OF STANDARDS CITED   The 1990 survey shows that, despite the considerable efforts ofinternational bodies to develop common standards, European users consider thelack of unifying standards to be the single largest obstacle to internationalcommunications.  This was also the finding in last year's survey,suggesting that whatever the progress on international standards, the impactis not strong enough or fast enough for users.   Close behind the complaints about standards comes criticism of the servicelimitations of the telecoms administrations, with users in Spain and Polandbeing the most critical, but with all European countries expressingconcern.   Closely allied with this concern are complaints against regulatoryrestrictions; feelings of users about telecoms administrations servicelimitations and regulatory restrictions seem to be running stronger this yearthan in last year's survey. This level of concern is due largely tothe fact that telecoms providers and regulators often do not keep pace withaccelerating advances in technology, thus competition from potential newmarket entrants is often stifled.    But it is also clear that users are becoming much better informed abouttelecoms developments; they are increasingly aware of what is technologicallyfeasible and what is available in certain other countries, for instance in theUnited States, but which may be denied to them through regulatory constraintsin their own country.   An example is satellite communications, where European users have come upagainst the inflexibility of certain administrations and other serviceproviders; whereas in North America similar problems can be solved by theflexibility of two-way satellite services allowed under the very smallaperture terminal (VSAT) arrangements.   Because of these types of difficulties, plus the globalization of their ownbusinesses, users feel a strong need for suppliers to offer serviceson aglobal basis.   Eastern European countries, of course, have a major task ahead of thembefore they can offer good quality communications, either within theircountries or internationally, and already there is a great deal of activity onthis score in many of the countries concerned.   The responses to the survey show that when European users were asked aboutthe quality of international communications, those in Eastern Europe tended tobe the most critical (though those in Yugoslavia were among the mostsatisfied).    Interestingly, the countries most dissatisfied with their internationaltelecoms also included Luxembourg, France, Finland and Switzerland.   But whether in Eastern or Western Europe, the level of tariffs charged forinternational telecoms is recognized as a major issue.   When asked in the survey which kind of tariff reductions would affect theway they used public telecoms services, users cited high international callcharges for both data and voice.   With the changing face of Europe and the globalization of markets, theEuropean users' need for effective international telecommunicationsis becoming increasingly crucial.   And telecoms authorities have shown that they can bring change aboutquickly when they really want to-for instance, in West and East Germany,where administrations are working to integrate their services.   As pressure mounts in Europe for improving the level of internationaltelecommunications, users clearly wish to see administrations, governmentbodies and others bring these changes about quickly.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Price The Missing Element In Europe's MobileMarket    By Garry Garrard         Although mobile communications service providers plan to offer anincreasingly wide range of new services and facilities in Europe in the nexttwo years, users say they would prefer lower prices.   In fact, users in nearly every country surveyed by PA Consulting Group, ofLondon, and CommunicationsWeek International rate the prospect of lowercellular costs more favorably than the industry's plans to introduceGSM, PCN, Telepoint and DECT technologies.   Lower equipment costs also outpolled such concerns as extended nationalcoverage, service quality, and provision of international roaming, dataservices and smaller phone size.   Cost was particularly an issue in the Benelux countries, Germany, Italy andSpain, where competition and choice are limited and where prices are farhigher than the European average. But price was also a concern in Scandinavia,where the mobile phone market has been liberalized for years.   Only in the United Kingdom was equipment price not considered important,but mobile phone equipment is often given away there, or sold at highlydiscounted prices. U.K. users almost unanimously called for lower callcharges-even more so than German users, who pay more. This reflects highpenetration in the United Kingdom and the growing proportion of telecomsbudgets spent on mobile communications as usage seeps down to lower levels ofthe company hierarchy.ROOM FOR GROWTH   There are more than three million cellular phone users in Europe, where themarket has grown nearly 60 percent in the past year, indicating buoyancy. Butclearly there is still room for growth in Europe's cellular market.Will demand be spurred by the new services and improved facilities planned fornext year?   These developments include GSM, a digital cellular service that will offerintegrated services digital network compatibility and international roaming;personal communications networks, which will start in the United Kingdom in1992, offering users new services, including some taking advantage ofsmart-card technology; Telepoint, which is being adopted in manycountries using CT2 technology, and DECT, a new European standard for cordlesstelephones which is currently in development.   If the new technologies are to be successful, then use of mobilecommunications must become more common. More than a third of the organizationssurveyed provide mobile phones only to senior management.   Outside the United Kingdom and Scandinavia, most companies still regard acellular phone as a privilege or a status symbol, instead of a tool toincrease business efficiency or improve customer service. This attitude wasprevalent in the United Kingdom for some time after cellular was introduced,but has now changed considerably.EXTENDED COVERAGE   A similar effect can be expected in other countries where penetration islow, and there is limited awareness of the real benefits of mobile phones.   Cellular networks usually start in major cities, with less populated areasbrought along gradually. The survey reflects the desire for national networksto offer extended coverage, with users clearly refusing to acceptlimitations.   According to the survey, extending coverage was the top priority in Franceand Italy, and an important issue in Spain. Even in Norway and Finland, wherepopulation coverage is high, improvements would be welcomed, presumably in thelarge, sparsely populated regions to the north.   The speed of rollout of GSM coverage is specified in a memorandum ofunderstanding signed by all the European cellular operators. However, theminimum requirements are modest compared even to that of current analogservices in France, Italy and Spain. It seems unlikely the GSM will be able tocompete seriously in the market unless the operators exceed their rolloutcommitments considerably.SERVICE QUALITY   Service quality is another factor affecting basic mobile telephony that isimportant to users, who find it frustrating when calls drop out or channelsaren't available when needed. Because U.K. cellular networks havebeen heavily criticized for failing to provide adequate service, it was nosurprise to find that this is still an issue for U.K. users, even thoughCellnet, at least, has been publicizing that it is improving itsinfrastructure.   The strongest implied criticisms of service quality, however, come fromSweden, where congestion in the Stockholm area can cause problems, as well asFinland and Spain.   The factors mentioned so far affect all basic telephony, but new featuresor service upgrades were also investigated: International roaming, dataservices and availability of smaller phones produced some unexpectedresults.   Conventional wisdom says demand for international roaming is small andconcentrated in the Benelux region. While the survey indeed shows a modestrequirement across Europe, only an average demand exists in Belgium and theNetherlands. The strongest response came from Czechoslovakia, Poland andHungary!   In Western Europe, Germany showed the highest level of interest, followedby Portugal and Switzerland. Still, users rated roaming less significant thanprice reductions.   There is moderate interest in mobile data services everywhere, butthese receive low priority from most experienced users. Finland was theonly country with reasonable cellular penetration to highlight data as apriority need. Other countries enthusiastic about data either had lowpenetration (Spain, Italy and Portugal) or no service at all (Greece.)   As cellular markets mature, and mobile telephones become widely accepted,users recognize that most requirements are for simple telephony.   The results of the survey have some clear messages for the success of GSM.The pan-European digital cellular system has been developed withcomprehensive features.COST TO USERS IMPORTANT    Compatibility with ISDN, and the availability of international roaming,are often quoted as the most significant features of the new system butneither is likely to increase market growth to any great degree. Costs tousers will be far more important.   It has been estimated that when the GSM system starts, infrastructure costswill be 20 to 30 percent lower than for analog systems, and competition inequipment supply can be expected to drive prices down even more as the systemmatures.    Operators will not be locked to a single manufacturer after they selecttheir initial supplier. If operators follow European Commission policy, andrelate tariffs directly to costs, users should gradually see the decrease innetwork charges that they want, and the market will grow even faster.   The complexity of GSM will make early phones large and expensive, comparedto analog versions. However, the survey showed that phone size was of littleconcern, and in many countries GSM should have little problem competing withanalog mobiles-particularly in Germany, the largest potential market inEurope.   Reciprocal type approval, where a product approved for use in one countrywill be accepted in other countries, allowing users to shop around, and volumeproduction will lead to rapid price reductions, and by 1993 or 1994, GSMmobiles and hand-portables should be available throughout Europe atreasonable prices.   GSM has been seen as a triumph of technological cooperation. It isundoubtedly true that great progress has been made, but it seems likely thatits real achievement will be political, by transferring the benefits ofcompetition and volume production to countries where it has been stoutlyresisted.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990What Users Were Saying One Year Ago    Users have found their voices.   Increased competition throughout Europe, and the prospect of even furtherliberalization, has empowered them-and with new and varied choices inequipment and service offerings has come the leverage to make demands.   This empowerment is clearly reflected in this year'sCommunicationsWeek International/PA Consulting Group survey.   This year, users loudly articulated their needs-and their expectationsthat these needs will be met.   This is a change from last year, when survey respondents took a morediffident approach, expressing their wishes from the position of the harriedprofessional left to contend with batches of problems foisted upon them bymanufacturers, telecoms administrators and even their own companies(CommunicationsWeek International, 16 October, 1989).   What follows is a summary of some of those wishes.   o On spending:   Users in all sectors surveyed foresaw greater outlays on communications,with the service, transport and government sectors reporting an increase inspending of more than 25 percent last year. In contrast, respondents fromfinance companies expected to see only a 5 percent annual increase over1988.   Yet, even as overall spending was expected to rise, the proportion to bespent on international communications was to grow, according to the survey.Respondents predicted an average increase of 10 percent in internationalcommunications spending between 1988 and 1989, with internationalcommunications accounting for 35 percent of all spending in 1989.   o On the telecommunications administrations:   Users were generally content with the quality of service their telecomsadminstrations provided. Switzerland, Finland and France were judged to havethe highest quality networks, while Italy was said to have the worst.   Users did say they wanted standard international data network services withquality network management and common tariffs-things that telecomsadministrations did not provide.   o On facilities management:   More than half of the telecoms professionals surveyed said they were likelyto adopt facilities management approaches for data communications by 1994.There was also significant interest in outsourcing as a management tool forvoice networks.   o On managed data network services:   Last year's survey predicted that the importance of managed datanetwork service would grow 24 percent across Europe, with growth fastest inthe transport and manufacturing sectors in Norway, Sweden, Italy and theUnited Kingdom.   o On packet switching:   The survey predicted that international public packet switching serviceswould become as important as international voice networks.   o On public voice services:   Public voice services were also expected to grow significantly inimportance while private voice networks remained at their 1989 levels ofimportance.   o On the integrated services digital network:   Response to ISDN varied depending on where the question was asked. In theUnited Kingdom, for instance, ISDN had lukewarm appeal, with only 46 percentof the survey respondents saying they believe ISDN is critical to thedevelopment of telecoms services and 46 percent saying it would be moderatelyuseful. In France, Belgium and West Germany, however, 70 percent of thosequestioned saw ISDN as critical.   o On electronic communications services:   Respondents to last year's survey predicted that electroniccommunications services would play an important role in their futures, withpublic electronic mail, electronic data interchange and videoconferencingrated as the fasted growing new technologies for international communicationsusers.   o On open systems:   Almost half of the users questioned last year predicted that Open SystemsInterconnection would oust IBM's proprietary SNA in the 1990s as themost popular networking technology. Only 9 percent of the companies surveyedfelt that SNA would gain a dominant position.   o On facsimile and telex technologies:   Last year's survey showed that facsimile was as important tocompanies as voice services, but demand was not expected to growsignificantly. As for telex, users predicted that it would soon become ananachronism.   o On barriers to international development:   Lack of standards was deemed to be the single greatest barrier tointernational development last year; this was closely followed by staff andskill shortages, limitations of telecoms administration services, vendors notunderstanding the needs of users, product limitations, regulatoryrestrictions, inadequate network management and insufficient support forbusiness managers.   o On human resources:   Average salaries for telecoms staff in western Europe hovered around$46,000; most managers in eastern European countries earned less than$15,000 a year.   Information systems managers were paid the least, averaging $39,000,with network/operations managers earning only slightly more.   The highest salary levels were found in the finance sector, withrespondents reporting an average of $53,000. Those in energy averaged$46,000; transport, $45,000.   Government salaries were said to be on a par with government, with averagesof $44,000.   The biggest problem facing telecoms managers in private industry last yearwas staff shortages. One-third of the respondents employed by governmentscalled staff shortages a major problem, while as many as 70 percent of therespondents in other areas said there was a serious lack of workers.   o Other points related by the human resources section of the 1989survey include:   Only one of every four managers reported to an information technologydirector; telecoms managers were more likely to report to an operationsmanager, administration manager or the finance department.      Most telecoms professionals served more than 200 people, and about$10,000 was spent each year on each person who uses telecomsfacilities.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990Increasing User Anxiety Surrounds Data Security    By By Peter Jenner         With more and more businesses in Europe depending on third partiesto exchange information for them, data security is proving to be a significantconcern.   This growing anxiety is reflected in results of the survey conducted by PAConsulting Group, of London, and CommunicationsWeek International. Ninetypercent of the respondents answered the questions on security, easily thehighest response level for any of the subject areas the questionnaire covered.(The next highest category was international telecommunications, with an80 percent rate of response.)    Probably the most significant outcome of the whole survey was the responseto the questions concerning availability. More than 80 percent of therespondents admitted that they had no idea how much it would cost theircompanies if their communications networks were to fail. Yet more than half ofthose who had estimated the potential losses thought it would cost $1million or more if the network collapsed.   Such a result suggests that most managers still subscribe to the attitudethat ``it won't happen to me.''   Confidentiality of information has always been the most prominent securityissue in the minds of managers and the survey confirms that this remainsso: Sixty-eight percent of the respondents said confidentiality wastheir biggest headache.CONFIDENTIALITY CRITICAL   There are many cases where confidentiality is critical but an objectiveanalysis usually shows that they are in the minority. In most cases, anobjective assessment of risks to the business would clearly show that failureto ensure the integrity of information, such as money transfers, or lack ofavailability of data-for example, in process control-would causemuch more damage or direct losses than if someone were to feed at theinformation.   In other words, businesses are more worried about the hacker than they areabout maintaining and transmitting incorrect data.    An example of the need for integrity in the finance sector was anattempted 20 million fraud targeted at Mitsubishi International FinanceCorporation. The fraudsters tapped into EUCLID, the Eurobond information andclearing service, using a home computer and modem and tried to divert funds toa Swiss bank account. The attempt failed only because the staff at the bankreceiving the proceeds queried the transaction. A better-planned attemptcould have been more successful.   One way of preventing this attempt would have been to check that the moneytransfer request was valid, thus ensuring the integrity of the data.   Concern over privacy has been growing over the past few years. Much of thisconcern is directed towards the storage and processing of personal data incomputer systems.GROWING CONCERN   Each European country has a data protection law which, in spite of itsname, is intended to protect personal privacy and shield the public from whatis seen as an insidious threat, as vast banks of computer-held dataspread across the world. Such data might easily be incorrect or open toabuse.   The survey showed that companies in many sectors hear the message and aregiving the issue the attention it deserves.   In the government, health and education sectors the most prominent concernby far was confidentiality of personal and employment-record information.But in some sectors-mostly retail and distribution-concern overpersonal privacy was far lower, pointing to a lack of concern aboutcustomers' information.    Business managers do not seem to realize that data protection laws giveequal protection to the rights of the corporate individual as to the privateindividual. Companies should recognize this deficiency and take care over whoholds information about them and their businesses.   Conversely, despite the importance of confidentiality in the publicsectors, there was no recognition of the need to care aboutcustomers' data, and in many cases no recognition of the existenceof customers.NATURAL DISASTERS   There are many stories of accidents and disasters that cripplecommunications facilities and can cost millions. One of the more extreme wasthe 17 October 1989 earthquake in San Francisco, which many businessessurvived without physical damage, but which made for very heavy financiallosses because their computers could not communicate with the outside worldlong afterward.    Less dramatically, many businesses realized how risky it is to depend on asingle supplier when British Telecom engineers went on strike in 1988.   Another common cause of problems is bad capacity planning. An example ofthis was the Companies Registration Office in the United Kingdom, which had 35computing system breakdowns in seven months. Of these, two were due to loss ofpower, two to operating system problems and 31 to network overload.Back to Headline List CopyrightCOMMUNICATIONS WEEK INTERNATIONAL via NewsNetOctober 15, 1990A Look At The Human Side Of Telecommunications    By Michele Williamson         Liberalization is not just about suppliers competing to provide thebest value equipment and services, it is also about jobs.   As the market is freed across the continent, people, too, will compete forbetter paying work with more status and improved working conditions.   And as telecoms deregulation takes hold, and the European Community movestoward economic unity, the job market will change. The post-1992 singlemarket will be as much about the freedom of movement of people as it will beabout goods and services.    But Europe still consists of a patchwork of telecoms structures andpolicies, from the centralized East to free-market West.   And as such, the 1990 CommunicationsWeek International/PA Consulting Groupsurvey results confirm that there are vast differences in the perceived value,importance and earnings of telecoms professionals from one country to thenext.   Most telecoms departments are fairly small: Sixty-four percentof survey respondents report fewer than 10 members and 81 percent are indepartments of fewer than 26. The vast majority-87 percent-reportdirectly to either an information technology director (45 percent)or other board member (42 percent).   Most of the 6 percent who belong to departments with 100 or more people,work in the United Kingdom. That country, however, has more large companiesthan most other Community states and this probably accounts for thedifference.   Many senior telecoms managers and directors reached their position throughexperience and not through formal education, starting their working careers asjuniors in telecoms or with the armed forces as radio operators, or with thenational telecoms administration.   But this is changing. Formal training-in business as well astechnology-is becoming more important among the newer generation ofwould-be managers. Developing more slowly, the world over, is highereducation in communications. Compared with the United States, which haspioneered higher education in business and telecommunications, Europe can onlyoffer a handful of MBA-type courses.    The survey found that the highest paid professionals are not found in themost liberal regime, the United Kingdom, where the average telecomsprofessional salary is under $40,000 a year, but in monopoly marketssuch as France and, in particular, Switzerland, where the average salary ismore than $60,000. Switzerland, whose telecoms professionals are paidthree times as much as their Polish colleagues, also dominated lastyear's salary league table.COMPETITION PLAYS ROLE   This, too, could well change as competition takes over. Althoughcompetition is not the only factor that determines salary levels-payscales are consistently higher for all industry sectors in certaincountries-it could play a significant part in an open, mobile employmentmarket.    Apart from differences in the telecoms markets themselves, the cost ofliving varies enormously from one country to another, and there are differentnational pay customs and cultural factors. In some countries, employees arepaid extra if they work outside normal business hours. Salaries vary not justbetween countries but according to business sector.   The tremendous salary range from one industry sector to another in theUnited Kingdom, for instance, is clearly seen in the results of PA's1990 Survey of Employment Trends in Telecoms. A network technician could earn12,200 in the manufacturing sector, up to 17,300 in the financial industry; atelecoms manager would make 25,600 in manufacturing and 31,000 infinance.   These variations reflect such factors as the employer's level ofinvestment in technology and the relative importance of telecoms in aparticular business.THE CHALLENGE AHEAD   Countries on the threshold of deregulation and new technology canpotentially reap the benefits of skills and solutions developed by thepioneering countries. But countries that deregulate early face the prospect oflosing their valuable skills to these``developing'' countries.   This is both a threat and an opportunity, and it will grow as 1992approaches and as Eastern Europe opens up. For example, skilled U.K.telecoms specialists, earning only around $40,000-an average sum byEuropean standards-may be well-placed for comparatively well-paid jobs innewly liberalized regimes, provided they have the necessary languageskills and can adapt to a new country.   On the other hand, telecoms professionals whose security may be threatenedby the coming deregulation must be prepared to welcome change and to work withcolleagues from other national backgrounds.   Just how significant this movement of the skills base will be remainsto be seen. Some people now predict that as equipment becomes morecomplex, but user friendly, user organizations will need smaller numbersof better-qualified technical people and fewer low-level operators.   The role of the European telecoms professional is on the verge of changingalong with the move to a new Europe. Since the nature of that change isuncertain, posing a mix of both opportunity and threat, the chances thatpersonal and economic circumstances will be affected are enormous. Thequestion is, how much will inertia hinder the revolution?Back to Headline List WT03-B12-9IA086-000622-B036-58http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te37.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045124 text/html 285521HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:48:20 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:02 GMTContent-length: 285333Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te37.html Sample Issue Copyright DATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNet November, 1991 Vol. 20, No. SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES NEWSFRONT 'MOTHER OF ALL CONCURRENT EDITORS' DEBUTS (190 words) WELLFLEET'S STAR RISES; CISCO SNUBBED (155 words) VITALINK, NSC FORM R&D, MARKETING STRATEGIES (215 words) FTP DEVELOPERS PREFER OS/2 TO WINDOWS (133 words) LOW-END NICS SALES REMAIN STRONG (117 words) SPRINT TO LAUNCH FRAME RELAY SERVICE (127 words) BABY BELLS START FRAME RELAY TRIALS (102 words) FRAME RELAY AT 45 MBIT/S (70 words) LOOK MA, NO LAN: SOFTWARE GAINS MORE OPTIONS (204 words) WHO'S MERGING VOICE AND DATA, AND HOW THEY'RE DOING IT (16 words) WHICH VERSION OF UNIX IS MOST POPULAR (16 words) U.S. FAX MACHINE AND SERVICE MARKET FORECAST (19 words) INTERNETWORKING VIEWS FRAME RELAY CONGESTION MANAGEMENT: TOO MANY OPTIONS? (1210 words) EOT: A POTPOURRI OF COMMENTARY ON DATA COMMUNICATIONS NET MANAGEMENT PROTOCOLS: A GOOD PLACE TO START, A BAD PLACE TO STOP (761 words) NEWS ANALYSIS HSSI SIZZLES But distributed bandwidth demonstrates there's more to the high-speed serial interface than just speed (1575 words) CANNED HELP FOR LAN PROBLEMS: EFFECTIVE, BUT LIMITED Expert systems from HP and Network General can solve some LAN problems fast, but they can't be fine-tuned (1738 words) BBN GREEN LIGHTS BUSLESS SWITCH Emerald's high-speed switching module hits 160 Mbit/s full duplex for aggregate throughput in the gigabit range (962 words) NEWS WATCH WOLLONGONG BUYS A EUROPEAN CUSTOMER BASE (143 words) SOUTH AFRICAN COMPANY PULLS OUT OF TIMEPLEX/ASCOM DEAL (148 words) AT&T CUTSLONG-DISTANCE T1 AND FRACTIONAL T1 PRICES. . . (126 words) AT&T CUTS LONG-DISTANCE T1 AND FRACTIONAL T1 PRICES. . .WHILE MCI PRICES SWITCHED T1, T3 SERVICES (127 words) STANDARDS WATCH ATM FORUM TO PROMOTE INTEROPERABILITY (185 words) DIRECT FAX LINKS PLANNED FOR DOS, WINDOWS, AND UNIX (154 words) OSPF GETS SEAL OF APPROVAL (91 words) SNMP MANAGEMENT FOR PROTOCOL ANALYZERS (79 words) VIEWPOINT VIEWING THE FUTURE FROM INTEROP (371 words) WAN VIEWS TRANSATLANTIC DIAL-UP LINKS: STILL HIT OR MISS (1337 words) VIDEO CODECS LIGHTS, CAMERA, ACTION . . . BREAKING INTO VIDEOCONFERENCING (530 words) THE BIG PICTURE FOR H.261 (539 words) FREEZE FRAME ON VIDEOCONFERENCING (320 words) VIDEOCONFERENCING: NOT JUST TALKING HEADS (4935 words) EUROPEAN ISDN CALLING ALL LANS: ISDN FOR LAN INTERCONNECT Public ISDNs are starting to emerge as a practical way to link LANs in Europe. But given serious equipment shortcomings and patchy service availability, users are well advised to look before they leap (3118 words) NEW LITERATURE MULTIVENDOR NETS MADE EASY (173 words) A COMMON MOTIF (178 words) SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT IBM'S SYSTEM VIEW: ADDING FUNCTION TO FORM A year after its unveiling, IBM's grand scheme for total systems management is still in its formative stage (3371 words) INFINITE BANDWIDTH IBM PULLS SAA OUT OF THE MIRE (1158 words) OPEN NETWORKING VIEWS START YOUR ENGINES FOR IMPROVED SNA PERFORMANCE (1254 words) DATA COMM USER SURVEY SURVEY METHODOLOGY (539 words) THE BENEFITS--AND DRAWBACKS-- OF GROWING YOUR OWN (290 words) USERS RATE SNMP MULTIVENDOR NETWORK MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS In a new market, users are still figuring out what SNMP management can do for them (2809 words) LAN VIEWS BILLING FOR LAN INTERNETS: WHO PICKS UP THE TAB? (1249 words) NEW PRODUCTS/LAN A COMPLETE INTERNET IN A SINGLE BOX ODS's server module puts all networking devices under one cover (1686 words) HUBS WITH A FUTURE (427 words) FIBER AND 10BASE-T HUBS BOW (341 words) TOKEN RING LINKS FOR DEC ULTRIX (149 words) MERGE AHEAD: ROUTER PLUS SMART HUB (110 words) FDDI SPEEDS ON UTP (183 words) STARTER HUB CONNECTS 10BASE-T NETWORKS (119 words) NEW PRODUCTS/INTERNETWORKING SNA, DEC, AND LAN TRAFFIC ON ONE BACKBONE Netlink also plans to OEM its software to router vendors (1362 words) SPEEDY LINKS FOR THE FAR-FLUNG (177 words) MORE HOSTS FOR MACS (96 words) SNA MEETS TCP/IP (146 words) DFT TRANSFERS OVER COAX (123 words) PRODUCT POTPOURRI FOR IBM MIDRANGE SYSTEMS (305 words) MULTITASKING FILE TRANSFER (188 words) RUMBA TIME (336 words) RJE EMULATOR FOR OS/2 AND DOS (179 words) CONFIGURE ROUTERS ON MULTIPLE SNMP SYSTEMS (283 words) THE SUNNY SIDE OF SNMP (133 words) NETWORK MONITORING BY PROXY (158 words) VAX SECURITY TO THE MAX (243 words) STRONG-ARMING SECURITY BREACHES (163 words) NEW PRODUCTS/WAN 'FRAME SERVER' DISHES UP MORE FRAME RELAY FLAVORS Timeplex's device comes in add-in and standalone versions and offers a choice of connection types (1243 words) ON THE ROAD TO T1 (161 words) DUAL-CHANNEL DSU AND MORE (221 words) BERT TESTER ADDED (136 words) TESTING MULTIPLE MODEMS (154 words) ECHO CANCELER ALSO MONITORS PERFORMANCE (165 words) OS-INDEPENDENT FAX AND VOICE API (161 words) JUST THE FAX FOR AS/400S (190 words) SMALL SIZE, BIG FEATURES (292 words) MODEM BOOSTS ERROR CORRECTION (139 words) MODEM GETS TOUGH (143 words) FROM OLD MODEMS TO NEW (154 words) V.32 ENTRY (117 words) REMOTE USERS GET LAN ACCESS (175 words) MAKE WAY FOR THE CAR MODEM (190 words) CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.'MOTHER OF ALL CONCURRENT EDITORS' DEBUTSResearchers at the University of Florida (Gainesville) may have solved oneof the thorniest problems of distributed computing--how to give multipleusers access to the same file without having one user overwrite another'swork. The researchers have developed a word processor called The Mother ofAll Concurrent Editors (MACE) that saves changes by locking only a portionof the file. MACE works across TCP/IP networks as well as single systems.Here's how it works: When a user calls a document, it appears on screen,along with the names of other users working on that same document. To makechanges to the document, users lock the portion of text they are workingon. These locks are managed centrally, so that all other users are aware ofthem. Other users can watch the locked text change, but they cannotinterfere. When the writer saves changes, the locks are relinquished, andother users can access that text. MACE isn't the first concurrent editor,but it is much larger in scope than its predecessors. It also has an openarchitecture to which other applications can be added.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.WELLFLEET'S STAR RISES; CISCO SNUBBEDCisco Systems Inc. (Menlo Park, Calif.) is still easily the leading vendorof routers, but Wall Street analysts have taken note of recent inroads madeby Wellfleet Communications Inc. (Bedford, Mass.). In September, GoldmanSachs (New York) issued a bulletin downgrading its opinion of Cisco from''fairly valued'' to ''fully valued,'' while simultaneously reiterating itsattractive rating of Wellfleet stock. ''We think Cisco's stock is notlikely to rise further and may decline,'' the bulletin stated. GoldmanSach's positive assessment of Wellfleet is based in part on the company'sannouncement that the three major long-distance telephone companies--AT&TNetwork Systems (Morristown, N.J.), US Sprint Communications Co. (KansasCity, Mo.) and MCI Telecommunications Corp. (Washington, D.C.)--had allsigned contracts to purchase Wellfleet products for use and resale. ''Thisrepresents a major endorsement of Wellfleet's architecture over itscompetitors by a sophisticated evaluation trio,'' the Goldman bulletinsaid.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.VITALINK, NSC FORM R&D, MARKETING STRATEGIESThe merged companies of Vitalink Communications Corp. (Fremont, Calif.) andNetwork Systems Corp. (NSC, Minneapolis) have hammered out their marketingand product strategies. NSC's host connectivity products will be largelyunaffected by the merger. Research and development for each company'srouters will remain separate, while all marketing will be handled byVitalink under the leadership of its chief executive officer, Les Denend.The router lineup will consist of Vitalink TransPath routers and TransLANbridges, NSC's 6000 Series routers, the 4000 Series of SNA connectivityproducts from Netlink Inc. (Raleigh, N.C.) (see ''SNA, LAN, and DEC Trafficon One Backbone,'' New Products/Internetworking, page 135), and the 8000Series of connectivity products from Coral Network Corp. (Marlborough,Mass.). Although the 8000 and 6000 Series overlap in some respects, theCoral router has unique capabilities including fault tolerance, and supportfor networks made up entirely of T3 or other high-speed communicationslines, Denend says. Future research and development efforts will centermostly on 6000, 4000, and 8000 products, rather than on Vitalink's TransLANand TransPath products. Enhancements to the Vitalink products will involvecode upgrades and connectivity options such as frame relay, but thearchitecture and capabilities will not undergo any fundamental changes orbe the basis for future products.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.FTP DEVELOPERS PREFER OS/2 TO WINDOWSWriting for Windows is like walking on thin ice, while OS/2 is adeveloper's dream, at least according developers at FTP Software Inc.(Wakefield, Mass.), which last month introduced a Windows and OS/2 versionsof its TCP/IP software, called PC/TCP. The developers say Windows crashesif an application doesn't behave perfectly and is extremely difficult todebug. Worse, they add, is the fact that Windows lacks many neededfacilities for communications applications. There's no way to share I/Obetween multiple processes, no queuing system, and no way for DOSapplications to open device drivers at the same time. FTP had no choice butto build all the necessary facilities itself. In contrast, the OS/2 versionof PC/TCP was a breeze to develop, the company reports.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.LOW-END NICS SALES REMAIN STRONGHigh-end 16- and 32-bit network interface cards (NICs) may grab theheadlines, but their sales don't come close to those for good old-fashioned8-bit NICs, according to Lisa Alloca, senior product manager for desktopproducts at Racal-Datacom (Sunrise, Fla.) and Bob Jones, director ofcommunications products at NCR Corp.'s Microelectronics Products Division(Fort Collins, Colo.). The two companies last month introduced a jointlydesigned Ethernet chip set and a Racal Ethernet NIC that uses the chip set.''We've been waiting to kill off our line of 8-bit NICs for years now,''Alloca says. She adds, however, that 8-bit NICs still account for 50percent of all sales.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.SPRINT TO LAUNCH FRAME RELAY SERVICEUS Sprint Communications Co. (Kansas City, Mo.) says it will launch itsframe relay service starting next month. The company says it has beenbeta-testing the service, announced last fall, with the accounting firm ofErnst & Young. Once it is generally available, users will be able to accessthe service at 56-kbit/s, fractional T1, and T1 speeds. Sprint also willoffer a more expensive ''reserved'' service, under which customers willalways have access to a given amount of bandwidth. Standard service doesnot include the guaranteed-bandwidth feature, and is priced comparably withother frame relay services, Sprint says. Reserved service will be priced ona monthly rate, while standard services will include both fixed andusage-based components.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.BABY BELLS START FRAME RELAY TRIALSPacific Bell (San Francisco) and Southwestern Bell Telephone Co. (St.Louis) have both announced frame relay trials to begin this year.Southwestern Bell says it will launch a general offering in early 1992;Pacific Bell wouldn't commit to an offering, but says it is examining theservice in the context of real-world applications. Both sets of trials arefor 56-kbit/s and T1 (1.544-Mbit/s) rates. Both companies also areconsidering Switched Multimegabit Data Service (SMDS) technology, andPacific Bell says it will offer SMDS in early 1992, pending approval by theCalifornia Public Utilities Commission..Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.FRAME RELAY AT 45 MBIT/SCisco Systems Inc. (Menlo Park, Calif.) recently added support for framerelay protocols at 45-Mbit/s to its internetworking routers. The framerelay support is available as part of the company's X.25/Packet switchsoftware, which runs on an AGS+ router equipped with a high-speed serialinterface (HSSI)/T3 interface card. Depending on the router chassis size,the software costs $750 to $3,200.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.LOOK MA, NO LAN: SOFTWARE GAINS MORE OPTIONSConcurrent Controls Inc. (South San Francisco, Calif.) is adding moreconnectivity options for its flagship Concurrent DOS software. The product,an operating system that allows multiple users to share DOS and Windowsapplications on one 386-based PC via terminal emulation. Concurrent DOScosts $795 for a five-user package, which the company says is cheaper thanadding a LAN segment. The company plans to add support for multiple Novellserver sessions in the first quarter of 1992. Presently, Concurrent DOSusers on one PC can communicate with one NetWare server. Token ring andUnix support are scheduled for the third quarter of 1992, the vendor says.Concurrent DOS already contains hooks for use with Netbios applicationdevelopment tools, such as ZIM from Zanthe Information Inc. (Ontario,Canada). It also has hooks for communications packages that deploy Netbios,particularly for communicating from PC to hosts. Concurrent DOS supportsall DOS and Microsoft Windows applications, including paged interruptapplications that address PC serial ports, single-userterminate-and-stay-resident (TSR) programs, and Microsoft's CD-ROMextensions. It comes with electronic-mail and remote access capabilities,security features, file transfer utilities, and a job scheduler that runsunattended file transfers.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.WHO'S MERGING VOICE AND DATA, AND HOW THEY'RE DOING ITChart: Who's Merging Voice and Data, and How They're Doing ItCopyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.WHICH VERSION OF UNIX IS MOST POPULARChart: Which Version of Unix Is Most PopularSource: UniForum AssociationCopyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.U.S. FAX MACHINE AND SERVICE MARKET FORECASTChart: U.S. Fax Machine and Service Market ForecastSource: Market Intelligence Research Corp.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.FRAME RELAYCONGESTION MANAGEMENT:TOO MANY OPTIONS?By:Nick LippisNo matter if a network carries data, voice, or video, congestion managementis--or should be--a constant concern. And congestion management can beboiled down to two basics: avoidance (staying out of trouble in the firstplace) and recovery (getting out of the trouble you should have foreseen).    It's not exactly brain surgery, but too many network planners andmanagers still think the best way to eliminate congested links is to throwmore bandwidth (and money) at the problem. When it comes to bursty,unpredictable internetworking traffic, though, congestion management startsto resemble a fine art.    The whole attempt to interconnect high-speed LANs via relativelyslow WANs presents some particularly thorny congestion problems. Part ofthe trouble can be traced to the fact that computer network architecturesand telecommunications infrastructures evolved separately, so there's adisjuncture in the way each discipline approaches congestion management.The new virtual data services--like SMDS and frame relay--now being jointlydeveloped by the telecom and computing industries should go a long waytoward closing this traditional gap. But questions have been raised allalong about frame relay's congestion management abilities.    It's true that frame relay's streamlined protocol stack reduces byabout two-thirds the processing overhead associated with X.25, the chiefalternative for public packet-switched service. But it's also true thatthis streamlining means frame relay doesn't offer any of X.25's congestionmanagement techniques (error correction and detection, for example). Whenframe relay networks reach a certain congestion threshold, the frame relayswitches start to drop packets. If the congestion becomes severe enough,the network can collapse.    The chief cause of this congestion is the way in which connectionsare made to a frame relay network, usually via an internet nodal processor(INP), such as integrated bridge/multiprotocol router, rather than the dumbterminals used with X.25. For every INP, there are typically 100end-systems (some combination of PCs, workstations, and minis) pushingpackets onto the network, which quickly adds up to a pretty hefty load.    It's not that frame relay is without any form of congestionmanagement. In fact, the American National Standards Institute's ANSIT1.618 spec addresses this issue.    The trouble is, congestion management for frame relay is optional,even though ANSI has defined several approaches. To date, there's noconsensus among vendors and carriers as to who will support whichalternatives.    ANSI has specified two congestion notification bits in the framerelay header: forward explicit congestion notification (FECN) and backwardexplicit congestion notification (BECN).    The FECN bit is set when a packet passes through a congested framerelay switch. It's up to the INP to read the bit and notify the logicalnetwork (DECnet, TCP/IP, IPX, AppleTalk) that it's time to throttle back onthe number of packets being sent.    This type of congestion avoidance is a natural for connectionlessprotocols that use the receiver end of a link for congestion management. Inessence, once it has been notified that the FECN bit is set, all a logicalnetwork need do is reduce the size of the window that defines the number ofpackets that can legally be sent onto the frame relay net.    But there's a catch: Most of today's peer-to-peer protocols do notsupport the FECN bit (the chief exception being DECnet Phase V/OSI). TheInternet Engineering Task Force (IETF), for instance, has yet to define theone bit in the IP header that would allow it to recognize FECN. It's not amatter of technology: The IETF, like the CCITT, can do no more thanrecommend FECN; it's up to the various IP communities to implement it.Since the FECN bit by definition limits traffic, considerate users of anetwork (who work with FECN to reduce congestion) could potentially loseout to more selfish networkers who keep pushing packets even whencongestion is present.    The BECN bit, in comparison, informs the source rather than thereceiving end (INP) about congestion. It's thus suited to terminal-to-hostprotocols like SNA that use the sender side of the link for congestionmanagement.    ANSI also specifies a third congestion-avoidance mechanism,Consolidated Link Layer Management (CLLM), which uses a reserved data linkcontrol identifier (DLCI) to send link layer control messages to an INP.In effect, this is an in-band signaling channel that establishes andidentifies the causes of congestion. To date, it has garnered virtually nosupport from vendors.    All of the foregoing are so-called explicit congestion controlmechanisms. It also is possible to use implicit congestion management,based, for instance, on delays. Thus, both TCP/IP and DECnet Phase IV nodesmonitor the elapsed time between when a packet is sent and when anacknowledgment is returned. If no acknowledgment is received within aspecified period, the node first stops sending altogether and then slowlybegins to put packets onto the network, watching to see if they areacknowledged.    The ANSI spec also addresses congestion recovery with the DiscardEligibility (DE) bit. This furnishes a way to identify a permanent virtualcircuit (PVC) on a frame relay network that is causing congestion. If a PVCexceeds its allotted burst rate (defined when the network is set up) over aspecific period, the frame relay switch sets the DE bit. If the networkstarts to experience congestion, it will first drop packets that have theDE bit set.    The carriers also are looking to help control congestion with theQuality Of Service (QOS) definition they supply with frame relay offerings.A QOS comprises a burst rate, access speed, maximum number of PVCs, andCommitted Information Rate (CIR), the last of which ensures that everypermanent virtual circuit always receives its specified bandwidth.    There is another--and some might suggest harsher--way to deal withPVCs that flood a network with packets: Set up tariffs that severely punishunfair or dangerous network behavior. None of the carriers have chosen thisapproach--yet.    Unfortunately, all of these strategies remain options. So what's anetwork planner to do? The most important guideline is to choose an INPvendor and carrier or frame relay switch supplier in tandem. Make sure thatone knows about and supports the other's approach to frame relay congestionmanagement. This may soon be simpler than it sounds: There's a growingtrend for carriers to enter into nonexclusive arrangements with INPvendors. Wellfleet Communications Inc. (Bedford, Mass.) now has sucharrangements with AT&T, MCI, and US Sprint. Cisco Systems Inc. (Menlo Park,Calif.) has cut deals with CompuServe, AT&T, and WilTel.    Right now, frame relay users should expect to see packet loss onthe order of 1 percent to 2 percent of the total sent, pretty much inkeeping with any robust, fully utilized network. It's highly unlikely thatpublic frame relay networks will collapse as a result of congestion--aslong as the protection afforded by the DE bit is carefully adhered to andINP vendors implement a range of implicit and explicit managementtechniques.About the Author(s):Nick Lippis is principal consultant with Strategic Networks Consulting Inc.(Boston). He specializes in LAN-to-WAN interconnection architectures andimplementations. His MCI Mail address is LIPPIS.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.NET MANAGEMENT PROTOCOLS: A GOOD PLACE TO START,A BAD PLACE TO STOPBy:Bruce FramStandards for network management protocols are the mom and apple pie of ourindustry. But what isn't clear to many users--and isn't talked about bymany vendors--is what protocols and standards can't do. This isn'tan indictment of any particular protocol--SNMP, OSI, CMIP, NMVT, or thelike. But net management protocols--standard or otherwise--don't addressthe entire management issue.    The truth is, they don't even deal with its most critical aspects.Network management involves more that just passing information betweendevices, which is the role of the protocol. A complete solution also mustencompass the user interface, database models, and application programinterfaces (APIs).    Yet instead of working on all these issues in concert, many vendorsare content to deliver products that boast pretty interfaces or to supplyprotocols bereft of real applications or hooks into other applications. Forinstance, of the 40 or so simple network management protocol (SNMP)management stations on the market, most give users no more than simplestatistics without interpretation. Their big selling point seems to be thatthey support one or more of the leading management protocols.    Beyond nifty graphics, what's needed are databases of informationabout network topology, traffic, performance, status, and the like. I'm nottalking about the management information bases (MIBs) for SNMP or thecommon management information protocol/services (CMIP/CMIS). These are meta-definitions or specifications for device-level data.    At least, I don't mean just that data. I'm also referring tothenetwork-wide information that a complete net management system orapplication would use. That data is available, although getting at it meanscapturing and analyzing packets, which requires the management system torun some fairly complex calculations.    But even if a system collects this data, consolidating it, storingit, representing it, and making it available for reports and furtheranalysis requires an underlying database far beyond anything typicallyavailable. What's missing are well-defined specifications that actuallyspell out the structure of the database and specify the elements it willcontain. For instance, how will routers be represented? How often willnetwork utilization data be collected? If packets per second are to bemonitored, will they be data packets or broadcast packets?    The ultimate form a net management database takes will varyaccording to need and configuration. But the database and the system itserves should be able to identify and explain faults in detail and letusers know what corrective action has been taken. What users really wantare reports and suggestions to help with capacity planning and networkdesign. The last thing they want is to sit in front of a monitor scrollingthrough screens of data.DON'T WAIT FOR DME    Without common database definitions, vendors and users are severelylimited as to the network management applications they can write. Yet theseapplications are the heart of network management: They're what theinterfaces, databases, and protocols exist to serve.    That's where APIs come into the picture. By giving developerssomething common to write to, they make it far simpler to write multivendormanagement applications. But developers of net management APIs faceproblems familiar to all software engineers: They need standards andspecifications to guide them. If it sounds circular, it is: Developers ofstandard APIs themselves need clearly defined standards. Only when bothpieces of the puzzle are in place can third parties and network managerscreate truly useful applications.    The Open Software Foundation (OSF, Cambridge, Mass.) may have ananswer in its Distributed Management Environment (DME). But it's too earlyto tell if its recently selected technologies will do the job or if manynet management vendors will support it. And what will happen to existingvendor APIs is an open question.    Meanwhile, users desperately need ways to manage multivendordistributed networks--today. It's time users began putting the pressure onvendors for network management tools that fit together and do the job. Ifthey don't vote with their pocketbooks, they'll pay the price downstream.    For their part, vendors need to start developingprotocol-independent, value-added applications. Graphical maps make forgreat demonstrations, but most don't have the depth to back those firstimpressions. We need to begin defining standards for user interfaces,database models, and APIs--as well as for management protocols.About the Author(s):Bruce Fram is manager of product marketing for Network General Corp. (MenloPark, Calif.), a maker of enterprise-wide management tools. He has workedas a project manager and has a background in software development.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.HSSI SIZZLESBut distributed bandwidth demonstratesthere's more to the high-speed serial interfacethan just speedBy:Eric M. HindinNow that far-flung LANs and mainframes regularly communicate with distantsites and data centers, network managers are increasingly concerned thatinterfaces to the wide area are becoming bottlenecks, costing them speedand bandwidth. Router, multiplexer, and channel extender suppliers say theyhave an answer in HSSI, the high-speed serial interface that's now startingto appear in products.    According to HSSI advocates, such interfaces as V.35 and RS-422aren't fast enough to connect multiple LANs and mainframe channels at fullspeed to T3 access devices. A T3 pipe delivers 45 Mbit/s of bandwidth;Switched Multimegabit Data Service (SMDS) and the Synchronous OpticalNetwork (Sonet) will be even faster. V.35 was originally intended tosupport no more than 6 Mbit/s, and RS-422 tops out at 10 Mbit/s.    HSSI, as its boosters to point out, operates at up to 52 Mbit/s.Perhaps even more importantly, it gives users a way to allocate all theavailable bandwidth as needed among HSSI-compliant data terminal equipment(DTE)--computers, routers, channel extenders, peripherals, and so on. Thesedevices are connected to HSSI multiplexers or channel/data service units(CSU/DSUs), which in turn establish links to the wide area.    Although no one device is likely to need the full bandwidth of,say, a T3 pipe, HSSI makes it possible to allocate the T3's 45 Mbit/s amongdifferent DTE. V.35 and RS-422 are not designed to allocate bandwidth. Forinstance, a single HSSI port on a T3 multiplexer could support six routerconnections. In contrast, six V.35 interfaces would be needed to link thesame six routers.    HSSI defines a physical and electrical interface between DTE anddata communications equipment (DCE). It was originally developed by CiscoSystems Inc. (Menlo Park, Calif.) and T3plus Networking Inc. (Santa Clara,Calif.). The two vendors submitted it to the American National StandardsInstitute (ANSI) TR30.1 committee about a year ago. TR30.1 also developedEIA-232 and V.35. HSSI's ratification is expected sometime in 1992,according to members of TR30.1. They say the HSSI specification is notlikely to be changed significantly between now and its adoption. A numberof vendors already support HSSI, and more are expected to sign on (seetable).    Changes in the way LANs and mainframes are used--and in the waythat the local area is viewed--are driving HSSI's acceptance. Databasesystems, for instance, commonly require exchanges to take place over thewide area as fast as if the communicating computers and resources werelocated on the same physical LAN. Only a high-speed service such as T3 orSonet in conjunction with HSSI lets LAN speeds be maintained fully.    What's more, as companies consolidate data centers, high-speedlinks are needed to tie in mainframes at remote sites, says Richard Farmer,product manager at Adaptive Corp. (Redwood City, Calif.). He also notesthat remote backup computers used during disaster recovery need high-speedlinks to the data center.    Also pushing HSSI along is the growing use of high-speed storagedevices, such as disk farms and tape silos (large rooms filled withcomputer tapes that are accessed by robots in response to requests fromcomputers). This sort of storage demands high-speed mainframe channelextension, according to Walt Hinton, product manager at McData Corp.(Broomfield, Colo.). Mainframe operating systems that allow multiplecomputers to work as one, such as IBM's Enterprise Systems Architecture(ESA), also mandate high-speed links, he adds.    HSSI's strong suit is distributed bandwidth. McData's 5300 HSSISystem, for instance, allocates user-specified portions of the T3 pipe toeach router, printer, and host (see Figure 1). Thus, the 5300 at Site Ballocates 10 Mbit/s to the router, 24 Mbit/s to the remote disk farm, 6Mbit/s to the printer, and 2 Mbit/s to the PBX.    The 5300 consists of a T3 multiplexer with HSSI interfaces and achannel extender housed in the same cabinet. The channel extender, used inthis case to support the disk farm and printer at Site B, is connected tothe T3 multiplexer through the latter's HSSI interface. The router and PBXat Site B also are connected to the multiplexer's HSSI interfaces.    Specifically, HSSI makes it possible to allocate bandwidth byestablishing how routers or other DTE accept clocking from an externalsource at speeds ranging from 1.5 to 52 Mbit/s. Network clocks aretypically derived from a central source (usually a clock maintained by theproviders of public network services) and passed along to all devices on anetwork so that the beginnings and ends of blocks, messages, and frames canbe identified clearly.    In most vendors' implementations of HSSI, bandwidth must beallocated manually by the network manager to the devices connected to theDCE. In fact, HSSI does not now specify a way for bandwidth to be allocateddynamically.    Dynamic allocation is obviously desirable because it eliminates thework associated with specifying how much bandwidth a router or channelextender is to receive. More importantly, it improves network performanceby accommodating bursty applications and users who come on-line withbandwidth-hungry applications without warning.    Some vendors, such as Newbridge Networks Inc. (Herndon, Va.), havedevised proprietary schemes that allow their HSSI multiplexers to allocatebandwidth dynamically. Newbridge uses simple network management protocol(SNMP) messages to enable routers and channel extenders to signalmultiplexers that additional bandwidth is needed. Most vendors agree,however, that it makes far more sense for HSSI's backers to work togetherto extend HSSI or devise a standard approach to dynamic allocation.    HSSI also does not specify how multiplexers or similar devices areto transmit data over the wide area. Most vendors' equipment gathers datafrom attached networking gear and sends it as one DS-3 stream over a publicdata service. DS-3 specifies 44.736 Mbit/s; T3, Sonet, and SMDS all acceptDS-3 as an input.    When configured in a mesh network, multiplexers typically send theDS-3 stream over the best possible route available at the time oftransmission. If that route fails, the data can be rerouted onto anothernetwork link that furnishes a path to the destination.    Once the DS-3 stream arrives at the receiving DCE, it is brokendown and specific data is sent to the appropriate devices (hosts, channelextenders, routers, printers, PBXs, disk farms, and the like).    Adaptive and T3plus have taken this basic approach one stepfurther. They allow data streams from individual devices connected to thesame HSSI interface to be routed to different destinations, over both T1and T3 communications lines.    Adaptive has implemented HSSI for its Sonet Transmission Manager,or STM (see Figure 2). The switching facility maps a data stream comingfrom a HSSI interface into multiple DS-1 channels. DS-1 specifies1.544-Mbit/s transmissions.    The STM's matrix switch can either combine DS-1s to transmit a DS-3data stream or transmit separate DS-1 channels over multiple T1 linesrather than one T3. In the latter case, the DS-1s are reassembled into aDS-3 by the receiving STM, so data can be routed through the receivingSTM's HSSI interface to the appropriate device.    Adaptive's and T3plus's ability to use multiple low-speed lines toform a high-bandwidth link between two nodes gives users three additionalbenefits. First, it allows network nodes to be installed in areas wherehigh-speed facilities may not yet be available. Second, it adds faulttolerance, since more links can be established between nodes. Prioritiesalso can be established among HSSI connections to ensure immediaterecovery in the event of a network failure.    Third, any one HSSI port connected to the STM's matrix switchactually has more bandwidth available than would be provided by a singleDS-3. For example, it is possible for a router and host to be connected toa remote router and host over both a T3 and a T1 line. Together, the T3 andT1 deliver more bandwidth between two STMs than would a single T3. Thebottleneck in an STM network thus becomes the HSSI interface itself ratherthan the T3 line.    HSSI's place as the preferred interface to high-speedcommunications lines seems secure. But not everyone is sold on HSSI. Somevendors point out that although it was originally designed for 6-Mbit/stransmissions, V.35 can be pressed into faster service.    Network Systems Corp. (NSC, Minneapolis), for example, uses V.35interfaces in its supercomputer connection equipment and routers to provideaccess to T3 transmission equipment at up to 40 Mbit/s. ''There is noadvantage to HSSI over V.35,'' asserts Bill Way, product marketing managerat NSC.    HSSI proponents disagree. While it's true that multiple V.35s canbe made to access T3, HSSI provides better electrical characteristics,according to Jim Michaels, vice president of network planning atNewbridge.    Wellfleet Communications Inc. (Bedford, Mass.) intends to supportHSSI but doesn't believe the interface offers real benefits today. HSSI isonly an electrical interface. What is most important is having theprocessing power to move packets at the speed the interface allows, saysRichard Yates, product marketing manager. Another prerequisite is off-the-shelf HDLC controller chips that support HSSI speeds, says Yates. Untilthese are shipped, HSSI interfaces, he maintains, will be expensive.Table: Vendor Support for HSSI (This table is not availableelectronically. Please see the November, 1991 issue.)Figure 1: HSSI Distributes BandwidthFigure 2: Sonet Meets HSSICopyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.CANNED HELP FOR LAN PROBLEMS: EFFECTIVE, BUT LIMITEDExpert systems from HP and Network General can solve some LAN problemsfast, but they can't be fine-tunedBy:Mary JanderWhen they're at their best, expert systems offer the collective wisdom of ateam of first-rate troubleshooters--without the high salaries, ego clashes,and other fringe benefits such groups tend to engender. The expert systemsunveiled recently by two leading LAN protocol analyzer vendors work morelike second-line technicians: They do a good job of handling problems thatare familiar to them, but they can't be trained to try different approachesor to handle new problems.    Both Network Advisor from Hewlett-Packard Co.'s ColoradoTelecommunications Division (Colorado Springs, Colo.) and Expert Snifferfrom Network General Corp. (Menlo Park, Calif.) can detect, diagnose, andsolve such LAN problems as duplicate addresses, cable breaks, and impropernode insertions in a matter of minutes. That not only saves LANadministrators time and effort, but it also allows them to focus theirattention on other management issues.    The down side to both packages, at least for now, is that thecanned wisdom they hold cannot be added to or altered. HP and NetworkGeneral enlisted the help of teams of network experts to develop theirrespective knowledge bases for LAN troubleshooting, but users can't changethose knowledge bases to meet their specific needs. HP has indicated thatit plans to give users the power to add logic to its expert system, but adelivery date for that addition has not been announced.    The inability to customize the knowledge bases limits the utilityof both packages and has some users and competing vendors wondering whetherexpert LAN analyzers are worth the trouble and expense to install at thispoint. One beta user of Expert Sniffer reports that although the expertsystem can uncover some critical flaws in the network, it also wastes timetracking and solving problems that either aren't important or aren'tcorrectable, such as intermittent packet storms. Others note that some ofthe expert analyzers' troubleshooting features already are available inproducts like the LANalyzer from Novell Inc.'s LANalyzer Products Division(San Jose, Calif.).EXPERTS AT WORK    HP's Network Advisor, which began shipping this past summer,comprises an HP 4970 LAN protocol analyzer and Fault Finder expert-systemssoftware. Network General announced and demonstrated its Expert Sniffer inSeptember; the product will ship sometime in the first half of next yearand will be made available as an upgrade to users of the vendor's Snifferanalyzer.    The two products are in the same general price range. A NetworkAdvisor capable of handling both Ethernet and token ring LANs costs$25,500. When it becomes available, Expert Sniffer will cost from $12,500to $24,000, depending on whether users buy a card-only analyzer or acomplete platform including a portable computer. In contrast, Novell'sLANalyzer costs $12,500 for a board and software that handles eitherEthernet or token ring and $19,980 for a package that handles both LANtypes.    Network Advisor and Expert Sniffer have many features in common.Both work with Ethernet and token ring networks. Both invoke the expertsystem as a function of the analyzer, treating the expert system likeanother type of decoding program. In addition to providing media accesscontrol (MAC)-layer troubleshooting, the expert systems use the decodingfunctions of their respective analyzers to report on problems inupper-layer protocols. For instance, if a file transfer can't be completedbecause of a faulty packet, Expert Sniffer reports the problem to the user,according to Network General. Among the protocols handled by both expertanalyzers are TCP/IP, DECnet, and Internet Packet Exchange (IPX). Neithersystem handles WAN protocols.    HP built its Fault Finder expert system with Smalltalk, a set ofDOS-compatible development tools from Digitalk Inc. (Los Angeles). In HP'sscheme, analyzer functions, such as decode tests, statistical monitoringprograms, and diagnostic tests, are organized in such a way that they canbe activated automatically in response to certain queries and hypothesesposed by the expert system. As various hypotheses are tested, they lead tomore tests or to final decisions, which are posted graphically or in textform on Network Advisor's display (see figure).    For example, if a network technician is having trouble inserting anew node onto a Novell NetWare token ring, he or she can activate FaultFinder, which then tests the LAN for broken transmit or receive wires andchecks for responses from all network interface cards on the ring. If thewires are intact and all other stations are responding, the system thenchecks for other possible causes, such as an incorrect speed setting on thenetwork card in the new node.    The initial version of Fault Finder uses what is known as arule-based approach to expert systems. In the rule-based approach, theexpert system's code contains hypotheses and solutions for each type of LANproblem for each possible set of circumstances. In a sense, rule-basedexpert-systems code can be thought of as containing an exhaustive list of''if-then'' statements.    In contrast, Expert Sniffer uses what Network General calls ablackboard approach. The vendor says its expert system continually gathersand sifts certain information about the network, such as routing paths,applications, protocols, station types, and user names. The expert systemuses this information to create a problem matrix that enables it topinpoint problems without running through the gamut of possibilitiesrequired by a rule-based system. Network General claims Expert Sniffer's''learning'' capabilities make it more adaptable to individual networks. HPsays it will add a similar self-learning feature to Network Advisor in anupgrade scheduled to be released this month.KNOWLEDGE LIMITS    The inability to modify the knowledge base of either Network Advisoror Expert Sniffer can be particularly frustrating for users. Because ofthis inflexibility, users can't add their own expertise to the analyzer ormodify the analyzer's responses to reflect specific networkingrequirements.    HP reportedly is investigating a way to let users add to NetworkAdvisor's knowledge base without disturbing its structure. Network General,however, has announced no plans to let users alter Expert Sniffer'sknowledge base.    Although users of either system can't alter the information in theknowledge base, they can make some adjustments to the parameters thesystems measure. To set the thresholds or levels of packet activitymonitored by the system, Network Advisor users can exit the system and editan ASCII file containing that information. The edited file then is loadedinto the analyzer. Expert Sniffer's main menu offers users the option ofentering such data via an electronic form.    One test user of Network General's Expert Sniffer gives the producta qualified endorsement for LAN troubleshooting. Dell Holmes, lead analystin the computer technology services division of Halliburton Corp.(Arlington, Texas), an engineering and construction conglomerate, says theproduct can help save time for highly skilled technicians who already useSniffers to troubleshoot LAN problems. Instead of having to list a range ofhypotheses and test them systematically, technicians can activate ExpertSniffer from the main Sniffer menu. According to Holmes, Expert Sniffer cancut the time it takes to diagnose certain problems from hours to minutes.PROS AND CONS    While HP and Network General move ahead with their expertanalyzers, some other vendors hope to release expert products of their ownin the near future. Lexcel (formerly Micro Technology Inc., Fullerton,Calif.) says it plans to add expert-systems technology to its Lance+analyzer, which uses Novell's LANtern monitoring device to gatherinformation on packet activity in multiple LAN segments.    The latest release of Lance+ has a fault-determination feature thatcorrelates the measurements taken by the network monitor with informationin Lance+'s relational database. This technique helps to locate the causesof network problems more precisely, Lexcel says. With older versions ofLance, when a hub caused a problem on a LAN segment, all the devicesattached to the hub were turned red on the monitor's graphical display.With the new feature, only the hub turns red on the display. The additionof an expert system will streamline this procedure even more: Instead ofhaving to activate a fault-detection program to get information aboutproblems, users will be notified automatically that a problem has occurredand how it can be solved.    Other vendors are acting as though they aren't convinced thatexpert systems are the answer for LAN analyzers and monitoring gear.Novell's LANalyzer Products Division, ProTools Inc. (Beaverton, Ore.), andSpider Systems Inc. (Burlington, Mass.) all say they are considering addingexpert systems to their analyzers, but they provide only sketchyinformation as to when and how they'll do so.    Novell, in fact, points out that some features offered by the newexpert analyzers are already available in products like its LANalyzer.LANalyzer's Automated Troubleshooting System lets users automate the stepsto be taken if certain types of network problems occur. For instance, ifperformance degrades, the Automated Troubleshooting System can activate aseries of tests that check how many packets of which protocol are runningon the LAN. The system contains a template that users can call up from themain menu to specify network conditions or thresholds at which certaintypes of tests should be activated. Users can choose specific tests andtest sequences for each situation; they also can create new tests or alterexisting ones, Novell says.SECOND OPINIONS    Some industry developments could complement or even replace thefunctions that expert systems provide to LAN analyzers and monitors. TheInternet Engineering Task Force (IETF) is now working on a simple networkmanagement protocol (SNMP) management information base (MIB) that couldspeed the addition of expert systems to LAN analyzers and monitors. The newMIB, called the remote monitoring (RMON) MIB, not only will set up a meansfor transmitting information from analyzers and monitors to SNMP managementstations but also will specify a way for SNMP coding to direct theautomatic testing of LANs by analyzers or monitors.    In this case, expert systems could be added to existing SNMPmanagement stations rather than to LAN analyzers or monitors. Severalvendors that sell both LAN analyzers and SNMP management stations,including HP, Lexcel, Network General, Novell, ProTools, and Spider, areactive on the IETF's RMON MIB committee, and all of them claim to be in theprocess of adding support for the RMON MIB to their products.Illustration: HP's Expert Analyzer at WorkCopyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.BBN GREEN LIGHTS BUSLESS SWITCHEmerald's high-speed switching module hits 160 Mbit/s full duplex foraggregate throughput in the gigabit rangeBy:Johna Till JohnsonBBN Communications thinks buses are just fine for crosstown traffic, butthey really don't belong inside corporate backbone processors. That's whythe venerable high-tech vendor has gone busless with Emerald, its recentlyannounced next-generation architecture for cell switching.    Instead of a bus, BBN has come up with a switching module thatdelivers port-to-port connectivity at 160 Mbit/s in full-duplex mode,yielding an aggregate switching speed of several gigabits per second.    Most of today's switches are built around buses, as are themajority of multiplexers, computers, and microprocessor-based products. Butfor very fast data transfers, even a high-speed bus can turn into abottleneck.    Going busless is something of a family trait at BBN. Its parentcompany, Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc. (Cambridge, Mass.), developed aconcurrent supercomputer, the Butterfly, based on a similar buslessdesign.    BBN clearly is hoping that its new architecture, which won't seelight as a product until late next year, will make the company assuccessful with cell switches as it has been in the X.25 packet-switchmarket, where it is a leading player.    Assuming it can build a workable product, BBN then must decidewhether to license the technology to others or sell it itself.    Building an Emerald cell switch might seem to make sense at first,but some observers point out that the demand for cell switches may not bestrong until the end of this decade, which would keep the architecture outof use for several years. If the company were to license the technology,however, parts of it could be appearing in routers and multiplexers--aswell as switches--as early as the end of next year.    Joaquin Gonzalez, vice president and service director for globalnetworking strategies at the Meta Group Inc. (Westport, Conn.), is amongthose who see cell switching in the wide area decidedly in the futuretense--possibly as late as 1997. Gonzalez thinks cell relay won't catch onin the U.S. until there is an application driving it, such asdesktop-to-desktop multimedia. That's why he thinks BBN should license thetechnology to internetworking vendors, which would bring it to market muchfaster.    Potential users for an Emerald product include companies with largenetworking needs, particularly carriers and alternative carriers, saysRobert Bellman, vice president of marketing for BBN. Fortune 100 companiesare another good bet, since many of their applications--such as tyingtogether fiber distributed data interface (FDDI) networks across the widearea, imaging, and transporting isochronous voice and data--require a greatdeal of bursty bandwidth.    ''Cell switching in the kind of product we're developing is theonly technology that can handle bursty traffic and be efficient at the sametime,'' says Mark Lunardoni, a product line manager at BBN.DESIGN IMPROVEMENTS    Its busless design enables Emerald to handle the high speedsinherent in cell switching. Bob Hinden, senior technologist at BBN, pointsout that because it's a shared resource, a bus acts as a bottleneck in thedata flow. Whenever one subsystem--say, a line card or processor--wants totransmit data, it asks for sole access to the bus. This means othersubsystems must wait until the first one finishes before they can senddata. At low throughputs, it's possible to make the bus much faster thanthe port connections. This isn't feasible, however, at multimegabit orgigabit speeds.    Another drawback with a bus-based architecture is that it's notinherently scalable. As more subsystems are added, performance dropsbecause each subsystem must contend with the others to gain access to thebus. The more subsystems, the greater the contention and the longer averagewait before any given subsystem gets the bus.    In the Emerald approach, each line card accesses the switchdirectly, so there are always full-bandwidth paths between cards on theswitch (see figure). Adding line cards doesn't reduce the performance,because cards aren't in competition for the bandwidth.    Key to the success of this approach is distributedprocessing--putting intelligence on the line cards as well as in thecentral processor. The line cards have two functions: They convert incomingdata to 53-byte cells (Emerald uses 53-byte cells with a 48-byte payload,the standard size for asynchronous transfer mode), and they forward thecells along the appropriate paths.    Most cells traverse the switch without ever using the centralprocessor, which is thus freed to handle global issues, such as managementand flow setup. When a line card receives a packet of data, it parses theheader to determine where it's going. If there is an existing path (orflow), the line card breaks the packet into cells and forwards the cellsalong it. If not, the line card alerts the processor, which establishes anew flow.    Most cells travel along an established flow, says Hinden, whichmeans the burden of packet processing shifts from the processor to the linecards.    The combination of busless architecture and distributed processingmakes Emerald scalable and modular. Line cards can be added without slowingperformance; the switch module also can be upgraded. BBN won't givespecifics on the number of line cards that can be accommodated or what theswitch module can be upgraded to. Nonetheless, scalability is good news forpotential users. It means they can purchase a smaller version of theswitch, then upgrade as needs grow and budget permits. (BBN also is notreleasing pricing details.)    A final feature of Emerald's is its ability to connect to LANs.Although BBN again is keeping mum about specifics, some line cards willconnect to token ring, Ethernet, and FDDI. The design also will includeframe relay interfaces.Illustration: Inside EmeraldCopyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.WOLLONGONG BUYS A EUROPEAN CUSTOMER BASEThe Wollongong Group Inc. (Palo Alto, Calif.) has acquired a majority stakein network integrator European Network Engineering (ENE, Brussels, Belgium)with an eye toward providing networks that use Wollongong's Unix, VMS,Apple Macintosh, Sun, and TCP/IP connectivity software on a range ofworkstations, routers, bridges, cabling, and other networking devicessupplied by ENE. Wollongong won't disclose the exact size of its share inENE, but says it is greater than 50 percent. For Wollongong, ENE's chiefattraction is its customer base, which includes British Rail and the U.K.divisions of Price Waterhouse and KPMG, formerly Peat Marwick. Wollongongsays it anticipates ENE's revenues, now about $5 million annually, to growby 40 percent to 50 percent as a result of the arrangement. Wollongong'srevenues, now at about $30 million annually, also are expected to grow.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.SOUTH AFRICAN COMPANY PULLS OUT OF TIMEPLEX/ASCOM DEALAscom Holding AG (Bern, Switzerland) has completed its purchase of networkequipment maker Timeplex Inc. (Woodcliff Lake, N.J.) from computer makerUnisys Corp. (Blue Bell, Pa.). Originally, Unisys announced that Timeplexwould be purchased by a joint venture involving Ascom and MercedesInformation Technologies Pty. Ltd. (MIT, Johannesburg, South Africa). MITpulled out of the deal, however, and Ascom now owns all of Timeplex. MITcited South African government regulations on foreign investment as thereason for its withdrawal, but analysts suspect that the change has more todo with Ascom's desire for sole ownership and its uncertainty about howTimeplex would be managed by two owners. ''The thought of trying to controlTimeplex proved a little more hairy than anyone wanted,'' says JimHarrison, program director for global network strategies at the Meta GroupInc. (Westport, Conn.), a market research firm.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.AT&T CUTSLONG-DISTANCE T1 AND FRACTIONAL T1 PRICES. . .AT&T has filed tariff revisions that would lower the cost of long-haul T1and fractional T1 circuits. The changes, which will take effect this monthpending Federal Communications Commission approval, will affect monthlyrates for Accunet T1.5 services, Accunet Spectrum of Digital Services(ASDS), and Voice Grade Private Line (VGPL) services. Accunet T1.5 priceswill rise for short-haul circuits and fall for long-haul T1 and fractionalT1 lines. The crossover point from increases to reductions occurs forcircuits longer than 150 miles. T1 service from New Jersey to California,for example, falls from roughly $19,000 to roughly $17,000 per month;384-kbit/s fractional T1 service on the same link drops from around $7,000per month to around $5,500.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.AT&T CUTS LONG-DISTANCE T1 AND FRACTIONAL T1 PRICES. . .WHILE MCI PRICESSWITCHED T1, T3 SERVICESMCI Communications Corp. (Washington, D.C.) announced prices for itsswitched T1 and T3 services. The services, offered under MCI's VirtualPrivate Data Services (VPDS) plan, are the first such offerings from anycarrier. Prices for switched T1 service begin at $2.50 for the first 30seconds and $0.20 for every six seconds thereafter, for an hourly cost of$121.50 on circuits of 55 miles or less. Pricing increases with distance toa maximum of $4.10 for the first 30 seconds and $0.37 for each six secondsthereafter for circuits longer than 1,910 miles. Prices for the switched T3service begin at $37.50 for the first 30 seconds and $3.00 for every sixseconds thereafter on circuits of 55 miles or less.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.ATM FORUM TO PROMOTE INTEROPERABILITYA forum dedicated to the further development and implementation ofasynchronous transfer mode (ATM) specifications was founded last month. TheATM Forum (San Jose, Calif.) aims to develop a specification for apermanent virtual circuit ATM interface. ATM is a form of switching thatcarries data in small, fixed-length packets called cells. The forum'sinterface specification, expected to be available next spring, will allowcompanies to design interoperable ATM products and services. Standardsgoverning ATM transport already have been developed by the CCITT and ANSI.The forum's goal is not to contest these standards or to set itself up as arival standards body, but to ensure that standards are implemented byequipment vendors and service providers, according to Charlie Giancarlo, afounder of Adaptive Corp. (Redwood City, Calif.) and a charter member ofthe forum. At press time, other members included Northern Telecom(Mississauga, Ontario), Cisco Systems Inc. (Menlo Park, Calif.), and USSprint Communications Co. (Kansas City, Mo.). Ungermann-Bass Inc. (SantaClara, Calif.) and Wellfleet Communications Inc. (Bedford, Mass.)reportedly are interested in joining the forum.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.DIRECT FAX LINKS PLANNED FOR DOS, WINDOWS, AND UNIXThanks to an impending standard, users soon may be able to fax documentsdirectly from word processing or spreadsheet applications running underDOS, Microsoft Windows, or Unix. FaxBios, an application program interface(API) from the FaxBios Association (Berkeley, Calif.), a vendor consortium,is the first standard to cover multiple operating systems. Initially,FaxBios will work only under DOS, but later releases will support Unix andWindows. An earlier standard, the Communicating Applications Specification(CAS), allowed documents to be faxed from an application, but only underDOS. ''For a company like WordPerfect, only supporting DOS is anunrecoverable flaw--we just can't be limited to one operating system,''says Richard Holder, manager of peripheral products for the Corporate Labof WordPerfect Corp. (Orem, Utah) and information officer for the FaxBiosAssociation. Association members include Hewlett-Packard Co. (Palo Alto,Calif.), Everex Systems Inc. (Fremont, Calif.), and Biscom Inc. (Billerica,Mass.).Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.OSPF GETS SEAL OF APPROVALThe open shortest path first (OSPF) routing protocol drew a majorendorsement over its rival, dual intermediate system-to-intermediatesystem (IS-IS), from the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG). TheIESG, which until now has given equal footing to the two protocols,recommended that OSPF be made mandatory for all TCP/IP routers. ''We'veput the official gold star of approval on OSPF,'' says Noel Chiappa, areadirector for the Internet. Vendors can still offer dual IS-IS, but theymust support OSPF as well.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.SNMP MANAGEMENT FOR PROTOCOL ANALYZERSUsers may soon be able to use the simple network management protocol (SNMP)to manage their network analyzers. The Internet Engineering Steering Group(IESG) has recommended that a remote monitoring (RMON) managementinformation base (MIB) be advanced to proposed standard status. The RMONMIB defines the SNMP values collected by analyzers. Several vendors alreadyare said to be using prototypes of the RMON MIB. Actual products could bereleased as early as next year.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.VIEWING THE FUTUREFROM INTEROPBy:Joseph Braue, Editor in ChiefTrade journalists must have a streak of fortune teller in the blood, givenhow we love to try to predict where the industry is headed. But at lastmonth's Interop, I thought I'd give my crystal ball a rest. Instead, Iquizzed several of the industry's top execs as to what they think the bigstories will be over the next two years.    For Frank Gratzer, a Bellcore division manager and point man forthe Baby Bells' Switched Multimegabit Data Service rollouts, the future isSMDS. Plans now call for tariffed SMDS by the end of '92 or early '93 in 30cities. With Bell Atlantic quoting a flat $500 monthly fee and an $800installation charge per site, SMDS is starting to make sense for companieswith three or four sites in a metropolitan area that need to be connected.    Eric Benhamou, president and CEO of 3Com Corp., sees SMDS, framerelay, ISDN, and Switched 56 as technologies whose time is at hand. Hebelieves such services will reduce the number of WAN ports that bridges androuters must pack, paving the way for cheaper, smaller internetworkinggear. Will corporations trust mission-critical data to carriers? Benhamousays over time they will.    The future of intelligent wiring hubs lies with cell relay,according to Ralph Ungermann and Andy Ludwick, who are president and CEO,respectively, of Ungermann-Bass Inc. and SynOptics Communications Inc.Faster LANs (thanks to FDDI) and higher-bandwidth applications will pushhubs to asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) technology.    Routers look to be headed for some interesting times, since threeof the industry's top execs are stressing different trends. Wellfleet'sPaul Severino, president of Wellfleet Communications Inc., sees 1992 asmore network management and deeper integration of internetworkingfunctions. John Morgridge, president of Cisco Systems Inc., looks to thecoming year as a time for further integrating SNA and increasing theemphasis on low-end sales. And Patrick Courtin, president of Proteon Inc.,sees users creating enterprise-wide applications on top of internetworkingdevices and teaching staff to support them.    Who's right? As soon as we know, you'll know. And you won't need acrystal ball, either.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.TRANSATLANTICDIAL-UP LINKS:STILL HIT OR MISSBy:Tom Mangan, Lead TechnologiesIn real-world data communications, the whole often is less than the sum ofits parts. This lesson in mathematical illogic is painfully evident toanyone who tries to establish transatlantic data links using dial-up lines.The fiber optic cables that now cross the Atlantic have vastly improved theline quality for voice calls, while advancements in modems have pushed thespeed envelope for data transmissions over domestic dial-up lines. Somehow,however, these two developments have not added up to reliable, consistentdial-up data communications.    Of course, a few years ago no one would have even tried to set up adial-up data connection across the big pond. Most of the dial-up linksbetween the U.S. and Europe--for that matter, most intercontinentallinks--were carried by satellite service. The echo, delay, and other randomnoise associated with satellite transmissions made trying to establishanything other than a low-speed (300- or 1,200-bit/s) data connectionvirtually impossible. Most users turned to leased lines or X.25 servicesfor transatlantic data exchanges. Others put disks or tapes in pouches andsent them via overnight delivery services.    The arrival of transatlantic fiber cables TAT-8 and PTAT-1 gavehope that reliable dial-up data links had arrived. But a recent project toset up such connections has taught me otherwise.    Our project involved connecting two IBM AS/400 computers, one inthe U.S. and one in the U.K., on an occasional basis for a client. TheAS/400 on the client's U.S. side (in Langhorne, Pa.) provides programdevelopment and operational support to the U.K. system, located inTunbridge, Kent, about 100 miles outside of London. The client wanted theU.S. AS/400 tobe able to dial up the U.K. machine and establish asynchronous SNA Logical Unit 6.2 link.    We considered using X.25 for the link, but ruled that option outquickly because of cost. X.25 access charges in the U.K. are on theprohibitive side. So we decided on the next obvious option, internationaldirect dial-up lines.    At first, we used V.32 modems from two different manufacturers. Wechose to let SNA take care of error detection and correction. After sometweaking of the modems and software, we were able to establish a dial-upconnection between the U.S. and the U.K.--but our success rate was onlyabout 20 percent. The other 80 percent of the time, we would get as far ashearing the U.K. modem answer the call, only to have the U.S. modem dropthe line. When we did establish a link, we could maintain the line at 4.8kbit/s, but 9.6 kbit/s was chancy. We tried adjusting the modems andsoftware further to improve our success rate, but to no avail.    We then decided to replace the modems we were using with a matchedset from a single manufacturer. After adjusting the new modems, our successrate improved from 20 percent to 60 percent. A 60 percent completion rateis fine for a quarterback, but for corporate networkers it's disastrous.    Our next move was to check the quality of the circuits. Theclient's carrier on the U.S. side is AT&T. I had noticed that although mostvoice calls to the U.K. site had good sound quality and lacked delaycharacteristics, the calls were half duplex. Also, when a call wasestablished, the line emitted what can best be described as ahigh-frequency glitch before the conversation could begin. Another factorthat began to be apparent was that starting around 10:30 a.m. Eastern Time,the chances of getting a clean line for data decreased rapidly.    We wondered why, with all the fiber optic circuits now linking theU.S. and Europe, transatlantic connections were so unlike placing a callwithin the U.S. We also wondered about using AT&T's Global Software DefinedNetwork (GSDN)--the client is an AT&T SDN user and was considering usingGSDN for placing calls to the U.K. site. In the U.S., SDN is primarily apricing mechanism; SDN calls use the same facilities as the rest of theAT&T customer base. Would using GSDN make any difference?    Armed with all these questions, we contacted AT&T for some help.This turned out to be quite an adventure on its own. One AT&Trepresentative told us that overseas data rates were still limited to 300to 1,200 bit/s. But a rep from AT&T Paradyne told us that AT&T Paradyne hadrun several successful overseas dial-up tests with its modems at speeds upto 14.4 kbit/s. The caveat for our project was that these tests wereconducted with sites located within major cities. We asked about testresults covering outlying areas, but such tests didn't seem to exist.    No one we contacted at AT&T was able to provide a good, firmtechnical explanation as to why we couldn't establish reliable dial-upcalls with the U.K. site. We speculated that since our location was in asmall town outside of London, the switching of the call through oldercentral offices in the U.K. might be the cause of the problem. Also, astraffic built during the morning, the carrier might be switching sometraffic over older facilities (or even satellite) across the Atlantic.    Research into the use of GSDN gave us some hope. AT&T works withBritish Telecommunications PLC's version of SDN, called FeatureNet. Thisservice uses only one switching point in the U.K., which means we could runan access line from our site to the FeatureNet node to bypass any oldercentral offices. Also, AT&T claimed that about 90 percent of the callsplaced with GSDN would travel on fiber facilities. And GSDN's productspecifications indicated that the network would support dial-up data ratesof 4.8 kbit/s, with 9.6 kbit/s ''permissive.''    For now, our client will use dial-up lines with matched modems,until a GSDN line is installed at the U.K. site. GSDN won't be acheapsolution: A FeatureNet access line now costs about $1,000 per quarter(not counting usage). But it may be worth it if the success rateincreases.    This adventure--or misadventure--has only reinforced my belief thatlong-distance dial-up data communications is a hit-or-miss proposition.Within the U.S., we have improved the odds with lots of fiber opticfacilities and better modems. But the odds are less favorable on theinternational front, even though intercontintental transmission facilitiesare improving rapidly. The odds won't get better until the localinfrastructures improve.    Although AT&T didn't exactly distinguish itself on this project, Idoubt that the other U.S. carriers could have done any better. There isn'tmuch that any carrier can do when a call from its network is delivered to acountry that hasn't upgraded its local transmission and switchingfacilities. Data calls to large cities stand a better chance of beingcompleted, but watch out in the outlying areas.    Users who need to set up occasional international datatransmissions should first explore X.25. For small file transfers,international public electronic-mail services are another option.    If dial-up lines are the best alternative, a couple of steps mayhelp improve the odds on getting connections that work. The first is toinstall matched modems from the same manufacturer--no small feat given thegovernment approvals required for equipment. That will allow you to do''matched tweaking'' on obscure options such as turn around time,disconnect signals, and the like. Another is to explore any advantages thatmight be obtained from global virtual voice network services.    One more word of advice: Keep the telephone number of yourovernight delivery service handy.About the Author(s):Tom Mangan is president of Lead Technologies (Haddonfield, N.J.), aconsulting firm that specializes in telecommunications and networktechnology.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.LIGHTS, CAMERA, ACTION . . . BREAKING INTO VIDEOCONFERENCINGBy:J.T.J.Videoconferencing's recent drop in price and increased picture quality makeit a very appealing technology. But before network managers shout ''Rollcameras'' or shell out any money for a system, they should consider thefollowing:    Ann Earon, president of Telemanagement Resources International(TRI, Lake Wylie, S.C.) advises: ''If you don't know what your needs are,there's no point in buying technology.'' She suggests network managers findout who within their companies needs videoconferencing, what kind oftechnology is required, and where and how it's likely to be used. Then, shesays, ''set a benchmark for success,'' a way to determine whether thevideoconferencing system actually is helping the company. TRI designscorporate videoconferencing systems and conducts seminars in this and othertelecommunications technologies.    Success, she notes, can initially be measured by how often theequipment is used. Another measurement can be travel dollars saved orincreased productivity.    William Ray, director of communications network services forCorning Inc. (Corning, N.Y.), points out that he took an active role infinding out just who in his company could benefit from videoconferencingand pumping up the technology. Before going ahead with a company-wideinstallation, he found an executive willing to spend money from his ownbudget to install a system. Ray paid for one unit and the executive paidfor the other.    Ray set up a pilot system, and the executive started to realize hisproject was being finished faster than planned. Meanwhile, Ray used thepilot system as a live demonstration for other employees. ''Once peoplecould see the benefit, it started finding its way into other operatingunits.'' Corning Inc. now has videoconferencing sites at its centralheadquarters and at plants throughout the United States and in Tokyo.    Ron Stevenson, the program manager for telecommunications atGeneral Electric Co.'s Corporate Information Technology division(Fairfield, Conn.), tells a similar story. GE has had a videoconferencingnetwork in place for the past two and a half years. It links over 50 sitesacross the United States and overseas and is tied into videoconferencingnetworks at other companies.    Before installing the network, Stevenson says, he distributed aquestionnaire asking employees about their meeting and travel habits. Hestresses that he didn't ask employees their opinions regardingvideoconferencing per se. Stevenson analyzed his data to see wherevideoconferencing would save on travel costs and increase productivity. Helater wrote a company-wide guide about videoconferencing that givesdetailed breakdowns of the costs of trips and meetings and demonstrates howand when videoconferencing might save.    Although network managers might believe videoconferencing will cuttravel costs dramatically, this isn't always the case. Stevenson estimatesthat 20 percent to 50 percent of travel can be displaced byvideoconferencing. In some manufacturing and engineering companies, thereal benefits may come in time saved designing and building systems.    Furthermore, Earon points out that videoconferencing may actuallyincrease travel costs for a given configuration. If a company with severaloutlying sites installs videoconferencing at its main sites, there might beless travel between those two cities but more from outlying sites toheadquarters to use the videoconferencing facilities.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.THE BIG PICTURE FOR H.261By:J.T.J.Key to videoconferencing is the H.261 Recommendation, which theInternational Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee (CCITT) signedoff on in December 1990. It specifies how video bit streams are to be sentacross the network (at rates that are multiples of 64 kbit/s). Codecs thatincorporate this standard should be able to work together.    H.261 also establishes a format for video, still-frame, andhigh-resolution graphics--the Common Intermediate Format (CIF)--butH.261-compatible codecs can conform either to CIF or to the Quarter CIF(QCIF) subset. QCIF establishes lower video resolution than CIF (176 pixelsby 144 lines compared with 352 pixels by 288 lines). It also allows lowerresolution for graphics.    Beyond decoding compressed video and displaying images in astandard manner, codecs must establish communications across a network linkand compress and transmit the audio portion of a videoconference. AnyH.261-compatible codec must by definition conform to the CCITTRecommendations that specify these functions. These recommendations fallinto two main categories: communications and control, and audio.Communications and control specs include H.221, H.230, H.242, and H.320.H.221 covers the frame structure of the videoconferencing link. H.230describes the commands that each codec must be able to send, receive, andinterpret, such as loopback notification. H.242 handles call setup andrecognition, defining, for example, how two codecs establish data rates,number of lines, and disconnect procedures. Finally, H.320 identifies theequipment and system needed for narrow-bandwidth audiovisualtransmissions.    Audio standards are spelled out in Recommendations G.711 and G.722.While these weren't specifically developed for videoconferencing, manycodec vendors have adopted them. G.711 defines a 64-kbit/s encodingalgorithm that uses pulse code modulation (PCM); G.722 calls for 32 to 64kbit/s of bandwidth using adaptive differential PCM (ADPCM). G.722 isbasically an improvement on G.711.    Given these recommendations, it's possible to believe thatvideoconferencing standards are well-nigh complete. But that's far from thecase. First, there are areas the CCITT has specifically chosen not tostandardize: video pre- and post- processing. It's this processing thatdetermines to a large degree the clarity of an image and processing delaytimes.    Second, there are areas that remain to be standardized, includingmultipoint bridging, low-bit-rate audio encoding, encryption, and imagestorage. Without a multipoint bridging spec, a vendor's codecs will onlyoperate with its own bridges. H.230 defines some of the necessary commands,but the topic also is the subject of CCITT AV.254, which is still indevelopment. Ratification is not expected until 1992 or later. The CCITT isjust starting to work on low-bit-rate (16-kbit/s) audio and encryption;low-bit-rate audio will free up more bandwidth for other purposes (such asfax transmission). Encryption will help protect conference transmissionsagainst eavesdropping.    Image-storage standards are under development by InternationalStandards Organizations (ISO) groups. The Moving Picture Experts Group, forinstance, is developing a spec for storing H.261-compatible video on harddrives and optical disks. The Joint Photographic Experts Group is doingsimilar work for digitized still-frame graphics.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.FREEZE FRAME ON VIDEOCONFERENCINGBy:J.T.J.To each its own'' is an apt description of the U.S. codec market. Of theindustry's Big Three, Compression Labs Inc. (CLI, San Jose, Calif.)PictureTel Corp. (Peabody, Mass.), and VideoTelecom Corp. (Austin, Texas),CLI is shooting for the high end. Its Rembrandt codecs are perhaps the bestknown in the industry and tend to be perceived as top performers at highbandwidths (384 kbit/s to 2.048 Mbit/s). The company also is hoping to putits compression algorithms to work in high-definition television (HDTV) andone-way business and educational video.    PictureTel's specialty is low-cost videoconferencing, and it hasrepeatedly broken price barriers for entry-level offerings. When itintroduced its $40,000 system in January, comparable setups cost about$100,000. Its recent under-$20,000 monochrome startup system comes in atroughly $10,000 less than rivals. Its codecs only run to 768 kbit/s; theydo not handle full T1.    VideoTelecom hopes to add value by tying PCs and LANs into thevideoconference. The company's approach has garnered some attention butrelatively small market share thus far, although there are signs this maybe changing.    A relative newcomer to U.S. videoconferencing, BT NorthAmerica--part of the British telecommunications giant--hopes to capturesignificant share with its VC2200 and VC2100 codecs. These products weredesigned by BT, but until this summer were manufactured and sold in theUnited States by GPT Video Systems (Stamford, Conn.) as the System 261. GPTwill continue to sell the units, but BT has decided it wants a share of theprofits. According to Max Arafa, marketing manager for videoconferencing atBT, his company has 70 percent of the market in the U.K. and 50 percent ofthe Western European market (including the U.K.). BT has announced that itplans on capturing 30 percent of the U.S. market within two years.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.VIDEOCONFERENCING: NOT JUST TALKING HEADSBy:Johna Till Johnson, Data CommunicationsIf videoconferencing conjures up the vision of CEOs and other captains ofindustry communing electronically with their international counterparts,it's time to hit the fast-forward. That may be an apt description of''traditional'' videoconferences, but today's technology is far more thantalking heads.    Users have gotten the message loud and clear: They're starting toconnect smaller sites and tie other companies into video networks. They'realso working with conferencing gear in unusual ways: Engineers designsystems, lawyers take depositions, and professors teach classes--all viavideoconferencing. And surgeons are even guided through operations underthe watchful eye of the camera.    Is videoconferencing a technology whose time has come? Industryanalysts and video codec vendors point to a barrage of statistics tobolster their claims: Over the past few years, the price of avideoconferencing system has dropped from $250,000 to under $25,000.Elaborate rooms dedicated to videoconferencing are being replaced byrollabout systems that turn any office into a conference room. And with astandard finished up last year by the International Telegraph and TelephoneConsultative Committee (CCITT) and now being implemented by codec vendors,videoconferencing gear should soon be able to interoperate just like faxmachines or modems.    Market forecasts are uniformly rosy. Forrester Research Inc.(Cambridge, Mass.) predicts the market for videoconferencing equipment willgrow from a projected $120 million in 1991 to $239 million in 1995.Herbert Maher, a senior vice president at the investment firm of TuckerAnthony Inc. (Boston) sees equipment sales reaching as high as $300 millionin 1992, up from an estimated $185 million in 1991. Consulting and marketresearch firm Telemanagement Resources International Inc. (TRI, Lake Wylie,S.C.) predicts worldwide annual revenues for videoconferencing equipmentand services growing from $510 million in 1991 to nearly $1.5 billion in1995 (see Figure 1).    ''I tell our clients, 'It's not a matter of if you will getinvolved in videoconferencing, it's a matter of when,' '' says Ann Earon,president of TRI. ''In fact, it's pretty safe to say that there aren't toomany industries out there that aren't doing something in video already.''    But what makes 1991 or 1992 the year of the codec?    Better equipment, for one thing: That means cheaper,standards-based coder-decoders running compression algorithms with improvedvoice and picture quality at lower speeds. Cheaper digital services fromnetwork providers also are driving the market.    To some extent, though, evolution has been the norm invideoconferencing since 1981, when Compression Labs Inc. (CLI, San Jose,Calif.) and NEC America Inc. (Herndon, Va.) were the only U.S. codecvendors to speak of. Since then, the market has broadened to include suchplayers as Picturetel Corp. (Peabody, Mass.), VideoTelecom Corp. (Austin,Texas), GPT Video Systems (Stamford, Conn.), and BT North America Inc.(San Jose, Calif.)--all of whom offer codecs and conferencing systems inthe United States. Each has attempted to carve out a slightly differentniche, and individual codec designs reflect this.    The top U.S. codec vendors are Compression Labs, PictureTel, andVideoTelecom, in more or less that order (see table). In 1988, according toTucker Anthony, Compression Labs had the lion's share of the market,selling 63 percent of all conferencing units. PictureTel followed, with 28percent. The remainder was divided among the other companies. By 1992,Tucker Anthony predicts that CLI's share will drop to 27 percent;PictureTel's will hit 38 percent; and VideoTelecom's will climb to 15percent (see ''Freeze Frame on Videoconferencing'').STATE OF THE ART    Compression is the sine qua non of videoconferencing; withoutcompressing the video images, conferencing would take up exorbitant amountsof bandwidth. Until recently, all compression algorithms were proprietary,which meant that codecs from different vendors couldn't work together. LastDecember, however, the CCITT approved recommendation H.261, which defines avideo compression algorithm and a transmission mechanism for images at 64kbit/s to 2 Mbit/s (see ''The Big Picture for H.261''). All major codecvendors in the U.S. market either have implemented or will shortlyimplement H.261-compatible algorithms. Many also still offer proprietaryalgorithms.    In essence, all compression schemes send an approximation of avideo image rather than the entire digitized image across the conferencinglink. And whenever possible, all transmit only those portions of an imagethat have changed since the last frame rather than retransmitting theentire frame each time.    Thus, an algorithm's designers end up making fairly subjectivedecisions about how best to approximate an image, and that can lead to afairly wide disparity in actual performance, even among algorithms based onsimilar mathematical techniques. It's also why multiple algorithms areavailable from most vendors.    PictureTel, for example, offers SG3 (''second-generation 3''), SG2,and H.261. SG3 is the most advanced, but software and sometimes firmwareupgrades are needed for older codecs. SG2 is offered for earlier PictureTelcodecs. Since putting multiple algorithms on a codec means adding softwareor hardware or both, PictureTel offers one algorithm as standard and sellsthe others as options (for $2,000 to $5,000 each). A typical customer mightpurchase an SG3 codec and add H.261 to talk to units from other vendors.    CLI supplies its Cosine Transform Extended (CTX) algorithm, CosineTransform Extended Plus (CTX Plus), and two versions of H.261 in fourpackages for its Rembrandt codecs. The cheapest ($4,000) delivers CTX and alower-performance version of H.261. The $8,000 package adds a high-speedversion of the CCITT spec, and CTX Plus is added to the $12,000 package.The final package includes four algorithms (both versions of H.261) plussoftware for connecting to all other CLI codecs; it costs $21,500.    Since vendors use different algorithms for their own products, howdo they ensure interoperability across their product lines? According toRich Baker, director of research for PictureTel, essentially the same waythat different-speed modems do. Once connected, two PictureTel codecs willattempt to communicate using SG3. If that fails, they will drop down toSG2, and finally to H.261.    If that makes H.261 sound like the algorithm of last resort, that'sjust how some in the industry see it. Robert F. Mitro, vice president ofsales and marketing at PictureTel, sees it as the the lowest commondenominator. ''We can get the same picture quality out of our proprietaryalgorithm at 112 kbit/s as we do out of H.261 at 284 kbit/s.'' PictureTel'sBaker says the spec is primitive compared with PictureTel's own algorithms,and John Walsh, senior vice president for planning and strategy at CLI,calls it ''rudimentary connectivity.'' He also says H.261 lacks such keyelements as a low-bit-rate specification, encryption, and multipointcommunications.    But BT sees it differently. ''We do not need a proprietaryalgorithm,'' says Max Arafa, marketing manager for videoconferencingproducts. ''We designed our product with H.261 in mind, and H.261 isleading-edge stuff. Other vendors designed their products with H.261 as anafterthought. Clearly they have optimized around proprietary algorithms.''He accuses other vendors of promoting the idea that the standard isinsufficient in order to sell more of their own products.    Users are equally split. Dan Gentile, telecommunications managerfor Maxtor Corp. (San Jose, Calif.) is evaluating videoconferencing systemsfrom CLI, PictureTel, VideoTelecom, and BT/GPT (products designed by BT andmanufactured by GPT are sold in the United States by both companies). Inhis opinion, H.261 ''is very limited.'' But Ron Stevenson, program managerfor telecommunications at General Electric Co.'s Corporate InformationTechnology (Fairfield, Conn.) has a different take: The vendors ''like thefact that they have this embedded proprietary base, and they're going tomilk that to the end. Once it's all standards, it's all a commoditymarket'' (see ''Lights, Camera, Action . . . Breaking IntoVideoconferencing'').    Debate seems inescapable in a market where performance is so much amatter of opinion. Although there are some objective criteria--framerefresh rate, for instance--evaluating a codec tends to be more subjectivethan, say, judging a T1 mux. Ultimately, there's really no substitute forwatching the picture through a range of motions and listening to thesound.    Resolution and motion are probably the best indicators of analgorithm's abilities. PictureTel's Baker notes three key flaws affectingvideo images: blocking, mosquitoes, and blurring.    Blocking (or tiling) refers to images that resemble Impressionistpaintings: The image is present but fuzzy. Mosquitoes are tiny sparklikepoints that form a shimmering halo (or aura) around a moving object orperson. Blurring describes a moving object that appears out of focus in thearea of motion.    All three problems stem from the fact that compression algorithmstypically try to stuff a huge chunk of data through a narrow bandwidth pipeby trading off resolution and smoothness of motion.    In a codec, the analog video signal is sampled and converted into adigital pattern that consists of 8-bit pixels. Each pixel describes eitherthe brightness or the color of a specific point. The Common IntermediateFormat (CIF) display specification, which is part of H.261, calls for152,064 pixels per video frame, greater than 1.2 Mbits of data. Most codecstransmit 15 to 30 frames a second. If those frames were uncompressed, itcould take nearly a T3 connection (45 Mbit/s) to transmit them. That'swhere compression algorithms come in.    Basically, compression algorithms attempt to hold down the numberof bits that must be sent per image. In effect, this is done bytransmitting only the ''important'' parts of an image and discarding therest.    Most algorithms do so by using some variation of the discretecosine transform (DCT) to transpose the bit stream into the frequencydomain. (Frequency here refers to spatial, not temporal, frequency.) TheDCT of the image is run through a filter, which takes out thehigh-frequency portions. (High-frequency, in this case, means those partsof the image that are more or less uniform, say, those representing walls.)The receiving codec performs the inverse of the transform and paints theimage on the screen.    ''The object is to be able to represent the image in an accurateway, even though you've thrown away 95 percent of it,'' explainsPictureTel's Baker. The transmitted information is thus not so much animage per se, but instructions on how to reconstruct an image on thereceiving end of the transmission.    The way a codec filters the signal affects the quality of theimage. If the filtering is not done well, viewers will see mosquitoes.Blocking and blurring result more from the ongoing tug-of-war betweenmotion and resolution. A limited amount of bandwidth can be used either forconveying information about motion or for image resolution, but not both.    Blocking can be traced to initial division of the bit stream intodiscrete blocks of pixels. With many algorithms, the processing isperformed block by block, rather than over the entire image. Typically, theblocks are smoothed away by postprocessing at the receiving end, but ifthere is a lot of motion, the algorithm won't have the bandwidth to modifythe blocks, and they'll appear on screen. With blurring, the codec lacksthe bandwidth to handle both resolution and motion: An object simply movestoo quickly to be captured with any degree of accuracy. The bandwidth isdevoted to capturing the motion, so resolution is sacrificed and the imageis blurred.    Even when vendors agree on specific coding techniques (H.261, forinstance), codec performance can vary remarkably. The quality of the imagedepends to a large degree on processing decisions (identifying the''important'' part of any image or deciding how much bandwidth to devote tosmoothing).    H.261, which is based on DCT, only specifies how the image isdecoded. It requires that codecs know how to conduct an inverse transformand paint the image on screen; it does not specify how the image is to becompressed. Hence, the diverse opinions about performance, particularlywhen it comes to the CCITT spec. If a particular implementation of H.261 isadept at reading the data and using the results, the picture will beclearer and the motion smoother than another implementation's--yet bothwill be able to interoperate.TURN ON AND TUNE IN    Another problem with judging performance is that many codecs mayappear to be ''tuned'' to particular data rates. In theory, the higher thedata rate the better the performance. In practice, this may not hold true.Algorithms that deliver a certain quality at one speed may not do muchbetter at higher speeds. Similarly, codecs that perform well at high speedsmay look far worse at lower rates--much more than the drop in bandwidth canaccount for.    ''You should be able to have an algorithm that spans a wide rangeof bit rates,'' says Baker. But given the complexity of the algorithms, itmakes sense for designers to try to optimize perceived performance atparticular speeds--usually those corresponding to such typical servicerates as 56 kbit/s, 112 kbit/s, 128 kbit/s, and so on.    However, both the tuning and a viewer's response are subjective;one vendor could choose to minimize certain features of an image at theexpense of others, making motion slightly smoother, say, at the cost ofgreater blurring. A viewer who notices blurring more than smoothness mightfind that ''tuning'' less desirable than other choices.    Still, objective criteria exist. One of these is frame refreshrate, the number of times a second that a receiving codec updates a pictureframe, which is basically a measure of the smoothness of motion. The NorthAmerican National Television System Committee (NTSC) standard specifiesroughly 30 frames per second for television broadcasts. The refresh ratefor codecs varies with the algorithm, data transmission rate, and motion ina given image. (The more an object moves, the lower the frame refresh ratewill be.) CLI, often perceived as the Cadillac of codecs, tops out at 30frames/s both with its CTX Plus algorithm and with H.261. That rate dropsto 15 frames/s for CTX. VideoTelecom achieves 30 frames/s with its BlueChip 30 algorithm and 10 to 15 frames/s with its other algorithms.    A key point that tends to be overlooked, however, is that themaximum frame rate is less critical than the minimum. An algorithm thattransmits 30 frames/s while displaying a blank wall but drops to 2 or 3frames/s for a moving person is clearly not as good as one that maintains asteady 10 frames/s.    The catch is that vendors won't give their minimum frame refreshrates, and for a perfectly valid reason: Frame rates decrease with theamount of motion. A codec that maintains 5 to 10 frames/s during aboardroom videoconference, for instance, might drop to 1 frame/s at abasketball game. The best thing for net managers to do is compare codecsdisplaying typical applications and attempt to push vendors on the issue ofminimum frame rates.LET'S HEAR IT FOR...    Another factor in the video quality equation is sound. True, theimage captures most of the initial attention in a videoconference, but''The audio makes all the difference in the world,'' says William Ray,director of communications network services for Corning Inc. (Corning,N.Y.). Ray, who oversees a videoconferencing network with sites in theUnited States and overseas, recounts an incident in which the audio wasn'tfunctioning properly. One potential user was unenthusiastic about theequipment. Yet when the audio was corrected, the same user was impresssedwith the video quality. The picture quality hadn't changed at all, Raystresses, but the user's evaluation had improved enormously.    Like images, sound is digitized and compressed by the codec.Problems arise when the sound isn't synchronized perfectly with the picture(someone appears to speak before his or her lips move, for instance) orwhen the receiving codec doesn't cancel out echo.    As with image transmission, these troubles are harder to overcomeat lower bandwidths because there are simply fewer bits to devote to asolution. The bandwidth that's allocated to audio can range from 3.5 kbit/sin very-low-bit-rate applications to 64 kbit/s in T1 video links. Mostvendors use adaptive differential pulse code modulation (ADPCM) for audiotransmission, so effective audio frequencies range from 3.5 to 50 kHz.    Videoconferencing echo is similar to echo in high-speed modems:When a speaker at one end talks, the voice is transmitted across the link,where it is heard at the other end. If the microphone at the other endpicks up that sound, it is retransmitted in an infinite loop, causingfeedback.    Some of the ways that vendors try to eliminate echo involve keepingvolume down at the remote speakers, using directional microphones, andemploying elaborate switching mechanisms so that only the speaker's voiceis transmitted. Unfortunately, normal conversations are full ofinterruptions, and speakers often get up and walk around the room. Thus,vendors have developed echo cancellation algorithms--similar to those usedwith V.32 modems but much more complex--that ''train'' thevideoconferencing units. In essence, the videoconferencing system measuresthe acoustic characteristics of the conference room, taking what's known astheimpulse response. (Depending on the algorithm, this impulse response canbe measured many times during the course of the conference.) Using thisinformation, the codec then subtracts the retransmitted echo from theincoming voice signal. All in all, though, this is a very challengingfiltering process, and it rarely works perfectly.NEC, VideoTelecom, andPictureTel all offer echo cancellation, but users seem to agree that thePictureTel algorithm lives up to its sterling reputation. Corning's Ray,for example, says PictureTel systems can be installed in virtually any roomwithout worrying about acoustics.PICKING A CODEC    Weighing all the performance issues to chose the right codec forthe job is probably the hardest part of designing a videoconferencingsystem.    As noted, users believe strongly that codecs vary in performance. Butperformance alone should not be the only criterion: The amount ofbandwidth that must be allocated to achieve the desired picture qualityalso is a factor. GE's Stevenson, for instance, says that his companydecided on the CLI product for most applications because of picturequality, which he felt was more important (for most applications) thanbandwidth costs.    GE's financial services division, however, chose PictureTel.''Their needs are different,'' Stevenson says, explaining that financialservices tends to hold frequent, informal meetings, which makes the cost ofbandwidth more of an issue than picture quality. PictureTel delivers ''agood picture at low bandwidth,'' Stevenson says.    Finally, some users have specific requirements, such as the abilityto send and receive computer files and graphics during a videoconference.Maxtor's Gentile, for instance, is intrigued by the fact thatVideoTelecom's MediaMax system will interface to his company's Ethernet LANto let him send engineering graphics. VideoTelecom is the only unit to datewith this ability.THE REST OF THE SYSTEM    Of course, a videoconferencing system includes more than just acodec. Codec vendors and systems integrators also offer various cameras,monitors, peripherals, and other options. From a network manager'sperspective, however, the most critical piece of equipment after the codecis the access device. Codecs can work with switched and dedicated digitallinks at bandwidths from 56 kbit/s to 1.544 Mbit/s, and they can connect tothese services in a variety of ways (see Figure 2).    The plain-Jane approach is via a T1 CSU; this gives the codeceither the full T1 data rate or multiples of 64 kbit/s (depending onservice selected).    Another option is to connect via a PBX. This makes sense when acompany has leased a T1 line to a site, for example, but will have somechannels free for low-bandwidth videoconferencing. Codec vendors oftenhave co-marketing agreements with PBX vendors. PictureTel, for example,has agreements with AT&T for its Definity products and with Rolm andNorthern Telecom.    With Switched 56 services, the codec generally connects through oneor two V.35 interfaces to a single or dual Switched 56 CSU/DSU. In somecases, the CSU/DSU is integrated into the codec. PictureTel does this, asdoes BT/GPT.    Codec vendors also maintain lists of the products that will operatewith their equipment. CLI, for instance, will work with CSU/DSUs from ADCKentrox (Portland, Ore.), Digital Link Corp. (Sunnyvale, Calif.), andVerilink Corp. (San Jose, Calif.).    A final option for connecting to the network--one that's gainingpopularity--is through an inverse multiplexer. Although these units aremore expensive than CSU/DSUs, running $7,000 to $10,000 compared with$2,000 or so, they make it possible to adjust bandwidth to the application.A typical example of such a product is the Multiband bandwidth manager fromAscend Communications Inc. (San Francisco).    Ascend's Multiband combines multiple Switched 56 lines into ahigh-bandwidth stream of up to 4 Mbit/s. This lets a company dial up onlythe amount of bandwidth necessary for a particular call, allowing it to optfor a low-bandwidth conference or a high-quality, 1.5-Mbit/s call. CLI isplanning to integrate its Multiband into its Rembrandt II/VP product line,according to Ascend's co-founder Jay Duncanson. The company is planningsimilar agreements with other codec makers.    Multiband can connect to virtually any digital service, includingT1, Switched 56, and ISDN basic and primary rates. The flexibility of thisclass of products, in fact, is a key reason for videoconferencing's growingpopularity. ''For the first time, videoconferencing is beginning to looklike standard telephone service,'' says Duncanson. ''You can procure a linefrom a public carrier and pay only for service when you need it.'' Inversemultiplexers also are offered by Teleos Communications Inc. (Eatontown,N.J.), Newbridge Networks Inc. (Kanata, Ontario), and Digital Access Corp.(Reston, Va.)    PictureTel is taking a similar approach to digital services.Although the company won't give specifics, the company's vice president ofsales and marketing, Robert Mitro, says it's planning to make its codecsISDN-capable.    One part of the videoconferencing system that's often overlooked isthe multiport bridge. It's this gear that allows network managers to set upmultisite conferences; split-second switching is critical, since a bridgemust be able to switch among participants to keep the speaker's image onscreen. Instead of using bridges, it's possible to set up multiplepoint-to-point links, but this gets expensive and cumbersome beyondthree-way conferences. Each site would need a codec, monitor, and comm linkfor every other site.    VideoTelecom, PictureTel, and CLI all make proprietary bridges.Alternatively, net managers can use special bridging services from thecarriers, which have already purchased bridges and installed them atcentral-office sites. Customers using digital services and codecs from thesame vendors as the bridges merely need to dial in to a specific number,and the carrier will arrange the videoconference.CHEAPER BY THE MINUTE    The precipitous drop in price of videoconferencing equipment ingeneral and codecs in particular also has excited interest in thistechnology. This year alone, the cost of an entry-level system hit two newlows. In January, PictureTel introduced its System 4000 family, with astarting price of $39,500; in July, it added two low-end models, the Model20 and the Model 100, with a buy-in price of $19,900 for a monochrome unit.Interestingly, even PictureTel admits to a degree of hype in all thisprice-slashing: Mitro concedes that a true entry-level system--a bare-bonessystem with a color monitor--starts at around $25,000. Still, that is asharp decline from the cost of a comparable system in 1988, which wouldhave run roughly $150,000.    Why the drop? Codec vendors cite two reasons: first, technicaladvances in the silicon. PictureTel and others who have been designingtheir own chips have found they can consolidate functions of two or morechips onto one piece of silicon, with a corresponding savings.    Second, the law of supply and demand dictates that asvideoconferencing becomes more popular and vendors sell more products,prices will come down.    Equally important is the drop in the prices of network services.''In 1987, the cost of a New York-to-California videoconference call wasmaybe $150 an hour,'' says Mitro. Today that cost is under $20 an hour.''Now it costs less than a call from a cellular car phone.''    In that same period, the types of available services has grownenormously. When videoconferencing made its debut as a business technology,the only feasible way to link codecs was via a 1.544-Mbit/s dedicated line.Now, in addition to dual 56-kbit/s links, carriers offer switched N56/64,Switched 384, and switched T1, among others. And these services are gettingcheaper all the time.    Bob McCarthy, product manager for AT&T Accunet switched digitalservices, explains that the big change came in 1990, when the carriersunderstood the need for usage-based prices for switched digital services.Until then, he says, AT&T expected the primary application would be to backup dedicated lines. But last year, it realized there were otherapplications--including videoconferencing.    As a result, AT&T cut its prices by about 75 percent, saysMcCarthy, with a resultant surge in videoconferencing applications.Corning's Ray says that his company installed its first pilot system lastsummer, although he'd been following videoconferencing technology for fiveyears: ''By then, the price had come down until it looked affordable.''    Despite the advances in network services, though, ''the big bugaboois still the network,'' says TRI president Ann Earon. Interoperability andavailability problems still remain. For instance, AT&T's switched digitalservices won't work with those from US Sprint Communications Co. (KansasCity, Mo.) or MCI Communications Corp. (Washington, D.C.).    Interoperability is holding back one of the most potentiallyexplosive applications of videoconferencing, company-to-company conferencing. While H.261 means that codecs can interoperate, acodec on a digital service from, say, Sprint, won't talk to another unit onan AT&T network except through a gateway, a custom-designed bridging unit. Companies that want to videoconference with theirsuppliers, customers, business partners, and anyone else have to make surethat these groups are on the same network.    In general, conferencing systems come in two distinct sizes: room orboardroom systems, which are more or less permanently installed in adedicated conference room, and rollabouts, which can be moved from room toroom. So-called desktop systems are somewhere in between--small enough tobe moved from one room to another but not designed to be portable. Somevendors offer a range of products: PictureTel, for instance, supplies sixmodels of its System 4000, and other codec vendors have followed suit.    The difference betwen a boardroom system and a rollabout isprimarily packaging: The same codec can be installed in either. Mostvendors' systems are modular, peripherals like control panels and graphicscameras and stands can be added as necessary.    Most analysts believe that traditional boardroom videoconferencingis on the wane. While conference rooms will never disappear, they say,these systems will become less important over time, as users add smaller,more flexible solutions. TRI predicts that while room models will capturenearly half of the revenue in 1991 (41 percent), they will account for only29 percent of the market by 1995. Desktop models, by contrast, will growfrom 8 percent in 1991 to 29 percent 1995. TRI also sees multipointconferencing as a small but growing segment of the market, moving from 1percent in 1991 to 3 percent in 1995.WHERE IT'S GOING    What lies ahead? The crystal ball is, as always, cloudy, but sometrends stand out:    For VideoTelecom, the integration of computer graphics and data isalready a reality. The company's Mediamax ''mediaconferencing'' system letsusers tie in LAN and PC data and graphics with more conventional audio andvideo components. Because the system uses a PC-based architecture, itconnects as readily to a LAN as any PC. This sort of computer literacy isnot wasted on some users. Maxtor's Gentile points out that the ability toexchange computer graphics would be very handy in engineeringapplications.    Other vendors agree that PC-based videoconferencing is the way togo. PictureTel and Intel Corp. (Santa Clara, Calif.) have entered into anagreement to develop multimedia technology for desktop applications.    It's no news that the original picturephone flopped in 1964 and hasgone nowhere since. But CLI and AT&T have a joint venture to bring tomarket a 19.2-kbit/s, full-color, full-motion videophone by 1992, andothers are likely to follow in their wake. PictureTel and BT/GPT have bothexpressed interest in developing such a device. Hitachi recently displayeda prototype ISDN-compatible unit that sells in Japan for 1 million yen(about $7,000).    In the end, the chances are very good that videoconferencing willfind its way to the desktop, whether inside a computer or added onto aphone. More importantly, codecs will continue to get better and cheaper,data services will proliferate, and standards will evolve to make productstruly interoperable. So get ready for videoconferencing. It'll be a fact oflife in the '90s.Figure 1: Videoconferencing on the RiseTable: Closeup on Videoconferencing (This table is not availableelectronically. Please see the November, 1991 issue.)Figure 2: Picture This: A Videoconferencing NetworkFigure 3: Costing Out VideoconferencingAbout the Author(s):Johna Till Johnson is wide-area networks editor for DATA COMMUNICATIONS,based in Gainesville, Fla.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.CALLING ALL LANS: ISDN FOR LAN INTERCONNECTPublic ISDNs are starting to emerge as a practical way to link LANs inEurope. But given serious equipment shortcomings and patchy serviceavailability, users are well advised to look before they leapBy:Stephen Saunders and Elke Gronert, Data Communications InternationalIn theory, Europe is just one PC card away from LAN interconnect via ISDN.Commercial ISDNs are beginning to operate across the Continent, promisingto deliver users at last from notoriously high leased-line tariffs. ISDN'slong list of benefits seems too good to be true: It provides as muchbandwidth as digital leased lines. It's billed by the minute instead of themonth. Users get advanced features like the ability to call multiplelocations simultaneously. A one-minute transmission can be set up within acouple of seconds between any pair of ISDN users. All that's been missing,so the theory goes, is a card to connect LANs to ISDN. And now that suchcards are starting to appear, Europe should be ready to cross the thresholdinto an era of faster, more efficient LAN connections over the wide area.    In reality, though, users looking to connect LANs over ISDN todayface two major obstacles. First, only a handful of European countries havefull-scale commercial ISDNs, and coverage is patchy in some of those.Second, most large vendors of bridges and routers--the key building blocksof LAN interconnect--have yet to implement ISDN interfaces. Many othervendors have brought out interim solutions, mainly in the form of PC-basedISDN interface cards and software that perform bridging and routing. Theseproducts range from low-end, manually operated devices to an IP router witha throughput of 2.048 Mbit/s (see Table 1).    These interim products are suitable only in certain applications.The penalty for picking the wrong product could be a PTT bill so large itmakes users wonder why they bothered to switch to ISDN. But in the rightsituation, an ISDN interface can save lots of money and even make possibleapplications that previously were out of the question. If any one statementcan be applied to ISDN products thus far, it's that it pays for users toshop carefully.EQUIPMENT OBSTACLES    The idea of ISDN for LAN interconnect is an appealing one: Itreplaces slow analog dial-up lines and costly digital leased lines with afast, cost-efficient, ubiquitous service. All nodes on all LANs get two64-kbit/s B channels, one 16-kbit/s D channel, and access to any othernode--a new concept for Europeans unfamiliar with switched digitalservices. But a standard device that ties LANs to ISDN doesn't yet exist.To date, the closest thing to it is a PC-based ISDN interface card andbridging or routing software, used in conjunction with a standard LANinterface card (see figure).    Europe's low number of ISDN users and its patchwork of differentISDN standards have discouraged bridge and router vendors from developingintegral ISDN interfaces for their equipment. ''Unless you target aspecific country, the market just isn't there,'' says David Bird, technicalsupport manager for the U.K. division of router maker Proteon Inc.(Westborough, Mass.). Each national ISDN interface has to undergo lengthyattachment approval tests, further discouraging vendors, says Nigel Oakley,product marketing manager for U.K. operations of 3Com Corp. (Santa Clara,Calif.). Still, some bridge and router vendors are developing ISDNinterfaces. Retix (Santa Monica, Calif.), for example, says it will add a64-kbit/s ISDN interface to its bridges by mid-1992 for unspecifiedcountries.    Using a terminal adapter to connect existing routers or bridges toan ISDN has some serious shortcomings, despite what vendors may claim. Theproblems arise from ISDN's use of a separate D channel to carry the signalsthat set up and tear down calls, identify the type of traffic on the Bchannels, and invoke other services such as calling-line identification. Ina normal bridge or router, that information is carried on the same channelas the data; terminal adapters cannot separate and convert it for use onISDN D channels. As a result, the terminal adapters will pass traffic fromrouters and bridges to ISDN B channels but they cannot set up and tear downcalls automatically--often a vital feature for minimizing line costs.    IBM acknowledges that the inability of its terminal adapter, the7820, to automatically control ISDN lines is a drawback, but it says it'saddressing the problem, as are other vendors. Terminal adapters thatpresent an X.21 or V.24 interface can be configured to automatically dial apreset number and thus set up an ISDN B channel call when requested by theattached equipment. Cisco Systems Inc. (Menlo Park, Calif.) uses thisfacility in Version 8.3 of its firmware so that its routers can invoke anISDN backup when the existing trunk fails or becomes congested.INTEGRATED INTERFACES    While bridge and router vendors are hanging fire on integratingISDN interfaces in their products, major computer makers such as DigitalEquipment Corp. (Maynard, Mass.) and Hewlett-Packard Co. (Palo Alto,Calif.) are launching ISDN interface cards that connect LANs to other LANs,hosts, or standalone PCs. Many smaller vendors also have developed packagesfor PCs and Apple Macintoshes comprising ISDN cards and bridging or routingsoftware.    Of the products shown in Table 1, most are PC cards. They can bemanaged with the PC's monitor and keyboard, and the PC's hard disk can beused to store configuration data. The disadvantage is PCs are not designedspecifically as bridges or routers and thus provide much lower performancethan specialized devices.    Some features of sophisticated bridges, such as filtering ofbroadcast packets, are likely to be rudimentary in PC-based bridges.PC-based routers will likely do a better job than PC-based bridges infiltering out unwanted packets before transmission over ISDN. It's worthchecking whether products support the full complement of router functions,such as multihop routing and intelligent load balancing. Some vendors, suchas MBP Kommunikationssysteme GmbH (Dortmund, Germany), have incorporatedsupport for Novell's Internet Packet Exchange (IPX) protocol in theirproducts to ensure full router functionality across an ISDN.    Some vendors interviewed for this article were unable to say iftheir products were bridges or routers, or what protocols their productswould support. For this reason, users are well advised to borrow productsfor evaluation before buying them. After installation, it's also advisableto monitor PTT bills, if possible on a daily basis, to check whether theISDN is carrying packets that should have been filtered out.LINE CONTROL    Automatic line control offers another way to minimize PTT bills.Usually implemented in software, line control lets users adjust theirequipment so that calls can be extended to match the billing increments setby PTTs. The length of these increments varies; it can be as little as 18seconds on many long-distance routes to as long as six minutes for localcalls in Germany. ''You can program our device to hold the call until justbefore that time, and then drop it,'' says Stefan Gieseler, manager ofproduct marketing for communication systems at MBP. As increment lengthrises, so does the ''free'' time available to users. At the same time, linecontrol helps users cut down on billing for unused connection time.    Automatic re-establishment of failed ISDN calls is a feature worthpaying for. It would have paid dividends for the Department of ComputerScience at University College London, where ISDN connections were droppedevery 10 minutes by a bug in an ISDN switch from British TelecommunicationsPLC (BT, London). Using information available on the ISDN D channel, theuniversity's failed calls could have been re-established automatically.    With automation, however, comes the need for network management.Like other services, ISDNs must be monitored so that alerts can betriggered when problems arise. Without alerts, network managers mayunwittingly invoke backup lines (and rack up usage charges) while failedlines lie idle and unreported to the PTT.    A few vendors, such as Hewlett-Packard and Bintec Computersysteme GmbH(Nuremberg, Germany), incorporate support for the industry-standard simplenetwork management protocol (SNMP) in their products. Other vendors, suchas OST S.A. (Cesson-Sevigne, France) and Teli AB (Nynashamn, Sweden),provide local proprietary management. Digital Equipment Corp. provideslocal or remote proprietary management.  But some vendors don't provideany method of managing their products, either locally or remotely; theseinclude Industrade AG (Wallisellen, Switzerland) and Stollmann GmbH(Hamburg, Germany).MANY CARDS, MANY CALLS    Most ISDN cards support simultaneous calls over both B channels of abasic-rate interface (BRI), and some products accept multiple cards in thesame chassis, enabling communications with several destinations at once.For example, up to three DEC ISDNcontroller 100 cards can be fitted intothe Q-bus of DEC's MicroVAX computers. When loaded with DEC's VAX ISDNAccess Software, the MicroVAX acts as an ISDN Ethernet server, allowingdata from LAN-attached nodes, including non-bus computers, to be routedover an ISDN to nodes on remote LANs also equipped with the card. Withthree cards loaded, the server simultaneously can exchange data with sixsites at 64 kbit/s per connection. Multiple ISDN cards can be installed inPCs as well as minicomputers. Up to four of MBP's cards supporting NetWarerouting functions can be combined to support eight simultaneous calls. Upto eight of OST's IP router cards canbe installed in the same PC tosupport 16 simultaneous 64-kbit/s calls.    Some vendors add another degree of sophistication by synchronizingcalls to the same location so that higher bandwidths can be supported.Industrade offers an IP router similar to OST's, but its product cancombine any two channels for total throughput of 128 kbit/s. InHewlett-Packard's ISDN Server, up to six B channels can be combined todeliver throughput of 384 kbit/s.BIGGER BANDWIDTHS    Bintec recently took the concept of multiple cards and channelsynchronization a step further with the introduction of its ISI/Gate IProuter, which can provide aggregate bandwidths as high as 2.048 Mbit/s--thesame as an E1 leased line. The router has slots for 16 ISDN cards (fromother vendors as well as Bintec) in an AT bus. Each ISDN card can beconnected directly to a BRI socket or to a PBX connected to an ISDN.    ''We tested all the available solutions on the market, and ISI/Gateis the only one which can be expanded to support 32 B channels,'' saysAndreas Merkel, a member of the data processing center's networking groupat the University of Konstanz (Germany).    Bintec also is the only vendor to have implemented data compressionin its product. Usually, protocol overhead can cut actual throughput torates as low as 40 kbit/s on each 64-kbit/s channel, but Bintec's deviceuses an algorithm called Van Jacobson Compression to reduce TCP/IP protocoloverhead from 40 bytes to just 5 bytes per packet. With compression turnedon, data throughput of 62 kbit/s can be achieved on each B channel,according to Merkel. ''Without the compression this throughput wouldn'thave been possible,'' he says. Another vendor, Dataflex Design Ltd.(London), is working on a way to incorporate the CCITT's V.42bis errorcorrection and data compression algorithm in its terminal adapter. Dataflexsays it will ship a product by the end of the year.    The ISI/Gate also supports communications with any other ISDN locationas wellas simultaneous communications at lower speeds with multiple sites,neither of which would be possible with a normal router attached to an E1line. A primary-rate version of the ISI/Gate will be available inmid-1992, says the vendor.    Only one vendor--Gandalf Data Ltd. (Nepean, Canada)--alreadysupports LAN interconnection over a primary-rate interface (PRI, which inEurope combines 30 B channels). Gandalf's ISDN Primary Rate Subsystem fitsinside its Starmaster multiprotocol communications server. The Starmasterlinks IEEE 802.3 Ethernets and routes TCP/IP and DEC's Local Area Transport(LAT) protocols. Like the Bintec product, Gandalf's offering cansynchronize all its channels to deliver the maximum throughput of 1.92Mbit/s.    Gandalf's Subsystem can connect the Starmaster to ISDN PBXs fromNorthern Telecom (Mississauga, Canada), AT&T (New York), BT, Siemens AG(Munich), and GEC Plessey Telecommunications PLC (GPT, Coventry, U.K.),enabling Starmaster-attached devices to share ISDN bandwidth withPBX-attached voice lines.    An early user of the Gandalf switch, the Department of ComputerScience at University College London, says the switch adds five seconds tocall set-up times. In experiments with BT's ISDN, calls took seven secondsto set up when routed through the switch and only one or two seconds whenrouted through other equipment.WHEN ISDN PAYS    But even the most advanced ISDN gear is only as good as the serviceit's connected to. However appealing the prospect of ISDN for LANinterconnect may seem, users should examine availability and tariffingissues before rushing out to buy the latest in ISDN interfaces. Theeconomic argument for or against LAN interconnect via ISDN varies accordingto the type of traffic being supported, the distance between sites, and thecountry. As is the case with the interface equipment, users need toconsider their needs carefully before committing to a service.    ISDN is best suited for relatively large file transfers because its64-kbit/s B channels are circuit switched and because usage charges arebased on ordinary telephone tariffs, which usually have a minimum durationof at least one minute. In theory, a 480-kbyte file--relatively large bymost standards--can be transferred across a 64-kbit/s link in one minute.    An unidentified car maker in Europe already is using ISDN to shipCAD files to its component suppliers, according to Sun Microsystems Inc.(Mountain View, Calif.). The files are generated on Sun workstations andshipped via networks of PC-based bridges and routers. ''ISDN is absolutelystrategic to this company,'' says Jean-Pierre Baudouin, head of Sun'sInternational Center for Network Computing (Grenoble, France), which ischarged with developing ISDN interfaces for Sun workstations.    There are other applications, such as those involving interactivetraffic, where ISDN may not be economical for LAN interconnect. Wheninteractive traffic is carried via ISDN B channels, users pay for bandwidthwhether they use it or not, since a link must be kept active to handlewhatever traffic is generated. In this case, packet-switched services maybe more economical. Some of the LAN interconnect services based on framerelay, itself an outgrowth of ISDN, might offer another alternative when(and if) they become widely available in Europe.    ISDN's feasibility vis-a-vis leased lines depends on the distancebetween sites and on the country (or countries) where the sites arelocated. In short, ISDN is most cost-effective when linking LANs acrossborders at 64 kbit/s, according to the consultancy Logica Cambridge Ltd.(London). In Belgium, for example, a 64-kbit/s leased line would be morecost-effective than ISDN only if users required more than 230 minutes aday of connect time (see Table 2). In Germany, where leased-line tariffsare among the highest in Europe, users would need 450 minutes of dailyconnect time to justify a 64-kbit/s cross-border leased line. Even in thecase of BT, which nearly doubles its charges for international data callsover ISDN, the break-even point for leased lines is 158 minutes per day.    Within countries, however, it's a mixed picture. ISDN is anonstarter as an alternative to leased lines within the U.K. But inBelgium, primary-rate (1.92-Mbit/s) ISDN compares much more favorably withleased lines than a single B channel, particularly for local links. Atpresent, it pays to use primary-rate ISDN rather than a 1.92-Mbit/s leasedline in Germany if daily usage totals less than 90 minutes. However,drastic cuts are planned in German leased-line tariffs that might upsetthese calculations.    Where tariffs are similar, of course, ISDN is a much betteralternative to digital leased lines. Unlike leased lines, ISDN enablesusers to connect with any other user of switched digital services--anadvantage that will snowball as ISDN's coverage increases, national ISDNsare interconnected, and the number of ISDN users increases.PATCHY COVERAGE    At present, ISDN in Europe is characterized by limitedavailability, few users, and plans for rapid expansion by 1994. Those arethe conclusions of a recent study prepared for the Commission of theEuropean Communities by two consultants, Ovum Ltd. (London) andFischer & Lorenz (Copenhagen, Denmark). The study, titled ''European ISDNAtlas, 1991,'' shows where ISDN is available and when it will reach otherlocations in the European Community. ISDN installation plans are given forall European Community countries, as are the years when ISDN will becommercially available in each major city.    Only four European countries--Belgium, France, Germany, and theU.K.--had commercial ISDNs on January 1, 1991, according to the study. Atthat time, the number of installed basic-rate ISDN lines totaled a mere14,665, compared with 100,000 in the U.S. and 20,000 in Japan. Europe had atotal of 2,865 primary-rate lines, compared with 500 in the U.S. and 500 inJapan.    Deutsche Bundespost Telekom (Bonn, Germany) gives higher figuresthan those in the study, but its numbers are for ISDN lines ordered, notlines installed. The difference in statistics does show that Germany isinvesting heavily in ISDN, as are some other European PTTs.    In fact, the PTTs are closer to offering comprehensive coveragethan U.S. carriers, according to one of the study's authors, Ovum's StephenTimms. France Telecom already claims to offer national coverage for itsISDN, Numeris, although it acknowledges that users might have to wait sixmonths for an ISDN line in some locations.    By January 1, 1994, the deadline set by PTTs for the delivery ofcommercial ISDNs based on common European standards, PTTs are promisingISDN in 100 percent of business locations in Belgium, Denmark, France, andthe U.K. Standardized service, sometimes called ''Euro-ISDN,'' will be available in 80 percent to 99 percent of business locationsin Germany and Portugal, 60 percent to 79 percent of those in theNetherlands and Ireland, and 40 percent to 59 percent of those in Italy andSpain, according to the study.Table 1: Se;lected ISDN Devices for LAN Interconnect (This table is notavailable electronically. Please see the November, 1991 issue.)Illustration: Linking LAN to ISDNTable 2: When Is ISDN Cheaper (This table is not available electronically.Please see the November, 1991 issue.)Source: Logica Cambridge Ltd.About the Author(s):Stephen Saunders is international new products editor of DATACOMMUNICATIONS INTERNATIONAL, based in London. Elke Gronert is a bureaueditor for DATA COMMUNICATIONS INTERNATIONAL, based in Munich.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.MULTIVENDOR NETSMADE EASYPutting together a multivendor network is difficult enough, but to thosecharged with explaining each vendor's systems and network architectures thejob can seem just about impossible. In A Manager's Guide to MultivendorNetworks, John Enck maps out an approach that's comprehensive enough fortraining executives and technical staff alike. The book not only definesthe networking architectures of four key vendors--IBM, Digital EquipmentCorp., Hewlett-Packard Co., and Sun Microsystems Inc.--but also notes thesimilarities and differences among them.    Enck also explores the ties that bind together multivendor nets,including standards, messaging services, and network management systems.Most major U.S. and European standards are covered, as are the OSIseven-layer reference model and the Government OSI Profile (GOSIP)standard. Enck examines the major components of wide-area services,including X.25 networks and X.400 electronic mail, and offers a guide totroubleshooting problems on LANs and WANs. The book costs $35.Professional Press Inc., 101 Witmer Rd., Box 446, Horsham, Pa. 19044Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.A COMMON MOTIFMotif, the graphical user interface for X-Windows, goes Microsoft Windowsone better: Unlike the popular PC operating environment, the Open SoftwareFoundation's Motif is platform-independent. Indeed, the X-Windows systemitself already has been implemented on networks made up of Unix, VAX, DOS,and Apple Macintosh systems. With Motif Programming Manual by Dan Heller asa guide, users can write a single, consistent, intuitive interface for alltheir applications.    Heller, the creator of Z-Mail, a widely used electronic-mailpackage, introduces the Motif tool kit and supplies definitions of allclasses of Motif objects. In addition to explaining the Motif programmingmodel, Heller discusses the basics of user interface design. Each of themain elements of the Motif library is examined in its own chapter. Themanual assumes some familiarity with the C programming language, althoughHeller notes in his preface that ''even those who dabble in C canunderstand the concepts well enough to do most things.'' Motif ProgrammingManual costs $34.95.O'Reilly & Associates Inc., 632 Petaluma Ave., Sebastopol, Calif. 95472Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.IBM'S SYSTEM VIEW: ADDING FUNCTION TO FORMA year after its unveiling, IBM's grand scheme for total systemsmanagement is still in its formative stageIn product announcements and statements of direction issued over the pastyear, IBM has gone to great lengths to tell the world that SystemView is acornerstone of its master information technology plan for the 1990s andbeyond. Yet more than a year after SystemView's unveiling, its compositionand implications remain a mystery.    IBM itself is largely to blame for much of the confusionsurrounding SystemView. In many of its statements, the vendor has impliedvery strongly that SystemView is a real architecture, albeit one that hasyet to be released formally. The reality, however, is that SystemView isnot an architecture but a strategy that to this point lacks a tangiblefoundation.    SystemView's charter is ambitious: to provide a total systemsmanagement framework for enterprises with information processing systemsthat are built on a diverse collection of computing and communicationsplatforms. SystemView encompasses not only the hardware but also theapplications and the operational procedures required to run a distributedcomputing environment from the largest IBM and non-IBM systems down toindividual desktop workstations.    SystemView's breadth and scope are daunting enough to give pauseeven to staunch IBM supporters. Yet many corporate networkers now arecounting on IBM to deliver on its lofty promises. More thana third of thenearly 460 network management professionals who responded to a May 1991survey by the Datapro Information Services Group (Delran, N.J.) said theywould choose SystemView as their open systems management model--ahead ofsuch high-profile solutions as OSI and TCP/IP with its simple networkmanagement protocol (SNMP). No doubt that percentage will climb as IBM'splans begin to take shape with real products.    If SystemView lives up to all of IBM's advance billing, few usersare likely to be disappointed. In IBM's scheme, SystemView will serve as aframework that will enable most, if not all, of the diverse managementactivities of running a computer system to be integrated and, wherepossible, automated. It will go beyond ''technical'' issues to addressother management tasks integral to the operation of any system, such asfinancial administration, service-level tracking, capacity planning, andeven business planning.    IBM is counting on SystemView to help it maintain its leadershiprole in defining the direction that information technology will take. IBMhas prided itself on being able to develop proprietary architectures thatbecome industry standards with tremendous staying power--witness theSystem/370 and SNA. IBM's latest architectural foray, Systems ApplicationArchitecture (SAA), has not been a resounding success to date, but IBMseems intent on boosting SAA into its systems pantheon. In its September1990 unveiling of SystemView, IBM went to great lengths to make one pointvery clear: SystemView is an integral part of SAA.    Ideally, IBM would have waited until SystemView's underlyingarchitecture was intact--or at least clearly defined--before announcing it.But pressure from other vendors, most notably Digital Equipment Corp.,forced IBM to take the wraps off its strategy. DEC announced its totalsystems management plan, Enterprise Management Architecture (EMA), in 1989,a year before IBM gave any inkling of SystemView.    Although the September 1990 introduction of SystemView and asmattering of ''conformant'' products seemed rushed, it did manage toswing the momentum in the systems management race in IBM's favor. With onebold and blustering move, IBM managed to take the high ground and redefinethe expectations for the range of management functions needed for computerenvironments in the coming years. In the process, IBM also raised the antein the high-stakes battle for the multivendor, open systems networkmanagement arena.    IBM upped that ante a little more this past September, when itannounced several more SystemView developments, including an expanded listof ''SystemView-conformant'' products from IBM and third-party partners anda set of criteria for gauging product conformance to SystemView. AlthoughIBM did not unveil its formal blueprint for SystemView--Systems ManagementArchitecture (SMA)--in its September 1991 announcements, as it was expectedto do, that introduction should take place within the next year.    The September 1990 and 1991 announcements don't come close torevealing the entire SystemView scheme, but they do offer some solid cluesabout where IBM expects to take systems management in general--and networkmanagement in particular--in the coming years. How well IBM succeeds inleading computer and communications technology into the next centuryremains to be seen; but the effect that those efforts will have oncorporate information networks will be profound.BLURRING LINES    The need for a management architecture that cuts across vendorlines and embraces as many facets of systems management as possible isdriven by one undeniable fact: The distinctions between computers,networks, and applications are blurring to the point of irrelevance.Management responsibilities are widening within specific disciplines aswell. For instance, systems managers can no longer focus solely onpredicting, isolating, tracking, and resolving network problems; they mustalso tackle such ''nontechnical'' issues as performance (response-time andservice-level) tracking, capacity planning, asset management, andconfiguration management.    Despite criticism to the contrary, IBM has not been a laggard inthe management arena. It started to embed integrated management featuresinto SNA as far back as 1977. In that pre-PC era, failures and errors inlarge-system communications hardware and in communications links were thebiggest problems for network managers. For that reason, IBM focused ondeveloping management facilities for monitoring and controlling hardwarerather than applications.    This original bias toward hardware is evident to this day. Over thelast few years, however, IBM has made a concerted effort to swing itsemphasis to the application side. NetView, introduced in 1986, is part ofIBM's push to expand network management beyond hardware. NetView is now thepredominant network management system for System/370 SNA networks.    IBM's efforts in the 1980s to move beyond hardware management werenot limited to NetView. IBM brought together all of SNA's managementfacilities in 1986, in a standalone, subordinate architecture known asSNA/Management Services (SNA/MS). Still, IBM's aspirations for managementfar exceed what is available with NetView today or even postulated in thelatest revision of SNA/MS.GRAND ENTRANCE    Enter SystemView. IBM introduced its systems management vision in amassive September 1990 coming-out party that featured nearly 150 productsrelating to the launching of the System/390 range of computers. TheSystemView announcement was a daring, and probably premature, move by IBMto articulate its long-term objectives for multivendor systems management.    In the SystemView introduction, IBM revealed a number of long-termsystems management goals, including the following: Improvements in theusability of its systems management control programs; Consistentdefinitions of resources to be managed; Consistent access to, andmanagement of, resource definition data; Compliance with open systemsstandards, such as the International Organization for Standardization's(ISO's) common management information services (CMIS) and commonmanagement information protocol (CMIP) standards; Automation of managementtasks whenever appropriate; Provision of management application programinterfaces (APIs) to ensure customer and third-party participation andintegration; Provision of relevant support applications, such as SAA AssetManager/MVS, one of the few SystemView applications to be released by IBM.    All these objectives are similar to, and no doubt inspired by, thegoals that IBM spelled out for SAA back in 1987.    This past September, a year after SystemView's introduction, IBMkept the ball rolling with another high-profile announcement, introducingmore SystemView products and its lineup of SystemView product developmentpartners (see Table 1). It also released a preliminary draft of SystemViewconformance guidelines (see Table 2).WAITING FOR AN ARCHITECTURE    Of course, before SystemView can become a reality, it needs anactual foundation. SystemView's architecture, known in IBM circles as theSystems Management Architecture, was supposed to have been delivered bynow; its debut has been pushed back to 1992. The delay is troublesome butunderstandable given the scope of IBM's undertaking.    When it is completed, SMA--and thus SystemView--will enable SAA,AIX (IBM's Unix), DOS/VSE, and other IBM hosts, as well as non-IBM systems,to be configured, controlled, and monitored across SNA, OSI, and TCP/IPnetworks (see Figure 1).    The September 1991 SystemView announcements included twodevelopments with important ramifications for network managers. One isIBM's implicit integration of NetView into the SystemView framework. Theother is management support for heterogeneous LANs.    Enhancements to NetView Version 2, such as S/390 AutomationServices and extended graphical capabilities announced in September, nowcarry the SystemView imprimatur. The NetViewinfusion adds immediatecredibility to SystemView. It also means that users won't have to worryabout backing the wrong management horse.    NetView already addresses some of SystemView's basic objectives,although with an emphasis on network management. These include problemmanagement, response time monitoring, inventory tracking, and softwaredistribution. NetView also has rudimentary compatibility with SNMP, theopen network management standard for TCP/IP networks.    NetView should provide a useful nucleus around which to expandSystemView--at least for the time being. At some point, however, NetView,with its heavy SNA orientation, will have to undergo some fundamentalchanges to conform with all SystemView goals.    IBM ultimately may decide to phase out its NetView products andreplace them with more robust SystemView counterparts. Although it debutedin 1986, NetView evolved from a series of vintage 1970s network managementproducts, such as Network Communications Control Facility (NCCF), NetworkProblem Determination Application (NPDA), and Network Logical Data Manager(NLDM). The overlap between some ''value-added'' SystemView and NetViewofferings, such as the SAA Delivery Manager and the NetView DeliveryManager, suggests that IBM may be thinking about replacing its NetViewofferings with SystemView equivalents.    Beyond NetView, network management support for heterogeneous LANscomes in the latest release of Advanced Communications Function/VirtualTelecommunications Access Method (ACF/VTAM). Version 3, Release 4 ofACF/VTAM, through the 3172 Interconnect Controller, now accommodates SNAtraffic over Token-Ring, Token-Bus, fiber distributed data interface(FDDI), and carrier-sense multiple access with collision detection(CSMA/CD) LANs alongside TCP/IP traffic. This support, which incorporatesthe 3172's fiber optic Enterprise System Connection (Escon) channelconnection, allows ACF/VTAM hosts to interact with LANs up to 5.6 milesaway at up to 10 Mbyte/s, the direct channel rate.    The SNA and TCP/IP support, coupled with the OSI support that IBMplans to offer via OSI/Communications Subsystem (OSI/CS), elevates IBM tobeing a prime, if not the only, vendor that can offer a heterogeneouscommunications system comprising LANs, WANs, integrated SNA, TCP/IP, andOSI. With ACF/VTAM 3.4, its other communications subsystem software, andexisting NetView technology, IBM at least has the makings of thecommunications infrastructure it will need to realize at least the SNA,TCP/IP, and OSI network management aspects of SystemView.    IBM's protocol repertoire should expand even further next month,assuming the introduction of its first multiprotocol router comes off asplanned. The router, which will be based on IBM's RS/6000 workstation, islikely to accommodate such non-IBM LAN protocols as Novell Inc.'s InternetPacket Exchange/Sequenced Packet Exchange (IPX/SPX), DECnet, andAppleTalk.SYSTEMVIEW'S THREE DIMENSIONS    In its SystemView outlines to date, IBM has defined its managementstrategy in terms of three interrelated elements that it calls dimensions:the end-use dimension, the application dimension, and the data dimension(see Figure 2). These three dimensions are analogous to SAA's Common UserAccess (CUA), Common Programming Interface, and Common CommunicationsSupport components. Like SAA's components, SystemView's three dimensionswill provide relevant guidelines, standards, architectures, and applicationprogram interfaces (APIs) for integrating systems management applications.    The end-use dimension will set the criteria for providingworkstation users with a consistent and uncomplicated view of SystemViewapplications. It will define the guidelines for a common interface to beused by all systems management applications. The criteria defined in thisdimension will ensure that SystemView meets its improved usabilityobjective. The end-use dimension is oriented toward iconic, object-based,point-and-click technology. It is based on an SAA CUA interface that willbe implemented on programmable workstations (IBM PS/2s).    It now appears that the SystemView end-use dimension will beimplemented on top of IBM's OS/2-based GraphicsView/2 product, which wasannounced in September 1990 and is slated to be released by the end ofthis year. GraphicsView/2 facilitates the display of system and networkconfigurations using color-coded status designations. The Graphic MonitorFacility of NetView Version 2, Release 1, though not based onGraphicsView/2, offers a relatively faithful preview of what will beavailable with GraphicsView/2.    SystemView's application dimension will set the criteria forimplementing and integrating systems management applications. It willspecify the services and interfaces needed to control, coordinate, andoperate heterogeneous, enterprise-wide information systems. This dimensionhas six distinct disciplines: business management, change management,configuration management, operations management, performance management,and problem management. IBM has said it will define the applicationdimension criteria in such a way as to promote the implementation ofsystems management applications to address the various disciplines thatwill cross operating system and network boundaries.    The data dimension will define the requirements for the consistentdefinition of resources and the consistent access to such data. To do so,it will rely on a data model that will use the SAA Database AccessInterface, a Structured Query Language (SQL) interface. The model will becompatible with the ISO's 10165-4 guidelines for the definition of managedobjects and the 10165-1 management information model.THE FASTSERVICE FACTOR    One IBM offering that is emerging as an important component ofSystemView is the Failure Analysis and Support Technology Service, orFASTService. Introduced in August 1990, FASTService comprisesmethodologies, software, hardware, and dedicated customer support--completewith a toll-free phone line--aimed at finding and resolving as quickly aspossible software problems that arise in S/390 MVS applications.    FASTService is an innovative and practical offering that in a sensecharacterizes the leading-edge, total spectrum management philosophyembodied in SystemView. It offers facilities to ''trap'' problems theinstant they occur; automatically log problems with a unique identifier toa user-specified database; produce customized storage dumps; automaticallynotify a remote support group; and automatically search a database forpossible resolutions to the problem.    FASTService is based on the use of IBM-supplied ''softwareprobes.'' Application developers insert these probes--which are in the form of S/370 Assembler, Cobol, or PL/1 macros--atcritical points within the application. A probe is triggered whenever it isencountered in the execution path of the application; thus, probes areinserted in error or unexpected paths within the application. Whentriggered, the software code associated with the probe performs a set ofservices specified for that probe. These services can include thegeneration of a code dump, the issuance of a NetView alert, or theinvocation of a search process to determine if a resolution has alreadybeen posted for the problem associated with that probe. The benefits ofsuch automated technology are so compelling that IBM itself intends to useit in its future strategic products.    FASTService has yet to be used widely and is now available as aservice within the United States only. It also is fairly expensive rightnow. But it does offer the very tangible benefit of significantly reducingthe time and effort needed to debug and maintain large applications,thereby saving many days, or even months, of programming labor.THE CURRENT LINEUP    According to IBM, only two IBM SystemView products are nowavailable: Workstation Data Save Facility/VM and NetView Graphic MonitorFacility. About a baker's dozen more IBM products carry the inscrutablelabel ''SystemView Conformance Announced.''    Workstation Data Save Facility/VM is a remote backup applicationbased on the client-server model. It permits workstations running underDOS, OS/2, or AIX to back up data on a central S/3X0 host running under VM.The idea of using host computers as hyper file servers for data backup,archiving, and retrieval is a sound one. For more than three decades, usershave been backing up and archiving S/3X0 host data, in some cases nightly.Hence, there's a wealth of proven products, tools, procedures, policies,and trained personnel in place to perform this crucial function on aregular basis.    The NetView Graphic Monitor Facility (NGMF) is an intrinsic featureof NetView 2.1. It offers the graphical user interface of OS/2 ExtendedEdition 1.2, with color-coded status messages. NGMF also providesmultilevel or hierarchical views of the complete network. A ''zoom-in''feature gives the network operator an expanded view of either a portion ofthe network or of individual components, such as Network Control Program(NCP) Type 4 nodes or peripheral node physical units.    This past September, IBM enhanced NGMF to include multivendorsupport through what appears to be an ASCII emulation facility. NGMF nowaddresses two key objectives of SystemView: Its user interface is compliantwith SystemView's end-use dimension, and it handles multivendor systems.    Among the products labeled as ''SystemView Conformance Announced,''the SAA Delivery Manager (DM) originally was hailed as a quintessentialSystemView product. SAA DM is a centralized software, document, and filedistribution service for networked OS/2 workstations. Its functions aresomewhat analogous to those of NetView DM, which offers delivery servicesto PCs, AS/400s, S/36s processors, and VM hosts, among other IBM systems.    The differences between SAA DM and NetView DM are intriguing. SAADM offers software license management and virus detection softwareintegration, workstation-oriented features that NetView DM now lacks. ButNetView DM works with a wider range of devices, including just about allthe strategic SAA remote platforms, while SAA DM works only with OS/2workstations. All things considered, NetView DM appears to be the strongerof the two products.    IBM has acknowledged the overlap between SAA DM and NetView DM.However, it has not specified any guidelines as to which product is morestrategic, or when to use one as opposed to the other. But most of IBM'skey SAA software development partners already have pledged their support toSAA DM.    SAA Asset Manager (AM) appears to be an initial implementation ofthe business management discipline in SystemView's application dimension.It provides an open database definition scheme that can be used to collectdata about all of an enterprise's resources in a central repository, aswell as a centralized, automated inventory management service for hardware,software, and other resources.    There is an obvious and acute need for such asset control indistributed environments. However, just as with SAA DM, the announcement ofSAA AM begs a coexistence question. For the past two years, IBM has beencreating an asset tracking service, albeit for hardware only, for NetViewthrough its Network Asset Management facility. In this case, however, IBMappears to have spotted the potential overlap between the SAA and NetViewofferings. Just before SAA AM was scheduled to ship, IBM pushed back therelease date of the product because of ''customer feedback.''    On the positive side, SAA AM--when it becomes available--willhandle inventory management for any software distributed via SAA DM. Thisis a clear signal that IBM is serious about tightly integrating allSystemView applications.    Both SAA DM and SAA AM rely on a new MVS and VM host-based productcalled SAA Application Connection Services (AConnS). AConnS extends theOS/2 EE Desktop Manager, icon, and resource manipulation environment toembrace mainframe applications andresources. It lets users of OS/2workstations directly invoke host applications and gives them direct accessto host-attached advanced function printers. With AConnS, an OS/2 user canexecute multiple applications concurrently, on separate windows. Suchapplications can be any combination of local PS/2 applications, LogicalUnit 6.2 (SAA) cooperative processing applications, or 3270-based(LU-to-LU) applications.Table: The Current State of SystemView (This table is not availableelectronically. Please see the November, 1991 issue.)Table 2: SystemView's Current Conformance Levels (This table is notavailable electronically. Please see the November, 1991 issue.)Figure 1: SystemView Meets SAAFigure 2: SystemView's Three DimensionsAbout the Author(s):Anura Guruge is lead consultant for BBN Communications (Cambridge, Mass.),specializing in SNA and SAA.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.IBM PULLS SAAOUT OF THE MIREBy:Anura Guruge, BBN CommunicationsThere sure were times when IBM appeared unsure as to exactly what it wantedto achieve with SAA, its proposed model for next-generation client-servercomputing. But IBM never lost sight of the fact that both it and itscustomers were in dire need of such a model.    That's why Big Blue never seriously contemplated ditching SAA, asso many industry analysts predicted. In fact, Big Blue has continually, ifnot diligently, striven to strengthen SAA's technical infrastructure andbolster its credibility. Its September 11 product blowout (over 100products and services) is certainly in that tradition: 40 percent of thatblockbuster revolved around SAA. (The SystemView announcement is discussedin detail on page 99.)    From its 1987 inception, SAA had the basic framework and the rightrepertoire of services to be a solid architectural platform for developingIBM-centric applications. What got it into trouble was IBM's initialpreoccupation with promoting it as the means of attaining that holy grailof contemporary computing: cross-platform application portability. Giventhat the standard execution environment needed to achieve this portabilityis only now beginning to appear, IBM's preemptive posturing left it withlots of egg on its face. The embarrassing slips in the availability ofOfficeVision Version 2, dubbed the first SAA application, did nothing tobolster SAA's credibility.    Much to its credit, IBM has been successful in pulling SAA out ofthe mire. The aforementioned September 11 extravaganza did a great deal todispel lingering doubts and reassert SAA's strategic significance. Themessage is clear: SAA is here to stay and is set to follow in theillustrious footsteps of SNA and the S/370 Principles of Operation.    The three overriding precepts of the new SAA, which I've taken tocalling SAA Mark II, are client-server, workstation-host cooperativeprocessing; unrestricted transparent access to widely dispersed data; andtotal system management of heterogeneous environments.    This trio is key to realizing the workstation-based integratedLAN/WAN computing model advocated by IBM and others. The entireparadigm--from the design of the iconic user interfaces to the mechanismsthat permit consistent, reversible updates of multiple distributeddatabases--is now synthesized, articulated, and implemented within thecontext of SAA.    The availability of SAA's Common Programming Interface forCommunications (CPI-C) across all six SAA platforms (MVS, VM, OS/400, OS/2,CICS, and IMS) is a big step. At long last, a standard interprogramcommunications service with the same API can be found on multipleplatforms.    In parallel, major strides have been made in harnessing thecapabilities of the pivotal Distributed Relational Database Architecture(DRDA), which has been part of SAA since 1988. DRDA specifies the protocolswith which a single transaction can access or update multiple, distributed,remote databases. It also supplies fail-safe mechanisms to ensure theintegrity of all databases in the event that a transaction needs to berolled back.    With the widespread use of DRDA and its file-oriented counterpart,Distributed Data Management (DDM), it is possible to see a decline in theindiscriminate file transfers routinely performed in IBM environments. Butthe real problem associated with moving data, ignoring the vast amounts ofnetwork and disk capacity consumed, is the loss of data synchronization andsecurity.    DRDA makes it possible to access and update a single copy of any givendatabase in situ, irrespective of location or dispersion. Performance,relative to local access, is the one drawback. The move toward networksbased on high-speed LANs interconnected by bridges and routers and thesteady decline in the cost of high-capacity WAN bandwidth, however, shouldminimize this.    A limited DRDA capability was announced on IBM's DB2 and VM SQL/DSin September 1990, enabling a transaction to freely access multipledatabases but only update one. This September, a similar facility wasoffered for the OS/2 Database Manager. Now an OS/2 user can access orupdate relational databases on MVS, VM, and OS/400 hosts, treating thosedatabases as if they were local. While the exact future of OS/2 is murky,it remains a major platform, and the DRDA facility gives it a compelling,competitive edge.    The Information Warehouse (IW), also announced in September, goeseven further in extending DRDA to non-IBM databases. Platform-independentdatabase manipulation is obviously of strategic interest to the largenumber of IBM customers who are locked into IBM long-term but starting to experiment with distributed databases available onUnix open systems. IW, at least in theory, permits all such databases to betransparently integrated.    IW narrows the gap between SAA and Network Application Support(NAS) from Digital Equipment Corp. (Maynard, Mass.). A few years ago, NASand SAA, despite their obvious parallels, could not be accurately compared.SAA was restricted to IBM platforms and appeared to be veryapplication-centric, while NAS was network-centric and geared tointegrating applications and data resident on diverse platforms on a DECserver.    With IW and its various interoperability ''viaducts'' (IBM lingofor gateways) to Unix/AIX systems, SAA is slowly but surely attempting tobecome more oriented toward open systems. There have been many hints fromIBM over the past couple of years that it intends to draw SAA and AIX evencloser together, cross-pollinating the two technologies. The inclusion ofthe Open System Foundations's Unix-based Distributed Computing Environment(DCE) within SAA is evidence of this move. It hasn't happened yet, but itcan't be too far away. The result would be SAA Mark III--an ''open'' SAAthat could stretch across SAA and Unix platforms.    IW also furnishes more evidence of SAA's newfound respectability.The hype that has accompanied earlier SAA adjuncts has been conspicuouslyabsent. This is a far cry from the IBM once determined to gain a clearmarket lead, the one that charged ahead with the aggressive promotion ofSAA concepts and products with scant attention to maturity oravailability.    In each case, this shoot-from-the-hip approach did more damage thangood. At least with IW it appears that the lessons learned so far are beingput into practice.    All in all, SAA has come a long way in its four and a half years.At a comparable age, SNA was just getting around to supporting its firstmultihost networks. That was 13 years ago.    Instead of writing off SAA, we'd be better off taking a closerlook--and the September 11 announcements are a good place to start. Andsince I was responsible for dismissing SAA as the Hubble Telescope of thecomputer industry, it's only appropriate that I take the lead in admittingthat where SAA is concerned, IBM has regained its focus.About the Author(s):Anura Guruge is lead consultant for BBN Communications (Cambridge, Mass.),specializing in SNA and SAA. He is the author of several books on SNA andSAA and a frequent contributor to DATA COMMUNICATIONS .Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.START YOUR ENGINES FOR IMPROVED SNA PERFORMANCEBy:Joe Mohen, Contributing EditorIn the racing pits of Indianapolis, a crew can change four tires, pump 40gallons of fuel, and add an aerodynamic spoiler in nine seconds flat. Eachcrew prides itself on the tricks it develops to squeeze the most work intothe least time. There's even a contest among pit crews, separate from thecar races, to determine who's fastest.    Networking professionals are no different: They, too, devoteendless hours to shaving a second here or there off procedures like filetransfers. There aren't any formal competitions, but maybe there should be:One of the most frequently traveled pathways, the SNA micro-to-mainframe link, continues to be dogged by sluggish performance.Off-the-shelf products can help turbocharge throughput, but the lessonwe've learned here at Team Mohen is that there's no link that wouldn'tbenefit from some fine-tuning.    Five years ago, most of us were happy just to be able to downloadhost files to our PCs, regardless of how long it took. Today it's adifferent story. It's not uncommon for companies to quit using first-generation micro-to-mainframe products because of their poor file transferrates. In one extreme case, a large U.S. bank went back to mailing floppydisks because it took such a ridiculously long time to downloadspreadsheets via modem.    Another company, a large proxy house, had a production applicationthat required it to download an entire DB2 database, several gigabyteslong, to a file server every night. The only problem was that each''nightly'' download took 27 hours! Obviously, that kind of rate isunacceptable.    The file transfer products in use at that time achieved throughputsof only around 8 kbit/s. That's excruciatingly slow, considering thatthetoken ring adapter cards in the user's 3174 communications controllerswere running at 4 Mbit/s. Put another way, an average file transfer ran at1/500th of the network data rate.A TUNE-UP GOES A LONG WAY    This user realized dramatic improvements in throughput by followinga few simple steps. The first thing was to correct the things that wereradically wrong with the environment:Not using LU 6.2 for SNA batch transmissions. The protocol used by 3270terminals, Logical Unit Type 2 (LU 2), is the worst possible choice forfile transfer. LU 2 limits message size--and thus the amount of informationit can transfer at a time--to one screen (usually 1,920 bytes). Sendinglarger records means sending multiple messages. Worse, LU 2 requires thereceiving PC to acknowledge each message by emulating an ENTER keystrokeeach time a screen is sent. Moreover, 3270 terminals cannot receive certainbinary strings, which means additional superfluous information has to besent to achieve data transparency. All in all, LU 2 imposes far too muchoverhead for file transfers.    Switching to the LU 6.2 protocol allowed messages of up to 32kbytes to be sent without restriction. This alone quadrupled thethroughput.Not using large token ring frame sizes. On this user's local token rings,it took almost as much time to send a small message as it did a large one.That's because the user had set a 265-byte maximum on each message, or''frame'' as it's called at the data link level. We increased the framesize to 1,929 bytes, and here the payoff was really impressive: Typically,throughputs showed fourfold or fivefold increases. Over the wide area, theimprovement is more modest (usually it's in the 15 percent range), but it'san improvement all the same. (Newer token ring boards now have enoughmemory to support frames as large as 4 kbytes.)Not using a fast processor. The speed of the local computer can be a majorfactor in determining micro-to-mainframe throughput. If you want fasttransmissions, don't even think of using an 8088 or 80286.Not using segmenting. Unlike the OSI model, which guarantees transparencyby isolating each of the seven layers from one another, IBM's SNA mixescontrol information from three high-level layers into a single messagecalled a Request Unit (RU). In the vast world of IBM connectivity, the sizeof the RU is the single most important parameter when it comes tofine-tuning a link.    As a rule, it pays to make the RU larger than the frame size. Thisforces the RU messages to be broken into multiple frames in a processcalled ''segmenting'' that boosts throughput. For this user--and, in fact, for every other installation I've seen--segmenting produced a50 percent boost in throughput on a LAN link and a 15 percent improvementacross an SDLC connection. Segmenting remains one of the best-kept secretsof link tuning.    When we were finished at this site, we got the user's transmissiontime down from 27 hours to less than one hour. Effective throughput wasapproximately 360 kbit/s--and that was without segmenting. When we employedsegmenting, throughput rose above the 500-kbit/s mark. Themicro-to-mainframe speeds that you're getting today are probably less thana quarter of that.    That's not to say there isn't any room left for improvement. Sincethen, we've boosted throughput on 4-Mbit/s token ring LANs to more than 1Mbit/s by using the very fast 3174-11 controller. This device is threetimes faster than its predecessor, the 3174-011.    Some of the things that seemingly would speed throughput canactually slow it down. A good example is adaptive data compression. Whenused with a slow processor, adaptive compression algorithms consume so manyprocessing cycles that throughput can actually decline, even though there'sless data to send. This problem isn't limited to low-end 8088 and 80286machines; I've also found it to be true of certain minis, such as IBM'sSystem 36 and DEC's MicroVAX.    I'm not suggesting by any meansthat compression should always beturned off. But it does play an important role in throughput, and networkmanagers should check to see how it affects throughput before they set itand forget it.DO TRY THIS AT HOME    Before fine-tuning your own token ring environment, first try todetermine what your optimum throughput can be. Right now, I believe theoptimum throughput using 3174 4-Mbit/s Token Ring Interface Controller isabout 1 Mbit/s, as described earlier. For a 3745 4-Mbit/s controller, theupper limit is faster than 1 Mbit/s. In either event, you'll probably needLU 6.2 to achieve these numbers.    So should you run out and buy a 3745 to replace your 3174? Notnecessarily. The 3172 token ring interface is faster than either. And sincethe 3172 can handle OSI and TCP as well as SNA, there's no longer a goodreason to buy those older alternatives. The embarrassing thing about the3172 is that it's basically a $35,000 PS/2. McData Corp. (Broomfield,Colo.) offers a strong alternative to the 3172 with prices in the low 20s.    In the not-too-distant future, I believe throughput will approachwire speeds. An IBM lab already has achieved rates of better than 3.8Mbit/s on a 4-Mbit/s token ring using Network Services/2. And within fiveyears, we're likely to see wire speeds on 16-Mbit/s token ring LANs. Untilwe see that checkered flag, though, there's still plenty of fine-tuning to be done.About the Author(s):Joe Mohen is vice president of Proginet (Uniondale, N.Y.), a consultancythat specializes in SNA/OSI integration. His MCI Mail address is 290-9811.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.SURVEY METHODOLOGYThe DATA COMM User Survey on SNMP multivendor network management systemscomprised a two-page questionnaire and incentive mailed to a random sampleof 2,500 subscribers on July 8, 1991. Results are based on 175 validresponses. The questionnaire listed 25 products from 24 vendors, with spaceleft for write-in mentions.    Users were asked to rank their SNMP systems in order of importancein their networks, number 1 being most important. Only products that wereranked first or second in importance by more than 15 respondents wereincluded in the final tabulations. The ''Other'' category compriseswrite-in candidates only; it does not include systems that drew fewer than15 responses as the first or second most important products. Users thenwere asked to rate their two most important SNMP systems in 14 technologycategories and in five service categories. The following scale was used: 5= Excellent; 4 = Very Good; 3 = Good; 2 = Fair; and 1 = Poor. Users alsowere asked to select a ratio that best described how they valued technologyversus service. They also were asked to describe the size of theirnetworks, the way they were using SNMP systems to manage network devices,and the importance they would place on SNMP in managing their networks.    Mean scores were calculated for each question by multiplying thefrequency of each rating by its value and dividing the result by the totalnumber of questions in either the technology or service categories. Themean scores in both categories were then weighted according to the meanpercentage of importance given by the respondents--70 percent fortechnology, and 30 percent for service. Winners in each category werechosen after the weighted scores in both categories were averaged.    Twenty products did not garner enough responses to be included inthe final tabulations. These were: the ACS 4800 from Advanced ComputerCommunications (Santa Barbara, Calif.); the NetCentral Station from CiscoSystems Inc. (Menlo Park, Calif.); the ExpressView system from DavidSystems Inc. (Sunnyvale, Calif.); the Eye*Node from Digital Analysis Corp.(Reston, Va.); the DECmcc Management Station for Ultrix from DigitalEquipment Corp. (Maynard, Mass.); the MONET system, formerly the HLS 9100,from Hughes LAN Systems (Mountain View, Calif.); the Lance NetworkManagement System now offered by Micro Technology Inc.'s Lexcel subsidiary(Fullerton, Calif.); the NCRNet Manager, provided on a request basis byAT&T (New York) and formerly sold by NCR Corp. (Dayton, Ohio); theDualManager from Netlabs Inc. (Los Angeles); the Series 5000 from NetworkEquipment Technologies Inc. (NET, Redwood City, Calif.); the OverViewsystem from Proteon Inc. (Westborough, Mass.); the LANcentral Express fromRacal-InterLan (now Racal-Datacom Inc., Sunrise, Fla.); the MultiMan systemfrom RAD Network Devices Inc. (RND, Huntington Beach, Calif.); the 5025Network Management Center from Retix (Santa Monica, Calif.); the LattisNetNetwork Management System from SynOptics Communications Inc. (Santa Clara,Calif.); the TIME/LAN 100 Element Management System from Timeplex Inc.(Woodcliff Lake, N.J.); the NetDirector from Ungermann-Bass Inc. (SantaClara, Calif.); the WANmanager from Vitalink Communications Corp. (Fremont,Calif.); the Wellfleet SNMP-NMS from Wellfleet Communications Inc.(Bedford, Mass.); and the Management Station from The Wollongong Group Inc.(Palo Alto, Calif.).Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.THE BENEFITS--AND DRAWBACKS--OF GROWING YOUR OWNSince SNMP's introduction in 1988, information about the protocol has beenreadily available to Internet users, and the source code has been offeredfrom vendors such as Performance Systems International Inc. (PSI, Reston,Va.). Armed with this code, users can design and build their own SNMPmanagement systems--and according to the DATA COMM User Survey, that'sexactly what some respondents have done. Since most commercial SNMP systemsare just barely out of the gate, homegrown systems have been an attractivealternative in these early days of SNMP.    ''We just didn't find exactly what we wanted in commercial systemswhen we looked at them last year,'' says Ron M. Hoffmann, assistant networkmanager at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Cambridge, Mass.).Hoffmann says his group found products that looked like they'd perform wellin smaller networks, but not in a setup the size of MIT's. That networkcomprises more than 4,000 Ethernet nodes attached to a fiber distributeddata interface (FDDI) backbone and segmented by Cisco routers.    The MIT group used software from NYSERNet Inc. (Syracuse, N.Y.) toconstruct Unix-based SNMP tools that perform a number of functions, amongthem turning specific nodes on and off and gathering information fromrouters and repeaters in the network.    The difficulty of constructing an SNMP management system fromscratch may be one reason why the customized systems didn't fare as well inthe overall ratings as the commercial systems did. In ease ofcustomization, however, the Other group ranked fourth with a score of 3.30,after Hewlett-Packard, DEC, and Novell, and before Sun Microsystems Inc.and Cabletron Systems Inc. The obvious conclusion: If you develop your ownsoftware, it's easier to modify it.--M.J.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.USERS RATE SNMP MULTIVENDOR NETWORK MANAGEMENT SYSTEMSIn a new market, users are stillfiguring out what SNMP managementcan do for themBy:Mary Jander, Data CommunicationsVendors of network management systems may proclaim this the Age of SNMPManagement Over Every Last Device on Earth, but according to the DATA COMMUser Survey of SNMP multivendor management systems, that just isn't thecase--at least not yet.    To be sure, network managers would love to control many differentdevices, from many different vendors, with a single, easy-to-use system. Survey respondents believe simple network managementprotocol systems will bring that dream closer to reality. They're quick toadd, however, that the systems are simply too new and their experience withthem too limited for anyone to declare that SNMP management of multivendornetworks is an essential, or even widely accepted, part of networking.    Many readers are still in the process of evaluating one or moresystems on isolated network segments. Indeed, almost half of the 320readers who responded to the DATA COMM survey haven't even gotten to thetesting stage yet, although most say they plan to use SNMP systems in thefuture.    One reason for users' general lack of experience with SNMP systemsis that these systems are relatively new: Novell Inc.'s LANtern ServicesManager shipped in March 1991; DEC's DECmcc Director SNMP Access Modulebecame available in November 1990; Cabletron Systems Inc.'s RemoteLANview/Windows was first equipped with SNMP management capabilities inJuly 1990, although it debuted in September 1989; HP's Network Node Managershipped in May 1990; and Sun Microsystems Inc.'s SunNet Manager shipped inMarch 1990, making this 21-month-old program the most venerable in thefield.    Even the simple network management protocol itself is fairly new.Devised in 1988 by Internet scientists to manage devices in TCP/IPnetworks, SNMP has not been extended far beyond its original charter.Several Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) groups are working onextensions that will allow SNMP to manage more types of devices, but itwill take time for these improvements to filter down to users.    While many survey respondents had yet to make a final commitment toa single SNMP system, they did seem pleased with the current crop ofproducts. The five systems that made the final tabulation rarely ratedbelow a score of Good, and no system ranked less than Fair in any category.Because the scores were so close, and because many of the systems werestill being evaluated, DATA COMM selected just onewinner--Hewlett-Packard's OpenView Network Node Manager.    HP's product fared well in both technology and service ratings,achieving the highest overall score and the top ranking in the technologycategories. Notably, the Network Node Manager scored solid ratings whereother systems stumbled, particularly in categories such as managementinformation base (MIB) extensibility and utilities, a key area formultivendor network management. HP's product also did well in degree ofautomation, availability and quality of user-defined reporting facilities,emergency support, and application development and systems integrationservices.    Digital Equipment Corp.'s DECmcc Director SNMP Access Modulegarnered the second-highest overall score. It had the top ratings in theservice categories, leading all other vendors in documentation, maintenanceand repair, and training.    DEC's solid service record was unusual: The other systems includedin the ratings did better in technology than in service. Scores werehighest in the technology categories of ease of use, ease of installation,and overall system performance (see Table 1).TIES THAT BIND    Despite the newness of the systems, the survey did reveal someclear patterns among users of SNMP systems:Many users acquired their systems mainly because they already had equipmentfrom the system vendor--Cabletron hubs, for instance, or Novell LANs--even though all the systems surveyed are billed as multivendor managers.Most were looking at other products too, and many were investigating thepossibilities of altering or customizing their existing systems with thehelp of vendors or consultants.Users haven't yet harnessed the full power of their management systems.Many survey respondents said they rely on their systems only to reporttrouble, even though the systems also perform trend analysis and activemonitoring. When the network is running smoothly, many respondents simplyignore their SNMP systems. Part of the blame for users' lack of awarenessrests with the vendors, which according to users could do a better job ofbringing them up to speed on their technology.Workstations and PCs are by far the most common type of device managed,according to nearly four-fifths of survey respondents (see Table 2). Thesecond most widely managed class of devices is LAN servers, by 59.22percent of users.Besides the users who were still testing their systems, many said they areundecided or ambivalent about keeping their SNMP management systemspermanently.SNMP is gaining the most ground in small networks and in portions of largerones. Users are trying out SNMP systems in departments or selected LANsegments before adopting them throughout their enterprises.    Fully 68 percent of users surveyed said they were using SNMPsystems to manage less than 10 sites. Another 9.7 percent are using SNMP tomanage from 11 to 20 sites, and only 8 percent are using SNMP to managemore than 21 sites. The mean of all responses was just 10.1 sites.    The number of devices managed at these sites is also small. Nearlyhalf of all respondents, 48.6 percent, said they manage less than 50devices with an SNMP system. Less than a quarter of respondents, 22.3percent, manage 50 to 100 devices with an SNMP system; 15.4 percent manage100 to 500 devices, 7.4 percent manage 500 to 1,000 devices, and just 4.0percent said they manage more than 1,000 devices. The mean number ofdevices managed is 185.1.Network management of all types--not just SNMP--accounts for a relativelysmall part of the typical communications budget. Survey respondents saidonly 32.1 percent of their budgets goes toward network management, with 12percent of this devoted to salaries for network management personnel, 11.6percent allocated to the management systems themselves, and 8.5 percentassigned to management services, including outsourcing.THE DAWN OF MULTIVENDOR SUPPORT    Support of multiple vendors' internetworking gear is still arelatively new feature, and one that few survey respondents had explored atany great length.    Until this spring, all of the products listed were capable ofsupporting only basic SNMP alarm information from nonproprietary gear.Although most vendors could and would add support for other vendors' MIBson a custom basis, most systems only understand MIB I, the set of generaldefinitions that describe a device's functions to an SNMP system.    That began changing this year, when vendors started adding MIBcompilers that can accept and manage a range of devices from multiplevendors. SunNet Manager Release 1.1, which shipped in February, includes atranslation utility that allows users to compile other vendors' MIBs,including those that include proprietary extensions. Version 2.0 ofHewlett-Packard's OpenView Network Node Manager, which shipped last spring,adds a MIB compiler to the system's Application Builder software. Thesoftware accepts any MIB and loads it automatically into the HP system'sgraphical user interface.    DEC's DECmcc Director SNMP Access Module currently accepts onlybasic alarm and status information from network devices that support MIB I.DEC says it will offer a MIB compiler with the second release of the SNMPAccess Module, slated to ship by the end of the year. This new release alsowill support MIB II and will come with several proprietary MIBs alreadyincorporated into the system. MIB II supports more types of devices thanMIB I does--most notably T1 transmission devices and a range of LAN mediatypes--and it provides more extensive management control.    Novell's LANtern Services Manager also displays only basic alarminformation from non-Novell devices that support MIB I. The LANternServices Manager is an interface for Novell's LANtern monitoring devicethat oversees one Ethernet segment at a time. The LANtern can send itsinformation to a range of other SNMP-based systems, including theHewlett-Packard and Sun systems. There have been rumors that Novell willsoon offer a MIB compiler for use with the LANtern Services Manager, butNovell won't confirm this.SEND HELP    Users have mixed feelings about how well vendors are helping themmeet specific network management requirements. Most respondents said theyare interested in modifying their SNMP systems to manage more types ofdevices, run on a different platform, or perform capabilities generally notoffered by their SNMP system out of the box. These comments send a clearmessage to vendors: Send more, and better, help.    Hewlett-Packard, DEC, and Novell products received relatively goodmarks for ease of customization, but all vendors' scores dropped fordatabase capabilities, availability and quality of user-defined reportingfacilities, and MIB extensibility and utilities. A notable exception wasHewlett-Packard's score of 3.69 for MIB extensibility and utilities.    In some instances, users said they'd asked for hands-on assistancein modifying their systems--a need that was not always met. ''Cabletroncould give us better service in showing us how to adjust the system,'' saysWilliam Vilwock, computer specialist at the U.S. Bureau of Mines fieldoffice in Spokane, Wash. Vilwock's group is using Cabletron's RemoteLANview/Windows on a 114-node Ethernet that comprises local and remotesites. The group needs to extend the network to incorporate non-CabletronWAN equipment, and Vilwock say it's been slow going.    A user of the Hewlett-Packard OpenView Network Node Manager alsosaid he'd like more support. ''HP hasn't been here in over a year,'' saidthis technician, who requested anonymity and whose group is usingHewlett-Packard's product to monitor a 400-node Ethernet network. ''TheNetwork Node Manager is a reasonably good product that covers the basicsand provides diagnostics. But the graphics aren't that customizable, andwe'd like to add more graphical features.''    In contrast, another user said Hewlett-Packard was extremelyhelpful in showing his organization how to create Unix-based applicationsthat allow the HP OpenView Network Node Manager to respond to networkproblems. ''On a Unix workstation, I can easily program a routine thatactivates a beeping pager if something goes wrong,'' says Randy J. Miller,systems support analyst at Union Carbide Coatings Service Inc.(Indianapolis). Miller describes his installation as ''an HP shop from wayback.''    Another user reported that his vendor, DEC, was taking more timethan he'd like in considering changes that he had requested. Dave Dorosz,systems engineer at Phillips Laboratories (Hanscom Air Force Base, Bedford,Mass.), is using DEC's DECmcc Director SNMP Access Module to manage a labnetwork containing 10 bridged Ethernet segments comprising DEC bridges androuters and computers from several vendors. He said his group is satisfiedwith the system, but would like more capabilities, including an automaticnode discovery tool--software that is capable of locating and graphicallydepicting devices with IP addresses in a network. The group also wants tomonitor network traffic across bridges through the Access Module, insteadof using a separate dedicated DEC LANbridge to collect network trafficstatistics for the DECmcc Director system. The group also would like torunthe DECmcc Director system and its access modules on a Sun workstation.    The Phillips Labs group is evaluating a range of other SNMPsystems, not because DEC hasn't been helpful, but because it's simplytaking too long for DEC to decide about adding these functions to itssystem, Dorosz says.    Users clearly want vendors to help them expand their systems, andmany are ready to go elsewhere if they can't get what they need from onesystem. In fact, most users contacted were evaluating more than one systemor were thinking about doing so. Some users are willing to create their ownsystems to get what they need (see ''The Benefits--and Drawbacks--ofGrowing Your Own'').SERVICE WOES    As noted, the SNMP systems included in the final tabulation scoredworse in service than in technology categories. The lone exception was theDECmcc Director SNMP Access Module, the only product to post higher overallscores for service than for technology. Users' satisfaction with DEC'sservice is reflected in first-place ratings for overall service, training,vendor documentation, and maintenance and repair. One user complimented DECon its commitment to service and commented that ''a DEC representativecamps out in our data center when something goes wrong.''    Hewlett-Packard also did comparatively well in the servicecategories, although its showing was not as strong as in the technologyratings. Hewlett-Packard's OpenView Network Node Manager scored first inthe emergency support category and in application development and systemsintegration, and it placed second to DEC in overall service and inmaintenance and repair.    In follow-up interviews, users' service complaints included gripesthat vendors had sold them a system and then deserted them, relied too muchon third-party support, or provided introductory training and then failedto deliver adequate help in a pinch.    Emergency support scores were lower than anywhere else in thesurvey ratings, and Novell users were especially vocal. Unlike the otherfour vendors, who rely on telephone service or sales reps to performmaintenance and repairs, Novell relies on third-party consultants, whocharge what they want to for service. Novell maintains a hot-line service,but if users can't get a problem fixed on the hot-line, they must rely on these third-party representatives to get the jobdone. Some users are unhappy with this setup because it puts them at themercy of local services--and the high prices they typically charge.    One LAN administrator complained that even if she calls the Novellrepresentative in her area and talks for only 10 minutes, she still mustpay a $75 hourly fee. When trouble hit, it was expensive. ''Novell is greaton training and provides hot-line service for their products, but when ourNovell system needed work, we had to hire the $75-an-hour consultant Novellassigned to us,'' this user says. The consultant's bill, added to the costof network downtime, made this particular repair job an unpleasantexperience.    Vendor documentation was another weak spot. H.L. Wilson,information systems manager at the U.S. Naval Air Station (Pensacola, Fla.)and a user of Novell's LANtern Services Manager, says that documentationfrom Novell and other vendors is better than it used to be but not as goodas it should be. ''Sometimes I get instructions that don't match theversion of software I'm using, but seem to have been written before it wasenhanced,'' Wilson says.FIRST AND LAST    The highest score in the survey went to Hewlett-Packard: 3.89 forease of use. The lowest score in the survey was Cabletron's 2.69 rating forthe service category of application development and systems integration.    The Cabletron ratings were the most uneven in the survey. Theyranged from a first-place score of 3.83 for ease of installation and asecond-place score of 3.83 for ease of use--two of the highest scores inthe findings--to last-place ratings for ease of customization, degree ofautomation, security, and application development.    Cabletron's latest SNMP system, Spectrum, wasn't listed in the DATACOMM survey form because it just began shipping when the survey wasconducted and consequently hadn't had time to build up a substantialinstalled base (see ''Survey Methodology''). Cabletron says Spectrum doesaddress the very areas where users felt Remote LANview/Windows is weak.Application development and systems integration are key functions ofSpectrum, and the vendor already has ported the system to a range of Unixplatforms.    In fairness, the ease-of-use rating turned out to be uniformly highfor all of the vendors, and the category for application development andsystems integration was similarly low for all.Best OverallHP OpenViewNetwork Node ManagerTop scores in far more categories than any other product gaveHewlett-Packard the top honors in this DATA COMM User Survey. Introduced inMay 1990, HP's network manager is among the oldest products surveyed andnow is in its second release. It runs on HP workstations under HP/UX and onSun Sparcstations under SunOS. HP's software finished first in nine out of14 technology categories and shared first place with Sun's SunNet Managerfor best graphical user interface. Users particularly liked the product'sMIB extensibility and utilities, which enable them to manage other vendors'devices.Table 1: SNMP Multivendor Network Management Systems Scorecard (This tableis not available electronically. Please see the November, 1991 issue.)Table 2: What SNMP Is Managing (This table is not availableelectronically. Please see the November, 1991 issue.)About the Author(s):Mary Jander is network management and new products editor for DATACOMMUNICATIONS.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.BILLING FOR LAN INTERNETS:WHO PICKS UP THE TAB?By:Robin Layland, Travelers Insurance Co.Ah, the joys of internetworking: Now that LANs are no longer strictly localaffairs, it's up to the corporate telecom department to decide who footsthe bill for all that connectivity. But when corporate starts askingquestions about utilization, it's funny how every department or workgroupsuddenly seems to be a ''below average'' user. And they want their bills toreflect that.    Strange how the same folks usually seem to be demanding morebandwidth.    Since all the parties on the network agree that someone else isusing the network more than them, a simple approach would be to chargeeveryone the same amount. This one-bill-fits-all tack is a surefire way toget everyone equally upset, but it's not going to accomplish much else.    On SNA installations, bills are tallied using data collected byperformance-monitoring tools such as IBM's NetView Performance Monitor(NPM). When all those below-average users complain about their charges,you show them the hard data on utilization.    But LAN internetworking isn't SNA networking. IBM's NPM doesn'tgather the needed information on network usage, which brings us fullcircle: How are internetworking bills to be generated? How do you provethat some of those below-average users are really above average?    Obviously, what's needed is a billing data collection system forinternets. But don't run out to your internetwork equipment vendor (whetherit specializes in bridges, routers, or analyzers) and expect to find one.Even Nick Lippis doesn't have one.    While it may sound logical for bridge or router vendors to supplythe gear needed to collect billing data, they don't see it that way. Infact, most don't seem to consider billing an important issue.    Some router vendors may try to convince you to use their product'sTCP/IP accounting feature, which keeps track of TCP/IP addresses. That'sfine if everyone is using TCP/IP (they aren't) or if a TCP/IP subnet isdirectly equal to one billing group. In most cases, though, the subnet isshared by many departments, and they don't want to see their billscombined.    You could solve the problem by adapting something on the market(like a LAN analyzer) and writing your own billing application. Of course,you'd probably have to deploy one of these devices on every LAN, which addsup to more work and expense than most corporate telecom departments want toget involved in.    But imagine just for a moment that we've actually convincedinternetworking vendors to solve the billing problem. Before they deliverthe solution, they're going to ask some questions of their own, startingwith: ''What type of billing system do you want?''    A usage-based system sounds like a good answer, but it's not thatsimple.    There are two basic models for usage-based billing in a LAN internet.The first is very similar to the way the local telephone company generallybills its users. There's a set fee that permits an unlimited number oflocal calls and a usage-sensitive (and distance-sensitive) charge forlong-distance calls. On an internet, this approach would translate into anunlimited number of packets within a locally bridged building or campusand a per- packet charge when communications lines are involved (longdistance).    With this scheme, a person sending one message to someone onanother floor in the same building would pay the same set monthly fee assomeone who sends a hundred messages to another floor. When communicationslines are employed, there would be a charge for every message. Much likelong-distance calls, the more you send, the more you pay. This model makessense because the cost of the bridge or router that ties together localsubnets doesn't vary with the amount of traffic flowing across it. Butcommunication costs do increase as the amount of data sent increases.    Thus, a department need only be concerned that its clients andservers are located within the same bridged building or campus, not thatthey are all on the same LAN. Further, users are not restricted as to wherethey can be located, as long as they stay within the same locally bridgedarea.    The second approach to usage-based billing is closer to what thelocal telephone company would like to do. Users are charged for every calloutside of their LAN. The more any group sends, the more it pays.    With this approach, keeping costs down means keeping everyone in adepartment on the LAN. This can lead to some interesting design challenges:Departments with people on more than one floor will want all of them on thesame LAN. And when people move, departments will want to make sure theystay on the same LAN.    Once network managers have sorted out how to implement ausage-based scheme, they still have to decide whether the billing rateswill be based on distance.    A distance-sensitive approach does have some fundamental appeal,and it's certainly familiar. A long-distance call from New York to LosAngeles costs more than one from New York to Boston. The communicationsline from New York to Los Angeles costs more.    A distance-sensitive scheme is more important when every messagethat leaves the LAN is billed for. Users who send a lot of messages betweenfloors won't be happy to learn their bills are the same as those for userswho send messages across the country.    There are drawbacks. It's going to eat up a lot of memory trackingwho sent what to whom. And it's also going to lower performance in packetsper second. Add to this the cost of transmitting all that distance-relateddata to the centralized billing system, and a distance-sensitive approachcould quickly run into money. Yes, it can lead to a ''fairer'' billingsystem, but the question remains what that fairness is worth.    It's also possible to use an external monitor to track all thebilling data. Here again, that monitor is going to need enough horsepowerto deal with distance-related data, which means it's going to be a priceypiece of equipment.    What's best for each corporation is an individual matter. Theproblem is, vendors are not going to develop a different system for everycustomer. They're big fans of the one-size-fits-all school of thinking. Butwhich size is it going to be?    Making billing-data collection an option in routers is the bestanswer. Asking for the distance-sensitive approach is tempting butimpractical. Vendors won't like distance-sensitive billing since it demandsso much storage and affects performance.    If you believe accounting is important, then the most importantthing to do is ask your vendor to provide it. If they don't know you wantit, they're not going to spend much time trying to figure out how toimplement it.    One reason that billing hasn't been a hot button for vendors maysimply be because LAN internetworking is still a fairly new idea. But thatattitude will change as LAN internets grow and management demands moreaccountability.    If we don't start telling vendors what we want, though, it's goingto get even harder justifying all the money that goes to internets andexplaining to all those below-average users why they should be payingaverage rates.About the Author(s):Robin Layland is an engineering consultant in charge of networkarchitecture at Travelers Insurance Co. (Hartford, Conn.).Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.A COMPLETE INTERNETIN A SINGLE BOXODS's server module puts all networking devicesunder one coverBy:Mary JanderMention ''LAN server'' to most network managers and they'll conjure animage of an oversized PC, probably in a tower case with 18 drive bays.Mention ''internetworking'' and they'll think of more boxes--bridges,gateways, routers--not to mention the network management system and snarlof cables needed to connect them all.    Optical Data Systems Inc. (ODS) has a better idea: Its ODSConnection Server modules put multiple 80386-based LAN servers inside thesame box as a hub or token ring multiple access unit (MAU), so all theequipment needed for local networking resides in a single device no largerthan a desktop PC.    Up to six server modules can reside in one ODS 295 or 296 ModularSystem hub chassis, with up to 350 Mbytes of hard disk storage in eachmodule. Up to 1.2 Gbytes of disk storage can be added with extra cards.    The combination of servers, interface cards, and other connectivitygear in a single box gives network managers another importantbenefit--fewer devices to be managed. A optional card furnishes a simplenetwork management protocol (SNMP) agent that allows all the gear in a hubto be managed by ODS's LanVision and by third-party SNMP managers. Thecard also contains an agent for management by IBM's NetView, but only whenusing ODS's token ring network interface cards (NICs). When used in ODS's841 and 861 MAUs, the Connection Server consolidates all devices neededfor 4- and 16-Mbit/s token ring LANs. Both MAUs can handle fiber optic aswell as copper wiring, and both run under IBM's OS/2-based LAN Manager 2.0and Token-Ring Bridge Program 2.2.    Both the hub and the MAU versions of the ODS Connection Server rununder Novell Inc.'s NetWare 3.11, Banyan Systems Inc.'s Vines, IBM's LANServer, Microsoft Corp.'s LAN Manager, and 3Com Corp.'s 3+Open and 3+Sharenetwork operating systems (NOSs).    Putting the server inside the hub or MAU lets users take advantageof a wider range of Novell's networking and net management products. Forexample, users can plug Novell's Link/T1 and Link/64 WAN cards into thehub, and at the same time use Novell's SNA gateway and server managementfeatures.    And by supporting several NOSs, the Connection Server allowsthird-party NICs to be added quickly to its hubs. All that's required isfor the cards be compatible with the hubs' PC/AT-based buses.    Before, the vendor supplied preconfigured, third-party cards forT1, X.25, SNA, and 56-kbit/s WAN connections. Without ODS's assistance,users would have to write their own NOS drivers.    As with the expanded Novell options, the Connection Server cutsdown on card costs by handling any cards for operating systems compatiblewith its AT bus. Users can save processing power by putting only theruntime version of a NOS in the server.    ODS's all-in-one approach is a novel one. Other hub vendors,including Cabletron Systems Inc. (Rochester, N.H.), SynOpticsCommunications Inc. (Mountain View, Calif.), and Ungermann-Bass Inc. (SantaClara, Calif.), provide NICs and other add-in modules only frommanufacturers that have alliances with them.    In a twist on the ODS concept, Novell (Provo, Utah) plans to announcean architecture in which a hub card runs inside a NetWare server. Whilethis is the exact opposite of the ODS design, Novell's architecture willachieve the same ends--consolidation of networking devices andimprovements in net management.   Novell apparently plans to help vendors such as Cabletron create hubcards that can run on a PC/AT bus, thus tapping the PC's power supply, diskspace, and operating system. Novell will show vendors how to write NetWareLoadable Module (NLM) agents for SNMP management systems and for NetWarethat will let their hubs be managed byNetWare or SNMP. At press time,Novell said it had already enlisted the support of 19 hub vendors,including Cabletron and SynOptics, that would build hub cards using theNovell specs.    The ODS Connection Server won't meet the needs of every customer.Since the only generally available processor is a single Intel 20-MHz 80386to 33-MHz 80386 and maximum disk storage is 1.2 Gbytes, users withprocessor-intensive database requirements or applications with large files,such as CAD/CAM, had best stick with their current servers. ODS says itwill supply 80286 and 80486 processors on special request.    Joe Head, ODS senior vice president and cofounder, says he hopesusers will adopt a ''Chinese menu'' approach to the ODS Connection Server.''We want users to just tell us what they need, and we'll put it into thebox,'' Head says.    Early users of the ODS Connection Server are attracted by its spacesavings and, because it consolidates network devices, its ability to makeLANs more manageable.    At the University of California at Los Angeles Medical School(Westwood), LAN manager Bill Rollins tested the ODS Connection Server as apossible means of reducing the number of dedicated servers in the campusnetwork. The UCLA Medical School network is based in part on a 16-Mbit/sfiber optic token ring backbone linked by ODS 841 MAUs. Rollins consideredputting the ODS Connection Server into these MAUs, thereby saving users insmaller departments the cost of purchasing a server.    Rollins says the option performed well in tests. He says the serveroption is particularly good for users who don't know much aboutnetworking--since everything is included in one hub unit, there isn't muchto set up or fuss with.    Users can manage their ODS hubs and MAUs in several ways. Anoptional management agent card contains SNMP agent software for the ODS295/296 hubs or 841/861 MAUs and NetView agents for the token ringconnections. This card doesn't take up space that could otherwise bedevoted to network interface cards; rather, it fits into a special,separate slot in the hub or MAU. The card costs about $3,200 for eithertype of system. ODS token ring NICs also can send alerts to IBM'sLAN Manager 2.0 program. When IBM ships its LAN Network Manager replacementfor LAN Manager 2.0 next year, alerts from ODS token ring NICs will be sentto that system, where they can be filtered and consolidated before beingtransmitted to NetView.    ODS also is working on a NetView/PC proxy agent that will run onthe Connection Server and allow ODS hubs to take advantage of NetView/PCapplications from IBM and third parties in the future. ODS's token ringNICs and bridges can be controlled by the IBM Token-Ring Bridge Program,just like IBM's own products.    Each ODS 295/296 hub and 841/861 MAU also has a dedicated slot for acard with an EIA-232 connection for out-of-band network management anddiagnostics. Out-of-band testing lets users perform troubleshooting evenif a network crashes. Users also can dedicate one of the LAN segments inthe ODS 295 or 296 chassis to handling management information via an ODSnetwork management card, thus isolating management from any user's datastream--an attractive option where security is a concern.    The ODS Connection Server module comes in different versions forthe hub and MAU. The hub version takes up two card slots in an ODS 295 or296 chassis. Its components are an Intel 80386 processor; 16 Mbytes of RAM;an Interactive Data Entry (IDE) hard disk controller; a 3.5-inch hard diskwith a capacity of up to 350 Mbytes right on the card; a floppy diskcontroller; and controllers and interfaces for a keyboard and VGA monitor.    The module fits into the 295 or 296 chassis without switching orrewiring, ODS says. The vendor cautions, however, that users planning toperform their own upgrades should know how to configure the drivers thataddress the various devices in the hub.    The total number of ports supported depends on how many NICs residein thehub chassis along with the Connection Server. If ODS's own NICs areused exclusively, a 295 or 296 chassis with the Connection Server can houseup to 120 10Base-T ports; up to 80 thin Ethernet ports; up to 60 attachmentunit interface (AUI) ports; or up to 140 fiber optic interrepeater link(FOIRL) ports. The hubs also can house up to 160 ports on 4- or 16-Mbit/stoken rings using fiber optic or shielded or unshielded twisted-pair copperwiring. The number of ports available from third-party NICs depends on theconfigurations of those cards.    Server modules for ODS's 841 and 861 occupy three of the fiveslots. One card holds the 80386 CPU and 16 Mbytes of RAM; one contains thekeyboard and VGA interface and floppy disk controller; the third houses thehard disk controller.    Unlike the ODS hubs, the 841 and 861 MAUs support IBM's Micro Channelas well as its PC/AT-bus architecture, and ODS offers 4- and 16-Mbit/stoken ring cards for both kinds of buses. However, it's not as easy toinstall NICs in the MAUs as it is in the hubs. A screwdriver and someknow-how with DIP switches may be required.Product SummaryProduct Name: ODS Connection Server module.Description: A full-fledged LAN server for ODS 295 and 296 hubs and ODS 841and 861 multiple access units (MAUs).Vendor: Optical Data Systems Inc., 11-1 E. Arapaho Rd., Richardson, Texas75081.Pricing: Depending on hub and options chosen, about $5,000 to $15,000 perhub or MAU. A hub with Connection Server module and LAN/WAN connectionscosts an average of $13,000. A similarly configured MAU costs an average of$9,000 to $10,000.Availability: November 1991.Advantages: Up to six servers can be placed inside an ODS 295/296 hub,putting server, hub, and LAN ports in one device and simplifying networkmanagement.Disadvantages: Server modules use a single processor. Also, as optionsmount, so does the cost of the hub or MAU.About the Author(s):Mary Jander is network management and new products editor for DATACOMMUNICATIONS.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.HUBS WITH A FUTUREBy:Mary JanderADC/Fibermux Corp. has added features to its Crossbow line of intelligentnetworking hubs that it says will help organizations planning to migrate toFDDI or simply needing to extend their LANs.    The new Crossbow Plus hub includes four more I/O slots, morepowerful I/O modules, and higher-capacity power supplies for support offiber distributed data interface (FDDI) cards. Crossbow Plus accommodatesup to 14 Fibermux cards, compared to two, four, or 10 cards for olderCrossbow chassis. The vendor says it will use all existing Crossbow cards,including those supporting Ethernet, token ring, and AppleTalk LANs, aswell as cards supporting Ethernet-to-Ethernet bridging and management viaFibermux's own LightWatch simple network management protocol (SNMP)system.    Crossbow Plus handles up to 210 Ethernet workstations usingFibermux's new high-density Ethernet I/O modules, which also run in theolder Crossbow hubs. The new hubs come with up to four 25-amp powersupplies, compared with two available for previous models. Along with fivecooling fans, the power supplies will allow the hub to support FDDI in thefuture. Crossbow Plus is rack-mountable and measures 17.5 inches high by 15inches deep. It is scheduled to ship this month for $1,550. Each powersupply module costs $950.    ADC/Fibermux also announced the CC6613Z/16, a more powerfulEthernet I/O module for Crossbow hubs that features 16 ports for 10Base-Tconnections. The new module fits in all Crossbow hubs, including oldermodels as well as the Crossbow Plus. Previous Crossbow 10Base-T modulesonly handled up to 10 ports. The CC6613Z/16 also is slated to ship thismonth for $2,100.    Finally, ADC/Fibermux announced a mini-hub called the CrossbowExtend24 that supports workstations in Ethernet star topologies locatedmore than 330 feet from the main 10Base-T hub. The Extend24 takes the placeof 24 unshielded twisted-pair cables running from the main hub,ADC/Fibermux says. The unit measures 1.75 by 11.5 inches, and can berack-mounted. Two models are available: The first offers a 50-pin telcoconnector supporting 24 10Base-T ports, plus attachment unit interface(AUI) ports for thick and thin Ethernet connections, for $3,200. The secondmodel furnishes two fiber optic interrepeater link (FOIRL) ports and an AUIthick Ethernet connector. It costs $3,325. Optional nonvolatile RAM thatstores network configurations and addressing information for eitherExtend24 model costs $100. Like the other products, the Extend24 unit isslated to ship this month.ADC/Fibermux Corp., 9310 Topanga Canyon Blvd., Chatsworth, Calif. 91311Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.FIBER AND 10BASE-T HUBS BOWBy:Mary JanderNetwork Resources Corp. (NRC) has added fiber optic and 10Base-T productsto its MultiGate line of intelligent hubs for Ethernet LANs. The fiber hubconforms to the fiber optic interrepeater link (FOIRL) standard beingdeveloped for IEEE 802.3 Ethernets. The second is a 12-port version ofNRC's existing 10Base-T Ethernet hub with an integral learning/filteringbridge.    Both hubs come with the vendor's MultiGate Manager system. NRC saysboth support open systems connections, in that both can be managed by arange of other vendors' systems and both feature backplanes and mediaconnections that comply with industry standards.    The MultiGate Intelligent Fiber Optic Hub allows users to connectother hubs and devices with FOIRL support in a star topology. The hub canbe configured with four, eight, or 12 fiber optic ports. Backbone portssupport thick and thin Ethernet or thin Ethernet and FOIRL.    The 10-pound hub, which measures 1.75 by 17 by 13.5 inches,supports 50-, 62.5-, and 100-micron fiber optic cabling at distances of upto 1.2 miles. It has 32 LED indicators and can be monitored by a dumbterminal or NRC's MultiGate Manager, which offers alarms, graphics, andmultiwindow monitoring. The hub provides port-by-port event summaries andhistorical and real-time reports. The 12-port version of theIntelligentFiber Optic Hub costs $6,595. An eight-port version costs$4,995, and a four-port version costs $3,395.    NRC's 10Base-T hub connects computers over unshielded twisted-pairwiring in a star topology, and it supports up to 12 Ethernet ports. Abridge filters traffic between the hub and backbone networks by protocoland address. The approximate filtering rate for this bridge is 10,000packets per second, the fowarding rate is 5,000 packets per second. Allaspects of the hub, which is the same size as the FOIRL version, can beremotely configured using the MultiGate Manager or the hub's externalmanagement port. The hub costs $2,495.Network Resources Corp., 736 S. Hillview Dr., Milpitas, Calif. 95035Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.TOKEN RING LINKS FOR DEC ULTRIXBy:Mary JanderThe ACP 3300 host adapter from ACC Systems connects Digital Equipment Corp.workstations running under Ultrix directly to a token ring network withoutthe need for an intermediate server, according to the vendor. The adaptercomplies with the IEEE 802.2 and 802.5 standards and works with both 4- and16-Mbit/s token rings. The ACP 3300 also uses the routing capabilitiesbuilt into the Ultrix kernel, enabling a DEC workstation to act as anEthernet LAN gateway to the token ring for other computers on theworkstation's native LAN.    The standalone box comes with a Motorola 68000 processor and 512kbytes of RAM. Software included with the adapter performs power-updiagnostics and installation verification. A driver for VAX VMS systemsalso is available. The ACP 3300 costs $5,250.ACC Systems, Rivers Center, 8320 Guilford Rd., Suite G, Columbia, Md.21046Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.MERGE AHEAD: ROUTER PLUSSMART HUBBy:Mary JanderCisco Systems Inc. has released the Cisco Router Module (CRM), a singleboard that performs internetwork routing, bridging, and gateway functionsfor Cabletron Systems Inc.'s intelligent Multi-Media Access Center hubs.    The module is available in local and remote versions. The localversion ($5,495) has two Ethernet ports, and can link two adjacent EthernetLANs or divide an Ethernet backbone into segments. The remote version($5,995) includes one Ethernet port and one high-speed serial port forlinking remote offices to headquarters or for linking multiple LANs.Optional software costs $1,350.Cisco Systems Inc., 1525 O'Brien Dr., Menlo Park, Calif. 94025Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.FDDI SPEEDSON UTPBy:Mary JanderThe T100A network adapter from PC Office Inc. matches the performance offiber distributed data interface (FDDI) networks by providing data rates ofup to 100 Mbit/s over unshielded twisted-pair (UTP) wiring, according tothe vendor. The adapter is a 16-bit PC card that fits into a half slot onIBM PCs and compatibles. It is based on the vendor's 6100 LAN chip, whichuses a proprietary technique called Differential Code Modulation to senddata at 100 Mbit/s over distances of up to about 330 feet and at 50 Mbit/snearly 650 feet using UTP. The 6100 LAN chip uses FDDI's standard framingformat, the vendor says.    The T100A comes with two cable connectors, which means the adapterscan be set up in either star or bus configurations. According to PC Office,the use of shielded twisted-pair wiring can effectively double connectiondistances. With signal repeaters, distances over UTP can reach 2,500 feet,the vendor claims. The adapter costs $595.PC Office Inc., 4901 Morena Blvd., Suite 805, San Diego, Calif. 92117Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.STARTER HUB CONNECTS 10BASE-T NETWORKSBy:Mary Jander3Com Corp.'s MultiConnect TP Starter Kit, a 10Base-T modular hub, comprisesthe vendor's MultiConnect repeater and four 10Base-T modules. The StarterKit accommodates up to 15 modules, each of which holds three ports,allowing users to expand their systems up to 45 ports in one repeater.    The repeater modules provide network maintenance and control bypermitting the network to be reconfigured or expanded without disruptingoperations. LEDs monitor segments and identify faults. Used with 3Comadapters, the modules support media segment lengths of up to 490 feet. TheStarter Kit costs $1,650; additional modules cost $395.3Com Corp., 5400 Bayfront Plaza, P.O. Box 58145, Santa Clara, Calif.95052-8145Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.SNA, DEC, AND LAN TRAFFIC ON ONE BACKBONENetlink also plans to OEM its software to router vendorsBy:Eric M. HindinGood news for the guardians of billions of dollars' worth of IBM and DECgear: Netlink Inc. has announced three products that let traffic from SNAand DEC devices share a backbone with PC LANs and Unix workstations usingIPX/SPX, TCP/IP, and AppleTalk protocols.    Netlink's SDLC Link Server connects IBM gear such as the 3174 and3274 communications controllers with 3745 front-end processors (FEPs)across bridged LAN internetworks rather than leased telephone lines. TheLink Server not only simplifies network design but also costs less topurchase and operate than comparable offerings from IBM.    Another Netlink product, the Internetwork SNA Gateway, lets DigitalEquipment Corp. VT terminals emulate IBM 3270 terminals and links the VTterminals to IBM hosts across the same backbone that carries SNA and LANtraffic.    Netlink also plans to resell its SNA software, which is based oncode used by Netlink products since 1988, to third-party vendors--most likely router makers, which in turn will be able tomarket routers that support SNA equipment. Sale of the software hasfar-reaching potential, since it gives internetworking vendors lacking SNAexpertise a chance to purchase that expertise outright. If enough vendorsbuy Netlink's software, the internetworking market could move away from itscurrent state of confusion toward greater interoperability and even a defacto standard.    The SDLC Link Server connects 3X74 controllers to 3745 FEPs byconverting the synchronous data link control (SDLC) data stream generatedby the controllers to the Logical Link Control 2 (LLC2) protocol sanctionedby the IEEE for token ring LANs (see figure). The IBM method of linking3174 controllers to remote FEPs across a LAN internetwork calls for usersto install a 3174 Token-Ring Interface Coupler (TIC) in the controller. TheTIC lets the controller communicate over a token ring LAN using LLC2. OtherIBM communications gear, such as bridges and gateways, also use LLC2. Butthere's one big drawback: LLC2 is not a routable protocol, so routers usedin LANs cannot direct LLC2 traffic. Routers equipped with Netlink's SNAsoftware, however, will be able to direct traffic from SDLC Link Server.    As noted, the IBM approach also costs more. A single 3174 TIC costs$3,745, while an SDLC Link Server supporting two 3174s costs $6,490. Thesavings grow as SDLC Link Servers are used to connect more 3174s. A 16-portSDLC Link Server costs $23,000, while 16 IBM 3174 TICs would run $59,920.Thus, the savings are greatest for sites with numerous 3174s. Moreover, aconnection to older 3274s or other IBM SDLC equipment, such as its bankingsystems, isn't available from IBM--it doesn't make a TIC for them.    As part of the conversion process, the SDLC Link Server addsmodified addresses and other information needed to make the data look to ahost as if it were coming from a 3174 equipped with a TIC.    The SDLC Link Server's approach is very similar to that used in theSNACS product line from Sync Research (Tustin, Calif.). Both convert anSDLC data stream and make the third-party controller look like a 3174equipped with a TIC. Another entrant in the SNA connectivity field, CiscoSystems Inc. (Menlo Park, Calif.), takes a different tack with its SNArouting capability. Cisco allows SDLC to communicate over a LANinternetwork, just as Netlink and Sync Research do. But Cisco's devicesdon't perform the conversions needed to make an SDLC device look like anyother device. They simply transport SDLC through a router-based LANinternetwork. To the 3745 FEP, the connected SDLC device still looks like a3174 linked over aWAN rather than a LAN-attached device.    The SNA software that Netlink will sell to other third-partyvendors offers yet another twist on this theme. As with Cisco routersequipped with SNA routing--software that Cisco has promised--routers usingthe Netlink code will able to form a LAN internetwork that products likeNetlink's SDLC Server Link and Sync Research's SNACS can then use. Atpresent, only bridges (or routers operating as bridges) can be used tobuild such networks.    Netlink's SNA software also adds capabilities not available throughIBM communications controllers, such as routing of data from 3174 and 3274controllers to multiple hosts. In comparison, a 3174 with a TIC can senddata to a maximum of two hosts.    Routers equipped with Netlink's SNA software also offer advantageswhen connecting to Logical Unit 6.2 devices. The routers will accept datafrom LU 6.2 devices in the same way a 3174 would, but with one improvement:The FEPs will not have to provide instructions to the router. Another plusis that multiple 3174s or other Physical Unit 2.0 devices attached to anSDLC Link Server or router will appear to FEPs as one device supportingmany terminals. This PU 2.0 ''concentration'' function will reduce theadministrative tasks involved in maintaining an SNA network.    Netlink says its routing software will support IBM's AdvancedPeer-to-Peer Networking (APPN) Network Node scheme if and when IBMpublishes its specifications. Netlink says it supports only those SNArouting capabilities with published specifications.    The router software also will support NetView and the simplenetwork management protocol (SNMP). Router vendors will integrate thenetwork management capabilities and all the routing functions performed byNetlink's software into their products by making available certainNetlink-defined ''hooks.'' The Netlink software, acting as an integratedpart of the routers, will use these hooks to collect information from therouter, such as its knowledge of all available paths through aninternetwork.    Netlink's Internetwork Gateway connects DEC VT100 terminals to IBMhosts across a LAN internetwork. It also provides a direct gateway to IBMhosts for these devices.    In a typical application, the Internetwork Gateway would attach onone side to an Ethernet LAN with a DEC or third-party terminal server. Tothe DEC terminal server, the Internetwork Gateway appears to be a DEC host.But rather than provide access to the host, the Internetwork Gatewayconverts the Local Area Transport (LAT) protocol used by the DEC terminalsto the 3270 protocol used by IBM 3270 terminals. Like the SDLC Link Server,the Internetwork Gateway then takes incoming data--in this case, 3270 datafrom VT100 terminals--and converts it to the LLC2 protocol for transmissionacross the LAN internetwork to a remote IBM 3745 FEP,.    As a result, DEC terminal users can run 3270 sessions on theirexisting DEC terminals, eliminating the need for users to have twoterminals on their desks.    IBM does not support DEC's LAT protocol. Many third-party terminalservers available for use with DEC terminals do provide 3270 gateways, butnone provide the LLC2 support of the Internetwork Gateway.    The Internetwork Gateway supports between 16 and 128 LAT and 3270terminal sessions, divided among any number of physical terminals. As withNetlink's router software, NetView and SNMP are supported. The InternetworkGateway also supports DEC's Terminal Server Manager network managementsoftware.Product SummaryProducts: SDLC Link Server Models 1, 2, and 3 and Internetwork Gateway. SNAsoftware for routers has no official name yet.Description: SDLC Link Server connects SNA computers and communicationsgear over LAN internetworks. Internetwork Gateway allows VT terminal usersto run 3270 sessions on hosts accessible via LAN internetworks.Vendor: Netlink Inc., 3214 Spring Forest Rd., Raleigh, N.C. 27604.Pricing: SDLC Link Server Models 1 and 2 with SDLC two-and four-portcapacities, respectively: $6,490 to $10,000. Model 3 with 4 to 16 ports:$10,000 to $23,000. Internetwork Gateway base configuration with 16 LAT and16 SNA sessions: $7,000; with 128 sessions: $20,000. SNA routing softwareprices are negotiated with individual vendors.Availability: SDLC Link Server: November 1991; Internetwork Gateway:January 1992. SNA routing software: first half of 1992.Advantages: Allows SNA and DEC traffic on the same backbone that carriesAppleTalk, IPX/SPX, DECnet, and TCP/IP data. Costs less and offers morefeatures than comparable equipment from IBM.Illustration: Sending SNA Across the InternetworkAbout the Author(s):Eric M. Hindin is senior editor for DATA COMMUNICATIONS and is based inBoston.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.SPEEDY LINKS FOR THE FAR-FLUNGBy:Eric M. HindinNovell Inc. has enhanced its NetWare Link/64 and NetWare Link/T1 routers tofurnish 64-kbit/s and T1 (1.544-Mbit/s) connectivity among remote NetWarenetworks via digital links or leased lines.    The enhanced routers comprise software and specialized WANcircuitry. New features include a NetWare Loadable Module (NLM) driver thatallows Link/64 and Link/T1 routers to operate on a NetWare 3.1X platform;support for larger frame sizes to increase data throughput; and support foran X.21 interface adapter to meet international PTT requirements.    Link/64 is suitable for electronic-mail, host access, networkmanagement, and file transfer tasks. Large file transfers and databaseapplications will need the faster network connections Link/T1 can provide.    The routers require an IBM PC/AT or 386 or compatible machine with640 kbytes of RAM and NetWare 2.15 or later. Link/64 costs $1,495; Link/T1,$3,995. Users of the earlier versions can upgrade for $625 and $1,500,respectively.Novell Inc., 122 E. 1700 S., Provo, Utah 84606Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.MORE HOSTS FOR MACSBy:Eric M. HindinWalker Richer & Quinn Inc. has released the Telnet Connection for theMacintosh, software that implements Telnet and the file transfer protocol(FTP) over TCP/IP networks to give users access to data and applications onDigital Equipment Corp. VAXes and Unix hosts.    The Telnet Connection should be installed with the vendor'sReflection 2 Plus for the Macintosh, a VT320 terminal emulator forconnection to DEC hosts. The Telnet Connection for the Macintosh costs$129.Walker Richer & Quinn Inc., 2815 Eastlake Ave. E., Seattle, Wash. 98102Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.SNA MEETS TCP/IPBy:Eric M. HindinOpenConnect Systems has released OpenConnect Server II Gateway, whichenables Sun Microsystems Inc. Sparcstations to interconnect IBM SNA andTCP/IP networks. The gateway allows peer-to-peer communications links to beestablished among IBM mainframes and midrange systems and Unix, VMS, andDOS systems.    Supported features include IP packet routing across an SNA backboneand NetView control of TCP/IP nodes. Nodes on both networks can access andpass data in either direction.    The software also includes an Advanced Peer-to-Peer Computing(APPC) library for Logical Unit (LU) 6.2 support on Unix workstations andfor 3287 printer support. The gateway supports all other OpenConnectsoftware products for terminal emulation, file transfer, remote job entry,distributed processing, and remote printing. OCS costs $5,950 and up,depending on platform.OpenConnect Systems, 2033 Chennault Dr., Carrollton, Texas 75006Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.DFT TRANSFERSOVER COAXBy:Eric M. HindinTangram Systems Corp. has released Coax Max, a device driver for 3270Distributed Function Terminal (DFT) coax adapters. Coax Max transfers dataat 1 to 3 Mbytes per minute, reducing communications time between DOSworkstations and the mainframe.    Coax Max works with coax boards in DFT mode, which allows PCs tosend and receive data directly instead of writing to a 3270 screen. CoaxMax supports all IBM PC/XT/ATs, PS/2s, and compatible machines. It alsoworks with IBM 3278/3279 emulation adapters and compatibles capable ofsupporting DFT. It costs $9,200 to $24,840, depending on CPU.Tangram Systems Corp., P.O. Box 5069, 118 Mackenan Dr., Cary, N.C.27511-1999Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.PRODUCT POTPOURRI FOR IBM MIDRANGE SYSTEMSBy:Eric M. HindinAndrew Corp. has announced a spate of products for IBM midrange systems,including an active wiring hub, enhanced file transfer software, and aWindows graphical user interface for 5250 terminal emulation.    The SuperStar/400C wiring hub uses coax cabling to connecttwinaxial devices to AS/400 and System/3X hosts or controllers, providingthe benefits of a star-wired network. The hub lets users upgrade theirnetworks while retaining their original cable investment.    The hub receives, amplifies, retimes, and splits signals into sevendevice channels. All connected devices operate concurrently yetindependently, because each port has its own transmit and receive drivers.A dual-port model supports up to 14 workstations. The single-port versioncosts $695; the dual-port, $1,395.    Andrew's ETU file transfer software for IBM S/38 and AS/400computers now features record and field selection, multidevice transfers,host-batch transfer execution, and entry/exit programs. Tasks that used torequire two or three separate commands now can be accomplished in one, thevendor says. ETU 5.0 costs $800 for the S/38 and $950 for the AS/400. Usersof earlier versions can upgrade for $149 (S/38) and $249 (AS/400).    Andrew also introduced TwinView, a Windows 3.0 graphical userinterface for the 3XTwin and Multi-Twin members of its Emerald Series of5250 emulators. With the new interface, users can link PCs under Windows3.0 to S/3X or AS/400 machines. TwinView users can operate up to sevensessions at once, moving around with a mouse and scroll bars. Otherfeatures include Windows Clipboard support, for copying and pasting text,and Windows font support, for choosing fixed-pitch display fonts and fontsizes. TwinView also is compatible with ETU 5.0. It costs $149.Andrew Corp., 2771 Plaza Del Amo, Torrance, Calif. 90503Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.MULTITASKING FILE TRANSFERBy:Eric M. HindinThe Systems Center Inc. has added OS/2 software to its Network DataMoverseries of automated data transfer products. Called Network DataMover-PC forOS/2 (NDM-PC for OS/2), the product allows IBM PS/2s and otherOS/2-compatible machines to communicate automatically with IBM mainframehosts running under the MVS, VM, or VSE operating systems.    The software uses the Communications Manager component of OS/2Version 1.3 Extended Edition to set up a synchronous data link control(SDLC) or token ring connection between the PC and the host. To set up thisconnection, the user must have an IBM Multi-Protocol SDLC Adapter orToken-Ring Adapter installed in the PC.    NDM-PC for OS/2 performs binary and test file transfers using datacompression.    Like other programs that take advantage of OS/2's multitaskingcapabilities, NPM-PC for OS/2 runs concurrently with Communications Manager3270 sessions and any other OS/2 sessions on the same machine. NPM-PC forOS/2 also features a menu-driven user interface. It costs $850.The Systems Center Inc., 1800 Alexander Bell Dr., Reston, Va. 22091Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.RUMBA TIMEBy:Eric M. HindinWall Data Inc. has added several products to its Rumba line of PC-to-hostconnectivity software, including 3270 emulation for TCP/IP networks and IBMAS/400 minicomputers and OS/2, French-, and German-language versions of itsflagship software.    The Rumba TN3270 interface allows PC users on TCP/IP networks toconnect to IBM mainframes through the Microsoft Windows graphical userinterface. It works with mainframe-based TCP/IP Telnet servers to deliver3270 terminal emulation to PC users. Users can access, use, and integratedata simultaneously from multiple hosts. TN3270 features include supportfor IBM Models 2 through 5 terminals, full mapping of 3270 function keys,multiple sessions, mainframe graphics, and IND$FILE data transfer. Theinterface is included with Rumba Version 3.1, which costs $495.    The Rumba for 3270 feature is an option for users of Rumba forAS/400. Users see the familiar Rumba interface, but now they can access3270 mainframe information and integrate it into their AS/400 and PCapplications. With a few mouse clicks, users can cut and paste informationbetween 3270 sessions and Windows or AS/400 applications, quicklyassembling elements from disparate host sources. The option costs $200.    Rumba PM 1.0 allows users of OS/2 with Presentation Manager toaccess 3270 host applications. Previously, Rumba was available only underMicrosoft Windows. Rumba PM features include QuickStep, which automateshost access; Hotlinks, which brings in host data to OS/2 applications; andHotspots, which activates common host functions. Users also can customizethe keyboard and display colors. Rumba PM costs $495.    Finally, for international and multinational users, the vendor hasreleased French- and German-language versions of its flagship product,Rumba 3.1. Context-sensitive help is provided in both languages. The Frenchand German versions are available from Wall Data and its distributors inFrance and Germany. The packages cost $495 each if purchased in the UnitedStates.Wall Data Inc., 17769 N.E. 78th Pl., Redmond, Wash. 98052-4992Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.RJE EMULATOR FOR OS/2 AND DOSBy:Eric M. HindinNetwork Software Associates Inc. has unveiled an 802.2 link driver for itsAdaptSNA RJE PC-to-host communications software package. This makesAdaptSNA RJE the first RJE emulator for OS/2 PCs to support Logical LinkControl (LLC) environments, the vendor says.    Remote job entry (RJE) is used by many companies for the efficienttransfer of large amounts of data. RJE under OS/2 is significant becauseOS/2 Extended Edition, while providing 3270 and Advanced Program-to-ProgramCommunications (APPC) and Logical Unit (LU) 6.2 links, ignores RJE.AdaptSNA RJE can be used for batch transfer applications in IBM Job EntrySubsystem (JES), Power, or other Virtual Telecommunications Access Method(VTAM) environments.    AdaptSNA RJE ($785) is available for both OS/2 and DOS. OS/2 userscan initiate an RJE file transfer and run other applicationssimultaneously. AdaptSNA RJE also can be used in unattended operations,automatically loading when the workstation is turned on and simply waitinguntil the host is ready to download.Network Software Associates Inc., 39 Argonaut, Laguna Hills, Calif. 92656Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.CONFIGURE ROUTERS ON MULTIPLE SNMP SYSTEMSBy:Eric M. HindinWellfleet Communications Inc. has introduced a Network ConfigurationUtility (NCU) that allows users to configure networks of many Wellfleetrouters from a central workstation. The NCU software works with any simplenetwork management protocol (SNMP)-based management system running on a Sunworkstation, the vendor says.    NCU offers a menu-driven interface for setting up new router nodesand automatically constructs and maintains a Structured Query Language(SQL) database of information on the network.    Wellfleet says NCU is simple enough for novice operators to use.Configuration changes to a network of routers are made from a Unix-basedwindowing interface via pop-up menus that prompt the user to define a nodeand bring it on-line. For example, to configure an IP router, Wellfleetsays, a user need only enter the IP address, subnet mask, and transmitbroadcast type; NCU automatically supplies the rest of the informationneeded to get the router up and running. The product also comes with anexpert editor that allows more technically astute net managers to adjustparameters and optimize network performance.    NCU is the first product in Wellfleet's Advanced InternetworkManagement (AIM) program, under which the vendor plans to provideapplications for managing Wellfleet routers on a range of SNMP platformsystems. In the future, the vendor says, AIM value-added SNMP applicationswill incorporate various SNMP management information bases (MIBs) formanaging Wellfleet equipment, such as the Remote Monitoring MIB, whichWellfleet says will offer more comprehensive fault and performanceinformation than is possible with SNMP MIB II. NCU prices begin at $5,000,including the SQL database.Wellfleet Communications Inc., 15 Crosby Dr., Bedford, Mass. 01730Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.THE SUNNY SIDEOF SNMPBy:Eric M. HindinRetix has added graphics and simplified configuration of its SNMP-based5025 Network Management Center by incorporating Version 1.1 of SunMicrosystems Inc.'s SunNet Manager. Simple network management protocolcapability also has been added to Retix's 2265 midrange local bridge in anew version called the 2265M/S.    Retix says the enhancements round out the vendor's SNMP productline, allowing users to build a network of bridges and routers that iscentrally managed from a 5025 Network Management Center.    The 5025 Network Management Center runs on Sun Sparcstations. Soldwith SunNet Manager, it costs $10,950. A 5024 version without SunNetManager costs $5,950. The 2265M/S costs $2,950. Users can upgrade from the2265 for $250.Retix, 2644 30th St., Santa Monica, Calif. 90405-3009Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.NETWORK MONITORING BY PROXYBy:Eric M. HindinKalpana Inc. has added simple network management protocol (SNMP) support toits EtherSwitch fast packet Ethernet switches. Network managers now canremotely monitor and control multiple EtherSwitches from a single SNMPstation.    EtherSwitch SNMP Proxy Agent combines an SNMP managementinformation base II (MIB II) agent and an MIB extension that works withthird-party SNMP management systems to generate alarms, collect statistics,and perform diagnostics. The proxy agent can monitor the traffic load ofeach EtherSwitch port, producing reports on both local and remote trafficloads.    The EtherSwitch SNMP Proxy Agent runs as a background task on SunSparcstations or servers and can be located on the same platform as themanagement station software. EtherSwitch products shipped after July 1,1991, include the Proxy Agent as a no-cost option. Upgrade kits for unitsshipped before then cost $150.Kalpana Inc., 125 Nicholson Lane, San Jose, Calif. 95134Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.VAX SECURITYTO THE MAXBy:Eric M. HindinDemax Software Inc. has added three packages to its Distributed SecurityTechnology Series of software products that monitor, control, and analyzeuser activity on Digital Equipment Corp. VAX/VMS systems. The Detectivefamily of products, acquired by Demax from Saber Software Corp., consistsof the Connection Detective, the System Detective, and Chalk Talk.    The Connection Detective is packet-monitoring software for VAX/VMS hosts that tracks incoming traffic. Itrecognizes more than 100 protocols, including DECnet, TCP/IP, OSI, AppleComputer Inc.'s AppleTalk, and Novell Inc.'s Internet/Sequenced PacketExchange (IPX/SPX).    The System Detective monitors host activity. It consists of twomodules. The Automated Operations Module (System Detective-A/O) monitorsand records user calls to the host and restricts user access. TheInteractive Session Module (System Detective-I/S) tracks specific hostsessions by user name, process, terminal type, privilege level, priority,and group membership.    Chalk Talk is a help-desk version of the System Detective-I/S thatgives network administrators access to users' screens from VAX terminals.Staff members can employ Chalk Talk to watch what users are typing on theirterminals and correct their syntax or look at their error messages.    The Connection Detective costs $1,200 to $9,600. The SystemDetective-A/O costs from $1,300 to $8,000. The System Detective-I/S costsfrom $2,000 to $12,000. Chalk Talk costs from $1,050 to $6,000.Demax Software Inc., 999 Baker Way, Suite 500, San Mateo, Calif. 94404Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.STRONG-ARMING SECURITY BREACHESBy:Eric M. HindinSunSoft has added two packages to its SunShield line of security products:Account Resource Management (ARM) and Automated Security Enhanced Tool(ASET). The packages let users customize security for Unix networks.    With ARM, administrators can specify parameters for functions suchas password length and the number of attempts permitted for gaining accessto a network. They can limit log-on attempts for all or part of thenetwork, as well as individual systems. ARM also lets network managersrestrict access hours, lock screens, and set automatic expiration limits onpasswords and user accounts.    ASET lets administrators adjust security levels, automaticallymodifying the system to the desired levels. With ASET, network managers canbuild a ''fire wall'' between a company's internal network and externalnetworks.    ARM and ASET together cost $295 for a single license and $4,500 fora site license. Additional documentation costs $100 per copy.SunSoft, 2550 Garcia Ave., Mountain View, Calif. 94043Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.'FRAME SERVER' DISHES UP MORE FRAME RELAY FLAVORSTimeplex's device comes in add-in and standalone versions and offers achoice of connection typesBy:Johna Till JohnsonPlenty of mux vendors have caught the frame relay bug, but only TimeplexInc. offers an interface both as an enhancement to existing muxes and as astandalone unit. That gives users of the vendor's Link/FrameServer morechoices for connecting FDDI, token ring, and Ethernet LANs--including theability to pass SNA traffic across a frame relay link.    Frame relay is becoming a popular choice for LAN interconnectbecause of its low overhead and high data rates (up to 1.544 Mbit/s atpresent). By adding a card to Timeplex's Link/2+ multiplexer, networkmanagers can squeeze more traffic onto available bandwidth.    Because the frame server also is available in standalone form, atypical configuration might include sites both with and without Link/2+muxes (see figure). Sites with muxes most likely will use them to transporta mix of voice and data, while those without probably will use bridges orrouters to transport LAN data, says James Babcock, Timeplex's vicepresident for product management.    At those sites with a mux, the frame server would permit LAN datato be carried across the backbone in frame relay form, along withcircuit-switched voice. Regardless of the presence or absence of a mux,LANs connect to the frame server either directly or through a router.    The frame relay network can be either a private network (i.e., amux-based backbone) or a public frame relay service. To transport data overthe wide area, the frame server encapsulates each data packet in a linkaccess procedure-D (LAPD) frame, adding a flag and data link circuitidentifier (DLCI) with addressing information at the beginning of eachframe and a frame check sequence at the end. The frame server then filtersthe frames based on their DLCIs and sends them to the appropriate wide-areaconnections.    Network managers can transport SNA traffic across frame relay netsthanks to the frame server's encapsulation of high-level/synchronous datalink control (HDLC/SDLC) frames. The encapsulated SDLC or HDLC frames aresent across the network in either point-to-point or multipoint mode usingidle suppression (a process that prevents idle SDLC frames from being sentacross the network) for improved bandwidth utilization.    Timeplex's encapsulation approach differs from that proposed bymany router vendors, according to Jim Harrison, program director for globalnetwork strategies at the Meta Group Inc. (Westport, Conn.), a marketresearch firm. Harrison says router makers may add SDLC-over-framerelay support by encapsulating SDLC frames twice--first within TCP/IPpackets, and second within LAP-D frames.    There are two advantages to dual encapsulation, Harrison says.First, it allows SDLC packets to be carried not only across the wide areabut also across LAN backbones at remote sites. Second, network managershave better control over the integrity and routing of SDLC data if it'sencapsulated within a higher-level protocol like TCP/IP.    However, dual encapsulation is more complex, and in Harrison's viewit's ultimately a stopgap measure. Most industry observers believe framerelay eventually will include specs for higher-level protocols that wouldensure end-to-end data integrity.    In addition to SDLC, the frame server also can handle traffic fromEthernet, token ring, and fiber distributed data interface (FDDI) LANs. Thecombination of LANs and WANs it connects to, and how it connects to them,depends on choice of configuration.    The unit features a high-speed (550-Mbit/s) bus with a controlboard and three slots for add-in cards that supply various connections.These links can include four T1/E1 lines, up to four Ethernets, two tokenrings, and one dual-attached FDDI connection. Any combination of cards canbe installed in the frame server; for example, network managers can chooseto install wide-area cards in all three of the device's slots for a totalof 12 WAN connections. LANs also can connect, via routers, across a T1 linkto the frame server.    The frame server's modular design means network managers can employit in a variety of settings, ranging from switching to routing. In the12-port WAN configuration, for instance, the frame server acts as a framerelay switch, accepting frames at a port, filtering them based on theDLCIs, and forwarding them out one of the other ports. If the unit isstocked solely with LAN cards, it acts as a multiprotocol router forTCP/IP, Xerox Network Services (XNS), and Internet Packet Exchange (IPX)traffic. In this case, LAN data packets are routed based on their TCP/IP,XNS, or IPX addresses.    But these two configurations--pure switch and pure router--areunlikely to be widely employed; users more likely will want somecombination of routing and frame switching. Timeplex's Babcock saysseveral companies have asked to use the product on a trial basis when itbecomes available for beta testing early next year. One user wants toinstall frame server cards in its Link/2+ multiplexers to add support forframe relay to its time-division multiplexing (TDM) backbone. That companynow uses the backbone for voice and video and wants to add LAN traffic.Another company has a router-based network to which it wants to add aframe relay backbone.    Most multiplexer vendors have been developing some form of framerelay packet switch for their TDM multiplexers. Timeplex's scheme ofdividing the backbone between packet and circuit data (when the frameserver is installed inside the Link/2+ mux rather than as a standalone unitconnected to a pure frame relay backbone) is a relatively common methodcalled ''packet over circuit.''    The essential feature in packet-over-circuit techniques is that themux-and-frame server combination uses separate components to processpackets and frames. There are other approaches to combining frame andcircuit technology; StrataCom, for example, creates virtual circuits over apacket-switched architecture.    Meta Group's Harrison describes the Timeplex approach as similar tothat of Network Equipment Technologies Inc. (Redwood City, Calif.) andNewbridge Networks Corp. (Menlo Park, Calif.). ''It's the right move forTimeplex,'' he says of the frame server. He believes, however, the productwill appeal mostly to network managers who are already Timeplex customers.Product SummaryProduct Name: Link/FrameServer.Description: A T1/E1 frame relay switching card with direct LANconnections. It is available both as a card for Timeplex Link/2+multiplexers and as a standalone unit.Vendor: Timeplex Inc., 400 Chestnut Ridge Rd., Woodcliff Lake, N.J. 07675.Pricing: Base unit costs $13,500. A one-port token ring card costs $3,700;two-port Ethernet card, $3,800; four-port Ethernet card, $6,300; one-portFDDI card, $15,000. A two-port card with RS-449, V.11/RS-422, or V.35interfaces costs $3,300; a four-port version costs $6,000. For wide-areaconnections, a two-port card with an EIA-232 interface costs $2,750; afour-port version costs $4,100. A one-port G.703 card costs $3,600; atwo-port version costs $6,500.Availability: Beta testing scheduled to begin in the first quarter of 1992,with availability slated for the following quarter.Advantages: Two versions give network managers more options for connectingto frame relay services. Frame server can pass SNA traffic across a framerelay link.Illustration: FGrame Relay Integration of LANs and WANsAbout the Author(s):Johna Till Johnson is wide-area networks editor for DATA COMMUNICATIONS,based in Gainesville, Fla.Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.ON THE ROAD TO T1By:Johna Till JohnsonAT&T Paradyne has introduced the Acculink 731, a channel/data service unitthat supports high-speed LAN interconnection, mainframe channel extensions,and videoconferencing. The Acculink 731 handles scalable amounts ofbandwidth, and eventually users can convert it to a 16-channel Acculink 741voice/data multiplexer, using an upgrade kit available from AT&T Paradyne.The Acculink 731 CSU/DSU supports T1 connections for up to four synchronousdevices via V.35 or RS-422 interfaces. It handles data rates from 1.2kbit/s to 1.536 Mbit/s.    Based on Acculink 741 T1 architecture and capable of being managedby the vendor's Comsphere 6800 network management system, the Acculink 731also offers diagnostics, an independent supervisory data link for managingfractional T1 networks, and an integral D4/extended superframe (ESF) CSU.The Acculink 731 costs $5,300. The upgrade kit costs $2,930.AT&T Paradyne, 8545 126th Ave. N., P.O. Box 2826, Largo, Fla. 34649-2826Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.DUAL-CHANNEL DSU AND MOREBy:Johna Till JohnsonHT Communications Inc. has unveiled three channel/data service unit(CSU/DSU) products: the Pro4002 for use over AT&T Digital Data Service(DDS) networks, the Pro4002-SW for switched 56-kbit/s data services, andthe DSU64 for OEM applications.    The Pro4002 operates over point-to-point or multipoint networks andsupports DDS rates of 2.4 to 56 kbit/s. Its two independent data channelsallow it to support a wide range of data and voice applications, and italso can be used for local-area data set applications.    The Pro4002-SW Terminal Interface Unit for 56-kbit/s data servicesfeatures an ''autolearn'' capability that allows data terminal equipment(DTE) to control the dialing operation. The device can be used for linkingLAN bridges, videoconferencing, backing up dedicated lines, or Group 4 faxtransmission.    Both the Pro4002 and the Pro4002-SW fit into 8.5-by-11-by-2.4-inchenclosures, including built-in power supplies. The Pro4002 CSU/DSU costs$745 and the Pro4002-SW Terminal Interface Unit costs $1,395.    The DSU64 OEM data engine includes all DDS data transmitting andreceiving functions in a 4-by-5-inch module. The microprocessor bus handlescommunications between the module and the external control processor. TheDSU64 costs $160.HT Communications Inc., 4685-K Runway St., Simi Valley, Calif. 93063Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.BERT TESTER ADDEDBy:Johna Till JohnsonProgressive Computing Inc. has added a bit error rate tester to its LM1Olympic Edition protocol analyzer. The tester, which complies with theCCITT G.821 specification, is one of several improvements included withVersion 8.0 of the analyzer. New macro commands automatically buildprotocol entities that simplify troubleshooting of protocol problems.Supported protocols include X.25, SNA, qualified logical link control(QLLC), Signaling System No. 7, IBM Bisync, async, and ISDN Q.931. Virtualbreakout boxes are included for V.35, V.10/V.11, and T1 circuits.    The LM1 Olympic Edition is an add-in card that fits into any DOS-basedPC with an XT or AT bus. The board and software package costs $3,495.Progressive Computing Inc., 814 Commerce Dr., Oak Brook, Ill. 60521Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.TESTING MULTIPLE MODEMSBy:Johna Till JohnsonThe TAS 3508A Modem Test Switch from Telecom Analysis Systems Inc.automates the sequential testing of modem banks and other datacommunications equipment, according to the vendor. Each switch connectsnine modem ports to a common testing port; each modem port has an EIA-232connector and an RJ-45 connector. The unit switches all eight RJ-45 signalsand 24 of the 25 EIA-232 signals (the lone exception is the frame groundsignal).    The TAS 3508A features front-panel controls and built-in EIA-232and IEEE 488 interfaces. The devices can be cascaded, with up to 256 portsconnected to one common testing port. The vendor says the switch works withits other testing components, including its Taskit integrated testingsoftware. The TAS 3508A Modem Test Switch costs $3,950.Telecom Analysis Systems Inc., 34 Industrial Way East, Eatontown, N.J.07724-9917Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.ECHO CANCELER ALSO MONITORS PERFORMANCEBy:Johna Till JohnsonMicro Integrated Communications Corp. says its EC1000 is the first digitalecho canceler that monitors circuit performance. The device, which can beused by common carriers and managers of private T1 networks, enables usersto control both functions from a single built-in keypad. The EC1000monitors performance of extended superframe (ESF) format traffic, accordingto the vendor.    Each EC1000 can monitor up to 16 T1 circuits. Operators are alertedto circuit problems via audible alarms and warning lights that flash on theunit's liquid crystal display. To cancel line echo, the unit has a residualecho control that replaces any echo encountered with matched backgroundnoise. The EC1000 also has a dual power supply configured for load sharing.If one supply fails, the other can maintain adequate power for the unit,the vendor says. The EC1000 costs $100 per channel.Micro Integrated Communications Corp., 3256 Scott Blvd., Building 3, Suite102, Santa Clara, Calif. 95054Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.OS-INDEPENDENT FAX AND VOICE APIBy:Johna Till JohnsonBrooktrout Technology Inc. has announced an application program interface(API) for its TR series of single- and multiple-channel facsimile- andvoice-line cards. The C-language tool kit helps programmers generatemultiple-channel fax and voice applications for the TR cards. The APIprovides a link between Brooktrout's hardware drivers and applicationsoftware and includes the T.30 facsimile protocol supported on theBrooktrout card, so programmers need not study each card's command set orprotocols to develop software.    The PC/AT-compatible cards, which support combined voice and faxapplications with a single chip, operate under DOS and Unix.    The API will work with any operating system, trimming developmenttime, according to Brooktrout. Comprising programming functionsthat combineASCII and Group 3 fax data into one structure, the API supports allBrooktrout voice/fax cards, which cost $2,495 each. The API costs $300.Brooktrout Technology Inc., 144 Gould St., Needham, Mass. 02192Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.JUST THE FAX FOR AS/400SBy:Johna Till JohnsonQuadrant Software has announced FastFax/Plus for the AS/400, a hardware/software product for both interactive and batch environments. AS/400 userscan send faxes directly from their terminals without leaving theirapplications, while the MIS department can batch faxes for off-hourdelivery using a single command.    End-users can scan in their own signatures, logos, forms, andgraphics. FastFax/Plus can capture multiple screens and send them in asingle transmission. The product automatically generates custom-designedcover pages, and it can transmit files created on PCs, such as text andspreadsheets from WordPerfect, Microsoft Word, and Lotus 1-2-3.    MIS staff also can add fax capability to interactive applicationswith minimal programming and set up AS/400 output queues using FastFax/Plusoptions. Another option allows FastFax/Plus to receive plain-paper faxesand print them on attached HP LaserJet or Canon LBP-8 laser printers.    The FastFax/Plus includes documentation for both systemadministrators and end-users. It costs from $4,995 to $6,495, depending onthe AS/400 model.Quadrant Software, P.O. Box 2400, Plainville, Mass. 02762Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.SMALL SIZE, BIG FEATURESBy:Johna Till JohnsonTelebit Corp. has announced the QBlazer modem, a miniature, cube-shapedV.32 modem for use with all PC- and Macintosh-compatible desktop and laptopcomputers. Measuring just 2.3 by 2.4 by 2.4 inches, the modem supportsasynchronous DTE speeds to 38.4 kbit/s. It features CCITT V.42 errorcontrol and V.42bis and MNP Class 5 data compression.    The QBlazer modem complies with CCITT V.32, V.22bis, V.22, V.21,and Bell 212A and Bell 102 recommendations. It supports Telebit's extendedversion of the Hayes AT command set, contains eight status LEDs and aspeaker, and enough memory for two user profiles and four phone numbers. Itweighs 8 ounces and runs on a 9-volt battery. An optional adapter provides115-volt, 60-Hertz a.c. power.    The QBlazer comes with a reference manual, DB-9/25 cable, a DIN 8cable for the Apple Macintosh, an a.c. adapter, and communicationssoftware. It costs $745.    Telebit also announced the T3000 modem, which conforms to the CCITTV.32bis standard. Besides offering V.42bis and MNP Class 5 datacompression, the vendor claims the modem can achieve speeds to 57.6 kbit/s.At that transmission rate, the modem can provide a dial-up alternative toleased lines.    File transfer and protocol support includes UUCP, Kermit, Xmodem,and Ymodem. Fifteen commonly used configurations are stored in the modem'sfirmware, and can be selected and monitored with front-panel LEDs, as wellas with Hayes AT commands.    The T3000, which supports synchronous and asynchronous operation,is shipped with remote configuration and diagnostics software and can beset up with password and callback security. It costs $1,095.Telebit Corp., 1315 Chesapeake Terrace, Sunnyvale, Calif. 94089Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.MODEM BOOSTS ERROR CORRECTIONBy:Johna Till JohnsonMicrocom Inc.'s QX/4232bis high-speed modem complies with the company'sMicrocom Networking Protocol (MNP) Class 10 standard to provide virtuallyerror-free PC communications on dial-up or leased lines, the vendor claims.The modem also provides CCITT V.32bis transmission at up to 14.4 kbit/s andeffective throughput rates of up to 38.4 kbit/s using V.42bis datacompression, the vendor says.    MNP 10 maintains data integrity by decreasing transmission rateswhen line quality degrades. When interference decreases, the modemincreases transmission speed to its maximum throughput.    Other features that improve transmission speed include changingpacket sizes to compensate for varying interference levels and beginninglink setup at the most stable line speed. The QX/4232bis costs $999.Microcom Inc., 500 Ridge Dr., Norwood, Mass. 02062-1000Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.MODEM GETS TOUGHBy:Johna Till JohnsonAydin Corp.'s Aydin Vector division has announced the MDM-700H, a modem forairborne applications, including remotely piloted aircraft and some missileapplications. The new modem connects computers over a full-duplex radiofrequency link that utilizes conventional FM transmitters and receivers. Italso can operate in simplex mode without degradation.    The ruggedized modem operates at temperatures from -20 degreesCentigrade to +50 degrees C and weighs 8 ounces. It can operate at datarates of up to 9.6 kbit/s, according to the vendor.    The MDM-700H Modem transmit section accepts an EIA-232 signal andconverts it into a half-sine shaped pulse. The receive portion accepts thepulses and recreates the EIA-232 data. The modem costs $2,940.Aydin Vector Division, Aydin Corp., P.O. Box 328, Newtown, Penn.18940-0328Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.FROM OLD MODEMS TO NEWBy:Johna Till JohnsonRelease 3.0 of Octocom Systems Inc.'s 8X96 line of 14.4-kbit/s modems canautomatically answer either full- or half-duplex calls. The use of ahalf-duplex autodetect mode allows users to phase in the faster devices asthey upgrade from older modems, such as half-duplex 4.8-kbit/s modems. Forinstance, modems at central sites can be replaced first, and those atremote locations can be phased in over a period of time.    The 8X96 modem works with dial-up or leased lines and connects to awide variety of front-end processors, according to the vendor. The modemssupport all Bell and CCITT modem standards, including the V.42bis standardfor data compression. In addition, the modems are fully compatible withOctocom's network management system. Prices for the 8X96 line start at$1,195.Octocom Systems Inc., 255 Ballardvale St., Wilmington, Mass. 01887Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.V.32 ENTRYBy:Johna Till JohnsonMotorola Codex has introduced the 3220 modem, a V.32/V.32bis modem suitablefor remote or distributed computing. The 3220 provides synchronous andasynchronous transmission of data over two-wire dial-up lines at rates from300 bit/s to 9.6 kbit/s. It supports MNP Class 5 data compression, whichyields asynchronous rates of up to 19.2 kbit/s. The unit also incorporatesthe CCITT's V.32 autodetect technique for automatically negotiating thehighest common modulation speed with any CCITT V.32, V.22bis, V.22, V.21,or Bell 212A or 103J modem it communicates with. The 3220 costs $795.Motorola Codex, 20 Cabot Blvd., Mansfield, Mass. 02048-1193Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.REMOTE USERS GET LAN ACCESSBy:Johna Till JohnsonA V.42bis modem from Microtest Inc. comes complete with built-in supportfor Novell Inc.'s Internet Packet Exchange (IPX) protocol, giving remoteusers direct access to Novell LANs without requiring remote controlsoftware.    Called LANModem, the 9.6-kbit/s device acts as a peripheral on the LANand lets users log in from a remote location and run network applicationsas if they were locally attached, the vendor claims. The company'sLANModem-based FastLink software allows file transfer, printing, andremote control of networked PCs.    LANModem's second serial port lets more than one usersimultaneously dial in or out of the network, and a second LANModem at theremote location permits linking via phone lines. The unit also includessecurity features, audit trails, setup utilities, and the capability toperform automatic field upgrades. LANModem works on thick and thin Ethernetcoax, 10Base-T, ARCnet, and 4- and 16-Mbit/s token ring networks. It costs$1,995.Microtest Inc., 3519 E. Shea Blvd., Suite 134, Phoenix, Ariz. 85028Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA COMMUNICATIONS via NewsNetNovember, 1991   Vol. 20, No.MAKE WAY FOR THE CAR MODEMBy:Johna Till JohnsonOutback, a cellular modem from Eagle Cross Inc., can transmit data at morethan 10 kbit/s over some cellular connections, according to the vendor. Theunit, which weighs about 9 pounds, comprises a Telebit Corp. T2500 modem, aMotorola Inc. 3-watt cellular transceiver and handset, Magicsoftcommunications software, a built-in antenna, and an interface board fromEagle Cross. Power can be provided by a.c. or d.c. lines or by BatPak, a4.4-amp battery pack that can operate up to 2.5 hours in transmission mode.The modem connects to a laptop or desktop PC via an EIA-232 serial port.    Although the Outback can connect to conventional dial-up modems,data rates with such modems generally are limited to 0.3 or 1.2 kbit/s viacellular links, according to the vendor. With Outback modems at either endof a cellular link, data speeds of 16,800 bit/s can be achieved with datacompression, Eagle Cross says. The Outback costs $3,495; BatPak costs $200,and a carrying case lists for $95.Eagle Cross Inc., 3023 N. Clark St., Chicago, Ill. 60657Copyright 1991 McGraw-Hill, Inc.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-10IA086-000622-B036-99http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te123.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045204 text/html 68511HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:49:54 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:32 GMTContent-length: 68324Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te123.html Sample Issue Copyright DOT.COM via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES PUBLISHING LinkStar Offers Integrated Service (454 words) Free Site for Senior Surfers (202 words) MARKETING Ads Delivered In Real Time (402 words) Image Checker for Web Sites (170 words) Internet Marketing Excellence Awards (290 words) Thomas Online Corporate Purchasing (291 words) THE SUPERHIGHWAY Excessive Fees Block I'Way Construction (258 words) 1996 Slowdown in Electronic Marketplace (300 words) GATEWAYS AT&T Changes Online Strategy (246 words) CompuServe Upgrades, Lets Users Pick Browser (178 words) SOFTWARE Enriched Internet Software by InterGo (412 words) WebBase Access Tool with Built-in Server (242 words) First Web-based Workflow Program (253 words) Lotus Changes Notes to Fit the 'Net (228 words) Internet Watchdog Monitors Users (251 words) 'Super Spider' for the Web (231 words) EDUCATION Connect Schools to Internet Now (324 words) HARDWARE Plug And Play Security Solution (289 words) Low-Cost Internet Set-Top Box (192 words) STANDARDS Microsoft Proposes I'Net Digital Signature (190 words) INTERNATIONAL Telefonica Selects FTP Software (155 words) Medicine Cruises Info Autostrada (210 words) HOME PAGES Design Your Own Home Page on the 'Net (638 words) Business Week's "Best Web Sites" (95 words) CA Real Estate Online (465 words) Internet World Trade Center (398 words) BILLING AND PAYMENTS IRS Promotes Internet Filing (165 words) BANKING AND FINANCE Complete Internet Commerce Package (348 words) Visa's New Electronic Services (285 words) Investment Advice on the Net (310 words) DATA POINTS (383 words) CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996LinkStar OffersIntegrated ServiceLinkStar Communications Corp. (662 S. Military Trail, DeerfieldBeach, FL 33442) has introduced LinkStar directory, an integratedsolution for finding, publishing and promoting businesses andpeople on the Internet. The directory allows anyone to have aninstant, free, entry-level presence on the World Wide Web that isaccessible and searchable by any other World Wide Web user.LinkStar Communications has signed several well-known companies ascharter advertisers, including c 5/8net, Digital Consulting Inc.,and Success Magazine Conferences. LinkStar is also beginning anaggressive Partners Program to recruit Internet Service Providers(ISPs) and Internet Presence Providers (IPPs) to share inadvertising revenue generated from an innovative new technologydeveloped by LinkStar. The company claims that "LinkStar isdesigned to publish your presence on the Web, promote thatpresence, and allow you to search for people, organizations and Websites with pinpoint accuracy."The heart of the LinkStar Directory is its free electronic businesscard (e-Card) system. Any Internet user with an email address caneasily fill out an e-Card that is accessible and searchable by anyother World Wide Web user. The e-Card includes standard businesscard information, as well as a variety of options which allow usersto describe their companies' products and services, and index theirdescription in a wide range of categories. In addition, the e-Cardprovides an automatic hot link to the entrant's email addressand/or World Wide Web home page.The LinkStar directory includes search capabilities allowing usersto locate listings based on a range of criteria. Searches can beexecuted for names, companies, cities, countries, states,provinces, postal codes, subject categories, key words, orcombinations of these criteria, by direct input into an entryscreen, without the need for Boolean logic entries. Search resultsreturn in order of a proprietary match rating index, display the e-Card as entered, and link the searcher directly to the informationprovider's email and Web locations.LinkStar users can have their search results sent to them by emailso that they can create their own targeted mailing lists, andlisted organizations will receive monthly statistics via email onhow many times their e-Cards have been viewed by LinkStar users. Toprevent tampering, LinkStar Communications provides eachorganization listed in their directory with a security password tocontrol editing of their listings.LinkStar claims that their directory is receiving more than 100,000hits per day and its stock of e-Cards and Web pages have grown tomore than 20,000 since an unpublicized beta version was put on theInternet last October.For more information, contact Kevin Rudden or Derek Lane (Tel:508/369-2100, email: 3566721@mcimail.com), visit the company's homepage at http://www.linkstar.com or send a request to:info@linkstar.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Free Site forSenior SurfersMillions of seniors already surfing the Internet now have freeaccess to Grand Times (El Cerrito, CA), a magazine edited foradults aged 55+. The magazine was launched in its print editionformat in November 1992 and is distributed to older adults in theSan Francisco Bay Area. Reece Halpern, publisher and owner,recognized that "it is a complete myth that seniors do not use theinformation highway or that they are afraid of technology," anddecided to launch the first weekly online magazine for active olderadults.According to Halpern, a recent survey conducted by Secure Horizonsof 1,750 seniors aged 64+ revealed that 24% of all seniors now usepersonal computers at home. Another survey found that approximatelyfour million seniors use the Internet on a regular basis. Microsoftreports that 16% of all people who have used a computer areretirees.To ensure immediate exposure, Grand Times will have live links withseveral online groups including SeniorCom (a senior networkaveraging 70,000 visits per month from computer users aged 55-75)and SeniorNet (a 17,000-member organization of computer-usingseniors).For more information, contact: Reece R. Halpern of Grand TimesPublishing Inc. (Tel: 510/527-4337, email: mags@grandtimes.com, orhttp://www.grandtimes.com/mags.Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Ads DeliveredIn Real Timec/net: the computer network (150 Chestnut St., San Francisco, CA94111) has unveiled new technology that allows advertisers todeliver custom ad messages to different customers in real-timebased on specific demographic information. The new technology,called DREAM (Delivery of Real-Time Electronic Advertisingmessages) was made available to c/net's advertisers beginningDecember 15 on c/net's two World Wide Web sites: c/net online(http://www.cnet.com) and shareware.com (http://www.shareware.com).Three direct marketing advertisers, Insight, Internet ShoppingNetwork, and MicroXperts are the first to utilize the newtechnology.Developed by c/net's technology group, c/net's DREAM software givesc/net advertisers the opportunity to filter choices for banner addelivery based on specific demographic information, such as:    age    gender    zip code    system platform (Macintosh, PC, Unix, etc.)    connection speed (14.4 modem, 28.8 modem, ISDN line, etc.)    browser type (Netscape, Mosaic, NetCruiser, etc.)    affiliation (AOL, Prodigy, CompuServe, Netcom, etc.)    domain (EDU, GOV, COM, etc.)    CD-ROM drive owner or not    connect from home or officeThe program allows advertisers to determine who sees a particularbanner advertisement and who doesn't. For example, a directmarketing firm such as Internet Shopping Network or Insight, candeliver one banner to Macintosh users and another banner to PCusers. Similarly, a modem manufacturer can send messages to peopleconnecting from a slower modem, suggesting they upgrade to a fastermodem. Or a CD-ROM distributor with many different titles couldtarget only people with CD-ROM drives and, then, further narrowtheir target to men or women depending on the title.Since October of last year, c/net also has offered ARM (AdvertisingResponse and Monitoring) software, a set of tools that allowsadvertisers to evaluate audience response to their messages. UsingARM, c/net online, advertisers can determine the audience mostresponsive to a product or message and compare advertising usageand response rates against system-wide averages. This technologyhas helped c/net to attract more paying advertisers than almost anysite on the Internet, including Microsoft, Intel, IBM, MCI,Hewlett-Packard and others.c/net's advertising rates are based solely on actual impressions orCADs (Confirmed Ads Delivered), with all advertising bannersrotated dynamically through the service. Through c/net's uniquedynamic ad delivery system, advertising is more seamlesslyintegrated into the site. Only one advertising banner appears perpage, and always in the premium position--at the top of the page.For more information, contact: Patrick Toland (Tel: 415/395-7800,ext. 535, email: patrickt@cnet.com).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Image Checkerfor Web SitesThe Delahaye Group (117 Bow St., Portsmouth, NH 03801) offersmeasurement services that analyze the effectiveness of InternetWorld Wide Web sites and evaluate a company's image in onlinediscussion groups.Delahaye/New Media's web site services include a Web TrafficAnalysis that analyzes data about who visits clients' Internet websites and where they go during their stay. Delahaye's CompetitiveWeb Site Analysis rates clients' web sites against theircompetitors' and recommends ways to improve the site.Other services give clients a glimpse of their online image byanalyzing conversations in Internet Usenet groups and commercialservice forums. Delahaye's Early Warning Monitoring Serviceidentifies and tracks negative issues that appear in onlineconversations. The company's Comprehensive On-Line Image Analysisgives clients information about online postings such as theirsubject and tone, the presence of positive and negative issues, andthe date and time they were posted. Sample reports on theseservices are currently available.For more information, contact: Beth Roed (Tel: 603/431-0111, email:beth.roed@delahaye.com, Internet: http://www.delahaye.com).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Internet MarketingExcellence AwardsThe 1995 Tenagra Awards for Internet Marketing Excellence wereawarded to Federal Express, Ragu, Yahoo!, NetPOST, Software.Net,and Virtual Vineyards.According to Cliff Kurtzman, president of The Tenagra Corp. (1100Hercules, Suite 120, Houston, TX 77058), "these awards provide peerrecognition to significant Internet marketing successes over thepast year. Each success makes our industry more credible in thepublic's eye, and recognition of these successes strengthens theindustry." Award nominations are made by an international panel ofInternet marketing experts and final awardees are selected byTenagra.    Federal Express (http://www.fedex.com/) was selected for theironline information center that provides immediate tracking ofpackage status.    Ragu Spaghetti Sauce (http://www.eat.com/) was selected due totheir online marketing and brand awareness campaign that is bothfun and entertaining while allowing them to gather customeropinions and collect valuable information about market trends.    Yahoo! (http://www.yahoo.com/) has facilitated Internetmarketing by making it possible for users to easily find onlineresources.    As the first Media Relations firm on the Net, Eric Ward andhis NetPOST service (http://www.netpost.com/) pioneered the conceptof a company specifically devoted to Internet online and mediaawareness campaigns.    By driving costs down and sharing the savings with customers,"Software.Net" (http://www.software.net/), a service of CyberSourceCorp., is a true global business success that could only havehappened on the Internet, electronically shipping over 5,000 piecesof software weekly to customers worldwide.    Virtual Vineyards (http://www.virtualvin.com/) has built aprofitable business selling wines and gourmet foods online.Focusing on small producers, they have demonstrated the potentialof the Net to take limited-distribution products to a worldwidemarket.For more information, contact: Cliff Kurtzman of The Tenagra Corp.(Tel: 713/480-6300, email: cliff.kurtzman@tenagra.com or Internet:http://arganet.tenagra.com//.Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Thomas OnlineCorporate PurchasingThomas Publishing Co.'s Electronic Purchasing Information Corp.(EPIC, One Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10001) has introduced anelectronic corporate purchasing network for industrial products.Called CONNECTSUS, it is targeted to provide timely information ona potential universe of over one million Maintenance, Repair andOperations (MRO) products, reducing purchasing time from weeks tohours and cutting transaction costs by 90%.The service is made possible by EPIC's new alliance with GEInformation Services (P.O. Box 6403, Rockville, MD 20849-6403).Companies using CONNECTSUS not only have a large number of productsto choose from, but they can also compare product features andprices at a glance. Using CONNECTSUS' Windows-based software,buyers have the ability to research and compare products, negotiateprices, and, through the alliance with GE, enter orders and makepurchases online with a purchasing card number via the system'slink to Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) standards.Buyers using CONNECTSUS are assured of privacy, ease of use, andgreater control over the purchasing of industrial supplies, amarket which accounts for $400 billion in expenditures annually.The high margin of error and costs associated with the traditionalorder process, as much as $150 per purchase, are dramaticallyreduced.Suppliers using CONNECTSUS have the opportunity to show to theirtarget markets a wider number of products, with a capability of50,000 product classifications to date, in greater detail than everbefore. CONNECTSUS' reach to corporate purchasers is wider thanavailable through print catalogues or even CD ROMs. CONNECTSUSallows suppliers to continually add to their listings, and toupdate that information more cost effectively than availableelsewhere.For more information, contact: Lynthia Romney or John Johmann ofPadilla Spear Beardsley (Tel: 212/752-8338) for Thomas PublishingCo.Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Excessive Fees BlockI'Way ConstructionTeleport Communications Group (TCG, New York, NY) has released itslatest "Info Bit" dealing with the roadblocks facing localtelephone competition. This information addresses a key issue nowunder discussion by the conference committee working on federaltelecommunications legislation.Competitive access providers and competitive local exchangecarriers are helping to pave the "Information Superhighway" withoptical fiber. To install such telecommunications infrastructure,new entrants need access to public 'rights of way'. But, the reportfinds, "excessive franchise fees imposed by municipalities retardinfrastructure investment."Both federal and state courts have supported the principle thatmunicipalities may not use their police powers over the publicrights of way to generate excess revenue. TCG states that "not onlyare excessive franchise fees often illegal, they are alwaysanticonsumer." Since incumbent providers typically pay nothing forthe privilege of constructing in, under, or over the public rightsof way, a franchise fee charged only to new telecommunicationsproviders is a barrier to entry. It deprives consumers of state-of-the-art infrastructure and new telecommunications services atreasonable prices.Thus, the report calls for "municipalities charging franchise feesshould do so on a nondiscriminatory basis. All local exchangecarriers, including the incumbent, should be subject to those fees,which should recover only the actual cost of providing access topublic rights of way. Other states and the U.S. Congress shouldfollow the lead of Connecticut, Florida and Texas which recentlylegislated nondiscriminatory access to public rights of way."For more information, contact TCG, Gail Schwartz (Tel: 718/355-2892).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 19961996 Slowdown inElectronic MarketplaceInternational Data Corp. (IDC, Five Speen St., Framingham, MA01701) has predicted 1996 to be a year of disappointment asinvestors and corporations suffer through the discouragingly slowdevelopment of a significant consumer base. By the end of the year,IDC predicts 20% of the Fortune 500 companies that have commercialWeb sites will close or stop maintaining them, resulting in ghostsites. The leading online information service providers will derivemore than one-half of their revenue from providing access to theWeb by mid-1997.IDC predicts that "In 1996 ... the Internet/World Wide Webphenomenon will shift from today's 'intoxication' stage to a'hangover' stage. The high-flying Internet suppliers will havedisappointing financial results, while technical capabilities ofthe Internet are stretched to the breaking point." Although IDCpredicts the overall growth in online subscribers will continue tobe very strong, they expect 1996 to show a high turnover rate asusers disappointed by the content on the Web cancel their onlinesubscriptions.But, they also predict that during the next five years, the numberof online users will rise to more than 200 million, and by 2010, itwill exceed 1 billion. Industry revenues will jump from $500billion to more than $2.5 trillion by 2010, and corporate spendingwill rise from 2 to 2.5% of revenues to more than 5%. In addition,IDC believes online commerce volume will hit $150 billion or moreby the year 2000 and more than $1 trillion by 2010.A full copy of IDC's 1996 predictions can be found on IDC's homepage. The address is http://www.idcresearch.com. Interested partiesare welcome to share views and insights with Frank Gens, senior VPof research at IDC, via email at fgens@idcresearch.com. For moreinformation, contact Hillary DeMello (Tel: 508/935-4282, email:hdemello@idcresearch.com).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996AT&T ChangesOnline StrategyAT&T Corp. (550 Madison Ave., New York, NY 10022) has signaled animportant strategic change in its computer online services,planning to abandon the proprietary software required to use itsonline services: the Imagination Network, PersonalLink, andInterchange. Instead, AT&T will reshape its online services aroundthe technical standards of the Internet, giving them Web-likehypertext links. The company stated that "the Interchange platformas we know it will phase out over a year or so, to be dissolvedinto the World Wide Web." AT&T bought Interchange from Ziff Davisin December 1994 for a widely-reported but unconfirmed $50 million.AT&T said it would be able to take advantage of the best electroniccommerce and navigation software for the Internet, most of whichare not compatible with Interchange. In doing so, AT&T is followingthe lead of Microsoft, which in December changed tack to open itsonline service for free to Internet users. Most of AT&T'spublishing partners already have their own Web sites. Some analystsquestioned whether they would need AT&T at all in that case.At the moment, subscribers to AT&T Business Network pay $24.95 amonth for up to 10 hours of use. With this they get freeInterchange software and a Netscape Web browser. AT&T has notdecided if or how it will charge for the service when it is web-based.More information on AT&T's new policy can be found at the company'shome page: http://www.att.com/press.Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CompuServe Upgrades,Lets Users Pick BrowserCompuServe (500 Arlington Centre Blvd., Columbus, OH 43220) hasreleased WinCIM 2.0.1. This Windows-based interface givesCompuServe a new look and includes many features, such as anintegrated Internet browser that lets users switch back and forthbetween the Web and CompuServe as often as they like. WinCIM 2.0.1is also more user-friendly, complete with tool tips (text thatidentifies the function of each icon), simplified email addressing,and a searchable filing cabinet. There is also a new look: TheExplore Services menu has been enhanced to include big, colorfulbuttons, and new online menus having hotlinks to Web sites. Theupgrade is free to CompuServe members.CompuServe's latest Internet service station WebCentral letsmembers  download virtually any World Wide Web browser in theindustry, giving them the ability to pick the one that suits thembest. They also receive technical support for the browsers, as wellas add-on  products and the latest in Internet industry news.For more information, contact: William Giles, CompuServe PR (Tel:614/538-4388) or access CompuServe's home page athttp://www.compuserve.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Enriched InternetSoftware by InterGoTeacherSoft Inc. (TeacherSoft, Inc., 903 East 18th Street, Suite230, Plano, TX 75074) has announced the worldwide availability ofInterGO, termed "the industry's first enriched Internet software."This new multimedia product combines browsing, searching, email,file transfer, Telnet, news and extensive reference content, virusscanning, and screening for objectionable material through a fullyintegrated series of familiar scenes.InterGO's interface uses scenes including an office, library, newsroom and treasure map to provide graphic options for users as theyaccess the Internet. InterGO's library is equipped with TheColumbia Encyclopedia, Fifth Edition; The American HeritageDictionary of the English Language, Third Edition; Roget'sThesaurus; a world factbook and atlas; an Internet guide; andhundreds of literary works which are hyperlinked to theencyclopedia. Key words within articles in the encyclopedia arehyperlinked to relevant information sources on the Internet.The company claims that "TeacherSoft's exclusive search technologyallows InterGO users to retrieve information from Internet sitesinstantly on virtually any subject. TeacherSoft has replaced thebookmark of traditional Internet browsers with a graphically-richlibrary, enabling users to create bookcases filled with virtualbooks of information." InterGO also simplifies the process ofobtaining an Internet account. During the easy installationprocess, InterGO searches for an Internet connection on the user'scomputer. If an online service provider is not located, InterGOlists Internet providers and assists the user in setting up anaccount.In addition to making the Internet easier to use, InterGOincorporates TeacherSoft's exclusive KinderGuard security screenand the SafeSurf rating system. These features allow a parent oradministrator to set parameters defining the types of materialswhich will be accessible to children or employees. KinderGuardscreens material from Web and gopher sites, ftp archives, newsgroups, and even mailing lists. When used in the home, thescreening mechanism enables parents to prevent children fromaccessing inappropriate material. In the office, the screeningdevice can be used to prevent employees from accessingobjectionable sites via a corporate Internet account.InterGO for Windows 95 is available from most major retailers andcomputer catalogers. Suggested retail pricing of the completeprogram, including the hyperlinked reference material, is $99.00.A Windows 3.1 version and a Macintosh version will be availableearly this year. For more information, see the company's home pageat http://www.teachersoft.com, call Tel: 214/424-7882 or Fax:214/424-5503. A free trial version can be downloaded athttp://www.teachersoft.com/products/order.htm. Or contact PegiProffitt, TeacherSoft Inc. (Tel: 214/424-7882, ext. 201, email:pegi@teachersoft.com).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996WebBase Access Toolwith Built-in ServerExperTelligence Inc. (203 Chapala St., Santa Barbara, CA 93101)announces WebBase 4.0, the latest version of their software whichallows access to database information over the Internet. WebBase4.0 incorporates the standard WebBase features plus full serverfunctionality.WebBase Version 4.0 is a single step 32-bit web server solution forall Windows platforms and databases. It includes improvements suchas: a new installation program, the incorporation of sophisticatedODBC connection and form caching for faster response, and newfeatures like insert, errorProtect, exit and case in addition to500 math, string, date and special functions.WebBase was product of the week in PC Magazine's November onlinechat, and the review in January's issue of PC Today says "the usesof WebBase are limited only by your business needs and yourimagination."  WebBase retails for $495.WebBase works with over 50 database formats including MicrosoftAccess, Excel, and SQL Server; Sybase SQL Server; Oracle; DBASE;Paradox; and Btrieve. Database pages created in WebBase can havepictures, input forms, anchors, and any other feature provided byHTML. The fields from a database record may be placed anywhere inan HTML document.To review sample WebBase applications or to obtain a trial copy ofWebBase and its documentation, visit the ExperTelligence Web siteat: http://www.webbase.com/. Orders may be placed directly at thatsite and are processed automatically by WebBase.For more information, contact Brian Colvin or Denison Bollay (Tel:805/962-2558).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996First Web-basedWorkflow ProgramAction Technologies Inc. (1301 Marina Village Pkwy., Suite 100,Alameda, CA 94501-1028) has announced Action Workflow Metro, thefirst workflow solution available for the Internet. Metro bringsthe functionality of Action's workflow technology to the Web,allowing companies to use the Internet to coordinate enterprisebusiness processes through any standard Web browser product,including Netscape.Metro provides customers with workflow functionality, enabling themto reap business benefits from their Internet investment, includingimproved customer satisfaction, reduced product delivery cycletime, and lowered costs for delivery of products and services.Metro allows any standard Web browser product to become a clientfor Action's work management services. The product includes 20customizable applications, such as customer service, sales andmarketing, human resources, finance and accounting, and engineeringapplications. These applications leverage both a corporate Intranetfor internal enterprise applications, such as human resources, andthe Internet for extended enterprise applications, such as customerservice. Metro is one of the first WWW product offerings to utilizeNetscape's published APIs, allowing Metro to leverage Netscape'ssecurity features.Metro also includes easy-to-use document publishing capabilities.Users can create and post documents via the ActionWorkflow Metrointerface and distribute them without having to use HTML code. Formore complex document publishing, structured HTML documents can beeasily incorporated into a Metro workflow process.Additional information is available on Action's home page locatedat http://www.actiontech.com, or by contacting Sumi Shohara ofAction Technologies (Tel: 510/748-1045, Fax: 510/769-0596, email:sumi_shohara@actiontech.com); or Julie Sauter (Tel: 415/512-0500).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Lotus ChangesNotes to Fit the 'NetLotus Development Corp. (55 Cambridge Pkwy., Cambridge, MA 02142),responding to competitive pressure caused by new Internettechnology, has demonstrated major changes to its hallmark Notesprogram that allow it to both read and create information for theWorld Wide Web.Most of the changes are included in a new version of Notes thatwent on sale on January 1, 1996. This includes the possibility toclick onto the Web while reading email sent by a colleague inNotes, or create Web pages using Notes. The steps are designed tokeep Lotus as the leading seller of messaging and groupwareprograms, which combine electronic mail and sophisticateddatabases.Lotus has been increasingly threatened by technical standardsrelated to the Web that allow documents to be linked easilyregardless of the computers involved, something that Notes firstmade popular. Those technical standards occur in Web programs, suchas browsers, that are less expensive than Notes.Thousands of companies are incorporating Web standards incommunications programs not just for the Internet but on theirinternal computer networks, something that's become known as an"intranet." The new products put Lotus at the forefront of majorsoftware producers who are changing their goods to embrace theglobal data network. Pricing for Notes server software starts at$495.More information can be found at Lotus web site(http://www.lotus.com).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Internet WatchdogMonitors UsersCharles River Media (P.O. Box 417, 403 VFW Dr., Rockland, MA 02370)has announced Internet WatchDog for PC and Macintosh computers, amonitoring tool for the Internet and personal computers. InternetWatchDog does not censor what is being displayed; rather it makesa record for later viewing by authorized individuals.Using this utility on any PC or Macintosh, parents, teachers andemployers will be able to view the activities taking place on theircomputers without arbitrarily limiting access to the Internet orcreating a false sense of security by simply "blocking" certainsites or keywords. As new sites are added to the Internet everyday,it is impossible to "block" unsuitable Internet activity. InternetWatchDog allows the user to monitor computer use, much like atelephone bill enables the caller to see a listing of phonenumbers.Internet WatchDog functions by capturing screen and otherinformation "intelligently" while the computer is running. The userwill be able to review a grid-like screen with a series ofthumbnail screen captures. For a closer look, any screen capturecan be seen full-size. In addition, Internet WatchDog records usageof all software applications whether Internet related or othercomputer activity. A password is required to access the monitoringcapabilities of the program, and any attempt to circumvent ortamper with the Internet WatchDog is also recorded.Internet WatchDog, priced at $29.95, is available from computersoftware stores, bookstores, mail order catalogs, and Charles RiverMedia, Order Desk (Tel: 800/382-8505, email: chrivmedia@aol.com).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996'Super Spider'for the WebDigital Equipment Corp. (111 Powdermill Rd., Maynard, MA 01754) hasintroduced the Internet's first "super spider" software for theWorld Wide Web. It conducts a comprehensive search of the entireWeb text at speeds up to 100 times faster than spiders used inconventional information search services. The technology promisesto surpass the limitations of current information services bydelivering the most complete, precise, and up-to-date informationof the Web's entire text. The technology's super spider and superindexer employ next-generation software and advanced networking,powered by the highest-performing 64-bit Alpha computers.The super spider creates and dispatches a "brood of spiders" thatcrawls the entire Web. Second-generation scalable softwaresimultaneously locates and indexes text as it finds Web pages. Asearch engine enables Web users to conduct precise searches forspecific information by looking for phrases, specifying key words,using case-sensitive matches, and restricting searches to titles orother parts of a document. Network connectivity is provided throughDigital's fiber optic and high-speed network switchingtechnologies. Ultra-high-speed search and indexing is enabled byDigital's 64-bit servers.Digital made the "beta" version of this technology available onDecember 15, 1995. Users can test the super spider's Web index andprovide feedback through Digital's Internet address at:http://www.altavista.digital.com. For more information, contact: EdCanty (Tel: 508/264-6672), Sarah Miller (Tel: 508/264-6673), TomMadden (Tel: 508/264-6675), or Don Bradley (Tel: 508/264-6678).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Connect Schoolsto Internet NowThe Advisory Council on the National Information Infrastructure, apanel appointed by president Clinton has recommended thatcommunities should push schools and libraries onto the informationsuperhighway by the year 2000. Connecting each public school to theInternet by the year 2000 would cost 1.5% to 2% of schools'budgets, or about $11 billion, the report estimated. That assumesputting about 25 computers per school into a special classroom, orlab, where a school's teachers can bring classes once a day.But schools often remain leery of making big computer purchases,worried they will buy the wrong thing or spend thousands on quicklyobsolete equipment, the panel noted. Poorer school districts andthose in rural areas face special problems. Often, schools must doextensive renovations simply to get modern phone lines intobuildings constructed 50-70 years ago.The panel found success stories others can follow:    In Chester Ridge School District in Fishertown, PA, teacherseach year seek corporate grants that provide free Internet access,then use the time to train colleagues and help students.    A radio station in Lansing, MI, formed a partnership withseven schools to help students email questions about current eventsto the news staff, the White House, the governor and people aroundthe world.    At Rosa Parks Interparish Elementary in Baltimore, MD, acorporate grant helped students talk via computer with the school'snamesake, the legendary civil rights activist.    In Taos, NM, students and adults use a university's computersto look for jobs, visit a virtual library, get health informationor send email to lawmakers. The town, the state, local businessesand corporations help pay.The report found that parents with technical knowledge often are aschool's best resource. But it encouraged schools to seek helpanywhere: from corporations, state agencies, colleges or even byswitching money in their own budgets. About 1.3% of public schools'spending is now devoted to technology, the study found.Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Plug And PlaySecurity SolutionDigital Secured Networks (DSN) Technology Inc. (New York, NY) haspreviewed its Net G-1 security device, a hardware unit thatprovides an economical plug-and-play solution for absolutely securedata transmission over the Internet and other internal and externalnetworks. Incorporating DSN's patent-pending "Electronic PrivacySwitch" technology, the Net G-1 offers transparent security,authentication and encryption for network users.The company claims that "Net G-1 is part of a bold new coretechnology which greatly enhances the level of security for usersof the Internet, LANs and WANs, and will eventually be included inother telecommunication applications."  The product is not afirewall but can complement, support or replace a firewall or othersecurity software solutions.The Net G-1, which resembles a small black-cased desktop computer,provides a distributed security mode that cannot be entered ordecoded. With Net G-1, encryption does not take place over networklines. So hackers, intruders or unauthorized personnel cannotintercept, log onto, subvert or decode messages.The Net G-1 is a completely plug-and-play device. The user plugs inthree cables and requires no further maintenance or support. Onceconnected, the unit self-configures to PC or server's IP andEthernet address. It then automatically uses sophisticatedhandshake mechanisms and authentication procedures and generatesunique public key encryption. These are combined with the privatekeys on the receiving Net G-1 unit and establish a common secretkey connection between each pair of nodes.Pricing for the Net G-1 will be "around $5,000.00 per unit" andunits will be available for sale in the first quarter 1996. DSNofficials are offering free evaluation/testing units to thoseinterested.For more information, contact: Steven Greene of Sperling GreeneAssociates (Tel: 212/366-5060, Fax: 212/366-5922).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Low-Cost InternetSet-Top BoxViewCall America (VCA, 5600 Oakbrook Pkwy., Suite 240, Norcross, GA30093) has announced WEBster, a TV set-top box (STB) which givesconsumers direct access to the Internet and online services throughtheir television sets. ViewCall America started trials in January,1996 with Northern Telecom.Only a television, ordinary telephone line and WEBster are requiredto access the Internet and ViewCall online services. Through theViewCall service, consumers will be able to conduct home shopping,banking, email, information lookup and other activities. ViewCall'sShort-Cut interface allows easy navigation guided by four well-marked buttons on the ViewCall remote control. An optional infraredkeyboard is available.ViewCall America is negotiating partnerships with contentproviders, online publishers and merchants concentrating ineducational services, news, home shopping, home banking and onlineentertainment. ViewCall America started an Atlanta roll-out inJanuary, 1996, after conducting its first presentations to industryanalysts in December. WEBster and ViewCall America online serviceswill be available through local and national ViewCall Americabusiness partners. Unit pricing is expected below $300, plus a lowmonthly subscription fee.For more information, contact ViewCall America, Alan McKeon (Tel:770/729-2929, email: info@viewcallamerica.com).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Microsoft ProposesI'Net Digital SignatureMicrosoft Corp. (One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052-6399) hasproposed an Internet digital signature initiative to provide asafer environment for executable code on the Internet. To addressconcerns about potentially malicious code or viruses, thistechnology will enable users to verify that a program's integrityis free of third-party tampering. Browsers will be equipped withthe ability to automatically download applications from a list ofvendors approved by the user. If the author is not on the user'spre-approved list, the browser can display the signature of theexecutable code and allow users to make an informed decision onwhether to proceed with the download.Microsoft plans to propose the Internet digital signaturespecifications to the W3 Consortium (W3C) and the InternetEngineering Task Force (IETF) as an open Internet standard. Thetechnology will be an open, proposed specification available to theentire Internet community. In addition, as part of the Open ProcessDesign Review, Microsoft will host a digital signature designpreview to solicit feedback from the Internet community.For more information, contact: Kira Sorensen (Tel: 206/882-8080) orvisit Microsoft's home page athttp://www.microsoft.com/corpinfo/pr.htm.Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Telefonica SelectsFTP SoftwareFTP Software Inc. (100 Brickstone Sq., Andover, MA 01810) hasannounced that it has signed an agreement with Telefonica de Espanato provide a customized version of Explore, FTP Software's Internetaccess suite, as the access software for subscribers toTelefonica's Infovia Service.Telefonica, the largest provider of telecommunications services inSpain, and FTP Software have worked together to customize theclient, based on Explore technology, that will allow users toaccess Infovia Service and the Internet via Spanish languagesoftware. This customized Explore product will include a TCP/IPkernel; the latest version of the enhanced Mosaic browser for theWorld Wide Web; Mail OnNet email; KEYview document viewing andinformation access technology that integrates with leading WorldWide Web (WWW) browsers and email applications; an advanced, easy-to-use dialer application and additional functionality crucial forTelefonica's customers.For more information, contact FTP Software Inc., Jill LeBallisterDudka (Tel: 508/685-4000, ext. 6458).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Medicine CruisesInfo AutostradaRemote-controlled surgery, dietary advice and prescriptions foryoga or antibiotics should soon be coming down the informationautostrada to a place near you, experts have predicted at atelemedicine conference in Adelaide, Australia.Futurist Dr. Peter Ellyard said communications technology offereda great new chance for people to control their own health and wellbeing. People would be able to enter their own health profile intopersonal computers and receive information to help them tailortheir own personal diet, exercise, stress control and healthprograms and diagnose and manage some illnesses at home.Dr. Ellyard said telemedicine should teach people about yoga,shiatsu, traditional Chinese medicine, Ayurvedic medicine and othercomplementary medicine as well as conventional treatments so peoplecould focus on creating health instead of ignoring their bodiesuntil they got sick.Australia has a long tradition of telemedicine from the first RoyalFlying Doctor Service pedal radios brought to remote settlements in1927 to a 1961 emergency operation in Antarctica directed throughtelegrams by a brain specialist in Melbourne, to today'stelepsychiatry. And experts at the South Australian HealthCommission and Northern Territory Health Services conference say arevolution is on the way, with Australia aiming to be at theforefront of Asian telemedicine.Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Design Your OwnHome Page on the 'NetRecently, more and more services are being offered on the net forindividuals as well as businesses to design their own home page,requiring a minimum of technical expertise as well as little or nocost. Below is a sampling:Home Page Wizard. CompuServe Inc. (500 Arlington Centre Blvd.,Columbus, OH 43220) is expanding access to its Web page creationand publishing tools, now also being available for businesses.The "Home Page Wizard" can be used to build a page of up to onemegabyte and place it in CompuServe's Our World area(http://www.ourworld.com). The Home Page Wizard and "PublishingWizard" are currently available for free to CompuServe members (GOHPWIZ). While CompuServe is developing more advanced features tocreate a specialized business-oriented service, businesses areinvited to start now in Our World and upgrade to the more advancedcorporate service when it becomes available. CompuServe said thatto date, more than 17,000 personal home pages have been posted inthe Our World area by CompuServe members. The Home Page Wizardsoftware package was downloaded from the CompuServe InformationService over 35,000 times in the first ten days of availability.For more information, contact Jeff Shafer of CompuServe, Tel:614/538-4632 or visit CompuServe's home page athttp://www.compuserve.com.Instant Home Page. Web Communications (Santa Cruz, CA) is offeringan online service that allows anyone to instantly create a WorldWide Web site simply by filling out forms in their Web browser. The"WebCom Instant Site Service" offers reference and overviewinformation and five individual page creation forms. The overviewtakes clients through a step-by-step process of creating pages,where they can select the pages they wish to create, and enterinformation into the automated form. They are then presented withforms for five standard Web pages, including a home page, feedbackform, sign guestbook form, guestbook page, and a hotlist page.After the file name is confirmed, clients can view their completedweb page.Web Communications provides a guest account which can be used byanybody on the Internet to try out the WebCom Instant Site Service.The guest account can also be used by visitors to create their owncustom Web pages, or modify the pages created by the WebCom InstantSite Service.Web Communications was founded in May 1994 by Chris Schefler andThomas Leavitt to provide tools, resources, and services designedto assist individuals and organizations to publish and communicateeffectively and affordably over the Internet. The company currentlyhosts 1357 individual Web sites. For more information, contact WebCommunications, Chris Schefler (Tel: 408/457-9671).WebWho. Scientific Research Management Corp. (1714 Ringwood Ave.,San Jose, CA 95131) offers WebWho (http://webwho.com), which allowsusers, for a nominal charge, to create a mini-home page,approximately 150 words in length, with up to two hyperlinks, andto define and control their directory listing even if they don'thave an existing Web site, email address or Internet connection.Web explorers can immediately use WebWho, at no charge, as a Webnavigation directory to locate businesses and individuals on theInternet. In addition to determining their directory listing, homepage owners will be able to specify up to 20 keywords to furtherdefine their Internet presence. Unlike other Internet navigationtools, home page owners will be able to dynamically change theirdescription, hyperlinks and keywords at any time and as often asthey desire.Customers who already have an Internet presence, can also reap thebenefits of WebWho, by complementing and enhancing their existinghome page. Home page owners can choose the search category,keywords, description text, and hyperlinks to their existing homepage or emailbox. The probability that Internet explorers will findthem should be greatly increased.For more information, contact: Skeeter Wesinger, or Peter Bowen,both of SRMC (Tel: 408/437-1813, email: info@webwho.com).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Business Week's"Best Web Sites"In its annual roundup of "The Best...," Business Week Magazine forthe first time included "The Best Web Sites" for 1995. Thefollowing were selected:    THE SPOT (www.thespot.com), A daily soap opera abouttwentysomethings.    EDGAR (www.sec.gov/edgarhp.htm) Repository for SEC filings bycompanies since '94.    CENSUS (www.census.gov) If it's demographic information youwant, this is the place.    ESPN SPORTSZONE (espnet.sportszone.com) Up-to-date scores ofcollege and pro games.    WOODROW (woodrow.mpls.frb.fed.us) Federal Reserve Bank ofMinneapolis' site has tons of financial info.    IBM's Almaden Research Center(www.almaden.ibm.com:80/vis/stm/gallery.html) Breathtakingportraits of atoms, made by scanning tunneling microscopes.Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996CA Real EstateOnlineMany California real estate agents are now able to tap into whatcould be the largest online offering of information about homes andcondominiums to date. Members of the Greater Inland ValleysMultiple Listing Service Inc. (MLS) will be offering their homelistings via the Internet on a system that ties in listingsthroughout Southern California. The Homeseekers Web(http://www.homeseekers.comsite) brings together up to 40,000 homelistings across Southern California, many offering photos andspecific addresses. Homeseekers is the creation of Visual ListingsInc. (Brea, CA), which is operating kiosk-based New Home Searchsystems in shopping malls.The service has about 3,200 members from several local boards ofRealtors. The site already contains thousands of listings fromregional MLS systems covering Orange County, the Los Angeles areaand the Greater South Bay region. Real estate agents at boards inthe Coachella Valley and High Desert are expected to join thenetwork soon. And board-operated MLS systems in San Diego Countyand elsewhere in the state may also join soon.The system allows consumers to narrow their search from a wideselection of criteria, including city, price range, home style(single-family, condominium) number of bedrooms and baths, size ofgarage, and by other features, including formal dining room, pool,spa, fireplace and family room. Consumers also can limit the searchto only homes where open houses are scheduled so they only areshown houses they can go and see that day.Each property listing also has room for one color photo of theproperty. Brokers or agents may add up to three more photos perlisting for an additional cost. A 20-second soundtrack also can beadded at extra cost. Many of the listings include the property'saddress so consumers can drive by the listing first. Agents alsocan have a link to their own Internet home page added to eachproperty listing. The home page includes a photo and brief resumeand other properties the agent has to offer. They also can addelectronic mail and fax-back capabilities for consumers to use. Thehome page costs the broker or agent $50 a year.Homeseekers joins a growing list of Internet sites offeringproperty listings. Indeed, there are an estimated 4,800 such Websites across the U.S. Unlike other Internet sites, the Homeseekersand California Association of Realtors Internet sites allow realestate agents to list their properties for free--they pay noadvertising fee for the service other than the listing ratesalready paid to be part of their local MLS. The systems make moneythrough other companies that sponsor or advertise on the networks.These "sub-advertisers" pay from $250 to $500 a month to be on thenetwork, but also must agree to promote their company's presence onthe Internet.Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Internet WorldTrade CenterA new business-oriented web site (http://www.internetWTC.com)designed as the virtual equivalent of a skyscraping world tradetower has opened for business on the World Wide Web. With over 100floors and a marble-walled lobby, the Internet World Trade Center(iWTC, Box 5474, Route 46 East, Parsippany, NJ 07054) offersvisitors hundreds of features including investor services; tradeshow listings; news and weather updates; hyperlinks to 20 major websearch engines; a medical information facility; an entertainmentand gaming center, and, from its observation deck, downloadableviews of New York's skyline and harbor that are alwaysspectacularly clear.Visitors to the Internet World Trade Center enter through its lobbywhere a newsstand offers USA Today, Time Magazine, the FinancialTimes and many other publications. A tenant directory can besearched by company name or by product or service. Companies aregrouped by industry. For example, electronics firms are located onthe 11th floor, insurance companies on the 19th and softwaredevelopers on the 29th. Government  offices occupy the 15th floorwhere visitors can drop in on Congress, the CIA, FBI, and over adozen other federal agencies. Those stopping at the 22nd floorMedical Information Center can gather background on everything fromrhinoplasty to organ transplants. A major feature of the iWTC isimmediate access to 20 major web search engines including WebCrawler, Yahoo, Gopher and Lycos. There is also a package trackingcenter for users of Federal Express, DHL and UPS.iWTC provides potential member companies all necessary services toget started including design of online advertising andcommunications, support of order entry and electronic datainterchange (EDI) and database integration. Companies lease spacein the Internet World Trade Center by purchasing various-sizedunits of online pages. These range from inexpensive one-pagebusiness cards to 60-page areas capable of housing multimediaannual reports, executive overviews and interactive advertising.iWTC installations also enable advertisers to process orders andtransactions, maintain catalogs and provide customer support.Firms already established on the Internet may opt for a welcomepage that offers visitors a description of their products andservices and a direct connection to their home page via hyperlink.Retailers can set up shop on the iWTC's mezzanine mall. Theclassified advertising section accommodates real estate, helpwanted, used equipment and legal listings.For more information, contact: Kenneth Browne at IWTC (Tel:800/579-8656 or 201/244-1785).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996IRS PromotesInternet FilingWith the official start of tax filing season, the Internal RevenueService has said it is expanding its electronic services. The IRSis putting more information on the Internet, rolling out atelephone filing system nationwide and laying plans to expandfiling of tax returns on personal computers.To reach more taxpayers, or at least those who are computer-literate, the IRS is improving its online information network, suchas the "Fedworld" Internet home page at http://www.irs.ustreas.gov,with answers to frequently asked questions and forms that taxpayerscan download. Also this year, taxpayers can file another form thatwill direct-deposit refunds into a savings or checking account.The agency is planning a project called CyberFile that would allowtaxpayers to file electronic returns directly. At present, the IRSrequires that electronic filings be sent via a middleman, such asa professional tax preparer. The project will start with a test insix states, but IRS officials say they haven't decided just whereyet.Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Complete InternetCommerce PackageSBT's (1401 Los Gatos Dr., San Rafael, CA 94903) Internet Div. hasannounced that its electronic storefront package, WebTrader 2.0,will integrate Checkfree's (8275 North High St., Columbus, OH43235) credit card processing service providing a complete, secureInternet commerce solution. The combination allows any company tosell products on the Internet, automate order entry and fulfillmentand receive credit card payments electronically. WebTrader has asuggested retail price of $1,295.The Internet commerce solution process will be initiated by amerchant contacting an SBT Internet Business Consultant (IBC) whowill install and configure WebTrader and provide the client withthe Checkfree Merchant Application package. The IBC will arrangefor a Checkfree account manager to be assigned to the account whowill assist with the application process. The IBC will thencustomize and modify the WebTrader application, and tailorCheckfree's processing to the merchant's specific needs. Once theapplication has been processed and approved, the IBC willcoordinate site testing for credit card transactions. At that pointthe merchant is equipped to conduct business on the Internet.WebTrader allows businesses to create an electronic storefront withorder forms for products or services on the Web. It automaticallyprocesses the orders and sends the customer confirmation via email.WebTrader initiates and completes the sales process by providing adirect, instantaneous connection between vendor and customer.WebTrader also includes RSA Data Security's (100 Marine Pkwy.,Suite 500, Redwood City, CA 94065-1031) encryption software whichkeeps credit card numbers and other sensitive data private once itis received by the vendor's Web server.WebTrader can be used as a stand-alone Internet application or inconjunction with SBT's Pro Series 3.0i accounting software. Systemrequirements for WebTrader users are minimal: A 486 66Mhz or highercomputer, 12 Mb of RAM, an account with a major Internet provider,Windows 3.1 or higher, a 14.4 modem, and an Internet mailconnection.For more information, contact: Valdis Hellevik (Tel: 415/703-0400,ext. 225, email: valdis@ipri.com), or Marissa Verson (Tel: 415/703-0400), both of InterActive Public Relations Inc., for SBT; orhttp://www.sbt.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Visa's NewElectronic ServicesMajor U.S. financial institutions are implementing a fullyelectronic back-end bill-payment system developed by VisaInternational (San Francisco, CA), linked to remote-bankingservices offered by a growing number of financial institutions.Visa is commencing electronic bill-payment programs with major U.S.financial institutions, including Banc One Corp., Barnett Banks,The Chase Manhattan Bank, Crestar Bank, First Bank System, FirstInterstate Bank, First Chicago, First Tennessee Bank, First UnionNational Bank, Mellon Bank, Norwest Banks, Star Bank and U.S.Bancorp. Teaming up with major billers, such as utility companies,additional financial institutions are expected to utilize Visa'snew turnkey system in first quarter 1996.In addition to enhancing front-end, remote-banking programs by VisaInteractive, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Visa International, andother providers, Visa's newly U.S.-patented, back-end standard isexpected to significantly reduce remittance-processinginefficiencies for participating financial institutions andorganizations that bill for goods and services. Visa's back-endsystem also enables billers to electronically send invoices totheir customers who pay bills online, expected to be available inmid-1996, aimed at reducing the cost of printing and mailingstatements.Many financial services providers and commercial billers currentlyoffer electronic bill payment systems that are only partlyelectronic. Visa estimates that more than 60% of "electronic" billpayments are converted to paper to complete the payment process.The Visa solution is fully electronic, improving efficiency forbillers and financial institutions. Future enhancements areexpected to include multi-currency, cross-border paymentsettlement.Sterling Software (Dublin, OH) worked with Visa to enhanceelectronic connectivity between financial institutions and billers--the final link--to create a turnkey, member-controlled paymentsystem.For more information, contact: Greg Jones (Tel: 415-432-2753) orvisit Visa's Internet home page at http://www.visa.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996Investment Adviceon the NetINVESTools, (http://INVESTools.com), developed by TabulaInteractive Inc. (3905 Bohannon Dr., Suite A, Menlo Park, CA94025), now offers a total of 21 publications. Among thenewsletters and research recently added are Zacks EarningsEstimates, Al Frank's The Prudent Speculator, John Dessauer'sInvestor's World, Individual Investor's Special Situations Report,George Putnam's The Turnaround Letter and the No-Load Fund Analyst,produced by the Litman/Gregory investment management firm. Reuters'Corporate World News Service will also soon be integrated into thesite.INVESTools brings together a selection of top-performing investmentnewsletters and research, providing top advisors' analyses,including useful recommendations such as model portfolios.Investors can either browse through INVESTools' collection ofimpartial advisory information, or quickly perform searches onspecific stocks.INVESTools offers free access to newsletter excerpts, headlines,searches, sample issues, discussions and educational materials.Paid publications are available by subscription or a la cartepricing. When users read the contents of investment letters,earnings estimates and other paid services, they are charged onlyfor the elements they choose. Payment is by credit card orCyberCash. Most reports and articles fall into the $3-$10 pricerange, and new registrants currently get a $25 user credit.INVESTools is part of a broad trend toward investor self-help. Moreindividuals are taking control of their investment activities usingPCs and online information, because they realize that if they don'tplan for their own financial security, no one will. This growingnumber of self-reliant investors has fueled the explosion ofdiscount brokerage firms, 401K savings and mutual funds. Computertechnology has become a key tool that allows these investors tochoose and track their holdings. Sources of commodity informationlike stock quotations and historical charting have becomewidespread. Now investors are looking more for qualitative,advisory material to help guide them.For more information, contact Marjorie Cannon (Tel: 415/833-0350,ext. 17).Back to Headline List CopyrightDOT.COM via NewsNetJANUARY 1996DATA POINTSLiberty Financial Companies Inc. (125 High St., Boston, MA02110) has introduced the WebSaver Annuity on the World Wide Web(http://www.websaver.com), the first financial product specificallydesigned and priced for the Internet. By exploiting theefficiencies of the Internet, Liberty Financial says, the WebSaverAnnuity lowers its sales and operating costs and then passes thosesavings on to the online customer in the form of higher guaranteedrates. The WebSaver Annuity is a guaranteed return annuity thatallows customers to order a policy online, while funding the policywith a check sent through traditional mail to avoid potentialsecurity concerns. However, because of local laws, the annuityproduct is only available in 24 states.    Prudential Insurance Co. of America has launched aninteractive World Wide Web site at http://www.prudential.com.Prudential claims that their site is different from others becauseit is 'needs-based,' meaning that it provides consumers with toolsand calculators that can help them figure out, and plan for, theirshort-and long-term financial needs. Prudential says it has nointention of offering actual sales through the Internet.    According to the Kansai Employers Assn., some 2,000 companieswill start exchanging information via the Internet on both vacantpositions and employees they plan to transfer to other companies,possibly as early as March 1996. Under the human resources exchangenetwork project, western Japan-based companies will seek to helpemployees being encouraged to look for work elsewhere as a resultof corporate restructuring. The network would allow both companiesand employees who are subject to restructuring to access a databaseon human resources and available positions. Proponents of thesystem would also like to include companies in Tokyo and Nagoya touse it. The new system would provide such data as employees'skills, job careers and annual salaries, while protecting theirprivacy.    The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) will soongo live on the Internet, with a computer database that offersinformation on everything from sex to business, to provide materialon its member-nations. The ASEAN home page will give information oneach ASEAN country, reports from their ministerial and securitymeetings, documents on the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA), economiccooperation and investment policies of its members. No dates wereimmediately available on when ASEAN goes live on the Internet.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-11IA086-000622-B036-129http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te73.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045242 text/html 38804HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:50:41 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:57 GMTContent-length: 38617Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te73.html Sample Issue Copyright EDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES INTERNET ACCESS: NEW WORLD WIDE WEB INTERFACE SOFTWARE FROM CUADRA SPURS "INTRANET" USE; STAR/WEB FROM CUADRA SUPPORTS GROWING TREND AMONG FORTUNE 1000 COMPANIES OF USING WEB TECHNOLOGY FOR INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS (716 words) NEW NETWORK: CONSTRUCTION UNDER WAY ON NEW FIBER-OPTIC NETWORK FOR NEW ENGLAND (512 words) ACQUISITION: AT&T ACQUIRES PHILIPS' PUBLIC NETWORK ASSETS IN EUROPE (518 words) ACQUISITION: PHILIPS ELECTRONICS NORTH AMERICA CORP. ACQUIRES ALAMAR; ALAMAR TO OPERATE AS INDEPENDENT SUBSIDIARY (259 words) NEW SATELLITE: ECHOSTAR-I LIFT-OFF SUCCESSFUL (295 words) LOCAL COMPETITION: TIME WARNER COMMUNICATIONS ASKS PUCO TO INTERVENE IN NEGOTIATIONS WITH AMERITECH (411 words) ATM: CASCADE ANNOUNCES SHIPMENT OF THE CASCADE 500 ATM SWITCH; ON-TIME DELIVERY FROM THE WORLD LEADER IN FRAME RELAY WAN SWITCHING DELIVERS UNMATCHED ATM SCALABILITY & GUARANTEED END-TO-END QUALITY OF SERVICE (893 words) VOICE PROCESSING: ENHANCED SYSTEMS INC., A WHOLLY OWNED SUBSIDIARY OF VODAVI TECHNOLOGY INC., IN VOICE ACTIVATED DIALING AGREEMENT WITH GTE MOBILNET (391 words) EXECUTIVE SUITE: R. MICHAEL FRANZ TO JOIN SPRINT AS PRESIDENT OF DIVERSIFIED BRANDS GROUP (342 words) FINANCIAL: V BAND REPORTS FINANCIAL RESULTS FOR FISCAL YEAR 1995 (544 words) CopyrightEDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996INTERNET ACCESS: NEW WORLD WIDE WEB INTERFACE SOFTWARE FROM CUADRA SPURS"INTRANET" USE; STAR/WEB FROM CUADRA SUPPORTS GROWING TREND AMONG FORTUNE1000 COMPANIES OF USING WEB TECHNOLOGY FOR INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONSNew technology originally designed for use with the Internet World WideWeb, the global network of publicly accessible computers, is increasinglybeing used by Fortune 1000 companies for strictly private use on theirinternal networks for in-house communications and information storage andretrieval.And STAR/Web, a software product by Cuadra Associates, a leading softwaredeveloper based in Los Angeles, is helping them do it.The use of Web concepts and technology in internal networks is beingwidely referred to as "Intranet." One of the major attractions is that itlets companies give their staff members better access to internalinformation resources, regardless of whether they use PCs, Macs,X-terminals, RISC workstations, or any combination of these.  It alsoallows them to store data on a number of different systems, yet access thedata through a common user interface.  Any desktop workstation for whichthere is a Web browser can be used to access corporate data easily throughthe company's Intranet.Early adopters of Web technology for in-house information, such as PacificBell and Amdahl Corp., claim that their investments in the Intranetapproach and STAR/Web are already paying off handsomely.  STAR/Web is acommon gateway interface (cgi) program that connects STAR, Cuadra'spowerful information management and retrieval software, to any standard orcommercial Web server so it can be used to provide sophisticated,interactive information retrieval to large corporate databases."Our purchase of STAR/Web has allowed Amdahl to move swiftly towards ourgoal of creating a Web window into vast amounts of corporate data whichhas previously been locked up on individual machines or on specificplatforms," says Christel Casjens, information specialist at Amdahl Corp.,a leading data communications supplier.  "It has enabled us to capitalizeon our prior investment of creating a corporate `Intranet', as well asemployee familiarity with the Internet and Web browsers.  All of thesefactors make us confident that the tools being built using STAR/Web willfacilitate the flow of timely information to all employees, which can onlylead to greater corporate responsiveness to the changing marketenvironment."At Pacific Bell, the incorporation of the Intranet model has changed theway that the company views and uses information resources.  Pacific Bellis standardizing desktop tools throughout the company and using STAR/Webfor internal access to the information in its Corporate IntelligenceCenter.  "We have been actively exploring ways to exploit other sources ofinformation," says Ralph Miller, director of the center.  "Departmentswithin Pacific Bell have developed Web sites to disseminate information toother departments, so we're experiencing increased awareness and usage ofinternal information sources horizontally across the corporation."Pacific Bell and Amdahl are typical of organizations that have created andcollected a great deal of valuable data -- their "corporate memory" --stored on a number of different computers using more than one softwarepackage.  Getting access to such data has typically been very difficult todo, particularly since it involves learning multiple interfaces or searchsystems.Now, with standard Web software and facilitating software such asSTAR/Web, the distributed information model popularized on the Internetprovides an easy solution.  If the search software follows the commongateway interface standard and the data includes hypertext links, staffmembers can use Netscape, Mosaic, and other Web browsers already familiarto them to search and retrieve information of almost any type or length.When users find relevant information, they can "click" on hypertext linksand find other, related information, no matter on which computer on theinternal network the data is stored.The role of STAR/Web in the Intranet model is to support the searching oflarge databases, with sophisticated, interactive, assisted searching.Unlike the typical clicking through menus to find a succession of"screens," STAR/Web users enjoy a full array of high-performanceinteractive information retrieval capabilities appropriate for largedatabases representing paper, electronic, and image files.For more information, contact Cuadra at 310/478-0066, 800/366-1390, fax310/477-1078, or e-mail to hq@cuadra.com.Amdahl is  a worldwide supplier of large-scale System/390 compatibleprocessors, UNIX systems software and servers, data storage subsystems,data communications products, applications development software, and avariety of educational and consulting services.  Amdahl products are soldin more than 30 countries for use across all types of computingenvironments.Back to Headline List CopyrightEDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW NETWORK: CONSTRUCTION UNDER WAY ON NEW FIBER-OPTIC NETWORK FOR NEWENGLANDConstruction of a new fiber-optic communications network for New Englandhas begun, FiveCom Inc., of Waltham, Mass., announced today."The NEON light is on, and we're moving," said FiveCom president VictorColantonio, referring to FiveCom's New England Optical Networkcommunications project."We're installing NEON's 36-mile link between Hartford and Springfield,"Colantonio said.  "That moves us toward our first-phase goal of a 410-milenetwork backbone linking most cities in three New England states by theend of 1997.  The fiber-optic system will offer high-capacity transmissionof voice, video and data.  We expect to build continuously from thatbackbone to serve the entire New England region, and possibly easternCanada as well."The first phase of NEON is being built in the areas of Connecticut,Massachusetts and New Hampshire served by the operating companies ofHartford-based Northeast Utilities.  FiveCom has long-term agreementsallowing it to install fiber-optic cable throughout the utility's servicearea.FiveCom will seek to negotiate similar agreements with other New Englandutility companies to expand its reach.  It has secured a letter of intentfrom Central Maine Power Co., Maine's largest electric utility.Construction costs for the first phase of NEON could exceed $30 million,including tasks such as installing specially manufactured 96-fiber cable.FiveCom is offering leases of fiber-optic capacity to major carriers thatwill be less costly than new construction by the carriers themselves."Piggybacking fiber on utility property is a win-win move," Colantoniosaid.  "It adds value to an existing asset for the utilities, and offerscarriers a fast and economical option for adding extremely reliablecapacity to their systems."FiveCom shareholders recently voted to sell a controlling interest in theprivately held company to MaineCom Services, a wholly owned subsidiary ofCentral Maine Power Co.  Besides stock, MaineCom gains seats on FiveCom'sboard and contracts for the continued services of FiveCom principals.Legal and financial details of the transaction were not disclosed."This a terrific opportunity for Central Maine Power and MaineComServices," said Gerald C. Poulin, chairman of MaineCom's board and a CMPvice president.  "The technology is proven, the potential market is big,and FiveCom's position in the market is impressive."Poulin added, "The relationships we're building by this investment couldlead to new utility partners, joint ventures and strategic alliances thatcould promote FiveCom's expansion."MaineCom Services began operations earlier this year after the MainePublic Utilities Commission approved CMP's request for permission toundertake limited diversification into new lines of business in NewEngland and eastern Canada.  "We've done fee-for-service work andconsulting," said MaineCom president Mark E. Curtis, "but this acquisitionis a critical step toward our business objective."Curtis said the combination of FiveCom's technical and marketing savvy andits current facilities agreement make it a very valuable acquisition."FiveCom is a young company," he said, "but they've very quickly seized acommanding position to compete in the carrier market.  We will fullysupport their plans to build on that foundation and become a market leaderin the Northeast."Back to Headline List CopyrightEDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ACQUISITION: AT&T ACQUIRES PHILIPS' PUBLIC NETWORK ASSETS IN EUROPEAT&T Network Systems and Philips Electronics N.V. have signed the finalpurchase agreement under which AT&T has acquired a portion of the publicnetwork assets held by the Philips Communication Systems division.Financial terms and conditions of the transaction were not disclosed.  Thefinal agreement follows the memorandum of understanding the two companiessigned July 27.Under the terms of the contract, AT&T Network Systems has purchased theassets related to four Philips Communications Systems units:  CellularInfrastructure Systems; Managed Transport Networks; Microwave Transmissionand Access; and Transmission.  These assets are currently held byTelecommunications Radioelectriques et Telephoniques (TRT) of Paris,France, and Philips Kommunikations Industrie (PKI) of Nuremberg, Germany.The contract provides for AT&T Network Systems to purchase from PhilipsElectronics the legal entity of TRT, and assets of PKI associated with theacquired business units.  Both TRT and PKI are subsidiaries of Philips.AT&T Network Systems assumes the TRT legal entity, name and brand whilePhilips retains the PKI legal entity and name.For AT&T Network Systems, the acquisition signals a strengthenedcommitment to offer customers worldwide the industry's most robust andcompetitive wireless and transmission infrastructure solutions.Philips' public network communications systems businesses include itsGlobal System for Mobile Communication (GSM) base station equipment; ruraltelephony solutions; point-to-point microwave transmission equipment;wireless local network access using the Digital European CordlessTelecommunications (DECT) standard; high-speed transmission systems basedon the Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) standard; and other publicnetwork systems.By the end of 1996 -- following the completion of AT&T's restructuringinto three separate companies -- AT&T Network Systems will become anintegral part of a new publicly-traded systems and technology company. Thecompany will retain the technological expertise and innovation of BellLaboratories.AT&T and Philips will complete the transfer of ownership to AT&T NetworkSystems in early 1996.AT&T Network Systems will assume a global workforce of approximately 3,500employees from PKI and TRT comprising managers, development staff andengineers, factory workers and marketing and sales personnel.  Thepurchase agreement covers PKI and TRT sales organizations in 25 countriesworldwide.The acquired assets also include specified commercial, manufacturing andR&D resources in Nuremberg, Germany, and Paris, Rouen and Lannion, France.Philips intends to integrate the remaining activities of PKI into PhilipsGmbH in Germany, and the remaining TRT activities into the Philipsorganization in France.In line with its Personal Communications strategy, Philips will retainsuch products as cellular, corded and cordless telephones; facsimiles andpagers; and its private network business units in Business CommunicationSystems; Data Communications; Private Mobile Radio; and Smart Cards andSystems.Philips Electronics of the Netherlands is one of the world's largestelectronics companies, with sales of $33.7 billion in 1994, and some265,000 employees worldwide.  Its products include lighting, consumerelectronics, recorded music, components, semiconductors, communicationsystems, medical systems, industrial electronics, and domestic appliancesand personal care products.AT&T Network Systems is one of the world's largest providers oftelecommunications equipment, software and end-to-end solutions used bynetwork service and information providers around the world.Back to Headline List CopyrightEDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ACQUISITION: PHILIPS ELECTRONICS NORTH AMERICA CORP. ACQUIRES ALAMAR;ALAMAR TO OPERATE AS INDEPENDENT SUBSIDIARYPhilips Electronics North America Corp. has completed its acquisition ofAlamar Electronics USA, Inc., a leading producer and installer ofbroadcast, cable and satellite television automation systems. Purchaseprice was not disclosed.Alamar becomes part of Philips' Business Electronics which includesextensive holdings in broadcast television equipment, systems andservices.  "Philips plans to help Alamar continue its fast growth as anatural extension of our television broadcasting activities," said StephenC. Tumminello, president, Philips Electronics North America Corp.Alamar has become the dominant provider of software-based solutions in themarket.  Broadcast, cable and satellite system automation is rapidlyexpanding, noted Douglas A. Hurrell, Alamar's founder and president.  "Weare experiencing increases in demand from virtually all global mediaoutlets.  These trends make our affiliation with Philips very timely andexciting."Alamar will continue to operate within its existing management structure.For example, the BTS Broadcast Television Systems unit of Philips nowoffers Alamar products and services to customers in the studio operationsfield.  This acquisition allows Philips to offer turnkey broadcast signalmanagement systems complete with automation solutions.Since its formation 13 years ago, Alamar, based in Campbell, Calif., hasinstalled more than 400 automation systems in broadcast, cable andsatellite facilities throughout the world.Philips Electronics North America Corp. is a major manufacturer andexporter in the United States, with more than 30,000 employees and annualsales of $7 billion.  Philips Electronics N.V. is among the world'slargest electronics companies, with more than 250,000 employees worldwideand annual sales of $34 billion.Back to Headline List CopyrightEDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996NEW SATELLITE: ECHOSTAR-I LIFT-OFF SUCCESSFULEchoStar Communications Corporation ("EchoStar"), announced the successfullift-off Thursday morning of its first direct broadcast satellite (DBS),EchoStar-I, from China Great Wall Industry Corporation's Xichang, Chinalaunch facility.The Lockheed Martin Series 7000 satellite was launched atop an LM-2Elaunch vehicle.  It will provide programming from its final location at119" west longitude for EchoStar's DISH Television Network beginning earlynext year."EchoStar-I was successfully launched into low-earth orbit at 4:51 a.m.(MST) today.  This is great news, but it is only the first step," statedEchoStar Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Charles Ergen from thelaunch site in Xichang, China."We have confirmation that we have successful firing of the third stage,which will place the satellite in its transfer orbit," commented CarlVogel, President of EchoStar Satellite Corporation. "We expectconfirmation of final spacecraft separation and achievement of geotransferorbit by 2:00 p.m. (MST) Thursday."Headquartered in Englewood, Colorado, EchoStar Communications Corporationis a leading manufacturer and distributor of satellite television systemsworldwide.  EchoStar is developing a state-of-the- art DBS system, theDISH (Digital Sky Highway) Network, expected to be operational early nextyear with programming transmitted from EchoStar-I.  A total of over 200channels of digital video, audio and data services are expected to bedelivered to homes throughout the continental United States with thelaunch of EchoStar-II in mid-1996. EchoStar Communications Corporation andits subsidiaries deliver direct-to-home (DTH) satellite televisionproducts and services to customers worldwide.  The Company is a single,convenient source for equipment distribution, sales, installation, andservice; consumer financing; and programming distribution; and is widelyrecognized in the industry for its research and development activities.EchoStar's international operations include sales and service locations inHolland, Spain, Singapore, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia and India.Back to Headline List CopyrightEDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996LOCAL COMPETITION: TIME WARNER COMMUNICATIONS ASKS PUCO TO INTERVENE INNEGOTIATIONS WITH AMERITECHAfter a year of negotiations, Time Warner Communications says Ameritech iseither unable or unwilling to reach an agreement to interconnect itsnetwork and it is time for the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio (PUCO)to get involved.The company said that an agreement with Ameritech "must be concluded bythe parties, with commission intervention or by commission directive, bymid-January 1996 or the promise of local telephone competition in Ohiowill be even further delayed."Time Warner Communications made the request for PUCO intervention in itssecond 60-day report to the commission on the status of interconnectionnegotiations with Ameritech and other monopoly telephone companies.Time Warner Communications has been negotiating with Ameritech sinceDecember 1994.  "While the parties have clearly reached agreements on alltechnical issues necessary for interconnection, the same cannot be saidwith respect to the economic aspects of interconnection," the company saidin its letter to PUCO Chairman Craig Glazer.Although the details of the negotiations are subject to a confidentialityagreement, Time Warner Communications said that charges proposed byAmeritech for some key services are excessive and that no costjustification has been provided by Ameritech.  In addition, "Time WarnerCommunications believes that it is not negotiating directly with thoseindividuals in Ameritech who can finally explain, modify and concludeinterconnection agreements," the report said.It further stated that negotiations with Ameritech are most criticalbecause Time Warner Communications plans to begin offering competitivelocal telephone service in Ameritech's area first.The company said it has had only preliminary discussions with CincinnatiBell and recently began negotiations with GTE-North. Talks also areunderway with United Telephone of Ohio.Time Warner Communications was granted a provisional certificate toprovide local telephone service in 37 Ohio counties by the PUCO in August.Before it can compete with existing telephone companies, it must reachinterconnection agreements with them so customers can make calls toanyone, regardless of which phone company they use. The PUCO also mustapprove certain rules under which telephone companies will compete beforeTime Warner enters the market.Time Warner Communications is a division of Time Warner Cable that isleading the company's entry into the telephone business.  It currentlyprovides local telephone service in Rochester, NY and competitive accessservice in 15 locations across the country.  Time Warner Cable has fouroperating divisions in Ohio serving more than 732,000 customers andpassing 1.2 million homes.Back to Headline List CopyrightEDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ATM: CASCADE ANNOUNCES SHIPMENT OF THE CASCADE 500 ATM SWITCH; ON-TIMEDELIVERY FROM THE WORLD LEADER IN FRAME RELAY WAN SWITCHING DELIVERSUNMATCHED ATM SCALABILITY & GUARANTEED END-TO-END QUALITY OF SERVICELeveraging its leadership and proven expertise in providing powerfulconnection-oriented Frame Relay wide area network (WAN) switches, CascadeCommunications Corp. Thursday announced that it has attained abreakthrough engineering achievement through rapid market delivery of thefunctionally-rich, high-capacity Cascade 500 Asynchronous Transfer Mode(ATM) switch.With delivery timing as planned, the Cascade 500 has shipped to fourorganizations for beta testing, including PSINet Inc. and LDDS WorldCom.This marks the third delivery of a major system platform from Cascade inthe last three years.Building upon Cascade's expertise in designing large Frame Relay networks,the Cascade 500 delivers the industry's highest scalability andreliability, critical requirements as the number of users on the Internetand other wide area networks continues to explode and higher-speedapplications are deployed.  Featuring the industry's only quad-planearchitecture and quality-of-service- capable routing software (viaCascade's Virtual Network Navigator), the Cascade 500 delivers end-to-endATM quality of service, guaranteeing simultaneous network transport ofdata and multimedia applications.  Seamlessly integrated with Cascade'sstandards- compliant B-STDX multiservice switches and fully manageable byCascadeView, the only standards-compliant WAN network management system,the Cascade 500 provides a complete solution for cost-efficient andeasy-to- administer high-capacity networks."We are pleased that major organizations have not only recognized therobust ATM capabilities of the Cascade 500, but also its strategicsystem-level capabilities within their overall communications initiative,"said Daniel E. Smith, president and CEO for Cascade.  "With the Cascade500, we continue to deliver timely, best-of-breed products that meetreal-world customer requirements with complete integration with existingnetwork systems."One organization testing the Cascade 500 is Internet giant PSINet Inc."With Cascade's B-STDX Frame Relay switches, we have experiencedtremendous success in meeting explosive demand for our Internet servicesworldwide," said Martin L. Schoffstall, senior vice president and CTO ofPSINet.  "With availability of the Cascade 500 ATM switch, we will buildupon that success, leveraging the Cascade 500's unique quality of serviceand scalability features for the introduction of exciting newInternet-hosted multimedia applications, such as on-demand interactivevideo and voice, and real-time multi-player, multimedia gaming.""Furthermore, the Cascade 500 and the B-STDX's tight integration andstrict adherence to standards will provide significant service andmanagement benefits," added Schoffstall.  "From a service standpoint, theB-STDX's Frame Relay-to-ATM Interworking functions will allow ourcustomers to seamlessly migrate to ATM without having to incur the cost ofglobally upgrading to ATM.  From a management perspective, because boththe B-STDX Frame Relay switch and the Cascade 500 ATM are SNMP-manageableby CascadeView, we will be able to add this next-generation technology toour network environment with minimal training and deployment."Designed as a 16-slot chassis system, the Cascade 500 is a non-blockingATM switch with a flexible 2.5, 5 and 10 Gbps capacity. It supportsnext-generation speeds of 45, 155 and 622 Mbps and the industry's highestport density on a single platform, supporting 56 OC-3c/STM-1, 112 DS-3/E3and 14 OC-12/STM-4 ports."Our timely delivery of the Cascade 500 to four robust networkenvironments for beta testing proves the singular relevance of Frame Relayexpertise to ATM networks," said Chris Baldwin, Cascade's senior productmanager for ATM.  "Beyond the simple mechanics of hardware-based cellswitching, ATM is all connection-management software.  Frame Relay and ATMshare the connection-oriented paradigm.  Cascade's proven leadership inFrame Relay connection management has given it a leapfrog position in ATMsystem design, proven now by our Cascade 500 engineering-deliverysuccess."PRICING/AVAILABILITYWith general availability in Q1 `96, the Cascade 500 is priced based onsystem configuration, with entry-level pricing starting at $25,000 andtypical systems averaging around $150,000 to $200,000. For moreinformation, customers should call Cascade at 1-800-647-6926.  Europeancustomers should contact Cascade Communications Limited at44-0-784-434377.  Cascade's World Wide Web address is http://www.cscc.com.PSINet is a leading provider of Internet access and services to bothorganizations and individuals throughout the U.S. and abroad. TheCompany's PSINet network offers access to the Internet from more than 200points-of-presence (POPs) in North America and abroad. Internet accessoptions range from modem dial-up and ISDN for telecommuters and smalloffice LANs to dedicated high-speed circuits for corporate connectivity.PSINet has defined industry standards and is a leader in technologicalinnovation and new service development.  The company has its headquartersin Herndon, VA, with sales and field service offices across the U.S., andsubsidiary offices in Cambridge, England, and Tokyo, Japan.  Furtherproduct, availability and pricing information can be obtained by calling+1.703.904.4100; through PSINet's Web site at http://www.psi.net/; or bysending an e-mail request to infopsi.com.One of the world's fastest growing data communications companies andprice/performance leader in Frame Relay, Cascade Communications ofWestford, Mass. is a global provider of wide area networking products forthe enterprise and public carrier network markets.  The pioneer ofmultiservice WAN switches, Cascade delivers enterprise-ready switches andnetwork management solutions that enable customers to seamlessly integrateexisting technologies with ATM for cost-effective network expansion andinvestment protection. Cascade's STDX and B-STDX multiservice switches andthe recently introduced Cascade 500 ATM switch offer the highestscalability and network capacity in the industry.  Worldwide, private andpublic networks such as BellSouth, Bridge Information Systems, GTE,Pacific Bell, US West, LDDS WorldCom, and British Telecom rely on Cascadeproducts for unparalleled quality of service and high-performance WANservices.Back to Headline List CopyrightEDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996VOICE PROCESSING: ENHANCED SYSTEMS INC., A WHOLLY OWNED SUBSIDIARY OFVODAVI TECHNOLOGY INC., IN VOICE ACTIVATED DIALING AGREEMENT WITH GTEMOBILNETEnhanced Systems Inc. (ESI) has been selected as the vendor of choice toprovide Voice Activated Dialing (VAD) systems to GTE Mobilnet.Michael Mittel, president of ESI, said, "We have been working closely withGTE Mobilnet on VAD for the past 18 months and of course we are quitepleased with their decision.  We have built a user interface that webelieve is second to none.  Also, our in-market experience has given us aunique understanding of the nuances needed to successfully implement voicerecognition technology in a cellular environment."We look forward to continuing our close working relationship with GTE tosupport their existing VAD systems and to provide systems they maypurchase in the future.  We have also begun development of next generationsystems which will offer a whole new range of features and serviceofferings."GTE made its decision after a thorough analysis from the leading vendorsin the voice recognition industry.  Dave Wasby, product manager for GTEMobilnet, said, "Over the past two years we were able to narrow the fieldof players in the voice recognition arena to just a few 'best in class'vendors.  Enhanced Systems was judged to be the best after extensivein-market testing.  We are pleased to be partnering with a firm asproactive and technically advanced as Enhanced Systems."VAD allows cellular customers to use voice commands in order to dial,simply by recording, then saying the name of the person (or speaking theirphone number).  The product also lets customers control their cellularvoice mailboxes simply by speaking work commands such as play, save,delete, etc.  Enhanced Systems is one of the first manufacturers to enableother vendors' voice mail systems with speaker-independent voicerecognition capabilities.Enhanced Systems Inc., based in Norcross, designs, develops, markets andsupports a line of voice processing and interactive voice responsesoftware products.  The company is a wholly owned subsidiary of VodaviTechnology Inc. (NASDAQ:VTEK) (VTI) headquartered in Scottsdale, Ariz. andis traded on the NASDAQ under the symbol VTEK.GTE Mobilnet, headquartered in Atlanta, is a leading mobile cellularoperator in the United States, with the potential of serving some 72million cellular and personal communication service customers.  Thecompany is a wholly owned subsidiary of GTE Corp., one of the world'slargest providers of telecommunications services.Back to Headline List CopyrightEDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996EXECUTIVE SUITE: R. MICHAEL FRANZ TO JOIN SPRINT AS PRESIDENT OFDIVERSIFIED BRANDS GROUPSprint announced that R. Michael Franz, currently president and chiefexecutive officer of Murata Business Systems, Inc., will become presidentof the Diversified Brands Group in the company's Long Distance Division,effective Jan. 8, 1996."We are pleased to have attracted an executive with the talent andexperience of Mike Franz," said Gary Forsee, president and chief operatingofficer of Sprint's Long Distance Division.  "He is a proven leader and iscredited with pioneering the consumer fax industry, in which Murata is oneof the world's top performers.  Innovation and passion for building marketshare are hallmarks of his 19 years in the telecommunications industry.His experience in developing sales and marketing distribution channels andcreating alternative distribution systems should be a major benefit toSprint."As president of the Diversified Brands Group, Franz will direct thepresent and future agreements and sales efforts with companies whichresell telecommunications services to businesses and consumers.  He willreport to Forsee and be based in Kansas City."While it will be difficult to leave Murata after 13 years, the dynamicenvironment and opportunities within Sprint are extremely attractive,"said Franz.  "I'm especially pleased to be part of Sprint's team and lookforward to participating in the company's success in the years ahead."Franz, 42, joined Murata Business Systems in 1982 as vice president andgeneral manager.  Two years later he became president and added theadditional responsibility of CEO in 1986.  Prior to joining Murata, Franzheld a variety of management positions with the Imaging Systems Divisionof Burroughs Corporation.Franz holds both a B.A. degree and MBA from Santa Clara University.Sprint is a global communications company -- at the forefront ofintegrating long distance, local and wireless communications services, andthe world's largest carrier of Internet traffic.  Sprint built andoperates the United States' only nationwide all-digital, fiber-opticnetwork and is the leader in advanced data communications services. Sprinthas $12.6 billion in annual revenues and serves more than 15 millionbusiness and residential customers.Back to Headline List CopyrightEDGE ON & ABOUT AT&T via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FINANCIAL: V BAND REPORTS FINANCIAL RESULTS FOR FISCAL YEAR 1995V Band Corporation (NASDAQ/NML: VBAN) reports sales for the fiscal yearended Oct. 31, 1995 of $29.4 million, a 6% decrease from sales for fiscal1994.Equipment sales decrease 12% from $26.9 million in 1994 to $23.6 millionin 1995.  Service sales increased 41% to $5.8 million in 1995 from $4.1million in 1994 as the number of customer installations serviced by thecompany has increased.  Fourth quarter sales were $7.6 million, a 23%decrease from the fourth quarter 1994 sales of $9.9 million.The company reports a net loss for 1995 of $11.6 million, or $2.18 pershare, including a $5.1 million charge for certain non-recurring items andinventory reserves.  This compares to a net income for 1994 of $1.9million, or $.35 per share, which included a cumulative income effect of$1.2 million, or $.23 per share, for the accounting for income taxesrelated to adoption of Financial Accounting Standard No. 109.  The netloss for the fourth quarter of 1995 was $7.0 million, or $1.32 per share.This compares to net income for the fourth quarter of 1994 of $1.3million, or $.24 per share, after giving effect to the adoption of FAS No.109, described above.  The net loss in the fourth quarter of 1995 includes$5.1 million of non-recurring charges related to a write-off of certainintangible assets, restructuring charges related to a company-widereduction in personnel and increases in inventory reserves related toolder product lines.Management believes that the restructuring of the company's operationscombined with new product introductions during the year has positioned thecompany to achieve profitability in the years ahead.  During the year thecompany installed a new management team, reduced total personnel 25% tothe current level of 216, substantially reduced its manufacturing expensesby out-sourcing production and implemented a new management informationsystem.V Band is a leading supplier of instant access voice communicationsystems.  These systems include sophisticated communications workstations,switching equipment, peripheral products, project management, technicalservices and WAN solutions. V Band products and services are usedworldwide by financial services organizations for the trading of stocks,bonds and other financial instruments.  Other industries served includethe mission critical communication requirements of the electric powerindustry and emergency service providers.                               Financial Summary                     (In thousands, except per share data)Quarter Ended Oct. 31,               1995        1994Sales Equipment                        $ 5,847      $ 8,270 Service                            1,723        1,592   Total sales                      7,570        9,862Net income (loss) before cumulative effect of accounting change       (7,001)         28Cumulative effect of accounting change for income taxes               --       1,242Net income (loss)                  (7,001)      1,270Average shares outstanding          5,323       5,324Per share data:Income (loss) before effect of accounting change                  (1.32)        .01Cumulative effect of accounting change for income taxes               --         .23Net income (loss)                   (1.32)        .24Twelve Months Ended Oct. 31,        1995        1994Sales Equipment                        $23,591     $26,944 Service                            5,760       4,134   Total sales                     29,351      31,078Net income (loss) before cumulative effect of accounting change      (11,594)        627Cumulative effect of accounting change for income taxes               --       1,242Net income (loss)                 (11,594)      1,869Average shares outstanding          5,322       5,311Per share data:Income (loss) before effect of accounting change                  (2.18)        .12Cumulative effect of accounting change for income taxes               --         .23Net income (loss)                   (2.18)        .35Back to Headline List WT03-B12-12IA086-000622-B036-160http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te80.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045305 text/html 40426HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:51:08 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:56 GMTContent-length: 40239Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te80.html Sample Issue Copyright EDI NEWS via NewsNet January 8, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES VAS VALUE-ADDED PROVIDERS FILL NICHE FOR BUSINESS BUT IS IT REALLY EDI? (796 words) MINIGUIDE: VALUE-ADDED EDI SERVICE PROVIDERS (291 words) TRENDS SMALL BUSINESSES WILL BE KEY TO OPEN EDI AND INTERNET USE (1028 words) MARKETPLACE PROFILE: APL GROUP APL STANDS FIRM IN VISION OF COMPANY AND PRODUCTS (453 words) INDUSTRY BRIEFS FIFTH THIRD BANK ADDS EDI (64 words) FDA TO HOLD JANUARY CONFERENCE ON EDI ADVERSE REPORT FILINGS (112 words) DISA PUBLISHES MODEL EDI AUDIT GUIDE TO TRACK AND VERIFY EDI (127 words) STERLING'S GENTRAN:INTEGRATOR PROVIDES INSTANT EDI (84 words) VHA SELECTS ABBOT LABS, CHOICE MEDICAL (101 words) SECURITY PREMENOS CERTIFICATION CAN HELP YOU TO OFFER SECURE INTERNET EDI (382 words) EDI NEWS INDEX OF STORIES FOR 1995 ANALYSIS (72 words) APPLICATIONS (160 words) AUTO MANUFACTURING (23 words) BRIEFS (216 words) DISA (54 words) ELECTRONIC COMMERCE (75 words) FEDI (75 words) GOVERNMENT (89 words) INTERNATIONAL (109 words) INTERNET (52 words) MANUFACTURING (21 words) MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS (35 words) ROUNDTABLE (24 words) RESEARCH (54 words) RETAIL (22 words) SECURITY (21 words) SOLUTIONS (148 words) STANDARDS (221 words) STRATEGIES (90 words) TRANSPORTATION (21 words) CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996VALUE-ADDED PROVIDERS FILL NICHE FOR BUSINESSBUT IS IT REALLY EDI?      Third-party service bureaus for electronic data interchange (EDI)are a small, but rapidly growing segment of the EDI support industrythat can help smaller businesses comply with federal procurementmandates.  But some industry insiders we spoke with cautioned againstrelying on service bureaus to help you convert your business toelectronic forms.      "It is not EDI when one is going from computer application tohard copy and back," says Steve Young, EDI program manager at MountainView, Calif.-based Input, a research company.      But such value-added services (VAS) can offer you everything fromgovernment requests for quotations (RFQs) servicing to off-site EDIthird-party delivery to document faxing-to-EDI, if you know how toevaluate the vendor and services you need. Finding the Easy Way Out      Not everyone sees the service bureau concept as a goodalternative to doing it yourself, however.  The question has beenraised whether using service bureaus is even true EDI.      Input's Young says the paperwork that VAS produce is movingbackward and causes more errors because the human element isreintroduced to the process.  "The point of true EDI eliminateserrors," he added.             But VAS see themselves as filling a niche in the EDI spectrum. "Our role is to fill in the blank for small business so they are notcompelled to get EDI or use a value-added network (VAN)," says KenKohler, vice president of sales for Comptech, a VAS in Amarillo,Texas.        Kohler says he is amazed at the number of businesses he comes incontact with that still don't use a computer.  "These are [thriving]companies that are doing business with the federal government.  Nowthey have to do EDI to win a new contract and where are they going togo to do that," he says.                    There are a lot of limitations to EDI regarding the sending ofspecifications or design alternatives, Kohler maintains.  VAS, on theother hand, can enhance a small business's reach beyond EDI byoffering the small-and medium-sized enterprise a multitude ofalternatives, other than just doing EDI with one or two clients, hesays.      VAS break themselves out into different slots, particularly whenit comes to being a provider of government procurement information. Some do very little business with commercial companies, but all dobusiness with government contractors.  The EDI Connection in Torrance,Calif., for example, specializes in the retail business.  CathyMueller, its president, says her clients range from those with only afax machine to fully-integrated EDI companies that just don't want tobother with going through the process of mapping transactions overagain.  "We are finding that there are more specialty retailers needingEDI," Mueller says.                  The most commonly-used standard for Mueller is X12 for its 850purchase order, 856 ship notice, 997 functional acknowledgement and864 message text.        Mueller says her company will be expanding its services and hasrecently signed a reseller agreement with Datamatix for RFQs. Datamatix is a certified VAN with the federal government, located inPlymouth Meeting, Pa.Going for the International Market      Trade Point's specialty is expanding trade opportunities bygiving companies international exposure.      The Columbus, Ohio-based firm uses the World Wide Web to finddomestic and international markets for its clients.  "We show them howto use research tools, such as Dun & Bradstreet, Price Waterhouse andthe Journal of Commerce," says Christy Bauer, general counsel forTrade Point.       Cataloging company products is another way that VAS can assistbusinesses to expand their exposure and to use EDI in taking andreceiving orders.       Neither Infomaze in Dayton, Ohio nor Ali Corp in Diamond Bar,Calif., provide third-party EDI services to commercial clients. Instead, they are strictly government-service providers of RFQs tocontractors.       Infomaze has a bulletin board service for the U.S. DefenseLogistics Agency.  The Ohio company began its business providing theinformation on paper, graduated to diskette and now provides the dataelectronically.        Ali Corp. has aligned itself with General Electric InformationServices based in Rockville, Md., to offer its clients a VAN.        "Pretty soon, all the VANs will be interconnected and everyonewill be able to access information through a number provided by thefederal government," says Sam Saffari, chief information officer ofAli Corp.       The largest growing segment of the VAS provider is the deliveryof RFQs, according to most VAS.  The delivery system for RFQs that usesFACNET, the federal government's procurement network, has improved andmore government agencies are on board (EDI NEWS, Oct. 2,).  No one hasfirm figures reflecting the increase in RFQ volume, but VAS tell us theyexpect the volume to double over the next 12 months. (Christy Bauer,Trade Point, 310/335-2600, http://www.tpusa.com; Ken Kohler, Comtech,806/353-0919; Cathy Mueller, The EDI Connection, 310/517-8787; SamSafari, ALI Corp., 909/396-8255; Steve Young, Input, 415/528-6310.) Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996MINIGUIDE: VALUE-ADDED EDI SERVICE PROVIDERS      Here's a sample of some value-added service providers.  Theyprovide a support service for businesses selling to the federalgovernment and for those strictly in the commercial arena. Key:Company Service Provided         Trading PartnersTransaction sets         TrainingFeeALI Corp.; 23441 Golden Springs; Ste. 334; Diamond Bar, CA      91765;909/396-8255RFQs and proprietary software         Yes; Government agencies; Inter and intra-network trading partners                      840, 843, 850, 810, 997, 856, 820, 841 and 855Yes$100 monthly; $400 start-up fee AT&T EasyCommerce Services ; 400 Interspace Pkwy; Rm 4A09;      Parsippany, NJ 07054; 800/242-6005; att.com/easycommerceVAN, E-mail, consulting, EDI services called Free-form conversion viafax, telex or hard copy        No850 and 810Yes$50 to $150 start up fee and $150 annually for EDI services Bidnet; 20 A Railroad Ave.; Albany, NY 12205; 800/677-1997Specialize in bid distribution of RFQs, RFPs and IFBsN/AN/AN/AVariesComtech; 3505 Olsen, Ste. 222; Amarillo, TX 79109      806/353-0919Full service bureau and RFQ providerYes840, 843,850, 810 997, 856, 820, 841 and 855Yes$330 monthThe EDI Connection; 25202 Crenshaw Blvd.; Ste. 301; Torrance,                    CA90505; 310/517-8787Retail specialists, full service bureauYes850, 810, 856, 997 and 864Yes$250 start-up fee, $45 monthly, $.75 to $2/documentInfomaze; P.O. Box 1888; Dayton, OH 45401; 513/254-2673Bulletin board service for DODN/AN/AYes$100 monthlySOS; P.O. Box 951; Altoona, PA 16603; 800/225-6853EDI translation services for Defense Logistics AgencyYesYesYes$800 registration fee and $80 monthlyTrade Point USA; 41 S. High St., Ste. 1660; Columbus, OH  43215;614/645-1700; http://www.tpusa.coTrade facilitation company using the WebYesN/AYesFrom $14.95 monthly subscription and fee for servicesSource: EDI NEWSBack to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SMALL BUSINESSES WILL BE KEY TO OPEN EDI AND INTERNET USE      Take a multi-track approach in migrating to open-EDI, industryexperts advise small- and medium-sized businesses.  Make sure yourevolution from traditional EDI involves the personnel and a technicalinfrastructure that can support multi-platform programming languages,such as Java, and advancements in intelligent agent technology, theseexperts told EDI NEWS.        But don't get ahead of the game, they caution:  Movement to theUN/EDIFACT standard from X12 won't be coming any time soon.  "Youcan't do [EDI] across the Web without human intervention," says Shaw.      That's the lay of the land painted for us as the new yearunfolded--lots of growth in EDI use is expected in the year ahead,particularly as enterprises move to the Internet.  "A large number ofsmall- and medium-sized businesses are excited about EDI," says JackShaw, president of the Atlanta, Ga.-based consultancy, ElectronicCommerce Strategies.  "Within two or three years, we'll see a largenumber of [these] businesses using EDI across the Internet and usingopen EDI."      "We see great prospects for doing EDI over the Internet," saidElizabeth Hudson, director of marketing for Concord, Calif.-basedPremenos Technology Corp.  "Although the Internet is still in itsinfancy, we foresee a great acceptance of the Internet in 1996."New Players     Shaw sees a lot of new players moving into the market in the nextseveral months, to join the "old savvy" EDI providers.  He citedPremenos (see related story, p. 8) and Dublin, Ohio-based SterlingSoftware, as two companies that can be expected to take advantage ofhow "the Internet will change the way EDI is done."      But not everyone is convinced EDI will grow, especially in thebanking industry.  "EDI is dead ... Not only have EDI implementationsflattened, they've trailed off," said Mike Alfonsi, who manages thetreasury consulting practice at Philadelphia-based Core States Bank. "We've hit a wall with the cost," he said.  Alfonsi anticipates littlegrowth in EDI at the current price of implementation.    A consultant who asked not to be named, suggests "EDI is taking onanother form."  Moving transaction information electronically isavailable through procurement card data, lockbox imaging and E-mail,observes this consultant, who added: "Over the short run, no one isgoing to make a lot of money on EDI."    According to The EDI Group Ltd., based in Oak Park, Ill., EDI andE-mail will be the fastest growing markets in electronic commerce. The firm's report puts the total volume of all business-to-businesstransactions at exceeding $45 billion and growing at a compound rateof six percent a year.    EDI itself has been gaining in use over the last five years, withan annual growth rate of 24 percent in the United States since 1990when 12,000 companies were using EDI.  Today 100,000 companies useEDI, according to The EDI Group.    The EDI Group sees EDI growing at more than 20 percent a year andis taking an increasing share of electronic commerce volume.  The EDIGroup cited the transportation services industry as increasingelectronic commerce expenditures 10.2 percent per year, with EDI andE-mail accounting for most of the growth.      On average, the 15 industries included in The EDI Group's marketforecast are increasing electronic messaging by 8.5 percent.  Otherindustries in the study included: Retail, manufacturing, health careand insurance, government, auto/aerospace, chemical, wholesale,utilities and financial services.     The total business-to-business document volume is projected toincrease from 45.5 billion in 1995 to 58 billion in 1999.  EDI'sgrowth is undeniable but still only a small portion of the potentialmarketplace, analysts say.    But the real action has been on the Internet where use has grown,and continues to grow, at a much faster rate than EDI alone.  TheWorld Wide Web hit the scene in July 1993 with 130 sites.  As of July1995, there were 38,800 Web sites.  At last count, the number ofexisting Web sites was doubling every 48 days, said David L. Taylor,vice president and research director at Stamford, Conn.-based GartnerGroup.    The EDI community wants to merge the Web's exponential growth withEDI's utility to forge a ubiquitous electronic commerce solution.  IfEDI vendors can secure the Web to the satisfaction of corporate users,the two technologies should mean easily available, cost-effectiveelectronic commerce for businesses of any size, the analysts said.    "A large number of small- and medium-sized businesses are excitedabout EDI," said Shaw.  "Within two or three years, we'll see a largenumber of [these] businesses using EDI across the Internet and usingopen EDI."    But EDI's growth will be bolstered only if it becomes moreinteractive and more Internet-friendly, industry insiders said at theElectronic Messaging Association's annual Messaging Solutions Summit(EDI NEWS, Oct. 30, p. 6).  There's still room, though, fortraditional EDI, says Shaw.  Internet Security    The race to secure the Internet for EDI use is changing the wayvalue-added networks (VANs) are offering services, encouraging use ofopen systems, and sparking a firestorm of product development,industry analysts told EDI NEWS (EDI NEWS, Nov. 27, p. 1).    Users of the Internet are becoming more comfortable with securityproducts, and are watching how the federal government and privateenterprises are moving ahead in implementing electronic fundstransfers (EFT), product data and credit card orders secured with dataencryption, and digital authentication products.   "There has been alot of hype about the potential for break-ins, but now with recent[product] developments, the Internet is viable," said Iang Jeon,senior analyst with Cambridge, Mass.-based Forrester Research.    Premenos' Templar Certification Program, for example, allows EDIvendors to incorporate Templar with their translation software tooffer secure Internet EDI.  Internet security companies such asPremenos and Redwood City, Calif.-based RSA Data Security are not theonly companies realizing that Internet security is important -- thoughthey are out in front.    Maynard, Mass.-based Digital Equipment Corp.'s Digital's newInternet Services Roadmap also offers a set of secure Internetservices for users and service providers.  Other security companiestaking advantage of the growing acceptance of the Internet forsensitive data transmission include Netscape Communications Corp. inRedwood City, Calif. and VeriSign Inc. in Mountain View, Calif. (Electronic Commerce Strategies, 706/578-4980, EDI Group, 708/848-0135.) Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996APL STANDS FIRM IN VISION OF COMPANY AND PRODUCTS    APL Group Inc.'s strategy for business is to insist on trainingpotential users on its electronic data interchange (EDI) translationsoftware products, to be sure they understand just how to use it.     Taking control of training has landed APL a profit margin of 67percent in 1995 sales revenues over 1994 for this year and projectionsfor 1996 expect to be about the same.     "The strategy that has led us to such success is to diversify intodelivering professional services and education along with productoffering," said Stuart Sawabini, president of APL Group.                  APL takes pride in its ability to provide EDI services to alllevels of users.  "The typical delivery of PC [personal computer]products to the marketplace come from the Fortune 1000 company.  Weare able to offer strategic level EDI consulting and EDIimplementation services to the HUBs and PC-based solutions to thesupplier," Sawabini said.          Big manufacturing companies and government prime contractors havebenefitted from the government's mandate to use EDI for allprocurement processes.  It's the small and medium-sized enterprisesthat need more support, Sawabini said. A Different Approach    APL competitor St. Paul Software, based in St. Paul, Minn., designsand sells translation software, but focuses on multiple platformsbeyond the PC.    "The final function of what we do is similar, but the majority oftheir business is consulting and they [APL] have a translator to goalong with it," said Larry Hastings, vice president of marketing forSt. Paul.    Hastings said his company focuses mainly on the product and will doconsulting around it.      "We just have a different approach--they grew up in the consultingbusiness and we grew up in systems business," Hastings said.                    APL client Heavenly Intimates, a manufacturing company in Mt.Vernon, N.Y., has been using the company's Qualedi translationsoftware for three years.  "We use it as a front-end forcommunications and translation," said Rob Rosenbaum, vice presidentfor operations.      Rosenbaum said he learned of the company at a Kmart suppliersconference.  "I can process effortlessly 10,000 EDI documents[transaction] a week," he said.  (Stuart Sawabini, APL Group, 203/762-3933; Rob Rosenbaum, Heavenly Intimates, 914/663-9700; Larry Hastings,St. Paul Software, 612/603-4400.) APL  AT A GLANCEAPL Group Inc.644 Danbury RoadWilton, CT 06897203/762-3933 (Tele)203/762-2108 (Fax)Contact: Paul Lindoerfer, Sales and Marketing DirectorPresident: Stuart SawabiniProducts: Qualedi Software-EDI translation software for the PC,Supports Ansi X12, CIDX, AIAG, EDX, VICS, ECS, WINS, TDCC and EDIFACT.Services: Consulting and systems integration Services. Provides on-site support for all networks.Education: Offers classes at its Northeast EDI Training Center and aselection of one-day courses.Competitors: EDI Able, DNS, TSI, St. Paul Software, Supply Tech. Source: EDI NEWS Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996FIFTH THIRD BANK ADDS EDI    Cincinnati-based Fifth Third Bancorp has added electronic datainterchange (EDI) translation capabilities, to be delivered throughits comprehensive TransAct personal computer workstation.  Fifth Thirdsupports a number of EDI transaction sets including payment ordersremittance advices and health care claims.  Fifth Third operates fourmain businesses:  retail, commercial, trust and investment servicesand midwest payment systems, the bank's data processing subsidiary. (Fifth Third, 513/579-5325.) Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996FDA TO HOLD JANUARY CONFERENCE ON EDI ADVERSE REPORT FILINGS    The U.S. Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) Center for Devicesand Radiological Health (CDRH) is planning a conference Jan. 25 inGaithersburg, Md., to introduce its plans to develop an electronicdata interchange (EDI) system for submission of medical devicesadverse event reports.  The system will be called MEDIC (Medical-EventElectronic Data Interchange Compact) and will use EDI to automate theexchange  of "adverse reports"  between the FDA, health devicemanufacturers and end-user facilities such as hospitals. Manufacturers and hospitals are required by law to file adversereports.  The conference will include a forum for industryrepresentatives to provide input on the MEDIC plan.  (Brenda S. Lucas,CDRH, 301/827-0027 or fax: 301/827-0038.) Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996DISA PUBLISHES MODEL EDI AUDIT GUIDE TO TRACK AND VERIFY EDI    The Legal and Business Controls Work Group of the AccreditedStandards Committee (ASC) X12 of the American National StandardsInstitute has developed a "Model EDI Audit Guide."  The guide isdesigned to track and verify the trail through which a message istransmitted from sender to receiver.  It addresses transmissioncontrols, translating software controls, information security controlsand usage of legal agreements regarding electronic data interchange(EDI).  The guide provides information for evaluating control issuesthat are unique to EDI and is meant to be used as an addendum toexisting application audit programs.  It should prove helpful for EDIand MIS managers and others who desire a "high-level" understanding ofthe objectives and requirements for auditing EDI, the Workgroup said. (Data Interchange Standards Association Inc., 703/548-7005.) Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996STERLING'S GENTRAN:INTEGRATOR PROVIDES INSTANT EDI    Dublin, Ohio-based Sterling Software introduced theGENTRAN:Integrator, an electronic data interchange (EDI) tool kitdesigned to bring trading communities up-to-speed on EDI.  TheIntegrator allows a hub company or system integrator to provide "pushbutton" EDI to thousands of small suppliers and customers rather thanwait for them to implement EDI on their own.  Hub companies and systemintegrators can use GENTRAN:Integrator to install transparent EDIfunctionality in existing applications or to give their tradingpartners Windows-based input forms and print templates.  (Sterling,614/793-7010.) Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996VHA SELECTS ABBOT LABS, CHOICE MEDICAL    VHA Inc. of Irving, Texas, selected Abbott Park, Ill.-based AbbottLaboratories and Louisville, Ky.-based Choice Medical Inc. to supplyelectronic data interchange software (EDI).  The software will enableusers to automate the creation and transmission of supply purchaseorders and to automatically receive purchase order acknowledgements,product catalogues and invoices.  Abbott's QUIK LINK and Choice's ECHOwill replace VHA's Net COM and Net CAP and be marketed to 250 VHAhealth care organizations that are currently using VHA health careorganizations that are currently using VHA's systems.  VHAorganizations will receive a discount from Choice Medical on ECHOsoftware.  (VHA, 214/830-0000.) Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996PREMENOS CERTIFICATION CAN HELP YOU TO OFFER SECURE INTERNET EDI    Software translation developers looking for Internet clients now have anedge by becoming certified vendors of Premenos Corp.'s Templar Certificationprogram.  Premenos, a subsidiary of Premenos Technology Corp., started itsprogram recently to allow interested electronic data interchange (EDI) vendorsto incorporate Templar with their translation software, to offer secure EDI over 61the Internet.    With the Templar Certification Program, customers who have implementedEDI can utilize the Internet as an inexpensive, high-bandwidth form for EDIcommunications, says Elizabeth Hudson, director of marketing for Premenos. "We see great prospects for doing EDI over the Internet," she explained. "Although the Internet is still in its infancy, we foresee a great acceptance oftthe Internet in 1996."  Templar is a suite of standards-based software, service and networksolutions designed to enable the secure transmission of end-to-end EDIdocuments over open networks.  Templar software is the layer between the mailagent, such as SMTP/MIME, and the EDI translation software to ensureconfidentiality, integrity, authenticity and non-repudiation of both origin andrecipe.    The first companies to participate are personal computer (PC) EDItranslation vendors Wilton, Conn.-based APL Group, DNS Worldwide and TSIInternational.  The APL group is a translation software and services company. Its soon to be released Qualedi for Windows was the first to be Templarcertified by Premenos as a solution for PC users to send EDI over the Internet. DNS Worldwide, which provides electronic commerce software and services forPC workstations, has integrated its EDI EDGE electronic commerce productswith Templar for Windows.Internet Opportunities    Hugh Stewart, DNS president, said that the number of companies that willbe able to conduct EDI over the Internet "will greatly expand by incorporatingour PC EDI translation software with Templar."    TSI International, the leader in Windows-based software with more than 85percent market share of that market, will offer Templar as a transport optionfor its thousands of Trading Partner PC kits.  Connie Galley, president of TSI,said that although TSI customers have always been free to make their owncommunications choices, Templar gives them a "viable Internet alternative"backed by a leading company.    The certification program is available to vendors from UNIX, AS/400 andMVS mainframe EDI translation software companies.  EDI software companiescan become certified in less than one week.  (Elizabeth Hudson, Premenos,510/602-2000.) Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996ANALYSISEDI Believed Key To Save New Jersey $760 MillionJanuary 9 page 5   Hubs Continue To Drive Expansion of EDI MarketFebruary 6 page 5   Frontec Sees Future without EDI Translation ...May 1 page 10EDI Contracts and Liability Relationships Seen ...July 10 page 8                                                        EDI Expenditures Predicted To Reach $2 Billion ...August 7 page 8VANs Reposition in Flurry of Activity for EC MarketDecember 11 page 6Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996APPLICATIONSBurger King Serves Up Purchasing SystemJanuary 9 page 4Developers in a Huff over DISA Price IncreaseJanuary 23 page 4Electronic Messaging Association Discusses Joint WorkFebruary 20 page 5Registry To Speed EDI Trading PartnershipsMarch 20 page 4Lawrence Livermore Set To License Controversial EDI ...April 17 page 1Frontec Sees Future without EDI Translation ...May 1 page 10R/3 Upgrade Offers On-line Training, More ApplicationsJune 12 page 6Everyman's EDIJune 26 page 1New EDI To Simplify and Promote EDI, Group SaysJune 26 page 8USPS Testing EDI System for PublishersJuly 3 page 3QuickResponse Services To Provide EDI WorldwideJuly 10 page 7Pallet Distribution Incorporates EDI for Efficient ...August 21 page 4EDI Group Releases Annual Forecast of MarketJuly 24 page 7Servantis Grows with Financial EDI Mortgage and ...September 18 page 5Navy Pilots EDI MSDA Project with ChevronOctober 16 page 8Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996AUTO MANUFACTURINGAIAG Seeks To Promote EDI Use in Lower Tiers ...May 15 page 3Automotive EDI on a RollSeptember 18 page 1Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996BRIEFSAT&T Lays Out Electronic CommerceJanuary 9 page 7DISA Debuts Home PageJanuary 23 page 7Internet EDI Specification Reaches Steering GroupFebruary 6 page 7                                                     Sterling Software Enters Health Care Reimbursement ...February 20 page 7Mortgage Information on America OnlineMarch 20 page 8GEIS To Resell RMS SoftwareApril 17 page 12CommPress Provides Data Compression SecurityMay 1 page 9Infonet Software Solutions Rolls Out X.435May 15 page 7CyberCash Gets Export License for EncryptionMay 29 page 7New Proposal Would Mandate EDI for All Health Care ...June 12 page 4Healthcare EDI Coalition Hopes for Total EDI Industry ..June 26 page 7QuickResponse Services To Provide EDI WorldwideJuly 10 page 7EDI Group Releases Annual Forecast of MarketJuly 24 page 7MCI EDI Services Available in South AmericaAugust 7 page 7Revenue Canada Pushing ForwardAugust 21 page 7Federal Purchasers Use Dun & Bradstreet Numbers...September 18 page 7League Submits Joint Petition To Modify ISCTAOctober 2 page 7Supply Tech Offers EDI Software for WindowsOctober 16 page 6Delaware Selects APL for EDI Strategy AssessmentOctober 30 page 7GEIS Introduces Business Network EDINovember 27 page 7 Digital Announces New Version of DEC/EDI SoftwareDecember 11 page 7Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996DISADevelopers in a Huff over DISA Price IncreaseJanuary 23 page 4DISA Debuts Home PageJanuary 23 page 7DISA Conference To Examine EDI in Electronic CommerceApril 17 page 10Steering Committee Set To Review ASC X12 Alignment ...June 12 page 8Finance Insurance, Real Estate GroupsJune 26 page 6Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996ELECTRONIC COMMERCEOracle Takes Business to the InternetFebruary 6 page 8Baby Bells Stocking up to Storm EC MarketsFebruary 20 page 5IBEX To Bring Electronic Commerce To Small BusinessApril 17 page 8Telephone Companies Edging Toward Electronic CommerceSeptember 4 page 3Electronic Commerce Committee To Address EDI's ...May 13 page 8Small Business Gets Help from Resource CentersNovember 13 page 8Sterling Considering Electronic Commerce SpinoffDecember 11 page 8Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996FEDIEDIBanx Wins over Customers for Financial EDIMay 15 page 1Bill Payment Service Set as Alternative to Financial ...June 12 page 7MCI Loses Financial EDI Software PartnerJune 12 page 4U.S. Government Banking on EDI for AID RevampingAugust 7 page 4Banking on Financial EDI over the InternetOctober 2 page 6Sterling Offering FEDI Co-BrandingOctober 2 page 8VISA Offers New EDI Remittance SystemNovember 27 page 5Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996GOVERNMENTExporters Resist New Customs SystemFebruary 20 page 7Lawrence Livermore Set To License Controversial EDI ...April 17 page 1Beset with Problems, Government EDI Program ...May 29 page 4FCC Experiments with EDI for Filing Radio LicensesJuly 24 page 8Federal Purchasers Use Dun & Bradstreet Numbers ...September 18 page 7FACNET Becomes UncloggedOctober 2 page 1EDI Required for Federal Government's FTS 2000 Rebid ...October 16 page 1EDI Group To Consider 837 Design Issues in DecemberNovember 27 page 8Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996INTERNATIONALCanada Provides Cautionary Tale of Electronic ...January 9 page 1UN/EDIFACT Syntax Revision Will Support Asian ...March 20 page 1EDI Helps Sears Canada Reduce Costs and Streamline ...May 15 page 5International Effort To Simplify EDI Reaches MilestoneMay 29 page 1Small-and Medium-Sized Businesses in Canada Search ...May 29 page 8 Exporters Still Fighting Custom's New EDI ProductsJuly 24 page 5DOD CALS Group Resurrected for Advancement of ...August 7 page 1Revenue Canada Pushing ForwardAugust 21 page 7Revenue Canada Increases EDI for Border CustomsSeptember 4 page 8U.S. Strolling Along Toward EDIFACT MigrationOctober 30 page 1Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996INTERNETOracle Takes Business to the InternetFebruary 6 page 8EDI Seen Speeding Move to WWW Electronic CommerceMay 29 page 6Everyman's EDIJune 26 page 1EDI Over the Internet: You Get What You Pay ForOctober 2 page 4Growth Industry for Internet Security ProductsNovember 27 page 1Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996MANUFACTURINGTextile Manufacturers Embrace EDI To Regain Lost ...June 26 page 4Companies Join in EDI-Enabled CommunityJuly 24 page 1Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONSIntegrated Software, New Prices Ahead for HarbingerFebruary 6 page 4Sterling Acquires Maxxus To Get New Customers ...March 20 page 3St. Paul and EDI Solutions Merge Mid-range ...August 21 page 6Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996ROUNDTABLEASC Chair Responds to Criticism; Charts Course ...October 30 page 4Fujitsu Forges into CALS, EDI with Lessons LearnedNovember 13 page 4 Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996RESEARCHFrontec Sees Future without EDI Translation ...May 1 page 10Interactive EDI Seen Growing Slowly--If at AllJune 17 page 1Textile Manufacturers Embrace EDI To Regain Lost ...June 26 page 4Oracle Takes Business to the InternetFebruary 6 page 8Registry To Speed EDI Trading PartnershipsMarch 20 page 4Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996RETAILBurger King Serves up Purchasing SystemJanuary 9 page 4Levi Strauss Spends $400 Million Revamping EDI ...August 6 page 6Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SECURITY On-line Security for Your Data: Firewalls or ...September 18 page 8Postal Service Seeks EDI NicheJuly 10 page 1Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996SOLUTIONSEDI Believed Key To Save New Jersey $760 MillionJanuary 9 page 5                                                      How To Make Quick Response Work? Trust One Another ...March 20 page 6How To Tame the Transaction Set from Hell, 856April 17 page 6IBEX To Bring Electronic Commerce to Small BusinessApril 17 page 8EDI Helps Sears Canada Reduce Costs and Streamlines ...May 15 page 5                                                         Everyman's EDIJune 26 page 1USPS Testing EDI System for PublishersJuly 3 page 3Barcoding Can Decrease Costs of Product DistributionAugust 21 page 1Temp Firm Enters EDI Accounting SupportAugust 21 page 8Servantis Grows with Financial EDI Mortgage and ...September 18 page 5CALS Show Hot Topic: Migration to EDIFACT ...October 16 page 5EDI Needs Embrace Internet To Fulfill Commercial ...October 30 page 6EDI to Imaging, Imaging to EDIDecember 11 page 4Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996STANDARDSEDI Standards Body Votes for Migration to UN/EDIFACTJanuary 23 page 1Petroleum Industry To Request its Own Standards ...February 6 page 1Electronic Messaging Association Discusses ...February 20 page 5X12 Resurrected at Standards MeetingFebruary 20 page 1How To Make Quick Response Work? Trust One Another ...March 20 page 6UN/EDIFACT Syntax Revision Will Support Asian ...March 20 page 1How To Tame the Transaction Set from Hell, 856April 17 page 6Lawrence Livermore Set To License Controversial ...April 17 page 1Frontec Sees Future without EDI Translation ...May 1 page 10Making EDI Easier To Adopt Dominates Discussion ...May 1 page 1CyberCash Gets Export License for EncryptionMay 29 page 7International Effort To Simplify EDI Reaches MilestoneMay 29 page 1R/3 Upgrade Offers On-line Training, More ApplicationsJune 12 page 6Interactive EDI Seen Growing Slowly--If at AllJune 17 page 1New EDI To Simplify and Promote EDI, Group SaysJune 26 page 8DOD CALS Group Resurrected for Advancement of ...August 7 page 1Airline Transport Carriers Preparing EDI StandardsSeptember 4 page 6On-line Security for Your Data: Firewalls or ...September 18 page 8Reach Agreement over ISO 9000October 30 page 8 Aerospace Adopts STEP StandardDecember 11 page 1Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996STRATEGIESTI Group Pulls Out of Sales, Systems IntegrationJanuary 9 page 1 Sprint, MCI and AT&T Race To Electronic CommerceJanuary 23 page 5                                                     PC Industry Tries Luring Small Resellers to EDIMay 1 page 5USPS Testing EDI System for PublishersJuly 3 page 3Mobil Slashing Accounting Staff To Implement EDISeptember 4 page 1Servantis Grows with Financial EDI Mortgage and ...September 18 page 5Navy Pilots EDI MSDA Project with ChevronOctober 16 page 8Small Business Battles Contractors over EDINovember 13 page 1Back to Headline List CopyrightEDI NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 8, 1996TRANSPORTATIONPallet Distribution Incorporates EDI for Efficient ...August 21 page 4Airline Transport Carriers Preparing EDI StandardsSeptember 4 page 6Back to Headline List WT03-B12-13IA086-000622-B036-188http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te22.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045345 text/html 26356HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:51:46 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:06 GMTContent-length: 26169Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te22.html Sample Issue Copyright DATA CHANNELS via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES IMAGING PAPER CONTINUES TO PROLIFERATE Users Disseminate, Then Print--Increasing Paper Use (1223 words) WIRELESS WIRELESS MARKET EXPANDS ACCESS FOR E-MAIL USERS (900 words) STRATEGIES TIPS FOR SELECTING A WORKFLOW TOOL (1161 words) SPEECH RECOGNITION COMPANIES CAN SAVE MONEY WITH SPEECH AGENTS IN CALL CENTERS (399 words) CopyrightDATA CHANNELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996PAPER CONTINUES TO PROLIFERATEUsers Disseminate, Then Print--Increasing Paper Use      Imaging is failing to produce the promised paperless office,experts tell us.  Indeed, expanded use of information technologies,such as imaging, combined with people's historic reliance on paper areproducing new mountains of documents to file.  "The misapplication ofimaging technology has fueled the use of paper," says Kerry Stackpole,president of The Association for Work Process Improvement (TAWPI) ofBoston, Mass.       Information is easier to access electronically than ever before,which makes it an easy target to print out constantly.  For instance,by the year 2004, the pile of information available at the desktopwill come first in electronic form, compared to a 90 percent paper-domination today, predicts Keith Davidson, executive director forXplor International, a Torrance, Calif.-based imaging educationalgroup.         There even is a laser printer paper shortage, according toDavidson.  He predicts paper use will continue to grow at a rate of 10percent annually.        Why does paper continue to proliferate, and what can you do aboutit?  Electronic dissemination has confused users about how to best usean imaging system.  The screens available on today's personal computer(PC) monitors still make it hard to read a document.  Paper continuesto possess a very strong historical significance--both human andlegal.  Vendors suggest the following solutions:     * View documents on screen only;     * Print-on-demand;     * Restrict paper use;     * Use flat panel monitors; and     * Employ in-bound faxes.Electronic Dissemination Proliferates Paper     Imaging systems were designed to reduce or eliminate paper useacross the enterprise--often by integrating images with an electronicdata interchange (EDI) system.  Documents were supposed to become adigital representation of the paper version and move across theenterprise easily, electronically.     However, instead of using these systems to reduce the amount ofpaper in the organization, users are continuing to print documents--just at another stage in the process.  Where an imaging system couldprovide essential workflow of images, users instead refuse to employthis functionality of an imaging system, or use it "incorrectly," saysStackpole.       The Internet and the World Wide Web (WWW) also have made it mucheasier to obtain information from universities, laboratories andcorporations around the world.     "The new accessibility of documents, searching methods and[electronic] filing systems are more efficient," says A.J. Rogers,vice president of marketing for Wilsonville, Ore.-based Tektroniks, acolor printer manufacturer.   The point in the process where thedocument becomes paper has shifted, says Richard Norton, analyst forNorwell, Mass.-based BIS Strategic Decisions.  For example, instead ofprinting the information and distributing it to real estate fieldoffices, the main office now is sending client information through E-mail. However, when it arrives at the remote site, agents often printout copies for themselves, the client and the office's files ratherthan rely on the electronic imaging system to manage the document forthem.          "Rather than print at the source and distribute through mail orfax, now information is disseminated digitally and printed at remotelocations," says Susan Hayes, manager of U.S. printer research, withInternational Data Corp., a computer research firm in Framingham,Mass.Still Not Easy To View Images    Another reason paper continues to proliferate is the poor qualityof computer screens.       While there are a few high-end monitors with very clear screensavailable from vendors like San Jose, Calif.-based Cornerstone andRicoh Corp., also of San Jose, for the most part, it still isdifficult to read an image directly from a PC screen.       "[Screens] are still not the best way to view a document," saysNorton.  He said that most high-end computer monitors are expensiveand that their deployment in the enterprise tends to be low amongbudget priorities.    Wayne Buchar, platform business team manager for scanners with ElSegundo, Calif.-based Xerox, has been involved in the printingbusiness for 20 years.  He thinks paper use can be reduced, but thatit will take a much better, portable screen, easily visible insunlight to make it happen.      Xerox believes enough in the advancement of just such a screenthat its Palo Alto Research Center has been developing a prototypecomputer screen based on flat panel technology.  This screen wouldreplace the typical glass screen monitor, says Buchar.  The newdisplay technology will have a 6.3-million pixel display, comparableto a 600 dots-per-inch laser printed page, says Lois Wong, spokeswomanfor Xerox.  Paper's History Makes it Popular     There remains quite an historical attachment to paper, in partfor its tactile nature and its continuing utility to the U.S. legalsystem, say the experts.      In fact, it is the older generation that often is unwilling toadapt to an electronic imaging environment.  "It depends on the age ofthe person whether [that person] will work on the document on thescreen or print it out," says Hayes.  "The need to have it in writingis the law of the land," added Davidson. But, "imaging use is growingwithin the courts," says Lynn Walker, analyst for the National Centerfor State Courts, in Williamsburg, Va.  A few states have begunallowing digital images in the courtroom, such as California andTexas.     In fact, images are being used instead of paper in the courtroomwhen tracking such information as witness lists and depositions, shesays.Reducing Paper Still is Possible    The worldwide installed printer base in 1995 equaled $22.7billion, for a total of slightly less than 33 million printers,including laser, ink jet and impact printers--such as dot matrix andline character printers, says Hayes.  Laser printers made up $12.5billion of that total, with ink jet printer sales $6.25 billion in1995.      Davidson predicts that business executives may even restrict theuse of printing, including the number of interoffice mail messages.      Routine documents will shrink over the next 10 years as companiesbegin to parallel the government's push to reduce paper use acrossfederal agencies, he adds.    "We will continue to see fewer and fewer routine documents [onpaper], including interoffice memos," he said.  Davidson predicts thelast interoffice memo will say something like--"no more interofficememos."    In the future, managers may restrict access to documents on localarea networks (LAN) unless they are viewed electronically.      "I wouldn't be surprised if people don't run reports that [theuser] can't print until after [the document] has been looked at,"Davidson says.      In addition, print-on-demand is helping to reduce paperconsumption by encouraging users to print only what they need.      Also, in-bound fax has become more popular, with such companiesas San Diego-based Mitek Systems Inc. providing software that routesin-bound faxes directly to the LAN.      "This may not do much to keep the paper off the [sender's] desk,but it will help the [recipient]," says Stackpole. (Richard Norton,BIS Strategic Decisions, 408/987-2774; Susan Hayes, International DataCorp., 508/935-4246; Lynn Walker, National Center for State Courts,804/253-2000; Kerry Stackpole, TAWPI, 617/426-1167; A.J. Rogers,Tektroniks, 503/685-3101; Wayne Buchar, Xerox, 716/231-5890; Keith Davidson, Xplor International, 310/373-3633.) Ways To Reduce Paper In An Imaging Enterprise*  Determine ways components of your business can be reduced or       eliminated.*  Examine process relative to customers' needs--whether or not       they are comfortable with or without paper.*  Don't produce paper in the first place--view documents       electronically.*  Use modest solutions--they are available.*  Look to long term success of imaging, not just short term. Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA CHANNELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996WIRELESS MARKET EXPANDS ACCESS FOR E-MAIL USERS    Companies moved closer to 100-percent wireless coverage for theirmobile E-mail users with the release recently of new services from SanMateo, Calif.-based RadioMail Corp. and strategic announcements byARDIS and RAM Mobile Data.    RadioMail is offering mobile E-mail users wireless access totheir "home" systems and the Internet.  The company's RadioMailMessage Center Services is being offered over ARDIS, RAM Mobile Dataand cellular digital packet data (CDPD) networks.  The company alsointroduced RadioMail Remote Control, which adds dial-up access,cellular access and message management to the Message Center Services.    Woodbridge, N.J.-based RAM is teaming with Megahertz Corp., theMobile Communications Division of U.S. Robotics, to make available anew wireless, Type II PC Card.  The AllPoints Wireless PC Card isdesigned to operate on RAM's Mobitex-based wireless datacommunications service.    Meanwhile, ARDIS, of Lincolnshire, Ill., is providing wirelessdata communications for Apple Computer Inc.'s MessagePad 120 using theNewton 2.0 operating system.Cellular and Paging    Cellular carriers can contract with RadioMail's Message CenterServices to add two-way wireless messaging services to their currentcellular and paging operations.  The two-way messaging services arecompatible with circuit-switched cellular and cellular digital packetdata (CDPD) networks.  The services support numerous applications,including Internet-compatible E-mail, faxing, pager notification ofnew messages and many message management choices to control wirelesscommunications costs and delivery.     Mark Elderkin, director of marketing for RadioMail, said that thecompany is using "products that people are familiar with already, suchas cellular phones and pagers."     RadioMail also introduced RadioMail Remote Control, which addsdial-up access, cellular access and message management to theRadioMail wireless messaging services offered over numerous networks,including ARDIS and RAM.Personal RadioMailBox    Remote Control provides individuals with a personal RadioMailBoxand a mobile Internet address that can be linked to their pagers orthrough their cellular phones or wireless modems, to their portablecomputers.  Users can exchange wireless messages with anybody who hasan Internet E-mail mailbox and send faxes, send messages to pagers,and monitor news reports and customized stock portfolios, saidElderkin.    The Remote Control service has a base price of $9.95 per month,with connect time charges of 20 cents per minute.    With E-mail, the company's "thrust will be increasing the amountof control users have on messages," he said.  Remote allows users tostore and forward certain large messages into their home mailboxes tobe read at another time, Elderkin said, saving air time.    ARDIS also announced new Mobile Office rate structures last monthfor E-mail applications for mobile professionals that start today at$19.95 per month.  Applications supported in the Mobile Office programare messaging and E-mail solutions for local area networks, includingARDIS PersonalMessaging and AirMobile Wireless for Lotus cc:Mail fromMotorola Inc. and Mail-on-the-Run from Greenwich, Conn.-based RiverRun Software Group.    Dan Croft, senior vice president of marketing operations atARDIS, said that the combination of hardware, software and air-timepricing will benefit individuals who want to take advantage of ARDISto "access their E-mail and to send and receive messages on theirlaptops and wireless communications from virtually any location."    Apple MessagePad users also can use the ARDIS network to sendwirelessly and receive electronic mail, send faxes and accessapplications and information, enabling mobile computing.     Newton personal digital assistants, developed by Apple andMotorola, now may be equipped with ARDIS communications software forthe Newton 2.0 operating system.  Used with Motorola's PersonalMessenger 100D PCMCIA wireless modem card, the ARDIS network providesMessagePad users nationwide with automatic roaming, enabling them tomanage business from remote locations.    Software developers creating wireless applications for theMessagePad can take advantage of ARDIS' Wireless Software DeveloperProgram.    RAM Focus    RAM is focusing its resources on five areas:  field service,sales, transportation and financial and utility markets.  RAMcurrently offers 92 percent service coverage in U.S. cities and isplanning to raise its coverage soon to 100 percent through these fiveareas.    RAM's and Megahertz's AllPoints Wireless PC Card combines theType II format with RAM's Mobitex-based service.      The PC Card contains a two-watt, built-in radio, giving usersnationwide wireless coverage.    Janet Boudris, senior vice president of strategic marketing forRAM Mobile Data, said that the card "will have particular appeal forsales and field management organizations that are already experiencingthe business benefits of using laptop and palmtop computers to conductbusiness."     Boudris said that these organizations are "already a step aheadof their competition.  Moving into the wireless environment is thenext logical step for visionary companies who desire a competitiveedge."    The AllPoints Wireless PC Card "leverages the strength of RAMservice, delivers superior coverage and battery life and utilizes theversatility of the Type II Format, said Steve Smith, senior vicepresident of marketing for Megahertz.  The "card delivers on all thesegoals, giving users a practical solution component they can useimmediately."    The Type II PC Card is about the size of credit card and slidesinto the side of the PC.  Its size--old modems were the size of abrick--and the fact that it's Mobitex protocol, make the cardadvantageous for mobile users, said a spokesman for RAM.  "The size isa killer," he said.    The battery saver protocol shuts down the modem automaticallywhen there is no traffic.  The battery lasts an average of 30 hours,the spokesman said.  (RadioMail Corp., 800/597-6245; ARDIS, 617/252-0606; RAM, 800/RAM-3210.) Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA CHANNELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996TIPS FOR SELECTING A WORKFLOW TOOL    Develop criteria for evaluating workflow software before youstart looking for a product, says Bruce Silver, principal at BruceSilver Associates in Weston, Mass.     "Shopping for workflow is not easy," Silver said recently at theBank Administration Institute (BAI) image show.  "The basic problem isthat all of the workflow vendors are trying to solve the same problem: managing, organizing and automating a business process.  [All of thevendors] give different names to the same concepts, [offer] unique[product] architectures and tend to baffle, rather than inform, thebuyer."    In addition, it's difficult for end users to compare thefunctionality of various workflow tools, Silver said.  Some workflowproducts have a lot of functionality built-in while other productsoffer a "thin layer" of software and a lot of consulting andapplication development services, he noted.    Another problem when shopping for workflow software is that manyproducts are less than a year old with few reference sites. Productscan be demonstrated, Silver said, but "many are too new to have atrack record." Keep the `Human Factor' in Mind    The first thing end users should consider when shopping forworkflow software is the "human factor," Silver suggested.  "Beforeyou start looking at the data sheets or the technical factors, youneed to look at your own organization and your users and developers,"he explained.      Silver recommended that workflow customers keep in mind theskills of their system operators when evaluating a product.  Forinstance, if the system will be used largely by clerical workers, lookfor software that is "built for speed" and has tight controls on howwork is presented to users, he suggested.  Choose products with "free-form" environments for managers and professionals.    Tip:  Decide whether you will use system integrators, in-housetechnicians, or ad hoc tools built into the software to design andupdate workflow applications.  "Each of these different types ofdevelopers is the target audience of different workflow products,"Silver said.    End users also need to consider the track record of workflowvendors.  Silver recommended users evaluate vendors based on theirmarket standing, company history, financial backing and experience inthe workflow market.       Silver noted that the best way to measure a vendor's success withworkflow is through its reference sites.  Have vendors provide youwith a list of reference sites in your industry, a breakdown of howtheir products are working at each site and a contact at each site. Be sure to ask reference customers whether you should contract withthe vendor or a reseller for on-going support.     Tip:  Look for products that are supported by several third-parties, such as consultants or resellers, who offer features that"snap" into the vendor's framework.  "Besides [offering morefunctionality], this implies the vendor may be a market leader becauseit is attracting third-party support," Silver said.Don't Be Confused by Scalability Claims    Silver warns end users not to be confused by vendors claimingthat their workflow software is scalable.  "Every vendor will say [itssoftware is] enterprise-scalable," he said.  "It's a meaninglessbuzzword at that level."    Silver recommended customers look at how many concurrent userseach vendor has installed.  "Few workflow vendors can point tocustomers with 1,000 seats, all doing workflow in a high-volumetransaction-processing mode," he noted.    Also, ask vendors whether they plan to offer software that cansupport multiple servers.  "The next frontier in workflow isdistributing the workflow server to support remote users in branchoffices, using dial-up lines," Silver predicted.  (Bruce Silver, BruceSilver Associates, 617/237-6879.) Features To Evaluate When Shopping for Workflow Software* Graphical workflow maps.      Every workflow tool has a graphical map, a visual representationof the workflow that helps users make changes in the process.    Silver recommended users look for graphical maps that clearlyrepresent the workflow.  For example, the maps in some workflowproducts have icons that users can click on to see every possiblerouting path that can come out of a step.  Other maps have icons thatcan be dragged and dropped to alter the workflow.*User interfaces.      Look for products that provide the same interface for all of yourworkflow applications if you want to build applications quickly andeasily, Silver suggested.  These interfaces generally feature pointand click tools that allow users to rearrange image windows, listboxes, status bars, in-boxes and action buttons with relatively littleprogramming, he added.    On the other hand, look for products that "hide" workflowapplications if you want to keep the interfaces for your legacyapplications, Silver said.  The downside:  These products require extra time and money forprogramming.*Deadlines.      Users should ask vendors whether their product includes a programthat is triggered if the deadline expires for completing a task orbeginning an item, Silver said.  Some programs move work to anotherqueue.*In-baskets.      "In a clerical application, you might want the workflow softwareto shove the next piece of work to the processing clerk, no questionsasked," Silver said.  "But in other applications you might want topresent an in-basket, which is a list of items [the operator] can workon."    He said some workflow products have standard in-baskets thatpresent data to help users choose their next work item.  Accountspayable applications, for example, might list each pending item'sinvoice number, amount and vendor name.  However, most workflowproducts require users to program their own in-boxes.*Process modeling tools.      A growing number of workflow products offer tools for simulatingthe effects of workflow changes on an operation's productivity,resources, throughput, cycle time and costs, he said.  These programs,which can be run on a laptop computer, also detail the duration ofeach task, the location of potential bottlenecks and the number ofemployees needed for each step.*Work management.      "Work isn't typically routed to [a specific employee], it isrouted to a particular job category or skill set, which can changedepending on who's doing that task each day," he said.  Some productsallow organizational models to be built into the software so if anitem needs to be routed to a manager, for example, the system knowswhich manager oversees that type of work.*Work tracking.      "This is incredibly important, but poorly implemented in manyworkflow products," Silver said.  End users should make certain thatthe tracking privileges in workflow products are available to systemoperators, such as customer representatives, and not justadministrators, he suggested.    Users also should look for products that allow operators tosearch for work items by keying in invoice numbers or customer names,Silver said.  "Few products provide this type of tracking withoutadditional programming," he said.  *Reusable tasks.      Ask vendors whether they plan to provide reusable tasks, whichare programs that can be used in more than one workflow application.     Also:  Consider each workflow product's server platform,databases, exceptions handling, messaging infrastructure, programminglanguage, forms handling, document support and routing rules.  (BruceSilver, 617/237-6879.) Back to Headline List CopyrightDATA CHANNELS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996COMPANIES CAN SAVE MONEY WITH SPEECH AGENTS IN CALL CENTERS    Companies will be able to hire fewer human customer servicerepresentatives by incorporating a natural-sounding automated agentinto call centers.  Unisys Corp. of Blue Bell, Pa., demonstrated itsNatural Language Understanding technology at the Retail DeliveryConference in Atlanta recently and to DC during an interview.    "In the top 100 banks in the United States, there are 80,000 to100,000 customer service representatives on the phone lines now andcall volumes are expected to double," said Joe Yaworski, generalmanager of the natural language understanding program at Unisys.  "Arethey going to try and find a better way or hire twice as many people?"Mortgage System Uses Natural Language     Unisys first is rolling out a mortgage loan application systemthat uses the natural language engine to "speak" to callers. Huntington Bancshares of Columbus, Ohio, wants Unisys to use theengine to custom-build a bill-paying application, said William Randle,senior vice president of marketing and strategic planning at the bank.      Unisys also is working with three as-yet-unidentified banks todevelop and deploy the mortgage application.  A commercial productbased on the natural language platform will be available this year. "We are targeting banking because of the growth in call centers,"Yaworski said.    In Unisys' first demonstration, potential mortgage loanapplicants call the system, which asks whether they would like to knowabout fixed or adjustable rate loans.  Once the callers select thetypes of loan, the system will ask about other details, such as howmuch of a down payment they have and how many points they are willingto pay.      Callers can ask to be transferred to an agent at any time duringthe call or can ask the system questions that the automated agent willanswer.  Unisys expects its natural language engine to go into a widerange of applications eventually, Yaworski said, from thetelemarketing to the credit card industries.  Third-party developerswho want to create applications using the engine can buy a developer'skit from Unisys.  Unisys will gain revenues from sales of the engineneeded to run those applications.    Natural Language Understanding technology emerged from fundingthat Unisys received for the U.S. Department of Defense in the early1980s for a project to create technology that could analyze textdocuments.      Unisys sold off its defense business last year but kept thespeech technology to market it to banks.  (Unisys, 215/986-4788;Huntington Bancshares, 614/480-8600.) Back to Headline List WT03-B12-14IA086-000622-B036-215http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te05.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045405 text/html 27586HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:52:09 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:09 GMTContent-length: 27399Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te05.html Sample Issue Copyright ELECTRONIC MESSAGING NEWS via NewsNet January 10, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES BIG THREE TRY TO WIN MESSAGING BATTLE IN '96 Lotus, Microsoft and Novell Struggling For Dominance (1812 words) MARKETPLACE PROFILE ALISA SYSTEMS INTEGRATES CITY OF SAN JOSE E-MAIL (1011 words) INDUSTRY NEWS GENERAL MAGIC PAIRS UP WITH ORACLE. (100 words) NOVELL CONNECTS GROUPWISE TO INTERNET, X.400. (76 words) PAGENET TESTS TWO-WAY PCS MESSAGING. (67 words) AT&T BRINGS WORD PROCESSING CAPABILITIES TO MESSAGING. (128 words) EDIFY HELPS BUILD INTRANETS. (122 words) STRATEGY WITH INTERNET STRATEGY HERE, LOTUS SHIPS RELEASE VERSION 4 (425 words) CopyrightELECTRONIC MESSAGING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996BIG THREE TRY TO WIN MESSAGING BATTLE IN '96Lotus, Microsoft and Novell Struggling For Dominance     Look for a shakeout in 1996 as Lotus Development Corp., MicrosoftCorp. and Novell Inc. tussle over which client-server messaging systemwill win enterprise hearts and networks.  Companies also can expectthe Internet to play a bigger role in corporate messaging strategies.     The large messaging companies repeatedly have set ship dates forthe three next-generation client-server products due--Lotus Notes,Microsoft Exchange Server and Groupwise XTD--with all of them shippingbehind schedule.  Only Lotus Notes is close to delivering a product,with Release 4 expected to ship Jan. 10 (see story, p. 8).  Exchange isdue out any time during the first quarter of 1996, and Groupwise XTDwill ship in the second quarter, a Novell spokeswoman said.What Effect Will Delays Have?     Analysts disagree over whether the delayed availability will hurtthe products' popularity.  One school of thought holds that oneplatform's potential customer will get impatient and move to anotherplatform in order to meet corporate needs quicker.     "Everyone in this next-generation offering is late," said GaryRowe, principal at Rowe Communications in Roswell, Ga.  "[And it] hasopened up the market for vendors like Hewlett-Packard who had its ownOpenMail.       "They said 'folks are clamoring for a client-server environment.  We'll take Microsoft Mail and cc:Mail front-endsand allow them to work with an OpenMail back-end server.'"     "I think a substantial part of Hewlett-Packard's current businessis based on users that don't have the OpenMail client but use theseother clients--so it has opened up the market for other vendors,"added Rowe.     Palo Alto, Calif.-based Hewlett-Packard (HP) also is winningclients due to its ability to put together an E-mail system for thelargest of enterprises--an OpenMail system can serve thousands ofusers and unite many disparate platforms.     Another school of thought says enterprises will be willing towait to get what they want.  Microsoft may have an added advantagehere because of its hold over corporate desktops.Some Willing To Wait     "In the case of many companies, Microsoft is in such a dominantposition in a lot of markets, just announced [Exchange] causes a lotof corporate users to put the end decision on hold," Rowe said.  "Theykept going with their file-sharing [systems] and probably aresuffering some pain based on it."     Consultant Dusty Sykes of Vanguard Communications Corp. in MorrisPlains, N.J., thinks the issue was of more concern to the news mediathan to users.     "If Exchange had been ready Jan. 1, 1995, most users would nothave been ready for it.  They hadn't done the analysis and had no firmidea of their needs," Sykes said.  But some analysts think Redmond,Wash.-based Microsoft may have lost business by delaying Exchange forso long.     "Microsoft's non-shipment of Exchange and ... the continualredefinition of Exchange ... has really turned off a lot of customersand [as a result] they have been uncertain about Exchange as a futureelectronic platform," claims David Marshak, vice president and seniorconsultant at the Patricia Seybold Group in Boston.     The industry will have to wait and see as Microsoft has announcedonly that it will ship Exchange Server sometime this first quarter. Microsoft did release the final beta version of Exchange in December1995, however (EMN, Nov. 29, p. 6).Eager To See Exchange     Even considering Microsoft's delays, analysts still wanted totalk about Exchange more than any other emerging client-serveroffering.  Sykes picked the release of the Exchange server as one ofthe most important events in messaging that will happen in 1996.       "Notes is no further along in infrastructure than Exchange," hesaid, even though Cambridge, Mass.-based Lotus is releasing version 4and Microsoft has yet to show a first-generation system.     Other analysts agreed that Exchange was a good product, but alsoacknowledged that it is a brand new architecture for Microsoft.     "[Exchange] is a real new paradigm for Microsoft," Rowe said. "It's certainly an order of magnitude better in lots of respects thanMicrosoft Mail."   People will be generally pleased with the overallfunctionality--it's a pretty solid offering."     But Rowe still felt that "no one can touch Lotus Notes."     As for Groupwise, analysts agree that it is a good product, andRowe says Novell of Orem, Utah, is "probably the farthest ahead in theuniversal mailbox arena."  But these analysts wonder whether Novellwill make it through 1996 intact as a company and whether a buyout ispossible that will undermine its ability to remain a messaging player.     "With Novell ... shedding businesses and with rumors about thembeing acquired, there's a question about [Novell's] long-termviability and the business decision [for companies] to buy Groupwise,"Marshak said.     Analysts expect Novell to have an advantage when the companyreleases Groupwise XTD, because of the way in which Groupwise XTDleverages Novell's Netware operating system.The Internet Card     Even with the three-way struggle playing out all last year,analysts had to give the Internet equal billing in their reviews ofthe big three messaging companies for importance in 1995.     "E-mail as a category became subsumed in Web activity," SeyboldAnalyst Marshak said.     In fact, the Internet and the World Wide Web became popular soquickly last year that Lotus, Microsoft and Novell were forced toscramble to create Internet strategies that kept their unreleasedproducts current with market demands.     David Zimmer, president of Pennsylvania-based American EagleCorp., singled out Lotus for having the most competitive Internetstrategy.     "[Notes] will be really large this year for two reasons:  Lotusis interested in the Internet and the Web.  With its new pricingstructure, it is cost effective and InterNotes lets me have a nicesecure Web server with which I can control who has access to what."     Zimmer does not think the Web will take over from Notes, becauseof Notes' powerful publishing and collaboration features the Weblacks, as well as Notes' strong security.     "People, because of their fear of the Wild West culture of theInternet, block [their Web-based internal networks] from externalaccess," Zimmer said.  "If you can have something that provides a dualpurpose, that's ... better."     Companies using Notes only need one network, Zimmer said, becauseNotes' security features more safely protects internal documents frombreak-ins.     In contrast, Zimmer thinks Microsoft's Internet strategy, justannounced last month (EMN, Dec. 13, 1995, p.1), could have an "adverseeffect" on the growing industry because companies will wait forMicrosoft's bundled Internet server without knowing what kind ofquality they will get from the product.     Companies, focusing specifically on the Internet and the Web--namely Mountain View, Calif.-based Netscape Communications Corp.--alsowill throw a twist into messaging, Marshak said.  "Netscape willbundle E-mail services into its server.  If I were a large oil companythat had [Microsoft] Mail and cc:Mail, for example, should I migrateit all to Netscape mail?"     As a result of this type of enterprise thinking, differentapplications are driving corporate decision-making, Marshak said. "Does E-mail stand alone--superseded by other decisions--or does theWeb drive these decisions?  Lotus and Microsoft are both companieshoping that E-mail drives the decisions."The Directory Question     Analysts have the most difficulty predicting what might happenwith directories in 1996, although all agreed that directories remainan area of concern.     "The need for directory services gets more acute every year, andthe solutions get further away from being real," Marshak said.  "Weused to talk about directories that would find printers and gatewaysand now we are talking about directory services which have toencompass every individual in the world."     X.500 is gaining popularity, but companies are not adopting it asthe answer to the directory dilemma at the pace the industry hadhoped.  Companies are not adhering to a strictly X.500 but buildingproprietary look-alikes to solve the same problem:  how to simplylocate network information.     "I think that before we think about the technology, we have tothink about what the model is we are looking at here.  We have to talkabout X.500 and look X.500 but I don't think they actually need to beX.500," Marshak said.     Several analysts cited Utah-based Banyan Corp.'s StreetTalkproduct as one good and available solution, but weren't willing to gomuch further than that.     "[Banyan is] a player that people don't focus on as much as theothers," Rowe said.  "They are a major player in the LAN operatingsystem area.  They are probably somebody else that people should atleast look at if they are making a decision in 1996."     Other companies analysts mentioned are Novell, which believesthat its Netware Directory Service is its "strategic advantage in theX.500 space," according to Marshak.  Marshak also said that "IBM[IBM], given that they now own Softswitch, will be a big player."     Rose also mentioned some smaller companies that are buildingstandardized X.500 directories: Control Data Systems, Unisys Corp. ofBlue Bell Pa., Enterprise Solutions and U.K.-based Nexor.     Until the major vendors seriously address this issue, however,"there is going to be some slow progress," Rowe said.     Although many efforts are under way, most do not think this yearwill bring a solution to the directory dilemma.  "I am not optimisticthat it will be much clearer by the end of 1996 than it is now,"Marshak said.Public Policy Sticking Its Nose In     Concern over public policy affecting electronic messaging alsoprevailed in the E-mail community in 1995.  Organizations such as theArlington, Va.-based Electronic Messaging Association (EMA) spent agreat deal of time lobbying against legislation that would restrictfreedom over public networks and hold corporations responsible for anyoffensive material individuals might transmit.     "We got involved, not because we have any great desire to be anygreat player, but because Washington became more aware of messagingand other technologies," said Victor Parra, EMA president.     The EMA's goal, with regard to messaging legislation currentlybeing considered as an amendment to the telecommunications bill (S.652), is to protect children from obscene material and corporationsfrom having to take responsibility for what individuals post oncorporate networks.     As the legislation now reads, any person who "initiates thetransmission of any suggestive, obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy orindecent message with the ability to annoy, abuse, threaten or harassanother person would be subject to a $100,000 fine or one year injail," according to Parra.     Corporations have what Parra called a "safe harbor," becauseanyone prosecuting them must prove that they willingly left suchmaterial on their networks after knowing it was there.  Still, the EMAwants the amendment's language rewritten to more narrowly define whatmaterial would be considered offensive.  With the negotiations on thebill now being finalized, the EMA is concerned that time this year isshort.  (The American Eagle Group, 215/482-3881; EMA, 703/524-5550;Patricia Seybold Group, 617/742-5200; Rowe Communications, 770/645-1250; Vanguard Communications Corp., 201/605-8000.) Back to Headline List CopyrightELECTRONIC MESSAGING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996ALISA SYSTEMS INTEGRATES CITY OF SAN JOSE E-MAIL     E-mail is not just growing, it is growing in a million differentdirections.  Departments are getting E-mail at such a rapid pace thatthe systems they install are not compatible with anyone else in theenterprise.  Therefore, enter the E-mail integrators.     Alisa Systems of Pasadena, Calif., is the E-mail integrator outconnecting departments within organizations and making them accessibleto the Internet, as it has done with the City of San Jose.       Employees did not want to abandon the E-mail systems they wereworking on just to become compatible, says Gary Zouzoulos, an employeeof San Jose, Calif.  So the city investigated several differentsystems that could integrate all of the city's current E-mail systemsseamlessly. The city's management examined products from severalcompanies, and also briefly considered Maynard, Mass.-based DigitalEquipment Corp.'s product, but concluded that it was too expensive,says Zouzoulos.     The two reasons the city of San Jose chose Alisa over itscompetitors, according to Zouzoulos were:    * it was the only company which could integrate WordPerfect atthe time; and    * they liked its database approach toward message conversion.     Alisa's AlisaMail is designed to create a central location withinan enterprise and connect the disparate   E-mail systems using thenative protocol of each system.  This makes each E-mail package appearto the user as the user's native E-mail system.For instance, AlisaMailis able to detect when an E-mail message is sent from a Lotus cc:Mailsystem to Redmond, Wash.-based Microsoft packages without having togenerate an internal address, Alisa President Don Cole told EMN.Alisa Systems at a Glance                        221 East Walnut Street                               Suite 175                           Pasadena CA 91101                             818/792-9474Contact:  Don Cole, president, 818/792-9474Founded:  1983Product:  AlisaMail; an E-mail system integration productUsers:  Companies with 1,000 or more employeesAreas Served:  Commercial and governmentCustomers:  City of San Jose, University of Texas, Washington StateDepartment of Transportation, Commonwealth of Massachusetts Departmentof Revenue, Hospital of Sick Children--TorontoStatus:  Privately held. Address File Helps Find Each Other    In addition, AlisaMail's integration system includes a MasterAddress file, which makes all users apparent to each other on thesystem.  In other words, it is a sum of all the other directories inall their unique formats, as well as the routes necessary to send themessage within the system.       This file is called OpenDirectory, Automatic DirectorySynchronization and Message Switch.     OpenDirectory creates and maintains a master directory of all E-mail users on the system by requesting directory updates from eachseparate mail system.  When changes are made in one E-mail system,such as adding a new person, modifying an address or deleting apersonal address, the information is transferred to the masterdirectory and used to update all the other directories, says Cole.     Zouzoulos said, "OpenDirectory is still based on a proprietarystandard instead of an industry standard."Integrator Preserves Unique Functionality     AlisaMail utilizes a multi-port gateway which connects thedifferent E-mail systems to the AlisaMail Message Switch.  The gatewayand message switch act as a store-and-forward message hub, handlingthe conversion of message formats as required by each individualsystem.  The message switch preserves the functionality of each mailsystem because it stores the message in its unaltered format.       This is particularly important when sending messages across theInternet, Lou Sears, senior programming analyst with the city of SanJose, told EMN.  The biggest challenge before getting AlisaMail waslack of Internet access, says Sears.  "Each person would have had tohave their own gateway to the Internet, with individual administratorsfor each, and the software to go along with it," he says.    AlisaMail helps users to see each other as they actually are--without having to communicate through multiple gateways andcomplicated massaging protocols.  For instance, an E-mail messagessent on the Reston, Va.-based America Online system might have a"return receipt" attached to it.  If this message is sent to a DigitalVMX system, it cannot read "return receipt."  Therefore, the AlisaMailwould attach to the message the concept of "return receipt" so thatthe user on the other end would know how to respond, says Cole.    Alisa Systems gears its product toward companies with between1,000 to 80,000 employees, says Cole.City Just Had To Have E-mail    When deciding whether or not to integrate its E-mail packagesacross the entire city-wide enterprise, Zouzoulos says the decisiondidn't turn on a cost/benefit analysis:  We just had to have it. "Before E-mail was just a curiosity and a luxury; now we depend uponit."    Other benefits to the integrated E-mail system include areduction in some paperwork.  "We are just at that curve where peopleare using [E-mail] more to actually send electronic documents [to oneanother] and not just messages," says Zouzoulos.    Whenever the city is having problems, such as a complaint comingin about a city function, "the phone rings off the hook," saysZouzoulos.  "E-mail has helped to keep things running smoothly."  E-mail is used mostly within the city organization, but people from theoutside can send in E-mail also, says Sears.  He considers the city'sE-mail system to be not only used as a "business to business" toolwithin the enterprise, but also as a communication tool to theoutside, he says.  For example, people from the outside can send E-mail directly to the mayor or other members of the council withquestions and comments, says Sears.Issues Continued To Be Worked Out    While the city of San Jose is satisfied with the work Alisa hasdone for its E-mail systems, there still are a few things to be workedout, according to Zouzoulos.  The city:    * wants to be able to handle the new Microsoft Exchange E-mailproduct and would like Alisa to support this along with its others;    * would like the directory structure to be made X.500 compatible;and      * wants smoother interface with the Internet.      (Gary Zouzoulos, City of San Jose, 408/277-5649; Lou Sears, Cityof San Jose, 408/277-4587; Don Cole, Alisa Systems, 818/792-9474.) Back to Headline List CopyrightELECTRONIC MESSAGING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996GENERAL MAGIC PAIRS UP WITH ORACLE.  General Magic Inc. of Cupertino, Calif., and Oracle Corp. are teamingup to provide mobile access to the enterprise with connectivitybetween General Magic's MagicCap platform and Oracle Interoffice.Oracle's messaging and document management suite to support severalclients, including MagicCap.  The two companies demonstrated how awireless personal assistant can and the MagicCap platform can be usedto access a corporate network running InterOffice.  MagicCap also canintegrate fax, online services, value-added networks, paging andtelephones.  It incorporates AT&T Corp.'s PersonaLink Services, whichis a public network service that supports smart and multimediamessaging. (General Magic, 408/774-4040; Oracle, 415/506-9034.)  Back to Headline List CopyrightELECTRONIC MESSAGING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996NOVELL CONNECTS GROUPWISE TO INTERNET, X.400.  Novell Inc. (NOVL) of Orem, Utah, this week announced its NetwareLoadable Modules (NLM) for Groupwise 4.1 on Netware networks thatserve as gateways for remote connections, the Internet, X.400 networksand IBM Corp.'s Office Vision/VM and SNADS systems.  Groupwise XTDusers will be able to upgrade the modules once XTD is released thisspring.  The modules run from $495 to $9,995, depending on theprotocol, and will be available early this quarter.  (Novell,http://www.novell.com, 800/861-2507.) Back to Headline List CopyrightELECTRONIC MESSAGING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996PAGENET TESTS TWO-WAY PCS MESSAGING.  Dallas-based Paging Network Inc. will launch a field trial of two-waymessaging services over its personal communications services networkstarting in Atlanta this year.  Motorola Inc. of Schaumburg, Ill.,will provide devices and infrastructure equipment for the field test. PageNet will test acknowledgement paging, which returns a confirmationthat a message was received, and message-back paging, which allowssubscribers to respond immediately to pages.  (Pagenet, 214/965-4100.)Back to Headline List CopyrightELECTRONIC MESSAGING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996AT&T BRINGS WORD PROCESSING CAPABILITIES TO MESSAGING.  AT&T Corp. of Basking Ridge, N.J., is putting word processing featuresinto its AccessPlus version 3.0 for Windows.  Users can choose textfont and point size, justification, bolding, italics, underlining,indentation, bullet-point formatting and spell-checking.  The systemalso has an unlimited file folder storage system and an advanceddirectory function that makes it easier to handle lengthy Internetaddresses due to its design for 32-bit-operating systems such asWindows NT and 95.  It also will run on 16-bit operating systems suchas Windows 3.1 and Windows for Workgroups 3.11.  AccessPlus 3.0retails for $69 and will be available in the first quarter of 1996. It requires at least 8 megabytes of random access memory and supportsmodem speeds of up to 28.8 kilobytes per second.  (AT&T, 800/242-6005.) Back to Headline List CopyrightELECTRONIC MESSAGING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996EDIFY HELPS BUILD INTRANETS.  Companies are using San Jose, Calif.-based Edify Corp.'s agentsoftware for the World Wide Web to build internal networks whichemployees will access using computers, telephones, pagers or faxmachines.  Unisys Corp. last month purchased Electronic Workforce 4.0to provide a self-service human resource application to its 36,000employees worldwide.  Employees will access this information throughthe "Intranet," or internal Web, that Unisys' human resourcesdepartment is building.  Telephone and fax access soon will be addedto the system.  Unisys is using Edify's software to allow resumes andremaining vacation days, through the Intranet.  Electronic Workforce4.0 will work with PeopleSoft's Human resources management System(HRMS) to allow employees to update records either over the Web or viatelephone.  (Edify, http://www.edify.com, 408/982-2000.) Back to Headline List CopyrightELECTRONIC MESSAGING NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 10, 1996WITH INTERNET STRATEGY HERE, LOTUS SHIPS RELEASE VERSION 4Lotus Development Corp. will be the first major messaging company tomarket with its complete client-server messaging solution NotesRelease Version 4 which was expected to ship today.    Notes Release 4 comes on the heels of Lotus' recent Internetstrategy announcement in December which tied Notes closely to theWorld Wide Web.  Lotus will be bundling at no extra charge theInterNotes World Wide Web server with Notes servers--InterNotesformerly cost $2,995.  Lotus also added native support for Webprotocols such as hypertext markup language.Notes Using Web To Its Advantage    "This has shown that Lotus has embraced the Web," said PaulaBoyle, industry analyst at the GIGA Information Group in Norwell,Mass.  "Its strategy now is more comprehensive than Microsoft's orNetscape's.  Companies looking to upgrade to Notes 4 will find the Webenhancements a major attraction.  Companies looking to adopt groupwarewill find Notes the most comprehensive platform, compared to whatExchange will have."    Analysts said Release 4 will conquer one of Notes's biggestchallenges--its difficulty to administer.      Lotus is doing this by increasing the scalability of a Notesserver.  Whereby Notes Release 3 server could support up to 120 usersper server, Notes Release 4 can fit nearly 1,000 users on a symmetricmultiprocessing platform, said Larry Jones, group product manager forclient-server messaging at Lotus.    "Clearly, if I can cut down on the number of servers on a mailnetwork it will be easier for me to administer and I will need feweradministrators.  All of that cuts costs of maintaining andadministrating my network," Jones said.    The Notes Release 4 server comes in single- and multi-processorversions at respective prices of $495 and $2,295 and runs on IBMCorp.'s OS/2 Warp and Microsoft Corp.'s [MSFT] Windows NT.  Supportfor Microsoft Windows 95, IBM AIX, HP-UX, Sun Solaris and Orem, Utah-based Novell Netware will follow.    Lotus also rolled out Lotus Notes Mail, a stripped down messagingclient for Notes servers, last month.  The client costs $55 per seat,and allows users to send and receive Notes Mail even if they do nothave full Notes capabilities.  The lower prices will make it easierfor companies to allow all employees Notes access.    Users can choose two other clients as well: Notes Desktop, a run-time version which costs $69, and can run any custom Notesapplication, or full Notes which costs $275.  All Notes clientsinclude the InterNotes Navigator web browser, which allows users toimport web documents into Notes applications.  (Lotus,http://www.lotus.com, 617/577-8500; GIGA Information Group, 617/792-2572.) Back to Headline List WT03-B12-15IA086-000622-B036-252http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te33.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045433 text/html 44373HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:52:26 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:03 GMTContent-length: 44186Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te33.html Sample Issue Copyright EN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNet October 2, 1991 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * THIS WEEK'S LEAD STORIES * SEARS STUDIES NETWORK ALTERNATIVES FOR PCRADIO (973 words) CONVERSION TO OMNITRACS SIMPLE, SAYS U.S. XPRESS (1014 words) * DELIVERY * SYSTEMS LINK PLANNED ROUTES WITH ACTUAL PERFORMANCE DATA (1290 words) CUSTOMER GIVES THUMBS-UP TO CLI'S FUEL DELIVERY SYSTEM (747 words) * FIELD SERVICE * MELARD EXPANDS PORTFOLIO WITH SERVICE ON RAM, ARDIS (1117 words) * UTILITIES * BOSTON EDISON TO EVALUATE STARTUP'S MOBILE DATA SYSTEM (988 words) * HEARD EN ROUTE * Speedwing Mobile Communications, a division of British (89 words) Qualcomm, Inc. in San Diego has filed a registration (127 words) Ericsson GE Mobile Data in Paramus, N.J. and Racotek in (121 words) CopyrightEN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetOctober 2, 1991SEARS STUDIES NETWORKALTERNATIVES FOR PCRADIO  Sears Roebuck and Co.'s Product Services Division plans totest the use of mobile data communications with a version ofIBM's new PCradio in about six months, says Stan Knipe,executive vice president for product services at Sears inChicago. Knipe expects recommendations on how Sears shouldconduct the tests, and what wireless network it should use,from the division's systems people in about 60 days.  Although Sears has stated its intentions to use theportable computer from IBM, it can't begin hands-on work withthe product until it implements a new system to support itsfield service operations, Knipe says. The system will allowSears to handle service requests through a small number ofregional centers, rather than through its 850 local servicecenters.  Call takers will schedule appointments with customers andthen transmit work orders to the local centers, from whichtechnicians are dispatched. "We have to have this softwaresystem, and even the process changes that that drives, inplace before we're going to be able to feed and support theremote access terminal type of thing," Knipe says. Searsplans to roll out the new system nationally over the next 18months.  When the tests occur, they might or might not involve theArdis public mobile data network. In early 1990, soon afterIBM and Motorola announced their joint venture to form Ardis,Knipe discussed imminent plans to test that technology forfield service applications (see our sister publication,Mobile Data Report, February 12, 1990).                    Tests Never Took Place  The tests never took place, however, and now it's not clearwhether Sears will use Ardis, Knipe says. The company mightinstead decide to use network facilities provided by SearsTechnology Services (STS) in Schaumburg, Ill.  STS operates the data communications network for the Searsfamily of corporations, including Dean Witter, ColdwellBanker and Allstate Insurance as well as the retailoperation. It also operates three information processingfacilities -- in Schaumburg, Dallas and Columbus, Ohio --which serve all the Sears companies except Allstate.  The STS data network, which is based on IBM System NetworkArchitecture (SNA), uses special access circuits obtainedfrom local telephone companies to connect locations within alocal access and transport area (LATA) to a concentrator.From the concentrator, data are transmitted to SNA boundarynodes over 56,000 bit/second links, and from the boundarynodes to host machines at the information processingfacilities at 56,000 bits/second or T-1. The processingcenters are linked by DS3 facilities.  Knipe and a spokesperson at STS both decline to specifywhat kind of radio frequency network STS could make availableto link the handheld terminals to host computer systems.Neither will they discuss the details of the system that willbe used to link the regional service call taking centers, thethree information processing centers and the local servicecenters.  It's probably safe, however, to draw some analogies betweenthe product service system and the system Sears employs totake catalog orders by phone. The 10 regional facilitiesthrough which Sears will handle service calls are the sameones at which it already operates its telecatalog service,Knipe says.  Telecatalog call-takers use "dumb" desktop terminals tointeract with host systems at the data centers. There isconsiderable redundancy among systems at the three centers;it is Sears' intention to be able to route applicationstraffic to any of the three centers, depending on currenttraffic, to maintain the fastest possible response time, saysthe STS spokesperson.  All data used in product service applications also residesat the three central data facilities. Service representativesuse desktop terminals to access information such as historyof service on the appliance, whether the appliance is inwarranty and whether the customer has purchased an extendedservice agreement. Under the new system, that function wouldshift to the 10 regional centers.  Adding portable terminals to the picture would allow thelocal centers to dispatch technicians in the field to newjobs. It would also allow technicians to close out jobs,exchange messages with dispatchers, access technicalinformation about appliances and view schematic drawings. Thelatter would not be transmitted over the network, but wouldbe stored on "a miniaturized CD-ROM," Knipe says.  To handle data transmissions as economically as possible,Sears expects to use a PCradio that can communicate over acellular network as well as over a public or private mobiledata network, Knipe says. Brief transactions would be routedover the mobile data network. Large files would betransmitted over cellular. (Of course, if Sears decides touse privately-licensed frequencies rather than a publicnetwork, it won't have to worry about paying by the packetfor transmitting large files, as it would on Ardis.)                         In One Box?  IBM is working on a version of the PCradio to meet Sears'needs, Knipe says. But it's not possible to fit the hardwarefor both cellular and mobile data network transmissions intothe same portable box, says Jim Robinson, the PCradio projectcoordinator at Boca Raton, Fla.  In August, IBM announced three versions of the PCradio.Model 001 contains a 2,400 bits/second landline modem; model002 contains a Motorola 400i packet assembler/disassemblerfor use on Motorola radio networks, including Ardis; andmodel 003 includes a cellular transceiver and a 2,400bits/second modem for transmission over cellular. Theterminal can't accommodate both the 400i and a cellulartransceiver, Robinson says.  A customer could, however, gain the ability to transmitover two kinds of wireless networks by sacrificing somedegree of portability. For example, a customer could use anRS-232 link to connect the cellular PCradio to an RF modem ina vehicle, Robinson says. This would allow the user totransmit over Ardis or a private network only while in thevehicle, but over cellular from anywhere.Back to Headline List CopyrightEN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetOctober 2, 1991CONVERSION TO OMNITRACSSIMPLE, SAYS U.S. XPRESS  When Geostar Corp. declared bankruptcy this May, U.S.Xpress, a full truckload (TL) carrier in Tunnel Hill, Ga.,was left in the dark. But the firm isn't kicking itself overthe time it spent integrating the now-defunct vehicletracking and messaging system with its operations. Thanks todevelopment work it did with its Geostar vendor, HughesNetwork Systems in Germantown, Md., U.S. Xpress is now havingan easy time linking applications on its AS/400 network withdata from its new satellite communications system, says JimClerc, data processing manager at the trucking company.  U.S. Xpress signed a $5.3 million contract this summer withSan Diego-based Qualcomm Inc. for service on its Omnitracssystem. The trucking firm is currently installing Qualcomm'svehicle tracking and two-way messaging system on its trucksat the rate of 50/week. All 550 trucks should be equipped bysometime in November, Clerc says.  Under the contract, another 250 units will go to a sistercompany, Southwest Motor Freight in Chattanooga, Tenn. Oncethe Georgia company finishes its own implementation, it willreplace Southwest's current dispatching and management systemwith its own software, including the Omnitracs interfaces.  The contract also includes an option to purchase anadditional 1,000 Omnitracs units to install on newly-acquiredtrucks in the future. U.S. Xpress used the Geostar networkfor about 15 months before bankrupt Geostar pulled the plugon its service. The trucking firm worked closely with Hughesto provide interfaces to its own dispatching and managementsoftware, which was developed in-house.  U.S. Xpress uses vehicle position data to help automatefuel tax reporting, watch for trucks that go out of route andestimate fuel consumption, among other applications.  If Geostar had not gone out of business, U.S. Xpressprobably would have been perfectly happy to continue usingthe system from Hughes -- but no one at the company regretsthe relationship with Qualcomm either, Clerc says.  During the weeks when the company was "dark" -- betweenGeostar's death and the contract with Qualcomm -- theadvantages of vehicle tracking and satellite communicationsbecame extremely clear, he says. The company has seen a 20percent increase in productivity through the use of thesatellite systems, he says.  Unlike many of Qualcomm's other customers, U.S. Xpress isflying solo in providing links to Omnitracs. Usually,Qualcomm gives new customers a shopping list of interfacesand applications it can provide. Once the customer decideswhat it wants, a software applications engineer employed byQualcomm writes the code needed to import data from thesatellite network into databases used by pre-existingapplications on the customer's host, says Jan Stevens,manager of software engineering at Qualcomm.  Qualcomm does a great deal of this "external applications"work, but Clerc recently told her that U.S. Xpress wouldn'tneed any outside programming help, Stevens says.  Applications at U.S. Xpress run on a network of five IBMAS/400s. One of the machines, whose main function is tomanage communications, is currently linked by a dial-upconnection to Qualcomm's network facilities in San Diego.This will soon be replaced by a leased T-1 circuit, Clercsays.  U.S. Xpress dispatchers work on "dumb" terminals tied tothe mainframe network. The multi-session CRTs allow them towork in three applications at once, moving from one screen tothe next without having to exit one program and enteranother.                     Link to Southwestern  One of the functions the dispatchers can perform is toaccess Southwestern's dispatching program, running on anAS/400 in Chattanooga. Although the two firms dispatch theirfleets separately, their computer systems are linked by high-speed lines.  A U.S. Xpress dispatcher with a new load to assign canquery the Southwestern database to determine whether thatcompany has a truck in the area that's better able to handlethe job than a truck in his own fleet. The link between thetwo system leads to "better utilization of both companies'equipment. We're competing against each other, but we're alsohelping each other," Clerc says.  As part of the integration with Omnitracs, the dispatchers'terminals will soon give way to 80286-based IBM compatiblepersonal computers operating at 16 MHz, with 2 megabytes ofRAM and 50 megabyte hard disks. Having the PCs will allowU.S. Xpress to use Qualcomm's Intracs software. Intracsdisplays vehicle location data, downloaded from the hostcomputer to a PC, on computerized maps.  Each dispatcher will use the map display to view the partof the fleet for which he is responsible. Data will bedownloaded from the AS/400 at set intervals and when thedispatcher requests an update. Ultimately, Clerc wants thesystem to update positions in the PC each time they'reupdated in the host. (Generally, Qualcomm transmits avehicle's position once each hour plus each time the driversends a message.)  Although the advent of the PCs will put new processingpower on dispatchers' desks, U.S. Xpress doesn't plan to takeadvantage of the added muscle when it designs applications.The desktop machine, with its super-VGA screen, is basically"a high-priced graphics display," Clerc says. "If the AS/400could do it [run the map display program], we probably woulddo that."  Further enhancements to the system will follow whenQualcomm provides U.S. Xpress with sensors, allowing it totransmit data from engines over the satellite network. Thecompany currently gets some idea of how engines arefunctioning by making calculations based on position data,but that's "kind of guesswork," Clerc says.  Eventually, rather than have its system simply displayengine conditions to dispatchers, U.S. Xpress would like thecomputer to analyze the data and make decisions about how tosolve problems, Clerc says.  Although U.S. Xpress will probably want to go its own wayin handling data from sensors, Qualcomm is preparing torelease a packaged application designed to make use of thattype of information. The Sensortracs program has been in betatesting for some time now, says Stevens.Back to Headline List CopyrightEN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetOctober 2, 1991SYSTEMS LINK PLANNED ROUTESWITH ACTUAL PERFORMANCE DATA  Like the plans of mice and men, the best-laid plans fordelivery routes sometimes go awry. A firm might invest manythousands of dollars in a routing and scheduling package thatuses sophisticated algorithms to analyze an information-packed database. Overnight, that software might churn outdelivery plans designed to save fuel, use equipmentefficiently and keep customers delighted. But once the truckshit the road, real world problems -- like traffic jams,overheated engines and errant drivers -- can play havoc withideal routes.  To help bridge the gap between plan and performance, somedelivery organizations have been merging data from theirrouting systems with data from trip recording computers. Thereports they obtain in this way at the end of each driver'srun can help them identify performance problems such asunnecessary detours and missed delivery windows.  In addition, at least two systems on the market today cancompare real-time data from automatic vehicle location (AVL)systems with pre-determined routes to detect problems whiletrucks are still on the road. These systems can calculate theeffect that a performance lag will have on deliveries laterin the day.  They can then plan a new route to put things back ontrack -- or at least to satisfy those customers with the moststringent delivery requirements. Using a mobile datacommunications network, they can automatically transmitrevised routes to computers or terminals in the deliverytrucks.  Routing Technology Software, Inc. (RTSI) in Vienna, Va.announced such a package this spring. The system uses the RamMobile Data network to transmit location data from a GlobalPositioning System (GPS) receiver mounted on a truck to ahost computer running RTSI's Roadshow routing and schedulingpackage. For transmitting new routes and other messages todrivers, RTSI is remarketing mobile data terminals fromRacotek in Burnsville, Md. and radio frequency modems fromEricsson GE Mobile Data in Paramus, N.J.  RTSI designed Roadshow primarily to address dense deliverysituations in metropolitan areas, although it also hascustomers with trucks serving multiple states. The otherproduct that can re-route drivers on the fly, the MobileCommunications System (MCS) from Rand McNally TDM in Skokie,Ill., is aimed at over the road operations.  MCS accepts location data transmitted over Qualcomm'sOmnitracs or Motorola's Coverage Plus systems (and formerlyfrom the now-defunct Geostar system). It compares currentlocations with planned routes, alerts the dispatcher when atruck is falling behind its estimated time of arrival (ETA)and detects when a truck is out of route.                       Visiting Shirley  A driver on a long distance trip might go out of route --using extra time and fuel -- because of road construction,bad weather or "because he's visiting Shirley," says HenryFeinberg, president at Rand McNally TDM. Once the problembecomes evident, the dispatcher can have MCS produce newinstructions to put the the driver back on target. He thentransmits those directions to the mobile data terminal.  The two systems seem to have tremendous potential forcertain delivery situations, but both are still unproven inthe marketplace. Although RTSI and Rand McNally are solidlyentrenched in the routing systems market, they're only nowstarting to market their mobile communications products.Neither has yet signed a customer for its new system.  Are the benefits that result from comparing planned andactual routes in real time worth the extra cost of using AVLand mobile communications systems?  Perhaps for some operations, but not for E & J Gallo, saysMonty Maglinte, an industrial engineer with the Modesto,Calif. winery. Gallo is starting to explore how to combinedata from its routing and scheduling system with data from atrip recorder. Gallo's distributorships, some of which arecorporate owned, use a routing package called Truckstops 2from Microanalytics in Arlington, Va.  Maglinte and his colleagues at Gallo serve as technologyconsultants to the distributors. The firm is currentlyinvestigating trip recorders they will recommend for variousfunctions, including comparisons of actual trips with routescreated by Truckstops 2. Like others who are combining thetwo technologies, Gallo wants not only to measure how driversprogress from stop to stop, but also to track other factors,such as how long drivers spend at each account and how manycases of product they unload per hour.  If the software creates effective routes, there won't be alot of problems the dispatcher needs to address in real time,Maglinte says. A truck might break down, or problems with anaccount might cause a driver to spend an hour at a stopinstead of the expected 20 minutes. But those complicationsdon't arise often enough to merit great concern, he says.  Technology that can produce and transmit revised routes todrivers is great, but it's more costly than it's worth, saysMark Whalley, transportation product manager at STSC inRockville, Md. STSC's routing and scheduling package, Trucks,is designed for both local and long-haul fleets. Most of itsusers are private carriers, Whalley says.  Drivers who cover the same geographic areas day after dayknow their territories well, he says. When they encounterdelays, they can figure out their own shortcuts andalternative routes.  There would be no extra value to getting performance datain real time rather than at the end of a delivery run, saysGary Strzelczyk, director of transportation at Bevaco Foodsin Pittston, Pa. Bevaco, a food service distributor, makesruns to 13 states out of its central location. Drivers maketrips of one to four days, delivering to restaurants, healthcare facilities and other institutions.  Bevaco has used routing software from Roadnet Technologiesin Timonium, Md. for about 3-1/2 years. The firm has beenusing trip recorders from Cadec Systems in Londonderry, N.H.for the past two years. Roadnet is now working out the bugsin an interface that allows the Roadnet system to accept datafrom the Cadec and produce printed exception reports,Strzelczyk says.  At the end of each run, a Bevaco staffer extracts data fromthe onboard computer by inserting a cartridge into the Cadecand then uses the cartridge to upload the data to a personalcomputer. Bevaco uses a floppy disk to transfer drivers' tripreports, containing the times they arrived at and left eachstop, to a second PC running the Roadnet system.  The customers that Roadnet serves don't need real time datacommunications to monitor routes, says David Carp, nationalsales manager at the Maryland firm. Unlike long-haul truckingcarriers, private delivery operations don't assign new stopsto drivers while they're on the road.  "Usually if you're dealing with a beer distributor, winedistributor, food service distributor, they're not gettingany orders during the day. It's all pack 'em up and send 'emout and let 'em come back empty," he says.                        Enough Hiccups  For drivers who make many stops in a compact, congestedurban territory, however, the workday contains "enoughhiccups" that it pays to track their progress all the time,says Donald Soults, president at RTSI. The routingsoftware/trip recorder combination is a good tool forevaluating driver performance, but RTSI's real time systemcan help companies anticipate and avoid customer serviceproblems, he says.  Dispatchers can use the mobile data network to transmitrevised routes not only when drivers fall behind schedule,but also when parts of the road system become unavailable. Adispatcher who learns, for example, that a bridge has beenclosed uses a mouse to click on the image of that bridge onRoadshow's video map display.  Once the bridge is selected and deleted, the softwarecalculates new instructions for any drivers whose routes areaffected by the change, Soults says. The dispatcher can thentransmit the changes to the drivers.Back to Headline List CopyrightEN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetOctober 2, 1991CUSTOMER GIVES THUMBS-UPTO CLI'S FUEL DELIVERY SYSTEM  Following a 90 day pilot on the Ram Mobile Data Network, MBTrucking Co. in New York City is implementing mobile dataterminals in 20 of its fuel delivery trucks. MB is using theterminals in connection with the Fueltronic 2000 dispatchingsystem from Carrier Logistics, Inc. (CLI) in Rye Brook, N.Y.CLI used the recently-concluded pilot to refine the newdispatching system before marketing it to other fuel deliverycompanies.  Fueltronic 2000 is based on the dispatching portion ofCLI's Routronic 2000 routing and dispatching package forless-than-truckload (LTL) carriers, says Don Adams, presidentat CLI. The new application, customized for fuel delivery,was designed specifically to be used with a mobile datanetwork.  MB Trucking delivers heating oil to private homes,apartment buildings and commercial buildings in the New Yorkmetropolitan area. Vendors that use its services includelarge companies such as Texaco and Amerada Hess as well asindependent retailers. During the pilot, MB operated mobiledata terminals from Ericsson GE Mobile Data in eight of its45 trucks. It has now decided to place terminals in the 20trucks that do regular residential deliveries -- to one- andtwo-family homes and small, brownstone-type apartmentbuildings -- says Joseph Magnone, general manager at MB.                   More Forgiving Schedules  Because trucks servicing larger accounts make fewer stopsper day, they operate on more forgiving schedules, and MBdoesn't think they need terminals "just yet," says Magnone.Also, because homeowners are less likely than commerciallandlords to plan for their fuel needs in advance, there aremore emergency calls for same-day service on the homedelivery side of the business, he says.  MB has been using software from CLI for various aspects ofits operations since the mid-1970s. The trucking firm'sprimary computer is a Unix-based IBM RT, which soon will beupgraded to an IBM RS/6000, Adams says. Fueltronic is runningon an 80386-based personal computer in a multi-user Unixenvironment.  Customer orders entered on the RT are passed to the 386,where Fueltronic routes deliveries, manages communicationswith the mobile terminals and receives drivers' statusreports. When a driver reports that a delivery is complete,the relevant data are passed back to applications on the RT.The 386 is linked to Ram's local switch via leased line.  MB expects to boost productivity and streamline operationsenough to make back its investment in the new system in ayear and a half, says Magnone. One area where it plans toimprove is in assigning deliveries for "will-calls" --customers who call when they need oil, rather than schedulingdeliveries in advance.  Using their mobile terminals, drivers will report theamount of product dispensed at each delivery, and the systemwill keep track of how much they have left. This means adispatcher receiving a call for same-day service will knownot only which drivers are closest to the account, but whichare carrying sufficient fuel. Based on those two factors, thedispatcher can assign the job to the appropriate truck and,if necessary, reassign one of that driver's other stops to adifferent truck, Magnone says.  By transmitting data on completed deliveries in real time,MB also expects to eliminate many hours of data entry time onthe RT. Currently, with that information reaching the officeat the end of the day, during the firm's peak season the dataentry staff often must work until midnight or 1:00 a.m. toupdate records. "We could be reducing our computer room timeby three or four hours per day," Magnone says.                   More Announcements Soon  CLI's Routronic 2000 package can be used with or without aninterface to a mobile data network. CLI is able to provideinterfaces to both the Ram and Ardis public mobile datanetworks and soon expects to announce its first Routroniccustomers on both, says Adams. AAA Cooper Transportation inDothan, Ala. implemented the system at its Atlanta terminal,with a link via private network to Motorola terminals in itstrucks, in 1986.  Since many of the functions in the LTL system apply toother transportation situations as well, other specializedproducts could follow Fueltronic 2000 to market. The companyrecently completed a system for a client doing fooddistribution and could sell that package to others, with orwithout a mobile data interface, Adams says. Other nichesmight include general warehousing and delivery, furniture orappliance delivery and messenger services.Back to Headline List CopyrightEN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetOctober 2, 1991MELARD EXPANDS PORTFOLIOWITH SERVICE ON RAM, ARDIS  Melard Technologies Inc., a field service systemsintegrator in Yonkers, N.Y., has added communications overRam Mobile Data to the list of services it will offer itscustomers. Melard was recently appointed a systems integratorfor the Mobitex network operated by Ram, which is based inNew York City. Melard previously announced that it had signeda joint marketing agreement with Ardis in Lincolnshire, Ill.,This allows Melard to offer communications over Ardis'nationwide mobile data network.  The commitment to wireless communications is part of anongoing effort by Melard to reposition its business. Thecompany was established in 1983 to design, manufacture andmarket handheld computers with communications capabilities.More recently, its product line has included peripheralhardware, such as barcode readers. Melard has carved a nichefor itself especially in the telecommunications industry.  The firm has sold about 20,000 of its ruggedized handheldcomputers, which use a proprietary operating system, saysNick Scalera, Melard's director of market development.Melard's current plan, however, is to provide turnkey mobileinformation systems -- including hardware, software,communications, training and support -- to a variety of fieldservice organizations.  Offering communications over mobile data networks "is anintegral part of our business plan and always has been," saysScalera. The right technologies at the right prices justhaven't been available until recently, he says.                        Stymied by PBX  Melard's product line has always included modems fortransmitting data over the public switched telephone network.For many of its traditional customers, these have proven asatisfactory solution. Technicians working for the regionalBell operating companies (RBOCs) can always plug their modemsinto outdoor equipment owned by their firms. But fortechnicians working on other kinds of equipment, who mighthave to ask a client's permission to use a phone, or might bestymied by a client's PBX, landline modems pose a problem,Scalera says.  Melard's Access II product is a 2.4 lb., clamshell-stylehandheld with 56K of internal memory allocated between RAMand ROM and up to 512K of battery-backed RAM. The supertwistLCD is available in either 8 lines x 40 characters or 16lines x 80 characters. The 49-key QWERTY-style keyboardincludes 16 function keys. A 300/1,200 bits/second internalmodem is included. Melard uses a removable nicad power packto run the computer.                      Engineers at Work  Melard's engineers are working on how to integrateMotorola's 400i radio packet modem into future products,Scalera says. The 400i is compatible with Ardis as well aswith private networks using Motorola technology.  Work on a handheld for the Ram network will have to waituntil a portable Mobitex RF modem reaches the market.Ericsson Mobile Data in Paramus, N.J. is expected to releasean external model in the first quarter of 1992.  In addition to its own terminals, Melard will also provideother end-user devices, including DOS-based machines. If thesystem that suits a customer's needs includes Melard's ownterminals, "that's fine; but if not, that's fine too,"Scalera says.  Scalera won't discuss whether Melard is working on its ownDOS-based handheld. But, "I would think at this point anyonewho would continue to develop proprietary kinds of systemswould have a very short-sighted view," he says.  Although Melard has yet to sign a customer for service oneither Ram or Ardis, it has customers conducting feasibilitytests and has seen a great deal of interest. "All of thepeople that we've been talking to, especially those thatdon't have such ready access to tip and ring, have beenwaiting for this kind of thing to happen," Scalera says.  Melard isn't the only vendor of field service systemsthat's convinced there's a big demand for wirelesscommunications. Although only the largest field serviceorganizations were looking at the technology in the past,with the advent of public mobile data networks, smaller firmsare also showing interest, says Rebecca Weber, marketingservices manager at Service Automation, Inc. (SAI).  The Houston-based firm provides management systems forcompanies that service computer systems, residentialappliances, medical equipment, telecommunications equipment,office machines and restaurant equipment.                   Still Piloting Internally  SAI announced a version of its Service Automation Systemfor use with Ardis in April. Although the company has begunmarketing the wireless application, it's still piloting thesystem internally and has not yet signed a customer, Webersays.  SAI does have about 100 service technicians transmittingdata over Motorola's specialized mobile radio system, PrivacyPlus, which provides local communications. Although thoseusers will continue to be supported, SAI is no longermarketing data over Privacy Plus because Motorola is nolonger offering it to new customers, Weber says.  A third field service applications vendor, The Data Groupin Burlington, Mass., first developed the Remote-Pluswireless communications module to its Field Watch system foruse with Motorola's Data Radio Network. That three-citynetwork was combined with IBM's nationwide DigitalCommunications System -- which Motorola built -- to formArdis in 1990. Ardis is jointly owned by IBM and Motorola.  Like its competitors, The Data Group has not yet signed acustomer onto Ardis. One customer has decided to use themobile data network but is still weighing the pros and consof various remote devices, says Robert Fogler, senior projectmanager at The Data Group.                 Non-"Bursty" Communications  Some of the applications that interest field serviceorganizations, such as transmitting new job assignments,closing out jobs and checking parts availability, are justthe sort of "bursty" communications for which Ram and Ardiswere designed. But other functions that service organizationswant to move into the field, such as accessing equipment andcustomer history data and using expert systems to performdiagnostics, could demand enough airtime to make publicmobile data networks an expensive choice.  An applications designer can keep costs down by designingdata transactions that require as little network time aspossible, Fogler says. It also pays to use a computer, ratherthan a "dumb" terminal, as the portable device, he says. Thisallows the system to operate in a client/server mode; dataare downloaded over the network as needed, but most of theprocessing occurs locally.  Although paying by the packet to use an expert system maybe costly, a lot of customers say it's worth the price, Webersays. "There may be enough value in what they can charge forthat [service] call that it's okay."  Melard's tactic for dealing with large transactions will beto provide more than one communications option in one device.Customers using radio networks will still need landlinemodems for moving large amounts of data, Scalera says. Melardhas also said it plans to offer data communications overcellular networks.Back to Headline List CopyrightEN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetOctober 2, 1991BOSTON EDISON TO EVALUATESTARTUP'S MOBILE DATA SYSTEM  Boston Edison Co. is about to begin a small pilot toevaluate the use of mobile data in maintaining its electricaldistribution network. After running this "prototype system"for a few months, the utility will use the knowledge it gainsto write a detailed request for proposals (RFP) for a larger-scale system, says Larry Dexter, senior electrical engineerfor communications, who works in Boston Edison's Waltham,Mass. office.  Using hardware and software from Metric Systems Corp., asmall startup in Acton, Mass., the utility will download workorders overnight to Zenith laptop computers in trucks used byline repair crews in Waltham. During the day, repair crewswill use the system to request more information about theirassignments, report on their status, close out completed jobsand receive assignments for emergency work.  Currently, field technicians spend 15-30 minutes eachmorning picking up computer printouts that list theirassignments for the day. By having the assignments waitingfor crews on their laptops, Boston Edison hopes to get a jumpon the work day, Dexter says. Also, by automating the way inwhich crews report on work they've completed, the utilitycompany hopes to cut the time they spend reporting verballyto the supervisor at the end of the shift, he says.  Boston Edison will be using Mavric 2000, a wireless datacommunications system provided by Metric Systems. In itsbasic form, Mavric 2000 consists of: 1. a base stationcontroller, containing a radio, an RF modem and interfacecircuitry, 2. several remote controllers, which are similarto the base station but are housed in more rugged boxes, and3. communications software. Mavric permits both two-waymessaging (host-to-remote or remote-to-remote) and bulk filetransfer.  "Messaging," in the vocabulary of Metric, includesinteracting in real time with a host system as well astransmitting text messages, says William Brown, president ofthe Acton firm. It also includes completing fill-in-the-blankforms and transmitting the contents of those forms to anothercomputer on the network.  In addition to providing the basic package, Metric isworking with Boston Edison to develop the utility'sapplication. One part of the project is designing forms thesupervisor will use to transmit work orders at night. Workingon an 80386 personal computer, the supervisor will obtaindata on pending jobs from the utility's work managementsystem, which is used to schedule jobs and control equipmentinventory. Metric uses a 3270 terminal interface to connectthe PC to the IBM mainframe running the management system,Brown says.  Once the supervisor sets priorities and assigns jobs towork crews, the Mavric system will automatically "dial" intothe laptop on each truck and download the appropriate workorder file. The form describing each job will consist of asection in fixed format and one in free text, Brown says.  Data will be transmitted over privately-licensed channelsin the 484 MHz-487 MHz range, says Dexter. In addition todetailing the work to be done, the forms will outline thematerials needed. Once they have their assignments, crewswill stop in the parts room to stock their trucks beforeheading out.  Boston Edison chose to download the large work order filesat night to help minimize daytime data traffic on thechannels, which are used for voice as well, Dexter says.Crews will also use the radios in the Mavric system in placeof their regular voice radios during the pilot. Voice modeautomatically overrides data whenever a user picks up theradio's microphone and starts talking, Dexter says.  Concern about boosting traffic on voice channels will keepBoston Edison from considering mobile data for dispatchingworkers for another operation -- customer service -- in thenear future, Dexter says. Users of wireless data networksoften report that traffic drops when they replace voicecommunications with more spectrally-efficient digitalmessages. But since the channels are licensed primarily forvoice, there's a limit to how much data the FederalCommunications Commission will allow the utility to transmit,he says.  Boston Edison might consider the technology for customerservice, however, after it switches its mobile communicationsto an 800 MHz trunked network in 1993 or 1994, Dexter says.In addition to Metric, the utility plans to investigatevendors of mobile data systems that can operate on trunkednetworks.  The pilot with Metric is Boston Edison's first time outwith a mobile data network, Dexter says. The company hadinvestigated the possible use of conventional mobile dataterminals in the past but found they didn't have enoughstorage to handle the volume of data it wanted to transmit.Boston Edison hasn't worked with any of the establishedutility system vendors -- such as TTI Technologies and DowtyControl Technologies -- that can provide dispatching systemsbased on intelligent mobile computers, he says.  Although the pilot won't begin for a couple of weeks, thevendor and customer already anticipate a second stage thatwould allow Boston Edison to attach diagrams to work orders,Brown says. Computerized graphics representing sections ofthe electrical grid would be stored locally on the laptop.When a supervisor entered a work order on the PC, the systemwould determine what diagrams the line worker needed. Then itwould remotely check the laptop to make sure it containedcurrent versions of the necessary graphics.  If the laptop needed an update, the PC (now linked tocomputer-aided design workstations as well as to themainframe and mobile data network) would obtain the necessarygraphics and transmit them along with the text portion of thework order, Brown says. The details of how this would operatehave not all been worked out.  Metric plans to use its work with Boston Edison, and withother early clients, to develop a variety of customizablehardware and software packages that could be sold to otherorganizations. The firm is concentrating primarily on theutility and public safety markets.Back to Headline List CopyrightEN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetOctober 2, 1991  Speedwing Mobile Communications, a division of British  Speedwing Mobile Communications, a division of BritishAirways, has signed a strategic vendor agreement withEricsson GE Mobile Data to market wireless data applications,using Mobitex networks, to the airline industry. Possibleapplications include linking roving personnel, such asfueling crews, baggage handlers and catering staff, to hostcomputers.  An article in the September issue of the Britishpublication, Mobile & Cellular, describes how British Airwaysis using Ram Mobile Data's U.K. network at Heathrow Airport.Ericsson GE will provide Mobitex modems and other hardwarefor the systems.Back to Headline List CopyrightEN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetOctober 2, 1991  Qualcomm, Inc. in San Diego has filed a registration  Qualcomm, Inc. in San Diego has filed a registrationstatement with the Securities and Exchange Commissionproposing an initial public offering of 3,500,000 shares ofcommon stock. The company plans to offer 2,800,000 shares inthe United States and 700,000 shares internationally. Theofferings will be managed by Lehman Brothers; Bear, Stearns &Co. Inc. and Alex. Brown and Sons Inc.  Separately, Qualcomm announced a version of its Qtracssoftware for IBM and IBM-compatible mainframe computers.Qualcomm introduced Qtracs for IBM AS/400, System/36 andSystem/38 machines last year. With Qtracs, trucking companydispatchers can use Qualcomm's Omnitracs system to viewvehicle locations and communicate with drivers on terminalslinked to their regular host computers, rather than on apersonal computer dedicated to Omnitracs.Back to Headline List CopyrightEN ROUTE TECHNOLOGY via NewsNetOctober 2, 1991  Ericsson GE Mobile Data in Paramus, N.J. and Racotek in  Ericsson GE Mobile Data in Paramus, N.J. and Racotek inBurnsville, Minn. have signed an agreement to co-marketRacotek's DOS-based mobile data terminals for use on Mobitexnetworks. Ericsson will supply vehicular radio modems forconnecting the terminals to the network, as well as marketingand technical support.  Racotek is already providing terminals to Toronto-basedCamco, a field service organization operating on the RogersCantel Mobitex network; and to the Hoboken, N.J. Fire Dept.,which recently signed an agreement for service on the RamMobile Data network. In addition, Routing Technology SoftwareInc. in Vienna, Va. is including Racotek terminals in asystem, using Ram's network, that integrates automaticvehicle location, computerized routing and wirelessmessaging.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-16IA086-000622-B036-294http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te24.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045457 text/html 71898HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:52:57 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:06 GMTContent-length: 71711Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te24.html Sample Issue Copyright EXCHANGE via NewsNet January 19, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES GOVERNMENT TIES TELSTRA TO DIGITALISATION TIMETABLE (359 words) TELSTRA'S DISTRIBUTOR AND TARIFF PLANS FALL FOUL OF AUSTEL (517 words) DRAFT TELECOMMS LEGISLATION RELEASED (862 words) TELECOMMS INDUSTRY TO BE SELF REGULATING (262 words) TELSTRA OFFERS RADICAL SOLUTION TO USO PROBLEM (626 words) FOXTEL/AUSTRALIS MERGER UNDER ACCC SCRUTINY (196 words) COUNCILS SCORE FIRST VICTORY AGAINST OPTUS CABLE ROLLOUT (144 words) TELSTRA AND OPTUS TO LOSE PLANNING EXEMPTIONS (262 words) JNA AND AUSDOC FORM MESSAGING JOINT VENTURE (426 words) SPECTRUM NETWORKS ACQUIRES RESELLER, CONFIRMS SWITCH PLANS (199 words) EXPORT EFFORTS PUT STANILITE INTO THE RED (201 words) COMMUNICATIONS COMPANIES CLUSTER FOR SYNERGY (188 words) WA DEMANDS MOBILE NUMBER PORTABILITY (210 words) TELSTRA TO SEEK ALTERNATIVE INDIAN INVESTMENT STRATEGY (422 words) OPTUS SHAREHOLDERS TIP IN ANOTHER $200 MILLION (169 words) TELECOM NZ PAY TV PLAN STYMIED BY LEGAL ACTION (209 words) ABA RELEASES ISSUES PAPER, INVITES COMMENT ON ONLINE SERVICES (361 words) APRIL LAUNCH FOR TELECOM NZ INTERNET SERVICE (247 words) ASTEC FORECASTS THE FUTURE OF THE CUSTOMER ACCESS NETWORK (379 words) STANDARDS' DIGITAL VIDEO REPORT RELEASED (411 words) US OPENS THE DOOR TO MAJOR TELECOMMS REFORMS (354 words) MAJOR NETWORK CONFERENCE IN AUSTRALIA (255 words) COMPANY AND SHARE WATCH (250 words) HARVEY PARKER LEAVES TELSTRA (114 words) NEW DIVISION HEADS AT TELECOM NZ (109 words) NEW COO FOR OPTUS (102 words) SEARCH FOR OPTUS CEO CONTINUES (92 words) INFORMATION SYSTEMS PROFESSIONAL TO ABC BOARD (47 words) CORRECTION (59 words) NEWS BRIEFS (1786 words) CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996GOVERNMENT TIES TELSTRA TO DIGITALISATION TIMETABLECommunications minister Michael Lee released on 17 Januarydetails of network development undertakings negotiated withTelstra which commit the carrier to six monthly milestones leading tofull digitisation of the network by 30 June 2000. The governmentmade a commitment to negotiating this network development deedin September 1994, as a result of issues raised by the Casualties ofTelstra cases.It commits Telstra to having 73.9 percent of lines in urban areas and63.9 percent of rural lines digital by 30 June 1996. The number ofrural lines served by old ARK exchanges is to be reduced to 3.4percent by the same date.Calling line identification is to be available on all exchanges by 30June 1997. CLI availability in rural areas is currently 89.8 percentand in urban areas almost 100 percent.Carrier preselection and itemised billing are to be available to allcustomers by 30 June 1997, in time for the new competition regimeon 1 July 1997. Preselection availability is already a requirement ofTelstra's licence but the new undertakings provide a timetable to itsachievement. Preselection and itemised billing is available toalmost all urban users and will be available to 89.4 percent of ruralcustomers by mid 1996.Telstra's compliance with its undertakings will be monitored by theDepartment of Communications and the Arts in conjunction withAustel and details will be tabled in Parliament.On 28 November the Democrats communications spokesperson,Senator Vicki Bourne, asked Senator Bob Collins, ministerrepresenting the minister for communications and the arts, when thegovernment expected to release this network development deed ofagreement and why it had been delayed for over a year. Collinsconcluded a long and rather vague answer by saying that "anumber of complex issues and detailed considerations haveneeded to be dealt with in developing the undertakings. This hasbeen taking place in a rapidly changing environment that Telstra isoperating in which does have consequences for its businessstrategies". According to Bourne's office he promised the deedwould be released "next week (ie early December). However theHansard record had it as "next month".Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996TELSTRA'S DISTRIBUTOR AND TARIFF PLANS FALL FOUL OFAUSTELTariff changes announced by Telstra early in December whichwould have made non-value adding resale of basic telephoneservice unviable have been blocked by Austel pending a detailedinvestigation.On 1 December Telstra announced its intention to withdraw theMultisite Plan 1 (MSP1) and Callsaver 3 (CS3) tariffs. These hadbeen designed for large corporate users but formed the backboneof many simple resellers' businesses and Telstra claimed this wasnot commercially sustainable. Value adding resellers were offeredrevised Service Provider 1 (SP1) and Service Provider 2 (SP2)tariffs which Telstra claimed did not disadvantage genuine valueadding resellers. Callsaver 4 (CS4) and Callsaver 8 (CS8) tariffswere also restructured.The announcement provoked a strong reaction from the ServiceProviders Action Network (Span) which, at a strategy meeting on 11December, set up a fighting fund with $1000 from each member andformed four committees to pursue its case: at the ministerial level,with Austel, with the carriers and with the ACCC and on legalgrounds.Austel announced on 22 December its initial decisions on thefilings. SP1, SP2 and the Freecall Flexiplan were disallowed.Corporate Virtual Private Network (CVPN), CS4 and CS8, BusinessSaver Plus, Corporate Centre Local and Long Distance tariffs werenot disallowed but without prejudice to subsequent Austel reviews.On 9 January Austel chairman Neil Tuckwell wrote to Span saying ithad conducted a preliminary investigation of the CS8 tariff and theresult suggested that CS8 may be anticompetitive. It requestedsubmissions from Span members by 16 January to help it finalise itsdetermination.Austel diasallowed SP1 because it bundled local and long distancecalls for discount purposes in a way which was not subject tocompetition. It also offered no additional discount on local calls tothe retail CS10 tariff even though the SP1 user was required to takeresponsibility for billing and bad debts. Austel also noted that SP1discriminated against switched service providers, the entities mostlikely to become competing carriers after July 1997.Austel also expressed concern at the bundling of national andinternational long distance services, fixed to mobile, 1800, 13 andcalling card services under CS4 and CS8 and said it wouldexamine these bundlings pursuant to clause 238A of theTelecommunications Act.Austel has also made a number of comments andrecommendations to Telstra and said it would pursue these matterswith Telstra early in 1996.These include:- recommending to Telstra that it give service providers reasonabletime to make adjustments to their businesses needed as a result offuture tariff changes, and that it should not use the interveningperiod to compete unfairly.- encouraging Telstra to develop a range of service providerproducts which meet government policy objectives and therequirements of service providers.- encouraging Telstra to consider a wide area egress product forswitched operators "since there appears to be no operationalrestrictions to this".Span chairman Brian Perkins, in a letter to members on 22December described the decision as "a great Christmas presentthanks to Santa Austel".Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996DRAFT TELECOMMS LEGISLATION RELEASEDThe Department of Communications and the Arts made good on itspromise to deliver a draft of the post 1997 telecommunicationslegislation, releasing it on 20 December as the TelecommunicationsBill (1996) and the Trade Practices Amendment(Telecommunications) Bill 1996. The issued 148 page documentcomprises the draft bills and commentary on each of them.The drafts were based on 99 post 1997 proposals released on 1August (Exc August 4, 1995). A new policy proposal provides for afurther full review of all telecommunications regulation "to becompleted in time for implementation in 2000".The government also announced plans for technical self regulationof the industry and simultaneously released an additional 38proposals setting out its policy intentions (see below).Communications minister Michael Lee said the new policy would"align (Australia) more closely with international approaches totechnical regulation of telecommunications".Not all provisions of the initial 99 proposals have been dealt with inthe draft legislation. It concentrates on licencing of carriers, codes ofpractice, anticompetitive conduct and the access regime, sayingthese are "likely to be the areas of most concern to industry andwhere the earliest prior notification to industry is required to enablepreparation for further competition and self regulation".The new Telecommunications Bill will remove almost all barriers toentry into all telecommunications services but will limit the marketpower of the incumbents by instituting access codes under whichthey will be obliged to make their networks available to competitors.The name Austel will be retained as the abbreviation for theAustralian Telecommunications and Spectrum ManagementAgency which will be formed by merging the present Austel and theSpectrum Management Agency. The SMA's responsibilities foradministering the Radio Communications Act 1992 will be takenover largely unchanged by the new Austel. Telecommunicationscompetition policy responsibility will be transferred to the ACCC.The new Austel will be responsible for carrier licensing, codes ofpractice, assisting carriers to fulfil universal service obligations andfor oversight of technical regulation.The Trade Practices (Telecommunications) Amendments Billincludes a new part XIC of the Trade Practices Act which willreplace Part 8 (access by carriers to networks and services of othercarriers) and other relevant provisions of the TelecommunicationsAct 1991. It also sets out a new part XIB of the TPC replacing part 9(supply of basic carriage services by carriers) of theTelecommunications Act 1991 to govern anticompetitive carrierconduct .Carriers will be required to join the Telecommunications AccessForum (TAF) which will be required to produce a code of conduct foraccess to carriers' facilities and resolution of disputes. The ACCCwill have a reserve power to override the TAF code.However the draft bill has not fully defined the term access,because, according to the commentary "the concept of accesscovers a diverse range of things (such as) access to land, tophysical infrastructure, computer systems, billing services andinformation, directory assistance and databases. Submissions areinvited on whether the legislation should include a precise definitionof the term access.Separate legislative provisions will apply to service providers andcarriers. Anyone will be able to become a service provider but maybe declared a carrier by the ACCC against criteria set out in thetelecommunications bill. Any service provider with substantialcontrol over customers through its own switches is likely to bedeclared a carrier, even if it does not own any transmissioninfrastructure.A carrier will be required to give undertakings to provide access toits services and facilities in accordance with codes and standards.As expected, pivotal to the new act is the distinction betweenservice provider and carrier. Carrier status is something that serviceproviders are likely to avoid rather than seek because it confersconsiderable responsibilities and few benefits. Commentary to thedraft bill details the distinctions and the decision making process insome detail.A service provider will be anyone who supplies what is known in thepresent Act as a telecommunications service, but has beenrenamed a 'carriage service', or who uses a carriage service tosupply an online entertainment of information service.A carrier will be someone who controls access to a network, ie canprevent service providers from using that component for thepurposes of providing services".The legislation also introduces the concept of a person's 'immediatecircle' to exclude what have been traditionally private networks frombeing assigned carrier status. The term 'immediate circle' includesstate and federal government bodies, employees of business andcorporations and corporations related to another corporation "withinthe meaning of the Corporations Law".There is also a three dimensional geographic test applied tocommunications networks. A point, whether fixed or mobile, is on anetwork within Australia if it is on Australian territory, or in theatmosphere below the stratosphere. Any point on a satellite andabove the stratosphere is outside Australia. The stratosphereextends only to a height of 50 kms so all points on planned lowearth orbit satellites would be outside Australia.The draft bills are open for comment until 16 February 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996TELECOMMS INDUSTRY TO BE SELF REGULATINGThe government has proposed a regime of industry self regulationof the technical aspects of communications and has issued anaddition 38 policy proposals setting out the new regime.The additional proposals seek to harmonise technical regulation ofradio communications and telecommunications and minimisegovernment control over technical regulation which will be"primarily addressed through industry self regulation involvingaffected groups including consumers".Interconnect standards will be developed by carriers and serviceproviders in conjunction with the Telecommunications AccessForum.Customer equipment and cabling standards will be industrydeveloped but "taking into account Austel/SMA's views on healthand safety aspects and on matters concerning the integrity oftelecommunications networks".Carriers and service providers will be required to report on theirquality of service and performance against a code of practicedeveloped by the industry and registered with Austel.Responsibility for accrediting conformance testing laboratories willbe transferred from Austel to a competent accreditation body suchas the National Association of Testing Authorities (Nata).However Austel/SMA will have a reserve power to mandatestandards where appropriate or where self regulation fails.Standards will be required to be based on international andregional standards unless this is inappropriate. Carriers and serviceproviders will be free to develop their own network standards butthese must be co-ordinated with interconnection, customerequipment and cabling standards.The controversial Telecommunications National Code under whichthe existing carriers enjoy protection from state and localgovernment planning requirements will be reviewed and carrierswill cease to have power to override planning rules.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996TELSTRA OFFERS RADICAL SOLUTION TO USO PROBLEMIn the height of the traditional media 'silly season' (betweenChristmas and New Year), major papers carried stories of a radicalproposal by Telstra to revamp the universal service obligation(USO) scheme.Telstra's proposals were submitted in November to the House ofRepresentatives Standing Committee on Banking, Finance andPublic Administration which was conducting an enquiry into aspectsof the national competition policy reform package. The terms ofreference for the enquiry included the impact of these reforms onthe efficient delivery of community service obligations.Telstra's preferred option was for a radical reform under whichforward looking multi year 'contracts' for the provision of USOswould be negotiated between a USO carrier and the relevantgovernment contracting agency. "The agency should be able to callfor expressions of interest in particular services in specifiedgeographic areas or markets after considering supply options,demand for service and other market conditions...If the expressionof interest process indicated alternative supply options acompetitive tendering process would follow to determine the cost ofthe USO (this) should be preferred as the most transparentmechanism and the best means of encouraging efficiency indelivery".Telstra suggests that it should remain the carrier of last resort and,failing the emergence of viable alternatives as a result of the tender,the agency would enter into direct negotiations to produce anexplicit contract for the provision of services. Telstra recommendsthat USO continue to be funded by a levy on other carriers.The story was short-lived. The following day, communicationsminister Michael Lee, in a radio interview, committed thegovernment to the present USO policy. Opposition communicationsspokesman Richard Alston, normally very quick to fire off a pressrelease critical of any pronouncement by Lee, was also silent. Theissue is sensitive with rural communities and neither side wants torisk upsetting rural voters in the run up to an election.However in addition to the radical reforms highlighted in presscoverage, Telstra's 50 page submission to the enquiry listed anumber of issues which it said would need to be resolved if thegovernment preferred minimal reforms to the USO scheme. Theseincluded:- That the system creates market distortions which impact on servicepricing and delivery and which could hinder development ofcompetitive markets.- That the USO system does not foster improvements in delivery ofservices to rural areas and "there is very little incentive for othercarriers to examine alternative means of providing the USO".- That the USO system does not recognise all Telstra's costs, thereare not direct links between carrier investment decisions and theUSO system thus limiting incentives for carriers to invest in USOs.- Because auditors will not sign off on the contentious USO costmodelling process Austel is required to finalise the cost "ineffect...audit the unauditable".- Payments of USO contributions to Telstra have been delayedbecause the system does not lead to timely closure of the costingprocess. Telstra says it is working with Austel to improve the costingprocess, but also calls for a dispute resolution process to enable itto receive payment from other carriers more promptly.Telstra also proposes a mechanism for evolving the definition ofUSO in line with the growth of new services in other markets. Itsubmits that a service should be subject to USO provisions onlyafter it has become "widely used and socially significant in a freelyoperating competitive market".Even where an extension to the USO is merited on this test Telstraargues that there should also be a formal evaluation of thealternative uses to which the community's resources might be put ifthe USO changes did not proceed.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996FOXTEL/AUSTRALIS MERGER UNDER ACCC SCRUTINYAustralis and Foxtel hoped to close 1995 with the way clear tocompleting the merger announced in September. However delaysin preparing the documentation for the deal and, more importantly,the close scrutiny to which it has been subjected by the AustralianCompetition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) leave the future ofthe merger in the balance with legal action threatened if the ACCCdoes veto it.When the deal was announced the two companies said theyexpected to put it to a meeting of Australis shareholders inDecember and the ACCC had also initially indicated it would reacha decision before Christmas.A key factor in the ACCC's decision making process is whether itdecides that pay TV is a separate market or whether pay TV andfree-to-air TV should be considered as a single market. OptusVision has also argued that the merger would lessen competition inthe market for local telephony even though Telstra (50 percentowner of Foxtel) has given no indication of plans to use the Foxtelnetwork for telephony and continues to cast doubts on Optus'announced intention of offering telephony on its network in 1996(Exc December1, 1995).Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996COUNCILS SCORE FIRST VICTORY AGAINST OPTUS CABLEROLLOUTCity councils opposing the installation of Optus Vision's cable TVnetwork from power poles in residential streets scored their firstvictory with the Supreme Court in Victoria on 21 December grantingthe council of Boroondara an injunction restraining Optus Visionfrom further installations in the area until the case can be heard infull.Judge Barry Beach found that Optus had a serious case to answeron possible breaches of the Telecommunications National Codeand also found that the exemptions granted by theTelecommunications Act 1991 were so wide as to createwidespread uncertainty on their application. Council lawyers hadearlier argued that the code could even be used to exempt Optusemployees from road speed limits.In NSW 16 councils are now participating in a joint action againstOptus Vision. Their application for an injunction will be heard on 12March.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996TELSTRA AND OPTUS TO LOSE PLANNING EXEMPTIONSTelstra and Optus Communications will lose their exemptions fromstate and local government planning regulations after July 1997. Ina statement issued on 20 December communications ministerMichael Lee said it would be wrong to allow an unlimited number oftelephone companies to be exempt from planning laws.Austel's report on the Telecommunications National Code whichgoverns the carriers' conduct of their exempt operations was due tobe received by the minister at the end of 1995 and will be releasedearly in 1996.The minister's statement gave no indication of any changes to thecode before July 1997 but with local government action againstOptus Vision's overhead cables starting to bite (see story above)commentators have said that the minister should act sooner in orderto prevent Optus from being disadvantaged against Telstra'sunimpeded underground cable rollout programme.Under the present legislation the planning exemption is conferredby the Telecommunications Act 1991 with carriers required toexercise their exemption in accordance with the NationalTelecommunications Code. In the new legislation, clause 2207 ofthe draft Telecommunications Bill 1996 ensures that all carriers willhave to fully comply with state and territory planning laws. It statesthat "A power conferred by this Act must not be exercised in such away as to prevent the exercise of the powers or the performance ofthe functions of government of a State, the Northern Territory, theAustralian Capital Territory or Norfolk Island".This approach has also been criticisedby ATUG because it wouldgive local councils control over nationally important infrastructure.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996JNA AND AUSDOC FORM MESSAGING JOINT VENTUREListed Australian companies JNA Telecommunications and AusdocPty Ltd have announced the formation of a joint venture company todevelop and deliver electronic messaging services. JNA will initiallytake about 60 percent equity in the company which will be formedfrom Ausdoc's recently established electronic messaging businessEDX.The technical platform underpinning the EDX service wasdeveloped by Ausdoc in conjunction with Digital EquipmentCorporation. According to EDX's chief executive Bob White, Ausdochas "an exclusive and perpetual licence to use the technology" withDigital receiving royalties. JNA will merge the electronic messagingresources of its Network Services division with EDX, to bring"experience, products and technical strength" to the joint venture.The two companies say they are looking for an additional investorwhich could either be an institutional investor or value addingpartner. They aim to hold 40 percent equity each, with the newpartner taking 20 percent. Further down the track the two partnerssay they plan to explore export markets for the service.JNA became involved with Ausdoc initially by providing technicaland consulting services in Canberra. According to Ausdocmanaging director, Peter Reilly, the company identified a need for apartner with expertise in electronic messaging which it lacked andthe joint venture evolved.Ausdoc operates the DX document exchange service widely usedthroughout the legal profession. It had $85 million sales in 1995 andemploys 780 staff and 250 contract owner drivers. It has two majorclients for its recently established EDX business: The SouthAustralian Courts Administration Authority and the QueenslandGovernment. The Queensland Government service is provided byEDX under contract to Pacific Star Communications' subsidiary,Sunnet Pty Ltd. It will link around 40,000 Government departmentand agency users over the next three years via an X.400 backbonelinking existing mainframe and LAN based email systems. Thesystem is seen as critical to the success of EDX. It is estimated torequire about $2.5 million in capital funding before becomingcashflow positive in 1996/97.According to Reilly, EDX is able to offer a more focussed approachto the electronic messaging needs of clients than competitors suchas AT&T and Telstra because large carriers lack the focus onmessaging which is only a small component of their business. Thecompany sees creation of communities of interest as a key tosuccess and aims to make services affordable and accessible forsmall members of such communities, charging fixed usage feesrather than per message charges and tailoring its service to thespecific needs of each community.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996SPECTRUM NETWORKS ACQUIRES RESELLER, CONFIRMSSWITCH PLANSSpectrum Network Systems Ltd has announced plans to acquire,subject to due diligence, the fixed network resale business ofAustralian Wholesale Communications Pty Ltd (AWC), based inMelbourne. Spectrum will pay approximately $1.5 million for AWC's30,000 customers with total annual billings of $A50 million.AWC will continue to act as Spectrum's exclusive agent for threeyears and will provide Spectrum with administrative andmanagement services at a rate of approximately $130,000 permonth. According to Spectrum, AWC's customer base includes"nine key trade organisations" and there are "further prospects forsignificant billings and sales growth".Spectrum also confirmed plans for the installation of its ownswitched network "initially along the east coast of Australia".The acquisition is likely to be only one of many which will rationalisethe service provider industry and in particular eliminateorganisations which add little value to the basic service. Spectrumappears well placed to absorb these organisations because it hasinstalled a sophisticated billing system obtained from its strategicpartner in the US, the inter-exchange carrier Capital NetworkSystems Inc (Exchange November 3, 1995). During December itwas promoting its billing service for other service providers withlarge press advertisements.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996EXPORT EFFORTS PUT STANILITE INTO THE REDListed telecommunications company Stanilite Pacific Limitedbecame the subject of takeover speculation at the end of the year inthe wake of reporting on 16 December that it was projecting a $11.7million loss for the half year to 31 December 1995.The company advised the Stock Exchange that it had revised downits October 1995 prediction of $75 million first half revenues to $30million, mostly as a result of delays in finalising export contracts inNorth Asia, Europe, the Pacific and Middle East. Delays in issuinglicences in India have also delayed an anticipated $6.5 million inrevenue into the second half of this financial year. Difficulties inRussia with telecommunications infrastructure have led to the lossof an anticipated $10 million in follow on orders.The company retrenched 86 'non-essential' staff in November (ExcNovember 24, 1995) following a restructuring into three separatedivisions (Exc November 3, 1995). In spite of its problems Stanilitesays it will continue with its major R&D programmes and is pursuingtwo R&D syndication projects. An $11.6 million rights issue toshareholders made in November 1995 closed with all but 6.3percent of the shares being taken up by existing shareholders.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996COMMUNICATIONS COMPANIES CLUSTER FOR SYNERGYAusindustry announced on 20 December its support for a coalitionof Australian communications manufacturers formed to exploitsynergies between them. Communications Cluster of Australia PtyLtd (CCA) is a joint venture comprising Mitec, Stanilite, Scitec, TCGComputer Aided Engineering Pty Ltd and Techcom Ltd.The company has been in operation informally for three years butwith assistance from Ausindustry network broker Anthony Jarrett,managing director of Mitchellsearch, has increased the scope of itsoperations.Jarrett said a marketing plan had been developed to promote thecluster as "a single source, diverse capability one stop shop forlarge and small customers, here and overseas...Indications fromtheir informal networking in the past suggest that CCA can producegrowth for each of its members beyond their individual capabilities".Associated organisations include: Telstra, the TCG Group, theRadiophysics Division of the CSIRO, Swiss Banking Corporation, RBarel and Associates (accountants) and Creative Planning CentrePty Ltd (business planners).In December, Exchange reported plans to form anothercommunications industry network under Ausindustry auspices.Details of the network, Baltel are to be announced later this year(Exc December 15, 1995).Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996WA DEMANDS MOBILE NUMBER PORTABILITYAccording to a report in the West Australian last month (19December) the West Australian government has specified thatnumber portability between carriers for mobile services will bemandatory. The government has called tenders for provision ofmobile services through its telecommunications manager,Commswest.Austel said last year, in its report on number portability, that it wascommitted to having portability available for digital mobile, 1800, 13and 1300, 1900, 1901 and 1902 numbers by July 1997 (Exc July28, 1995) but statements made by communications minister MichaelLee in answer to Parliamentary questions later in the year did notconfirm this commitment (Exc December 8, 1995).* In the UK the telecommunications industry has welcomed a reportby the Monopolies and Mergers Commission which says thatnumber portability is necessary for a competitive telephone marketand that BT and other operators should split the cost 70/30.According to Telecomeuropa's Communications Newsletter, BT hadearlier rejected an Oftel ruling that it should bear the full cost ofimplementing portability. According to TCN, BT has beenconducting portability trials since mid 1995 and has reduced costestimates for introducing portability as a result. BT says otheroperators should be able to offer portability to new customers fromearly 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996TELSTRA TO SEEK ALTERNATIVE INDIAN INVESTMENTSTRATEGYTelstra is among foreign telecommunication companies which havedecided to alter their investment strategy in India following thedebacle over the awarding of licences to run basic services in 20regional telecommunication circles.On 1 January Telstra, along with significant industry players such asAT&T and US West, failed to re-submit bids for basic servicelicences. Only six consortia submitted bids for licences in fivecircles. The Department of Telecommunications (DoT) had earlierre-opened the tender for 13 licences following the notification ofminimum bids prices.Telstra spokesman Paul Rea, told Exchange that although Indiaremains a priority area for investment, DoT's minimum price of$A3.2 billion for the Tamil Nadu circle was too much. Also, thepresent uncertainties discouraged a resubmission for a basicservices licence. Rea said that "Telstra was not prepared to seek thelicence at any price". So instead Telstra would pursue alternativeinvestment strategies.Telstra's alternative strategies include joining other internationalcarriers, with majority Indian partners, in managing basic regionaltelecommunication services. Rea confirmed that Telstra has beenapproached by foreign telcos to join them in partnerships; he wasnot prepared to say which companies. Rea did point out that Telstrahas appointed a senior executive, Dr Sanjay Modak, to head up itsNew Delhi office. Modak's appointment indicates that Telstraconsiders India one of its most important overseas investmentareas, according to Rea.Other investment strategies open to Telstra include building itstechnology transfer relationship with India's centre fortelecommunications research, C-Dot, and focusing more on cellularservices.The uncertainties referred to by Rea include the threat to cancelgovernment awarded licences by India's largest opposition party,the Bharatiaya Janata Party which - not withstanding the 17 Januaryarrest of its parliamentary leader on corruption charges - has beenwidely tipped to win April general elections, and eight separateSupreme Court petitions which seek to invalidate the DoT'sauthority to award licences. The petitions relate to the failure of theCongress government to establish a telecommunications regulatorybody before opening the telecommunications sector to foreigninvestment.Meanwhile, Telstra looks set to replace the US' Vanguard Cellularas an equity partner to Modicom Networks Ltd to run cellularservices in Karnataka and Punjab. The proposal comes after DoTannounced on 12 December that it had awarded 18 licences to runcellular services in regional areas. If Modicom's proposal isaccepted it will likely encourage other Indian-led consortia to swapforeign partners in equity arrangements for both cellular and basicservice licences.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996OPTUS SHAREHOLDERS TIP IN ANOTHER $200 MILLIONOptus Communications announced on 15 December 1995 that ithad completed a $200 million rights issue to its shareholders.Bellsouth, Cable and Wireless and Optus Pty Ltd in proportion totheir existing shareholdings of 24.5, 24.5 and 52.1 percent.Shareholding in Optus Pty Ltd remains unchanged at MayneNickless (49 percent), AMP Society (20 percent) AIDC and otherinstitutions (19 percent) and National Mutual (12 percent).The rights issue brings total shareholder equity and loancontributions to in excess of $2 billion. An attempt to raise $800million from shareholder equity earlier in the year was rejected byshareholders.Optus had planned to disband Optus Pty Ltd in 1994 and make itsshareholders direct shareholders in Optus Communications whenthe Nine Network was to take a stake in the company. It announcedin November 1994 that it had been given a Tax Office ruling to beable to do so without shareholders incurring capital gains tax, butthis latest announcement shows that the move was never made.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996TELECOM NZ PAY TV PLAN STYMIED BY LEGAL ACTIONThe battle between New Zealand carriers Clear Communicationsand Telecom New Zealand over pay TV escalated in late Decemberwhen Clear successfully gained an injunction preventing TelecomNew Zealand from proceeding on plans to conclude a pay TVprogramming agreement with Sky Television.Telecom NZ is planning to wire 6000 homes in the country's twolargest cities, Auckland and Wellington to deliver pay TV andbroadband services and has tried to gain programming through theagreement with Sky. Clear had earlier challenged Telecom NZ'splan to acquire the 25 percent of Sky shares held by its own majorshareholders, Bell Atlantic and Ameritech. Clear argued that suchan acquisition would create a dominant player in the telephony andpay TV industries. Clear has not indicated any intention to enter thepay TV or local loop telephony markets.Clear lawyers were granted access to the confidential programmingagreement and claimed that it constituted a serious breach of thecountry's fair trading legislation, the Commerce Act.The injunction preventing the agreement proceeding until a furtherhearing was granted on 21 December. Telecom NZ says it willdefend the action. Its share acquisition plan is dependent on theprogramme sharing agreement, and so has also been put on hold.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996ABA RELEASES ISSUES PAPER, INVITES COMMENT ONONLINE SERVICESThe Australian Broadcasting Authority (ABA) released on 22December an issues paper as part of its enquiry into content andconduct of online information services. The ABA was instructed inAugust 1995 by the minister for communications and the artsMichael Lee to "explore strategies to encourage online serviceproviders and users to meet community needs, including thedevelopment of codes, options for complaints handling, educationalprogrammes, devices for blocking and filtering certain material andoffence provisions" (Exc August 18. 1995). The 50 page papersummarises community concerns garnered as a result ofconsultative meetings with industry, government and communityorganisations.The ABA says that its consultative process revealed concerns farmore wide ranging than those about adult material andpornography which have received widespread media coverage.They included:- the potential to widely disseminate material that vilifies people onthe basis of race, gender, sexual preference or disability;- the intrusion of online services into people's privacy,- the improper use or disclosure of personal information;- the potential for defamatory material to be widely disseminated;- the potential for infringement of intellectual property rights;- the need to ensure that consumer interests are adequatelyprotected;- the need to promote a better understanding of gender issues andgender equality in the on-line environment;- the need to ensure that Australian content is available andpromoted in an online environment to the same extent that it is inother media.The Office of Film and Literature Classification also undertook forthe ABA 27 hours of research searching the Internet for material thatwould, in other forms, be restricted by its classification scheme. Itfound such material to be less widely and easily available than hasbeen suggested by recent press coverage of the Internet.Even after a seven hour search the OFLC was unable to findmaterial for downloading which would have been covered theOFLC's category 1 and category 2 classifications governingdepictions of sex and violence in publications.A copy of the issues paper (approximately 100kb) is available fromhttp://www.dca.gov.au/aba/hpcov.htm. Deadline for submissions is16 February.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996APRIL LAUNCH FOR TELECOM NZ INTERNET SERVICETelecom New Zealand is understood to have set April for the launchof its Internet service. That service will also see Telecom NZbecome an Internet service access provider and it is also workingon content provision.Telecom NZ is understood to be primarily targeting the businessmarket where it believes it can make money. It will try to lurebusiness customers by offering value added content such as newsservices. It also believes that it has a unique differentiator in thatcustomers can be billed for Internet services on their Telecomaccounts.Telecom NZ will also offer an access service to the consumermarket but believes the pay-off will take much longer.The company is buying at least a dozen servers from SiliconGraphics and is understood to have done a deal with Netscape sothat it can offer a customised version of the Netscape Internetsoftware.Reports vary as to how much Telecom NZ is spending on the projectbut $NZ50 million is seen by many observers as accurate. It isunderstood that more effort is going into this project than into pay TVmoves.This month Telecom NZ is taking over management of WaikatoUniversity Internet gateway which connects to the USA via linkssupplied by AT&T and Sprint. Clear Communications is alsooffering services to domestic access providers through a BT link.Clear will also offer separate frame relay links direct to MCI in theUSA. Adrienne PerryBack to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996ASTEC FORECASTS THE FUTURE OF THE CUSTOMERACCESS NETWORKThe Australian Science and Technology Council (Astec) hasreleased a customer access network foresighting study Surf's up:alternative futures for full service networks in Australia. The studywas undertaken by Astec in conjunction with the Australian NationalTraining Authority and the Australian Photonics CooperativeResearch Centre.The term full service network (FSN) is one that has only recentlyentered the industry vocabulary. The report defines the FSN as thesuccessor of today's telecommunications customer access networkwhich will "integrate entertainment and switched communicationseach with multimedia capabilities based on digital technologies. It isonly one component of the future network.The 70 page report identifies "plausible alternative paths of networkdevelopment and the specific science and technology requirementsfor such development. It looks at a time horizon up to 2010.The report sees government initiatives as the major factor inproducing the favourable development of future broadbandnetworks and services and it makes 10 recommendations almost allof which call for government action: to facilitate standardsdevelopment, market acceptance, lead the way in usage of newservices, commission further study into industry, security and accessissues, continue Astec's foresighting work and generally plan for thegrowth of future services.The report discusses at some length the most suitable technologiesfor implementing the FSN. These include: hybrid fibre coax, fibre tothe home, fibre to the curb and ADSL. It lists a number of criticalvariables that will affect the deployment of FSNs and attempts toassess their relative degree of importance and uncertainty. Rankinghighest on both counts are the issues of consumer value andconsumer trust. Industry structure and human interface factors alsorank highly.The report explores four scenarios:- Widespread takeup of broadband and narrowband interactiveservices by business and industry, but much lower penetration inthe residential sector.- Widespread takeup by all sectors of the community, leading to"significant changes in social behaviour, ways of doing businessand attitudes to use of computers".- Slow take up in all sectors with conflict and confusion about amultitude of standards and services.- a disaster scenario in which a series of difficulties prevent therollout of a widespread full service network.(See also page 15)Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996STANDARDS' DIGITAL VIDEO REPORT RELEASEDThe Digital Video Services Task Group (DVSTG) set up jointly byStandards Australia and Standards New Zealand to investigate andrecommend on standards development strategies needed for thedelivery of open access digital video services has released its finalrecommendationsAn earlier draft of the report caused considerable controversybecause it identified a clear need for standards in consumerequipment for use on future broadband services and called on theGovernment to mandate standards "where clear community benefitis identified" (Exc June 30, 1995). At the time Standards Australiaplayed down the force of the recommendations saying thedocument was only an interim for-comment draft directed at industryand any 'recommendations' would not have such status untilcomments have been received and a final report produced.The final document, Strategies for the Development of Standardsfor Digital Video and Associated Services identifies standardsurgently needed "to ensure that (pay TV) and future services can beharmoniously introduced". It lists these most critical of these, inorder of importance as:(1) Standards for customer access interfaces for both broadcast andinteractive digital video services with priority given to hybrid fibrecoaxial cables and satellite, MDS and digital terrestrial delivery.(2) A standard for baseband analogue video/audio connection totelevision receivers, consistent with international standards.(3) Standards for baseband digital interfaces. These would apply todigital televisions, multimedia personal computers with plug inMPEG-2 decoders and digital video recorders. A digital interfacestandard for remote control units with optional one-way control, ortwo way interactive communications is also required.The report recommends that all standards be based on an agreedinternational digital video and associated services reference modeland it notes that the model developed by the task group mapsclosely to that produced by the Digital Audio Visual Council whichwas not finalised and not available to the group at the time itdeveloped the model.Other recommendations of the report are:- for a common scrambling algorithm- a standard application programming interface- a single customer identification addressing scheme, irrespective ofthe service provider- all existing Australian and New Zealand standards bodies,technical committees and fora continue with their primarystandardisation and specification efforts under the unified co-ordination of a single standards body with wide industryrepresentation.Copies of the report, catalogue number SAA/SNZMP74-1996 canbe obtained from Standards Australia and Standards New Zealandsales offices.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996US OPENS THE DOOR TO MAJOR TELECOMMS REFORMSUnder a compromise deal brokered by US president Bill Clinton,the House-Senate conference committee has agreed to deregulatethe US telecommunications sector agreeing to Democrats'demands that industry concentration is countered.Despite Republican claims that the proposed deregulation bill doesnot go far enough, the legislation will see sweeping reforms that willessentially end government barriers to the tie-up between long-distance telephony, local telephony and cable television.Analysts predict a series of mergers as the US telecommunicationsindustry becomes free to offer seamless information services. Nynexand Bell Atlantic are already said to be discussing merger plans inpreparation for the deregulation.Republicans accepted limits on the size of broadcasting companies,but insisted on provisioning to slow the elimination of cable TV pricecontrols and make it more difficult for Baby Bells to enter longdistance enterprises. Price controls on cable TV companies willremain only to 1999 and will end sooner if a competitor enters amarket.In towns with fewer than 50,000 inhabitants, cable TV operators canimmediately raise rates.Nynex will be especially favoured in the new laws and Bell Atlanticand Pacific Telesis will do well because those closest to meetingtougher requirements to get into long distance will haveadvantages. The broadcasters, and especially News Corp will notbe happy. A single TV company will be allowed to reach 35 percentof the US population but the FCC can cancel waivers letting FoxBroadcasting go beyond 35 percent.Rules forbidding a TV broadcaster owning a local newspaper or asecond station in one market still are on the books and the FCC stillwill be overseeing Baby Bells (with input from the JusticeDepartment) as they seek to go into long-distance telephonyservices* The Federal Communications Commission said that the partialgovernment shutdown and bad weather along much of the US eastcoast this week had forced the agency to postpone its 18 Januaryopen meeting. The FCC has tentatively set 31 January as the newmeeting date to discuss president Bill Clinton's brokered changes tothe 1934 Communications Act.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996MAJOR NETWORK CONFERENCE IN AUSTRALIAAustralia will host one of the most important conferences on theinternational telecommunications calender next month when the11th International Symposium on Subscriber Loops and Services isheld in Melbourne from 4- 9 February. Telstra's views on full servicenetworks and industry partners for their development are expectedto be discussed by CEO Frank Blount who will deliver a keynotespeech. The conference is likely to prove a watershed in theevolution of customer access networks, bringing together for the firsttime participants from cable TV and multimedia industries andaddressing questions of market demand and services. Previousconferences have focussed largely on copper technologies. Nextweek Exchange will feature a more detailed preview including aninterview with the chair of the local organising committee, DougCampbell deputy managing director of Telstra.For details of the conference contact IREE on (02) 9929 0099.* A Cable and Telephony conference at Sydney's Gazebo Hotel on25-26 March will have discussion sections on the post 1997regulatory environment and whether there will be room for morecarriers and the need for strategic alliances in the cable andtelephony industry. Speakers include: Bob James, group generalmanager strategic development Telstra; Wayne Nowland, directorcorporate strategies and technologies Optus; Bob Peters, mediaanalyst with ANZ; Peter Lewis, national managertelecommunications and IT Austrade; and Richard Alston, shadowcommunications minister. John Buckett, vice president EuropeScientific Atlanta and John McConnell, director global marketingADC Telecommunications, will also speak. For details phone: (02)210 5777; fax: (02) 221 7773.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996COMPANY AND SHARE WATCHASX Listing Price 6 Dec Price 11 Jan Price 17 Jan Div'd Yields PEratio 3 mth trendAWA* 0.54 0.50 0.55 - - -0.01Australis 1.24 1.15 1.19 - - +0.26Charter Pacific 0.50 0.38 0.48 - - +0.02Datacraft* 0.47 0.59 0.60 1.67 24.7 -0.06Digicall 1.34 1.21 1.15 - - +0.10ERG* 1.48 1.50 1.59 1.57 16.7 -0.04Exicom* 0.13 0.27 0.26 - - -Int. Media 0.35 0.33 0.34 - - +0.02JNA* 1.35 1.15 1.15 2.61 9.0 -0.20Matrix * 2.05 2.45 2.46 - - +0.61Mayne Nick 6.29 6.02 5.78 6.06 22.4 -0.19Mitec 0.85 0.77 0.77 1.30 19.3 0.00Netcomm* 1.04 1.30 1.29 - - +0.44News Corp 7.25 7.23 7.31 0.41 15.9 +0.38Newsnet 0.80 0.80 0.80 - - 0.00Pacific Comm* 1.05 0.95 0.95 15.79 5.8 -0.07Pirelli Cables 0.78 0.77 0.77 10.39 6.2 -0.03Quiktrak 0.20 0.23 - - -Scitec* 0.28 0.25 0.24 4.17 10.0 -0.06Seven Network 3.50 3.90 3.97 4.16 29.4 +0.65Spectrum 0.80 0.95 0.98 - 30.9 +0.39Stanilite* 0.64 0.53 0.54 12.96 3.3 -1.01Techcomm* 0.54 0.57 0.53 - - +0.03Techniche* 3.40 3.59 3.40 - 19.5 -0.60Techway* 0.55 0.46 0.43 - - -0.07Telecom NZ 5.64 5.82 5.85 4.56 20.0 +0.65Transcom 0.15 0.15 0.14 - - -0.01Univ'ty Paton 1.60 1.55 1.55 5.16 8.6 -0.20Westel 0.50 0.48 0.49 - - +0.12BBY Index 1131.2 1209.5 -74.7All-Ordinaries 2198.6 2248.7 2250.3 +138.9* Stocks included in the BBY Telecommunications IndexBack to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996HARVEY PARKER LEAVES TELSTRAIn a surprise move Harvey Parker, one of Telstra's most seniorexecutives, left at the end of 1995 to head United Energy,Australia's first privatised electricity company. Parker joined Telstrathree years ago from a position as head of New Zealand Post. Lessthan two months ago he was appointed to a new position asgeneral manager Retail Products Group with responsibility for allproducts and services sold to end users whether corporate orresidential.Parker had been tipped as a successor to Telstra CEO Frank Blountbut Blount recently signed a second three year contract and Telstrainsiders have suggested that the lure of a chief executive's roleprompted Parker's departure. (5/1/96)Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996NEW DIVISION HEADS AT TELECOM NZTeresa Gattung, now general manager marketing has beenappointed group general manager Telecom Services and managernetwork operations. She takes over responsibility for all of TelecomNZ's marketing: mobile, international, consumer and business salesand service. She is in her mid 30s and joined Telecom NZ in August1994 from the Bank of New Zealand where she was marketingmanager.Ken Benson has been appointed group general manager TelecomNetwork. He joined Telecom NZ in 1990 after 26 years with BritishTelecom. He will develop and manage the fixed and mobilenetworks. His division will market services to other Telecom NZbusinesses and to external users, particularly carriers.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996NEW COO FOR OPTUSPhil Jacobs, formerly president of Bellsouth Business Systems hasreplaced Ian Boatman as chief operating officer of OptusCommunications. Boatman, who has been with Optus since itsfoundation will return to Cable and Wireless in the UK early in 1996.Bellsouth Business Systems is the arm of Bellsouth which serveslarge business customers: a sector of the market which many in theindustry believe Optus has seriously neglected. (17/12/95).ICO has also appointed Ms Millie Banerjee as vice president forprogramme management. She was formerly with BT where sheheld responsibility for a major restructuring of the company's billingsystem. (8/1/96).Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996SEARCH FOR OPTUS CEO CONTINUESThere was speculation just before Christmas that OptusCommunications would appoint a senior Australiantelecommunications executive who had recently returned toAustralia as its new CEO. A prime candidate surfaced in Greg Crew,a former Telstra executive recently returned to Australia after 12years with C&W including chief operating officer of Mercury andmanaging director of Hongkong Telephone. Asked in an interviewin Australian Communications if he would be interested in the chiefexecutive position at Optus he replied: It would be very interesting tocontemplate but no-one has made an offer"..Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996INFORMATION SYSTEMS PROFESSIONAL TO ABC BOARDRussell Bate, managing director of Sun Microsystems Australia PtyLtd, has been appointed to the board of the Australian BroadcastingCorporation for five years. Communications Minister Michael Leesaid that his appointment would "help the ABC take up theopportunities presented by emerging new communicationstechnologies". (2/1/96)Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996CORRECTIONLast month (Exc December 8, 1995) we reported a trial of a user-pays paging service being carried out by Link Telecommunicationsusing a 1900 number to collect messages and revenue from callers.Link has asked us to point out that callers to this service hear thestandard preamble which is required by Austel in accordance withTISSC guidelines.Back to Headline List CopyrightEXCHANGE via NewsNetJanuary 19, 1996NEWS BRIEFS* Prices for international telephone calls continue to fall withWorldxchange announcing cuts on 8 January, in response toTelstra's cuts announced on 1 December which come into effect on1 February. Optus is also expected to announce substantial pricecuts before the end of January. Worldxchange, which has a flat rate24 hours per day, now offers discounts of up to 50 percent onTelstra's peak STD rate to the UK, USA and Japan, 41.5 percent toTaiwan and Switzerland and 37.5 percent to Germany. Figures arebased on a call of less than three minutes. The company hasannounced an additional special discount to Asian countries duringRamadan (1-20 February) and Chinese New Year (18-28February).* Austel has released a for-comment draft of its technical standardon end-to-end network performance (TS27). The standard willensure that all public and private telecommunications networkscarrying public traffic within Australia can support text, telephone,fax and popular dial up modem applications at data rates up to2400 bits/sec. It also specifies performance of low to medium ratedata applications such as telephone typewriters for the hearingimpaired. The standard was first issued in June 1994, butaddressed only performance standards for voice calls. Commentsare required by 28 February 1996. Copies of the draft can beobtained from Standards Australia sales offices. (14/12/95)* Plans to hold the first International Telecommunications UsersGroup conference and exhibition in Asia, in Shanghai in 1996, havefallen through. The exhibition and conference was to have beenorganised on Intug's behalf by Total Concept Exhibitions of Sydney.Total Concept wrote to interested parties at the end of November1995 saying that the planned location in Shanghai would beunavailable in time. Peter Braun of TCE told Exchange this weekthat the company was now looking to work with the Department ofForeign Affairs and Trade to participate in the New Horizons eventin New Delhi in November and was looking to have the conferencesponsored by the Asia Oceania Electronic Messaging Associationinstead of Intug.* Austel's Technical Standard 002 has been altered to require allincoming voice calls on a PABX to be either answered by arecorded voice announcement, or else not connected. Theamendment follows a consumer complaint which found callers havebeen charged for dialling an engaged signal on PABXs (12/95).* A voluntary standard to inform consumers about the government'spolicy on the phaseout of analogue mobile services by 1 January2000 has been agreed by Austel and mobile telephone industryrepresentatives. Austel member, Sue Harlow, said that Austel wouldmonitor the effectiveness of the voluntary standard and wouldconsider mandatory standards if it is not successful. (11/1/96)* Telecommunications reseller First Netcomm Pty Ltd has beeninstructed by the ACCC to make refunds to customers because ithad given them misleading advice about the savings they wouldmake if they transferred their telephone service to First Netcomm.The company was using multilevel marketing techniques to sell itsservices and the ACCC also found that it had mislead its distributorsabout the amount of income they could earn. They were told theycould earn up to $20,000 per month but "by the end of October1995, the most that had been made by any distributor in one monthwas $411".* Austel has released a for-comment draft of a technical standard(TS29) covering telecommunications charging and billing. It setsminimum performance levels for both carrier and service providerbilling systems and "is intended to provide a framework formonitoring the quality of those systems. For digital networks usingsoftware billing it proposes maximum errors of no more than 22calls in 100,000 to be charged incorrectly and no more than onecharge for an unmade call for every 200,000 calls. Errors in callduration are limited to six in 100,000 calls. Submissions are due by28 February. Copies of the draft can be obtained from StandardsAustralia sales offices. (20/12/95)* Telstra has awarded a major contract to Boston Technology of theUS to supply messaging systems for the GSM and analogue mobilenetworks. Boston said it would supply "numerous" Access TPnetwork services platforms to Mobilenet to support a range ofservices for Messagebank customers including call answering,voice messaging, fax messaging, short message service andpaging alert. "Additional enhanced services will be offered via theseplatforms in the future", according to Boston. Telstra will retain itssupply agreements with other vendors.* In the National Business Bulletin's 1995 Corporate Image SurveyEricsson improved its ranking in the telecommunications andtelephone systems categories. It came in third in thetelecommunications and telephone systems categories after Telstraand Optus and ahead of NEC (4) and Vodafone (5). Alcatel fell fromsixth to tenth position. In telephone systems Ericsson pushed NECinto third position coming in second after Telstra. However it failedto make the top 10 in mobile phones, where the top five rankingfrom one to five was: Motorola, NEC, Nokia, Telstra and Optus.Nokia, the magazine reported, was the big surprise rising from fifthposition and pushing Telstra and Optus down.* Inmarsat has appointed UK advertising agency Publicis as itsglobal advertising agency charged with establishing Inmarsat as abrand among target audiences internationally. The head of Publicis'international division, Joanna Baldwin, described the project as"converting one of the world's best kept secrets into a global brand".* The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC)has released a guide to Part IIIA of the Trade Practices Act, whichcovers access to essential services. "Part IIIA introduces a new fieldof regulatory responsibilities and access rights which will havesignificant impact on the provision of services that are critical tocompetition in related areas", according to ACCC chairman, AllanFels. Phone (06) 264 2808 for details (19/12/95).* Low-orbit communications satellites will be launched fromWoomera in South Australia within 18 months after an agreementbetween STC Complex of Russia and the engineering division ofthe Australian Submarine Corporation (ASC), according to SenatorChris Schacht. Schacht said on 13 January that ASC had signed aletter of intent with STC Complex to set down a business plan for acommercial Australian space launch service in which ASCEngineering will manufacture satellite launch support equipmentand provide project management and systems integration with theRussian company supplying the START family launch vehicles.STC Complex was established by the Moscow Institute of HeatTechnology, the company which developed three generations ofRussian mobile rockets.* Vodafone claims that it now offers the world's largest globalroaming network with 38 participating countries, including 18countries with automatic global roaming facilities. Vodafone'smanaging director, John Rohan, said that New Zealand was thelatest addition to the global network and that several more countrieswould be added to the network during 1996. (12/1/96)* Vodac and Apple Computer have released an integrated packagefor mobile access to office databases and the Internet. The VodacData Solution ties Apple's Newton Messagepad 120 GSMconnectivity to Vodafone's mobile digital network using a Nokia2110 mobile phone, a Nokia cellular data card, Winfax Pro 4.0communications software and a PCMCIA slot for a portablecomputer. (9/1/96)* Datacraft Ltd's Latin American subsidiary has received $7 millionworth of orders from Columbia, Mexico and Brazil in the first half ofthe current fiscal year, according to George Kepper, executive chairof Datacraft Ltd. Kepper said that major projects which Datacraft isnow supplying include a national paging network in Mexico, high-speed network access and switching systems for twotelecommunication companies in Brazil and supply contracts toTelecom Columbia. (8/1/96)* Link Telecommunications and the South Australian EconomicDevelopment Authority have jointly announced plans for Link's fifthcall centre. The Adelaide centre will employ 400 people and isexpected to handle over 12 million calls in its first year, according toTerry Winters, the managing director of Link. Winters said that Link'smessaging business is currently growing at 35 percent per year andthat during 1995 the company handled around 50 million calls anda further 20 million from direct access clients.* New standards for the global information highway have beenapproved by the ITU. A revised text of Recommendation G.707,which includes G.708 and G.709 has been approved at the studygroup level. Recommendations include setting standards for:transport networks, including bit-rates, frame structure for SDHnetworks and network management; audiovisual systems, includingprotocols and coding for visual telephony; and for ATM equipment.(5/1/96)* The Telecommunications Development Advisory Board (TDAB) ofthe ITU has called for clear strategies to attract more partners to thedevelopment activities of the telecommunications sector and thedevelopment of a strategy for the application of interactive televisionin developing countries. The Director of the TelecommunicationsDevelopment Bureau, Ahmed Laouyane, told a December meetingof the TDAB that strategic partnership and mobilisation of resourceswere crucial to the success of the telecommunications sector.(5/1/96)* Mobile service provider Digicall Group claims a 75 percent rise insubscriber numbers in the December quarter to more than 61,000,from about 35,000 in the previous three months. This is an increaseof over 26,000 for the three month period, compared to just 2,956net additions for the same quarter last year, or 16,000 net additionsfor 1995. However, billing revenues grew by only 62 percent overthe final quarter to $9.7 million. Digicall's profit before interest, tax,depreciation, amortisation and exceptionals increased by 200percent on the previous quarter to $1.32 million. Digicall opened 30shops during December and plans to open another 15 early in1996.* Telstra and Bay Networks Australia have signed an enhanceddistribution channel (EDC) partnership which will provide a jointcommercial venture for a tightly-integrated set of products andservices to specific vertical markets, according to Steve Wood,regional director for Bay Networks. Under the EDC Bay Networkswill provide products for Telstra's networking and data services,WAN and remote access. (8/1/96)* Advance Bank has claimed an Australian first by offering itscustomers access to their accounts through the Internet. Allcustomer information is encrypted for transmission in both directionsusing Techway locally built software. In November Exchangeforeshadowed that Web Australia, a division of Techway, wouldsoon announce the first customer for its Catalogue Server usingRSA and IDEA v2.2 software (Exc November 24, 1995).* The Telecommunications Ombudsman, John Pinnock, hasannounced the resolution of another casualty of Telstra (COT)claimant's case. However, because the COT arbitration cases areconfidential Pinnock did not release further details. (23/12/95)Back to Headline List WT03-B12-17IA086-000622-B036-315http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te54.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045519 text/html 14765HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:53:29 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:58 GMTContent-length: 14578Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te54.html Sample Issue Copyright FCC DAILY DIGEST via NewsNet January 11, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES * NEWS RELEASE SUMMARY * INFORMATION (85 words) The following items were adopted at the FCC's December 15 open meeting and released later that day. (955 words) The following items are released today, January 11, 1996: (43 words) The following items were dated for days when the government was shutdown and are released today. (345 words) The following items were dated for and released December 15, 1995: (406 words) CopyrightFCC DAILY DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996INFORMATION     This is the electronic version of the FCC DAILY DIGEST asprovided by the FCC Office of Congressional and Public Affairs. Items listed under the "NEWS RELEASE SUMMARY" department may notnecessarily appear in full text under "FCC NEWS RELEASES" due tothe unavailability of news releases provided by other divisions ofthe FCC.  All news releases issued by the Office of Congressionaland Public Affairs are, however, included.  For furtherinformation, call FCC at 202-418-0500.Vol. 15, No. 1                                     January 11, 1996Back to Headline List CopyrightFCC DAILY DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996The following items were adopted at the FCC's December 15 openmeeting and released later that day.FCC APPROVES SPRINT ALLIANCE WITH FRANCE TELECOM AND DEUTSCHETELEKOM SUBJECT TO STRICT CONDITIONS (Report No. IN 95-37,INTERNATIONAL ACTION)  The Commission today cleared the way forSprint's global alliance with France Telecom (FT) and DeutscheTelekom (DT) to ensure U.S. consumers enjoy expanded serviceofferings and lower prices.    Action by the Commission December15, 1995, by Declaratory Ruling and Order (FCC 95-498).  News Mediacontact:  Rosemary Kimball at (202) 418-0500.  International Bureaucontacts:  Diane Cornell at (202) 418-1470 and Kerry E. Murray at(202) 418-1460. [Internet filename:nrin5026.txt]COMMISSION OPENS A PORTION OF THE "MILLIMETER WAVE" FREQUENCY BANDSABOVE 40 GHZ FOR COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND USE, PROPOSESADDITIONAL RULES CHANGES RELATING TO THE USE OF THE 46.7-46.9 GHZ,59-64 GHZ AND 76-77 GHZ BANDS --ET Docket 94-124 (Report No DC95-145, Action in Docket Case)  The Commission today made available6.2. GHz of spectrum and established technical rules that permitthe introduction and development of new communications technologiesin the "millimeter wave" frequency bands above 40 Ghz.  Action bythe Commission December 15, 1995, by First Report and Order andSecond Notice of Propose Rule Making (FCC 95-499).   News Mediacontact: Patricia A. Chew at (202) 418-0500.  Office of Engineeringand Technology contact: John Reed at (202) 418-2455. [Internetfilename:nret5015.txt]FCC PROPOSES AMENDING RULES REGARDING THE 37 GHZ AND 39 GHZ BANDSAND ORDERS FREEZE ON PROCESSING OF PENDING MXed 39 GHZ APPLICATIONS--GN Docket No. 95-183, PR Docket No. 93-253 (Report No. GN 95-148,Action in Docket Case)      The FCC today proposed to amend itsrules to provide a channeling plan and licensing and technicalrules for fixed point-to-point microwave operations in the37.0-38.6 GHz (37 GHz) band.  Action by the Commission December 15,1995, by NPRM and Order (FCC 95-500).  News Media contact: AudreySpivack and Kara Palamaras at (202) 418-0500.  Office ofEngineering and Technology contact: Tom Mooring at (202) 418-2450. Wireless Telecommunications Bureau contact: Bob James at (202)418-0680.FCC ADOPTS GEOGRAPHIC LICENSING AND COMPETITIVE BIDDING RULES FORTHE UPPER 200 CHANNELS OF 800 MHZ SPECIALIZED MOBILE RADIO SPECTRUMAND PROPOSES GEOGRAPHIC LICENSING AND COMPETITIVE BIDDING RULES FORREMAINING 800 MHZ SMR SPECTRUM --PR Docket No. 93-144, GN DocketNo. 93-252, PP Docket No. 93-253 (Report No. DC 95-150, Action inDocket Case)  The Commission has adopted final service andcompetitive bidding rules for the 10 MHz block of contigous 800 MHzSpecialized Mobile Radio (SMR) spectrum.  Action by the CommissionDecember 15, 1995, by First Report and Order, Eighth Report andOrder, and Second Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (FCC95-501).  News Media contact: Stacey Reuben Mesa at (202) 418-0654. Wireless Telecommunications Bureau contact: D'wana Speight at (202)418-0620 and Rosalind Allen (202) 418-0600. [Internetfilename:nrwl5044.txt]COMMISSION REFINES CABLE COST OF SERVICE METHOLOGY FOR ESTABLISHINGREGULATED RATES --CS Docket 94-28, MM Docket 93-215 (Report No. CS95-146, Action in Docket Case)  The Commission has adopted an Orderrevising rules applicable to cable operators seeking to establishor to justify regulated rates in accordance with cost of service principles and resolving pending for reconsideration of the interimrules.  Action by the Commission December 15, 1995, by Order (FCC95-502).  News Media contact: Morgan Broman (202) 416-0852; CableService Bureau contact: Thomas Power (202) 416-0800. COMMISSION ADOPTS REVISIONS TO CABLE HOME WIRING RULES -- MM Docket22-260 (Report No. DC 95-147, Action in Docket Case)  The Commisionhas adopted an Order (MM Docket 92-260), First Order onReconsideration and further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking), whichgrants in part and denies in part petitions for reconsideration ofthe Commission's cable home wiring rules.  Action by the CommissionDecember 15, 1995, by Order (FCC 95-503).  News Media contact:Morgan Broman (202) 416-0852; Cable Service Bureau contact: ThomasPower (202) 416-0800. SHOULD THE COMMISSION HARMONIZE ITS CABLE AND TELEPHONE RULES IN ANERA OF CONVERGENCE? --CS  Docket No. 95-184 (Report No. DC 95-149,Action in Docket Case)  The FCC today adopted a Notice of ProposedRulemaking seeking comment on whether certain telephone and cableinside wiring rules should be should harmonized or otherwisechanged in light of the rapidly evolving and convergingtelecommunications marketplace.  Action by the Commission December15, 1995, by NPRM (FCC 95-504).  News Media contact: Susan LewisSallet at (202) 418-1500 and Morgan Broman at (202) 416-0852. Common Carrier Bureau contacts: Mary Deluca at (202) 418-2334 andJohn Hays at (202) 418-0875.  Cable Service Bureau contact: LarryWalke and Rick Chessen at (202) 416-0800. [Internetfilename:nrcb5024.txt]COMMISSION SEEKS COMMENT ON INTERCONNECTION ARRANGEMENTS BETWEENWIRELESS AND LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIERS --CC Docket Nos. 95-185 and94-54 (Report No. DC 95-151, Action in Docket Case)   TheCommission today announced that it is seeking comment on policiesgoverning interconnection between local exchange carrier (LECs) andcommercial wireless service such as personal communcations services(PCS), cellular telephone services, and specialized mobile radio(SMR) services.  Action by the Commission, December 15, 1995, byNPRM (FCC 95-505).   News Media contact: Susan Lewis Sallet at(202) 418-1500.  Common Carrier Bureau contact: David Sieradzki at(202) 418-1576 and Kathleen Franco at (202) 418-1932. [Internetfilename:nrcc5100.txt]FCC TO AUCTION DBS AUTHORIZATIONS AND UPDATE "INTERIM" SERVICESPULES (Report No. IN 95-36, International Action)  The FederalCommunication Commission today adopted new rules and policies forthe Direct Broadcast Satellite ("DBS') service, includingprocedures to auction two DBS construction permits for channels andorbital location assigments now available now available due to thecancellation of the permit held by Advanced CommunicationsCorporation.  Action by the Commission December 14, 1995 by Reportand Order (FCC 95-507).  News Media contact: Kara Palamaras at(202) 418-0500. International Bureau contacts: Suzanne Hutchings at(202) 418-0762, or Bill Wiltshire at (202) 418-0425.  WirelessTelecommunications Bureau contact: Diane Conley at (202) 418-0660.Back to Headline List CopyrightFCC DAILY DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996The following items are released today, January 11, 1996:PUBLIC NOTICES:  BIDDING TO RESUME IN FCC SPECTRUM AUCTIONS JANUARY16, 1995 - Contact: Sue McNeil at (202) 418-0660.PUBLIC NOTICES:  PROCEDURES FOR THE FILING OF DOCUMENTS THAT WEREDUE DURING THE GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN OR DURING THE WEATHER EMERGENCY[DA 96-2].Back to Headline List CopyrightFCC DAILY DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996The following items were dated for days when the government wasshutdown and are released today.FCC RELEASES CARRIER LOCATOR   The FCC has released its annualCarrier Locator: Interstate Service Providers report, listing 2,847telecommunications carriers that provide interstate services. Foradditional information, contact Emily Hoffnar or Jim Lande of theBureau's Industry Analysis Division, (202) 418-0940.FCC ANNOUNCES DBS AUCTION TO START ON JANUARY 24, 1996.  (FCCAuction No. 8, General Action)  The Federal CommunicationsCommission today announced filing and other requirements for theauction of two construction permits in the Direct BroadcastSatellite ("DBS") services.  Interested parties may retrieve theDBS auction Public Notice from the FCC Internet site using ftp itconnect as anonymous["at"symbol]ftp.fcc.gov.  News Media contact:Stacey Reuben Mesa at (202) 418-0654. International  Bureaucontact: Bill Wiltshire at (202) 418-0420.  WirelessTelecommunications Bureau contact: Jay Markley at (202) 418-0600.(December 21, 1995).PUBLIC NOTICES:  FCC ANNOUNCES PROCEDURES FOR THE FILING OFDOCUMENTS THAT WERE DUE DURING THE GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN [DA 96-1].PUBLIC NOTICES:  FCC RELEASES NEW TELEPHONE SUBSCRIBERSHIP REPORT-UNEMPLOYED ADULTS LESS LIKELY TO HAVE TELEPHONE SERVICE - Forfurther information, contact Alexander Belinfante at (202) 418-0944(December 21, 1995).PUBLIC NOTICES:  FCC LABORATORY EQUIPMENT AUTHORIZATION PROCESSING- SPEED OF SERVICE December 19, 1995).PUBLIC NOTICES:  Report No. AUC-95-08, Auction No. 8 - FCCANNOUNCES AUCTION OF DIRECT BROADCAST SATELLITE SERVICE -- AUCTIONNOTICE AND FILING REQUIREMENTS FOR 2 DBS CONSTRUCTION PERMITSSCHEDULED FOR JANUARY 24, 1996. (December 21, 1995).PUBLIC NOTICES:  TARIFF TRANSMITTAL PUBLIC REFERENCE LOG - December18, 1995.PUBLIC NOTICES:  TARIFF TRANSMITTAL PUBLIC REFERENCE LOGINFORMATIONAL TARIFFS - December 15, 1995.PUBLIC NOTICES:  Report No. N-003 - COMMON CARRIER BUREAU NETWORKSERVICES APPLICATIONS.PUBLIC NOTICES:  Report No. N-003-A - ACTION ON COMMON CARRIERBUREAU NETWORK SERVICES APPLICATIONS.PUBLIC NOTICES:  Report No. 105 - TYPE ACCEPTANCE/NOTIFICATIONACTIONS AND CERTIFICATION ACTIONS.TEXTS:  POST NEWSWEEK CABLE INC. SANTA ROSA, CA. Granted thewithdrawal and dismissed its appeals against the local rate ordersissued by the City of Santa Rosa, CA.  (By Orders [DA 95-2445 and2446] adopted December 8, 1995 by Chief, Cable Services Bureau)Back to Headline List CopyrightFCC DAILY DIGEST via NewsNetJanuary 11, 1996The following items were dated for and released December 15, 1995:PUBLIC NOTICES:  BROADBAND PCS C BLOCK AUCTION WILL PROCEEDREGARDLESS OF POTENCIAL GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN --MDS AND SMR AUCTION also Unaffected by Possible Shutdown.  For further informationplease contact Kathleen Ham or Amy Zoslov, Auctions Division,Wireless Telecommunication Bureau at (202) 418-0660.PUBLIC NOTICES:  ADDITIONAL QUALIFIED BIDDER FOR DECEMBER 18, 1995BROADBAND PCS C BLOCK AUCTION - For further information, pleasecontact Sue McNeil and Jamie Hedlind, Auctions Division, WirelessTelecommunications Bureau at (202) 418-0660. PUBLIC NOTICES:  Report No. 43651 - BROADCAST ACTIONS.PUBLIC NOTICES:  Report No. LM-29 - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONSBUREAU BROADCAST AUXILIARY.PUBLIC NOTICES:  Report No. B-27 - ITFS APPLICATIONS ACCEPTED FORFILING AND NOTIFICATION OF CUT-OFF DATE: JANUARY 16, 1996. Anyinquiries regarding the foregoing should be directed to BrandonBullis at (202) 418-1610.PUBLIC NOTICES: Report No. 43653A - BROADCAST ACTION.TEXTS:  "MILLIMETER WAVE" FREQUNCY BAND ABOVE 40 GHZ.  See seconditem under "News Releases" adopted at FCC's December 15 openmeeting.TEXTS:  RULES REGARDING THE 37.0-38.6 GHZ AND 38.6-40.0 GHZ BANDS,COMPETITIVE BIDDING.  See third item under "News Releases" adoptedat FCC's December 15 open meeting.TEXTS:  FUTURE DEVELOPMENT OF SMR SYSTEMS IN THE 800 MHZ FREQUENCYBAND REGULATORY TREATMENT OF MOBILE SERVICES OF COMPETITIVEBIDDING.  See fourth item under "News Releases" adopted at FCC'sDecember 15 open meeting. TEXTS:  DIRECT BROADCAST SATELLITE SERVICE. Adopted new rules andpolicies for the Direct Broadcast Satellite ("DBS") service,including procedures to auction two DBS construction permits forchannels and orbital location assignments now available due to thecancellation of the permit held by Advanced CommunicationsCorporation. (By R&O [FCC 95-507], by the Commission)TEXTS:  SOCIAL CONTRACT FOR TIME WARNER CABLE.  Implemented severalterms of the Social Contract, clarified the manner in which TimeWarner may provide advance notice of initial changes in rates andservices to subscribers, specified when Time Warner may commencerate restructuring to create lifeline basic service tier,established procedures for prospective rate reductions and/orrefunds of rates restructured pursuant to the Social Contract andaddressed a number of waiver related issues.  (By Order [DA95-2491] adopted December 15, 1995 by the Chief, Cable ServicesBureau)TEXTS:  SOUTHWESTERN BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY.  Dismissed petitionfiled by Teleport to reject, or suspend and investigate TransmittalNo. 2519.  (By Order [DA 95-2487] by the Chief, Tariff Division,Common Carrier Bureau)TEXTS:  220-222 MHZ BAND BY THE PRIVATE LAND MOBILE RADIO SERVICES.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-18IA086-000622-B036-337http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te52.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045657 text/html 39738HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:54:23 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:59 GMTContent-length: 39551Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te52.html Sample Issue Copyright FCC REPORT via NewsNet JANUARY 3, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FROM 281 TO FOUR PAGES, FCC REPORT DIGESTS NEW TELECOM BILL (2497 words) DEMOCRATS, BELLS SCORE ON TELECOM BILL - IF THIS VERSION FLIES (1731 words) FCC STILL CLOSED, BUT LICENSE AUCTIONS ROLL ON - NETTING $1.5B (690 words) SMALL CARRIERS NET BIG COMPLAINT TOTALS, FCC STUDY FINDS (372 words) 'TOWER' OF 214S SHRINKS AS CARRIERS GIVE UP, LOOK TO CONGRESS (542 words) THE POST-BILL WORLD: MORE LAWSUITS, NEED FOR WELL-CRAFTED RULES (369 words) CopyrightFCC REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996FROM 281 TO FOUR PAGES, FCC REPORT DIGESTS NEW TELECOM BILLThe differences of House- and Senate-passed telecom legislationhave been reconciled by a House-Senate conference committee intoa compromise bill - a "conference report" - that largely hews tothe House version of the bill, but incorporates Senate languageon such key issues as universal service. The report still onlyis being circulated on Capitol Hill and among key lobbyists, buta copy of the 281-page measure obtained by FCC Report shows itis full-scale legislation, ready to be passed by each chamber -if key leaders give their go-ahead.  But while the legislationlooks like the stuff of future law, will anyone but lawyers beable to read it?  FCC Report offers this condensed version.TITLE I:  Telecommunication ServicesIn Part II, "The Development of Competitive Markets," the billgets down to the nitty-gritty, detailing the interconnection anduniversal service requirements and eliminating federal and statebarriers to local-market entry.  This section includes thechecklist of services that all telcos, except some rural ones,must make available to competitors.  They must offerinterconnection and unbundled access to network elements "at anytechnically feasible point within the carrier's network" and on"just, reasonable and nondiscriminatory" terms.  They must alsoprovide nondiscriminatory resale, number portability, dialingparity, access to their right of way and reciprocal compensationarrangements.Regarding resale, the bill requires all services the telcoretails to also be offered at wholesale, but lets stateregulators ban competitors from reselling a telco's localservices to business customers if the regulators choose.  Thetelco must also offer the competitor on-site colocation unlessthe state regulators allow the telco to provide virtual, oroffsite, colocation.The FCC is given six months to write these rules.  It also getsto preempt state rules if those rules violate the bill's localcompetition requirements.The states, meanwhile, are allowed to set their own rules,provided they do not "substantially prevent implementation" ofthis part of the bill.  They also can issue exemptions to smalltelcos (those with less than 2 percent of the nation's accesslines) if compliance with a part of the law would be "undulyeconomically burdensome" or not technically feasible.  (Butrural cable TV operators offering telephony don't qualify forthis.)States also get to review interconnection agreements - they canreject them if they violate the public interest, among othergrounds - and they must act within 90 days or the agreement goesinto effect.  The bill also lets the FCC step in and take chargeof any proceeding if it is advised or otherwise learns that thestate is not carrying out its job under the new law.States also get to review the terms and conditions offered bytheir Bell company - they must act on the tariff in 60 days -and they get to set the wholesale rates for a telco's telecomservices.  The bill defines "wholesale" as the retail rate,minus the telco's "avoidable" costs such as billing, marketing,collection.  (This resolves a long-standing dispute over whatterms should govern resale.)All negotiations with competitors must be in good faith and theresulting agreements, with prices, are to be submitted to stateregulators, who also can be called on to mediate negotiations.If they don't get an agreement 135 days after their request, acompetitors may call on state regulators to impose compulsoryarbitration on the telco.  The state can then set the rates andimplementation schedule for a telco to provide the requestedservice.  But, in setting those rates, the state cannot userate-of-return regulation and "may include a reasonable profit."Charges for transport and termination of traffic must allow eachcarrier to recover its costs.The opposite side of the coin, for state regulators, is thatthey must remove all barriers to entry to both the interstateand intrastate telecom markets.  But they still get to imposetheir own universal service and public safety requirements andthey and local governments get to manage their rights of way,provided they don't discriminate among carriers.On universal service, the bill requires all carriers tocontribute to universal service, but only allows eligiblecarriers - common carriers selected by their state - to withdrawfrom that fund.  Otherwise, it follows the route taken on thattopic by the House legislation by giving the job of setting theuniversal service rules to a federal-state board.  The board andthe FCC, which will implement those rules, will act under a setof principles, including a mission to ensure that comparablerates and services are available in urban and rural areas.  Thedefinition of universal service can be expanded by the FCC, thebill says.On the other hand, the bill also requires that discountedservice be offered to  public elementary and secondary schoolsand to libraries.  The FCC will set the discount.  Rural healthcare providers - medical schools, county health departments -also cannot be charged more for service than their urbancounterparts.Unlike resale, sharing allows a telco, typically a smaller one,to rely on the facilities of the larger telco, say a specializedswitch, to offer services in the small telco's own region. Thus,the bill says qualifying carriers "lack economies of scale orscope" but also says telco A cannot require telco B to sharefacilities if telco A will use them in telco B's territory; adifferent section of the bill governs local competition.The bill also lets the nation's 14 utility companies that areregulated by a 1935 federal law provide telecom services, butrequires those companies to first apply to the FCC and to abideby several rules.  For instance, the parent company may not sellits facilities to its telecom subsidiary without state approvaland the subsidiary may neither offer its own stock or bonds.Even the parent company cannot mortgage its operation to financeits telecom operation.  And the parent must file reports withthe FCC concerning its capitalization of its telecom venture andstates may audit the books of the subsidiary or the parent.Part III, "Special Provisions Concerning Bell OperatingCompanies," gives the particulars on the incentive - entry intonew markets - that the bill offers the Bells in return foropening their networks.  The bill lets a Bell into out-of-regionlong-distance immediately and lets a Bell company immediatelyapply to the FCC to offer in-region long-distance.  It also letsa Bell offer "incidental" long-distance immediately, meaning theuse of long-distance to carry its video or alarm monitoringtraffic or cellular calls.The FCC, which must act within 90 days, will grant permission ona state-by-state basis after reviewing the application andconsulting with the Department of Justice (DOJ).  The FCC mustgive "substantial weight" to the DOJ's view, but that view neednot preclude the FCC from reaching a differing decision. Oncethe FCC gives its OK on long-distance, that Bell is alsoautomatically allowed to enter the once-proscribed business ofmanufacturing network and customer premises equipment.If the Bell violates the terms of its approval to enter long-distance, the FCC can also revoke its approval or impose fines.To win FCC approval, the Bell company must meet the bill'sspecial checklist of open access conditions and have in eachstate a local competitor that is predominately facilities-based.The list requires interconnection be made available and that theBell offer nondiscriminatory access to poles, ducts and right-of-way elements.  It also must offer these items on an unbundledbasis:*  local loop transmission from central offices to customerpremises,*  local transport from the trunk side of the switch and*  local switching.The Bell must be willing to resell its services, providereciprocal compensation and offer competitors access to "911"and "E911" services, directory assistance, operator callcompletion service, White pages listings of its competitor'scustomers, interim number portability (via call forwarding), andfull number portability (when the FCC issues the rules ).If the Bell has submitted its terms and conditions to a stateand gotten no takers after 10 months, or gotten a taker whonegotiated in bad faith, a Bell can "self certify" compliancefor that state.A Bell also is required to offer dialing parity, but not forthree years, unless it enters long-distance or is in a statethat is all of one LATA or has required that service as of Dec.19, 1995.Hewing to the Senate bill's language, a Bell in long-distance ormanufacturing must house those businesses in separatesubsidiaries involving separate books and offices and a federal-state audit every two years.  But, taking the language of theHouse bill, the bill lets a Bell eliminate these separatesubsidiaries three years after it it wins entry into the long-distance business.On manufacturing, the bill requires each Bell company tomaintain a separate manufacturing subsidiary that does notdiscriminate in favor of its parent.  Nor can the parentdiscriminate in favor of that affiliate in terms of certifyingequipment for network use or by giving it information on itscompetitors that the competitors haven't allowed.When buying equipment, a Bell cannot discriminate in favor ofits manufacturing unit and must consider other makers' hardwareas well.The Bell also must file with the FCC full information on theprotocols and technical requirements of its network and to keepthat information up to date.  The Bell also must keepinterconnected competitors posted on changes the Bell plans toits network.  As for Bellcore, the Bell's research operation, itcontinues to be banned from manufacturing until it is no longeraffiliated with more than one Bell company.On electronic publishing by the Bells, the bill again requires aseparate subsidiary, one that can hold no property in commonwith its parent nor use the parent's name or trademark.  TheBell cannot engage in joint activities with this affiliate otherthan to jointly do telemarketing or operate a "teamingarrangement."  Such an arrangement, says the bill, could involvethe Bell providing its facilities or basic phone service to theaffiliate.But this separate subsidiary is no longer required four yearsafter the parent Bell is allowed into long-distance.On alarm monitoring, the bill bans the Bell companies fromentering that line of business for five year after enactment,except for Ameritech, which already owns an alarm monitoringcompany.  However, Ameritech cannot acquire other alarmmonitoring companies for five years.TITLE II: Broadcast Services deals with changes that aim tospeed the renewal of broadcast licenses and to give broadcastersmore flexibility.  Presently, the bill tells the FCC to give newdigital "advanced television (ATV)" spectrum only tobroadcasters and not to auction it.  (If the broadcaster usesATV for for-pay services, the FCC gets the right to assess feeson that service.)This is the section of the bill most in flux.  Senate MajorityLeader Bob Dole, R-Kan., would rather have the FCC auction thatspectrum to raise revenue to reduce the federal debt.  Anagreement on this could help solve the continuing dispute overthe federal budget.This section of the bill also loosens current limits on how manyradio and TV stations may be owned per market.  TV stationowners, though, are still subject to the one station per marketrule, but now can seek FCC waivers of the rule in any of the top50 markets.Broadcasters also now are able to buy cable TV networks andtheir licenses will run for eight years, not 10.  However,renewal has been speeded since the FCC cannot ask for anyinformation that already has been supplied to it earlier by theapplicant, nor can it consider competing applicants' claims toprovide better uses of the licensee's license.In fact, the FCC can only turn down a renewal application ifthere was a pattern of violations of the law, a seriousviolation or a failure to serve the public interest.TITLE IV: Cable Services aims to give cable TV the flexibilityand the profitability to compete with local telcos.  It does soby lifting cable TV rate regulation "upper tier" services inmarkets where there is "effective competition."  For instance,if a local telco offers video programming on its network.Small operators, those with less than 1 percent of all U.S.subscribers, are rate-deregulated immediately. And all cableoperators escape rate regulation of service packages, other thanthe locally-regulated basic tier, as of March 1999.Presently, complaints about cable TV rates can be filed by anyperson with the FCC, which then launches an examination ofwhether the rate meets the national "benchmark" of fairness.  Ifnot, the rate must fall.Under the bill, the FCC will regulate rates until competition orthe "sunset date" arrives, but rate complaints will only beallowed from the cable operator's local franchise authority.And the franchiser can't complain unless it receives citizencomplaints within 90 days of the rate increase. Turning totelco-provided video, the bill retains current Title IIIregulation for wireless cable systems, Title II rules for purecommon carrier systems and Title VI rules for telco-owned cableTV systems.  But the bill also creates a new category called"open video systems" that are like a common carrier network, buton which the carrier can own some of the programming. Thosesystems may program up to two-thirds of their systems with theirown content, but have to leave the remaining third open to othercontent providers - if "demand exceeds channel capacity..."The FCC must write the rules for such system within six monthsand then will sit in judgment on the applications of telcos thatwant this form of streamlined regulation.  The category  exemptsoperators from franchise fees, although the bill states that afee may be paid by the operator in lieu of the franchise fee.Telcos, under the bill can own no more than 10 percent of thecable system in their territory unless the cable system serves arural area of under 35,000 population or the telco has under$100 million revenues and the cable system has under 20,000subscribers (and no more than 12,000 are in an urban area).  Twoother conditions that allow such mergers are if the cable systemserves fewer than 10 percent of the households in the telco'sservice area or the FCC issues a waiver.Title V: Broadcast Obscenity and Violence is perhaps the mostcontroversial part of the bill, the part best known to thegeneral public and also the part most likely to face immediatecourt challenge.  In general, it calls for TV set makers tobegin including a "V chip" in their sets so that parents canprogram the sets to block shows that carry high violence contentratings.Back to Headline List CopyrightFCC REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996DEMOCRATS, BELLS SCORE ON TELECOM BILL - IF THIS VERSION FLIESCasey Stengel would be proud.  Turns out Stengel's axiom "itain't over till it's over" applies as aptly to telecom reformlegislation as it does to baseball games.Late last month, Sen. Larry Pressler, R-S.D., chairman of theHouse-Senate conference committee on the bill, thought he andkey committee members had struck a compromise that gaveconcessions to the Clinton administration in order to avert athreatened veto.  But when conservative Republicans heard aboutthe terms, they rebelled, forcing Pressler to call his deal justa "framework agreement" and scuttling plans to bring the bill toa pre-Christmas vote.The new uncertainty left the bill vulnerable to more changes.The latest draft of the bill is not public but a copy obtainedby FCC Report shows changes already have been made to Pressler'sframework deal.  One of them is the removal of language thatwould have kept the Bell companies from joint-marketing long-distance and local service until a year after their localcompetitors were doing so.There's still some uncertainty whether this version will do thetrick.  Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole says he has somedisagreements with the bill.  He and House Speaker NewtGingrich, R-Ga., will meet this week.Gingrich called "time out" last month, advising HouseRepublicans to hold off onvoting on the report until after Congress returns to sessionthis week.  His staff said the speaker had not yet reviewed thenew language to see if it was sufficiently deregulatory.On the other hand, Pressler and Rep. Thomas Bliley, R-Va.,support the bill.Perhaps recognizing that only the fine details of the billremain to be ironed-out, all sides in the yearlong battle appearto be pulling back their forces.  Jim Smith, president of theCompetitive Telecommunications Association (CompTel), told FCCReport his group of local competitors doubts it will get theconference committee to reverse itself and toughen a conditionon Bell long-distance entry.At the United States Telephone Association (USTA), chieflobbyist Larry Clinton, said his group has given up hope ofgetting the conference to undo a change to the bill that letsstates use rate-of-return regulation for competitive services.The provision was excised early last month by the conferencecommittee, which is producing a compromise version of thetelecom bills passed this summer by the House and Senate.Another measure of how the deal is jelling:  Key factions arereleasing statements endorsing the new draft bill, even thoughit has not been released.  Supporters include theTelecommunications Industry Association, the Alliance forCompetitive Communications - the Bell's lobbying group - and theNational Association of Broadcasters.The USTA and CompTel haven't issued statements, but Clinton saidhe expects the USTA "will be OK" on the bill and Smith said hisgroup will find the bill "minimally acceptable" as long as it'snot changed more.A similar view was expressed by a long-distance industry source,who warned that the game is not over.  If the bill remainsunchanged, he said, long-distance will grudgingly support it.However, he noted that, "The ball has already been pulled outfrom under us once" this year when a "manager's amendment" inthe House undid the pro-long-distance language of that chamber'sbill just before passage.The heavy-hitters are checking their swings because they'vechalked up plenty of runs in the last inning of the bill's ballgame.  In recent days, the Bells have won the right to keep oneof their brethren, Ameritech, from expanding its alarm-monitoring operations beyond the company's current holdings.Ameritech, the only Bell the bill lets into alarm monitoring -by "grandfathering" the company's current holdings - now cannotexpand its alarm monitoring presence until after the five-yearwait that the bill imposes on all of the Bells seeking to getinto that line of business.Ameritech's next alarm monitoring move was expected to beoutside of its territory.The nation's 14 largest utility companies also scored byconvincing the conferees to let them offer telecom services.But the latest draft of the conference report - in effect, thenew telecom bill - shows that the biggest runs were scored bythe Democrats, including the addition of a role for theDepartment of Justice (DOJ) in assessing the long-distance entryapplications of the Bell companies.Though the role is only advisory, as the Senate bill originallyoffered, the change was one of three called for by the WhiteHouse when the administration was threatening a veto.Another recent change is adoption of the House bill's 35 percentcap on the size of the national audience that any one TV stationchain may accumulate.  The cap, a part of the House telecom billadded by Rep. Edward Markey, D-Mass., addresses the "mediaconcentration" aspect of the bill, another prime White Houseworry.Those and other changes were added to the bill after a meetingDec. 13 between Pressler and Bliley and the two top Democrats onthe conference committee, Rep. John Dingell of Michigan and Sen.Ernest Hollings of South Carolina.For his part, sources say Hollings was able to convince Presslerto remove from the bill entirely all language that would havelifted the current 25 percent cap on foreign investment in FCClicensees.The next day, Pressler and Bliley were set to sell their deal toHouse and Senate Republicans.  But that morning's newspapersreported that Vice President Al Gore had endorsed the bill onbehalf of the Clinton administration, the entity mostconservative Republicans despise.The error cost Pressler his run.  He was forced to call his deala "framework" - not an agreement - when key conferees, includingRep. Jack Fields, R-Texas, the chairman of the House telecomsubcommittee and a key drafter of the House bill, rebelled.Fields released a statement saying, "There was no deal" with theWhite House, and then left to spend the holidays with his familyin Texas.The Senate returned to session yesterday and House returnstoday, but it's still uncertain when Congress will to take upthe telecom bill.  The chief item on the agenda remains federalbudget legislation and, if no new compromise is available for avote, some members may call for another recess so that they cantend to their re-election campaigns.Therefore, the best that can be expected is for the conferencereport to be voted on by the conferees and released this week.More likely, the report will be held back.Besides the new role for the DOJ in deciding Bell entry intolong-distance, other key aspects of the draft version of thereport are:*     "Grandfathering" states that, as of Dec. 1995, require theBells to offer dialing parity,*     Expedited judicial review of the bill's "cyberporn"restrictions, and*     Inclusion of the Senate bill's requirement that discountedtelecom service be offered to schools and libraries.  Now,however, the requirement is part of the definition of universalservice itself, meaning that providers can seek compensation fortheir loss via the universal service subsidy.The DOJ's role on Bell long-distance entry will come as part ofthe FCC's imposition of a public-interest test on Bell long-distance applications, a concept taken from the Senate telecombill.  The FCC must give "substantial weight" to the DOJ'sassessment, but that assessment will not be decisive in itself,the new version of the bill states.The Pressler compromise also requires a Bell to first have afacilities-based competitor in place, as the House wanted,and give the FCC the power to test whether there is "actual anddemonstrable" local competition in the Bell's local market.  Butthe Pressler framework agreement eliminates language adopted bythe conferees just days before that would have required Belllong-distance entry to be predicated on the Bell facingcompetition throughout each of its states, not just in one cityin each state.The bill does not require the Bells to provide dialing parityuntil they enter the long-distance business, unless they operatein a state that has only one LATA or which required the serviceas of December 1995.  Dialing parity, already available in long-distance, means the ability to place a local call on a competingcarrier's network by dialing the same number of digits as neededby the local carrier's network.The bill bans making indecent material available over electronicnetworks, a hewing to the Senate bill's approach.  The bill'spenalties for sending "cyberporn" - a fine up to $100,000 and upto 10 years in jail - are also the same as the Senate bill's,but the draft bill uses the test of whether such material isindecent, not the "harmful to minors" standard that has beenupheld by federal courts.As a concession to opponents, the bill calls for expeditedjudicial review of this provision, meaning that legal challengesto the law will, if appealed, go directly from the federaldistrict court to the U.S. Supreme Court.Contrary to the House version of the telecom bill, the draftagreement has no language banning the FCC from regulating theInternet or letting the FCC selectively lift the 25 percent capon foreign ownership of FCC licensees.  But these changes may besubject to change.  The Senate appears willing to acceptPressler's view that the latter matter should be dealt with viaseparate legislation - he says a bill will be introduced thisspring - but some in the House still are pressing their fight toreturn their foreign ownership language to the bill.In the Senate, Pressler believes he has "a good majority" buthis compromise has won an ardent foe, fellow conferee Sen. JohnMcCain, R-Ariz.  A source with McCain's office told FCC Report,"My boss and others were beside themselves" when they heardabout the framework agreement.  The deal, he said, was workedout behind closed doors, with Hollings, the ranking Democraticsenator on the conference committee, carrying water for theWhite House.McCain voted against the Senate bill when it came to the floorand now his staff hints he will use his considerable power as asenator to slow the conference report's progress in the Senateuntil he wins his revisions.Back to Headline List CopyrightFCC REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996FCC STILL CLOSED, BUT LICENSE AUCTIONS ROLL ON - NETTING $1.5BThe FCC's offices have been closed since Dec. 22, but thathasn't kept the money from rolling in.  Since that date, the FCChas netted nearly $1.5 billion for the U.S. Treasury from threeauctions of operating licenses.The auctions were suspended for the holidays and resume thisweek -which is more than can be said for the operations of thecommission itself.  Only a skeleton crew, most of them involvedwith the auctions, is working at FCC headquarters.  The nearly2,000 other FCC employees have been furloughed and won't returnuntil funding for the commission and other government agenciesis restored.The shutdown of the FCC so far has had only limited impact ontelecom regulation - most of the action right now is on CapitolHill - but it has postponed release of the FCC's report andorder on the investment of Deutsche Telekom and France Telecomin Sprint.  A Sprint source said the company cannot be sure ofhow to proceed regarding the $4 billion investment until the FCCreleases its full report on the matter, which was decided at theFCC's Dec. 15 meeting.Also delayed will be the planned Jan. 18 meeting and any actionon proposed rulemakings, such as that regarding GTE's recentrequest to deaverage its switched access rates and offer volumediscounts in five states.  Comments on the plan, which resemblesthe Nynex Universal Service Preservation Plan the commissionadopted in 1995, were due yesterday, but the FCC is notaccepting filings during the shutdown.  Instead, all commentsdue during the shutdown are due the day the FCC re-opens.This means the FCC also may have to postpone its planned day-long enbanc hearing on spectrum policy.  More likely, it willhold that hearing, scheduled for Jan. 31, in lieu of its Januarymeeting.  However requests to participate in the hearing weredue Dec. 22.While some actions have been delayed, the three license auctionsthe FCC began in December were not.  Of these, the auction of 30megahertz (MHz) personal communications service (PCS) licenseshas generated the most revenue.  The auction, which began Dec.15 and is open only to small businesses, posted $1.2 billion ofthe $1.45 billion earned so far in all three December auctions -after just four rounds of bidding.The top bidders in the PCS auction, which resumes Jan. 5, arePCS 2000 LP, which bid $443 million and is high bidder in 124markets; GWI PCS Inc., which bid $257 million and is high bidderin 10 markets; and NextWave Personal Communications, which bid$162 million and is high bidder in six markets.The PCS auction involves the nation's 493 metropolitan tradingareas (MTA), as defined by the Rand McNally Business Atlas.  Ofthese, PCS 2000 holds the top bid ($203 million) for any MTA,that of New York City.  Next in the ranking are GWI PCS, whichbid $113 million for Los Angeles, and DCR PCS Inc., which bid$70 million for Chicago.The second auction, which resumes Jan. 4, involves specializedmobile radio  (SMR) licenses and has netted $167 million inrevenue, a figure that  includes the fines assessed againstthose that withdrew bids.  Without those fines, which surelywill be disputed, the figure is $100 million less.In the SMR auction, Paging Network of America, Ram Mobile Dataand Geotek Communications are among the most prevalent biddersfor the regional licenses at stake.  Paging Network holds thehighest bid so far, the $925 million it offered for the New Yorklicense, which also includes much of Northern New Jersey.The third auction, which resumes today, involves a form ofwireless cable TV service called multipoint distribution service(MDS).  The auction has generated $73 million after 37 rounds ofbidding.Among the leading bidders is CAI Wireless Systems, a wirelesscable company jointly owned by Nynex and Bell Atlantic.  CAIWireless has the top bids in New York and Washington, D.C.,which so far have generated the highest bids.  In those markets,it has offered $3.1 million and $2 million respectively.Back to Headline List CopyrightFCC REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996SMALL CARRIERS NET BIG COMPLAINT TOTALS, FCC STUDY FINDSSome of the nation's smallest carriers have garnered the highestnumber of customer complaints, according to recent FCC data.The data, contained in a "Common Carrier Scorecard," shows threecompanies - Oncor Communications, Value Added Communications andZero Plus Dialing Inc. (ZPDI) - far exceeding the nation'smultibillion-dollar carriers, when all carriers are compared onthe basis of their annual revenue.For instance, ZDPI garnered 9 complaints per million dollars inrevenue, while Bell Atlantic netted .03 complaints per milliondollars in revenue.Other small companies leading the list of complaint recipientsinclude Operator Assistance Network (275), Sonic Communications(130) and Matrix Telecom (114).  Matrix last month was fined$40,000 for slamming, the unauthorized transfer of customersfrom one long-distance carrier to another.Slamming was one of the top three reasons for the customercomplaints, which routinely pour into the FCC.  The otherreasons were operator services and "800-" number informationservices.Oncor, an operator services provider (OSP), was a leader in thistype of complaint.  Other top complaint-receiving OSPs:  PolarCommunications and Cleartel.But the FCC said a key finding of the study, which used 1994'scomplaint totals, was how few companies were netting complaints,when companies were equalized for size.  Of the total 11,350complaints, only 67 companies received more than 10.In fact, 20 companies were responsible for 73 percent of allcomplaints, the FCC said.Compared on a per-line basis, small companies lead the list ofcomplaint recipients, even though their total complaints weresometimes smaller than those filed against major carriers.  Forinstance, Oncor's 590 complaints equaled 1,140 per million lineswhile Bell Atlantic's 385 complaints equaled 21 per millionlines.The report found that some carriers have complaint rates 100times greater than the rates held by large carriers, the FCCcharged.The FCC also ranked the nation's largest local carriers on thebasis of their complaints (see chart), but noted that complaintsmade about those carriers often involve services the customerreached via that carrier and not the local carrier itself.The commission said carriers can reduce their complaint levelsby improving customer service, maintaining better billing andservice records and resolving complaints quickly.Back to Headline List CopyrightFCC REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996'TOWER' OF 214S SHRINKS AS CARRIERS GIVE UP, LOOK TO CONGRESSThe towering pile of Section 214 applications that once loomedover the FCC's Common Carrier Bureau is fast becoming a mole-hill, partly because of industry reluctance to continue pursuingthe applications - which will be done away with under thecongressional telecom bill.Last month, Ameritech became the latest Bell company to pull outof the Section 214 process, which a phone company now mustfollow in order to build a video dialtone (VDT) network.  Itacted just weeks before its applications were to expire underthe FCC rule that a permit holder must act on its applicationwithin 12 months.In December 1994, the FCC approved Ameritech's five applicationsto construct VDT networks that would serve 1.2 million homes inits service region.  But the telco has since shifted strategytoward becoming a franchise cable operator."There were two main reasons for the withdrawal," Ameritechspokesman Dave Onak said.  "We have been getting increasingcommunity support for us to operate as a cable franchiseoperator.  And the FCC still has not finalized their VDT rules."Ironically, the chief reason the commission has failed to act isthat it first must see what rules Congress sets for VDT in thetelecom legislation.Ameritech currently has eight franchise agreements with thelocal authorities, primarily in the outlying areas of Detroit.Onak said Ameritech continues with its brisk construction pacedespite the fact that the FCC has yet to approve theapplications.  Additionally, Illinois cable operators are suingthe telco and the authorities in Glendale Heights.Nevertheless, Ameritech intends to begin offering programmingservice during the first half of 1996, Onak said.  "We've got acourt ruling that said we can do so, so why not?"Ameritech is in engaged in franchise discussions with anadditional 40 communities across the Midwest, Onak said.  Thetelco has no plans to attempt to provide cable service outsideof its five-state region.  "We've got enough to keep us busy inour own backyard," he said.During the past year a handful of telcos - including BellAtlantic and U S West -  have amended, and then outright pulledtheir applications for commercial VDT before they ever got tothe approval stage at the commission.  Of concern is the rapidlychanging technological landscape and the commission's lack ofclarity on just how, when and where the telcos can operate VDTservice.Bell Atlantic in the late spring withdrew two of its Section214s and currently has only one 214 application pending, whichseeks to provide VDT service over a switched digital videonetwork in Florham, N.J.  The application was filed nearly threeyears ago and spokesman Harry Mitchell said the telco is lettingit sit because it includes up-to-date technology.  Bell Atlantichas no plans to file any other Section 214s in the near future."The wild card is the federal legislation," Mitchell said.  "Weare prepared to make the filings if necessary but we are notgoing to tip our hand if we don't have to."The FCC said it will finalize its VDT regulations by early 1996if the federal government does not pass telecom reformlegislation making it a moot point.Back to Headline List CopyrightFCC REPORT via NewsNetJANUARY 3, 1996THE POST-BILL WORLD: MORE LAWSUITS, NEED FOR WELL-CRAFTED RULESNow that the congressional telecom bill appears on track toenactment, several industry experts say the bill will promotelitigation and that regulators have their work cut out for them.That's because Congress can give a general statement of what itwants but the rules must be detailed to get that view to work.Augie Ros, adviser to the Illinois Commerce Commission (ICC)chairman, noted how, recalled how, as part of its adoption ofthe Ameritech Customers First plan, the ICC set a formula forthe cost of a loop.  Thus, Ameritech's tariff for loop costsincluded at least one no-cost loop.   Yet, said Ros, the movewas completely within the new rules.There's aspects of new rules "you can't even begin to thinkabout," he warned.Attorney Jon Canis, of the Washington firm of Swidler & Berlin,agreed and pointed to the FCC's efforts to produce rules oncolocation, virtual or physical.  He advised the FCC to turn tostates like Illinois for advice on how to proceed with some ofthe ground-breaking rules the bill will require."Whether this [legislation] will work will depend on whether[the FCC] will cooperate" with the states, said Joseph DiBella,a federal regulatory attorney in Nynex's governmental affairsunit.Ros, Canis and DiBella all spoke at a December conferencesponsored by the accounting firm of Deloitte & Touche andBusiness Research Publications.There, DiBella and Canis warned that another outgrowth of thebill's passage will be litigation.  Calling the new law "a boonto regulatory lawyers," DiBella said the FCC and state boardscan avoid litigation by setting up step-by-step routes tocompliance - and offering carriers incentives along the way.That's the idea behind giving the Bells a shot at the long-distance market once they meet the bill's checklist of openaccess and unbundling requirements.Canis said the bill's passage is essential - because of lawyers,who otherwise drive up the cost of any company trying to enterlocal competition on a state-by-state basis.  It can costhundreds of thousands of dollars to mount these cases beforeeach state board, he said, because of the lawyers and expertwitnesses involved.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-19IA086-000622-B036-376http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te29.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045751 text/html 37487HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:55:38 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:03 GMTContent-length: 37300Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te29.html Sample Issue Copyright FIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CABLEVISION SYSTEMS ANNOUNCES $300 MILLION FIBER BUILD (152 words) DSC-BELL ATLANTIC FIBER EQUIPMENT DEAL SEEN WORTH $150 MILLION (131 words) SPECTRAN CORP. AMP'S GLENN MOORE NAMED SPECTRAN'S PRESIDENT, CEO (153 words) ANDREW CORP. ANDREW TO MARKET HYBRID FIBER/COAX CABLE (162 words) 1996 FORECAST 1996: MAJOR GROWTH SPURRED BY DEREGULATION, HYBRIDIZATION, THE INTERNET (3804 words) FIBVER OPTICS DIGEST FIBVER OPTICS DIGEST (532 words) AT&T AT&T SCORES $10 MILLION OPTICAL FIBER CONTRACT WITH DEUTSCHE TELECOM (96 words) ALCATEL ALCATEL GETS APPROVAL FOR SONET MULTIPLEXER FROM AT&T (164 words) UNISOURCE ALCATEL SCORES SDH CONTRACT WITH UNISOURCE PARTNERS IN EUROPE (78 words) CopyrightFIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CABLEVISION SYSTEMS ANNOUNCES $300 MILLION FIBER BUILD     Cablevision Systems Corp. has announced it will invest $300million in northeastern Ohio to build a fiber optic telecommunicationssystem.  The company already has begun constructing the 750 MHzsystem, which Cablevision says will provide a platform for programmingchoices and advanced two-way communications services.     "The new telecommunications network will initially provide 77analog channels with future digital capacity," says Lawrence Drake,senior vice president and general manager for Cablevision's midwestregion.       "In the near future, those programming choices will be joined bythe exciting new capabilities that our fiber optic telecommunicationssystem allows, including video-on-demand, interactive services andhigh-speed computer connections," Drake says.     Cablevision anticipates the $300 million investment will createan estimated 100 new jobs.  Cablevision of Ohio now employs 670.       The company recently applied with the Public Utilities Commissionof Ohio to provide telephone service there as part of its attempts tobroaden its market impact.  (James Evangelista, 216/696-0229.)   Back to Headline List CopyrightFIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996DSC-BELL ATLANTIC FIBER EQUIPMENT DEAL SEEN WORTH $150 MILLION     DSC Communications Corp. has signed a two-year agreement withBell Atlantic Corp. to supply DSC's Next Generation Digital LoopCarrier equipment. An industry source says the deal is worthapproximately $150 million during that period.  The deal primarilyinvolves DSC's Litespan-2000 product, this source told us.     The agreement is part of an ongoing relationship that DSC has hadwith the regional holding company, which continues to be a majorcustomer as it packs more fiber into its network. For example, BellAtlantic contracts with DSC accounted for 10 percent of DSC's annualrevenues in 1992 and 11 percent in 1993.     Bell Atlantic actually has been deploying the Litespan productsince 1990, according to DSC.  DSC characterizes Litespan as the fiberoptics industry's first integrated, synchronous optical network-based,optical loop carrier system.Back to Headline List CopyrightFIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996AMP'S GLENN MOORE NAMED SPECTRAN'S PRESIDENT, CEO     Recently reorganized SpecTran Corp. has named Glenn Moore to be itspresident and CEO.  Raymond Jaeger remains chairman of the board of theSturbridge, Mass.-based company.     Moore, 44, comes from outside the company.  He was general managerof the Optical Connectors and Assemblies Division at Amp, where he spent20 years.     "The experience and success Glenn Moore achieved in developingAmp's Optical Connector business will be a major asset in the executionof SpecTran's aggressive growth plan," commented Jaeger.  "[The move]will allow me to concentrate more on longer term corporate developmentissues and pursue strategic alliance opportunities that will furtherstrengthen and diversify the company."     Reporting to Moore will be the heads of SpecTran's three subsidiarycompanies, which were created as part of the reorganization.  Thesesubsidiaries include SpecTran Communication Fiber Technologies Inc.;SpecTran Specialty Optics Co.; and Applied Photonic Devices.     Bruce Cannon, SpecTran's chief financial officer, also will reportto Moore.Back to Headline List CopyrightFIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ANDREW TO MARKET HYBRID FIBER/COAX CABLE     As part of its positioning in both the cellular and fiber worlds,Andrew Corp. is introducing premise composite fiber optic and coppercable assemblies for use in cellular and emerging personalcommunications systems.     The assemblies connect RF antennas that provide coverage throughouta building with cellular or PCS base stations via an RF analog fiberoptic link which includes the electrical conductors that power theremotely located antennas.  These composite cables may also beintegrated with an uninterruptible power supply so that a building poweroutage will not affect wireless services.     The cable assembly is composed of two Andrew-manufacturedMicrocables, including optical connectors and two standard insulatedcopper wires.  Single-mode fiber--which can be dispersion-shifted--isincorporated.  The company notes that such cables eliminate the need for"bulky ductwork" because the company's optical fiber cables employ aunique sheathing design that protects the cable.     The composite designallows electrical power and fiber to run together, making expensiveconduit, outlets or transformers unnecessary, Andrew says.Back to Headline List CopyrightFIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 19961996: MAJOR GROWTH SPURRED BY DEREGULATION, HYBRIDIZATION, THE INTERNET     The year 1996 will be a strong one for fiber optics both in theUnited States and throughout the world, according to extensiveinterviews we have conducted with fiber optics industry experts.     Global telecom deregulation, and particularly the potential foropening markets in the United States, will continue to accelerate thegrowth of fiber optics.  Because of its amazing properties, fibercontinues to find its way into operating networks, whether it is pushingcloser to the home as the result of cable TV overbuilds in hybrid fibercoax networks, via a new product that Andrew Corp. is announcing thatpacks both fiber and copper into the same cable, or as part of the newhybrid fiber wireless architecture.     When we asked James Crowe, chairman and CEO of MFS CommunicationsCo. Inc., what general business trends in fiber he anticipates willoccur in the coming year, he responded, "The Internet, the Internet andthe Internet."  It is cheaper by over a factor of 100 to moveinformation over the Internet versus the circuit switched voice network,said Crowe.  That kind of economic advantage is unstoppable over thelonger term.     The paradigm shift in many companies to the Internet suggests anopportunity to many of our interviewees for fiber.  Forget the video-on-demand market dream that simply has not driven bandwidth to this level,we were told; right under our noses people are demanding more bandwidthon the Internet--and there is no doubt that fiber optics will deliverit.  ...All Agree: A Solid U.S. Market, Especially With Telecom Reform     1996 very well may be the most explosive year that we have seen inthe industry, says Craig Young, president of Brooks Fiber.  "We will seea lot of folks that are new players in new markets that will be buildinginfrastructure in new fiber markets," Young tells us.  "You are probablygoing to see an explosion of fiber going into the ground."     The only limitations to U.S. fiber growth are going to be the fibermanufacturing capabilities of Corning and Alcatel, says Gary Glick,business unit manager of fiber optic cable at  Andrew Corp..     Crowe believes 1996 will be "an excellent year," noting that thefocus may shift a little from more traditional voice-oriented telcoservices to methods of broadband interconnect with the Internet.  "Ifthe local loop was considered a bottleneck for voice-grade service, itbecomes a real restriction as people demand more broadband access to theInternet," says Crowe.     Brian McFadden, assistant vice president of high capacityapplications for the SONET networks group at Nortel, believes "thedemand for bandwidth across the network is increasing and thereforefiber deployment should be strong in 1996."  McFadden believes it stillis "an elastic market for bandwidth" as prices come down and newapplications are invented.      "In the area of high-speed, trunked telecommunications, 1996 isgoing to be the year that 10 Gbps OC-192 networks come into play and atthe same time the first [large commercial] deployments ofmultiwavelength WDM times OC-48," says John Ryan, principal at theCalifornia consulting firm of Ryan, Hankin and Kent. "The next step inhigh capacity telecom gear is going to happen in 1996 and that will pushthe state of development of both TDM and dense WDM."  With regard tohigh speed TDM and WDM, "its very clear that at least for the firstseveral years, they have to co-exist," says Ryan.      Stephen Montgomery, vice president of Electronicast Corp., acompetitor to Ryan, Hankin also based in California, believes strongmarkets will continue for premises data and broadband communications. "We see prices remaining very stable, although going up in [a few] fiberoptic cable components."     The market for fiber to support cable TV also is expected tocontinue strong in the coming year.  "We feel it will be a very goodyear," says Ron Coppock, vice president of international sales andmarketing for Texscan. How good, Coppock adds, depends on whethertelecom reform legislation is passed into law.  Still, "in terms of HFCarchitecture we build products for, we see an increased evolution towardthat type of architecture and the market is significant."  There are anumber of 350 MHz or 550 MHz architectures that need to be rebuilt andCoppock does not see that happening without some fiber infrastructuregoing in as part of it.     Andy Meyer, Scientific-Atlanta Inc.'s director of marketing fortransmissions, believes there "will be a lot more activity on the MSOside continuing in fiber for 1996."  Meyer believes a lot of that isdriven by the concept of narrowcasting, which he defines as the abilityof cable companies to segment their markets into smaller sections. "They have done infrastructure changes that allow them to go to smallerpockets of nodes and they can target those nodes with a specificadvertising using data modems," continues Meyer.  "Fiber optics to allowthem to do that."     Scientific-Atlanta also is pretty optimistic about the products itmakes for the telecom market, says Tim Wilk, director of strategicplanning. The regional holding companies (RHCs) have been tryingunsuccessfully to get into the video market for a number of years, heobserves.  "As we start 1996, there are a number of RHCs that are readyto start rolling out HFC networks. With Pacific Bell and SNET we see theintegrated networks," he continues.  "We are really excited about someof the telcos that are starting to build a video-only system."  It is atrend that Wilk believes will "really kick into high gear" in 1996 asthe telcos see that fiber to the curb is not living up to itscapabilities and not hitting the target availability and cost targets.     "Emerging technologies can only run on fiber," says oneinterviewee, who works for an RHC and who asked not to be identified. "That is where the growth is going to come," this source adds.  "You aregoing to see major market growth in the United States."     Drew Zogby, director of strategic marketing for ADCTelecommunications Broadband Connectivity Division, believes 1996 willbe a very strong year for U.S. fiber optics deployment.      Otto Szentisi, vice president and director of hardware andequipment technology at Siecor Corp., says the company expects to seecontinued growth, "very similar to 1995."      Optelecom Chairman William Culver predicts "market revenues willcontinue their inevitable growth in spite of decreasing prices."     David Maack, vice president for research, development andengineering at Porta Systems, believes telecom reform legislation willbe made law and "it is going to spur people to add plant equipment."     Michael Mattei, vice president of technology for TII-Ditel, saysthere is the potential for large increase in the number of fiber milesinstalled in 1996, depending on whether telecom reform legislation isapproved.  If not, the industry will go through its normal increase, hereasons.      Joe Chisholm, a manager of network infrastructure planning andtechnology at BellSouth, says that all he has heard "internally andexternally leads me to believe that [the fiber optics market] shouldcontinue to grow." BellSouth's Greg Mims, who has the same title,believes there will be a continuing upward fiber optics trend across allof the regions in the U.S.  ...Diverging Views Mark Undersea Fiber Forecast     There were widely divergent viewpoints among experts with regard toundersea growth in fiber.     "1996 is going to be the busiest year in the history of the worldwith regard to the installation of undersea fiber optic cable," saysClifton Lundberg, president and CEO of General Offshore Corp. (GOC),which installs optical fiber cable up to depths of 50 meters throughoutthe world.  The company recently has been deploying new tools, such asthe Gator, to help get the cable in the mud and out of the way ofanchors and trawling nets.     GOC's Lundberg cites FLAG, as well as installations in such diverseplaces as Ukraine and Thailand as helping to fuel an acceleratingmarket.  Based in Alexandria, Va., but with offices throughout theworld, GOC is 60 percent owned by Hannon, Armstrong and Co. and 40percent owned by Cable & Wireless.     While believing that the terrestrial market in the United Stateswill remain strong, Konnie Schaefer, president of K. Schaefer &Associates, believes the market for undersea fiber optic systems "isgoing to be slow." That is because, Schaefer reasons, a number ofsystems are going to become operational and fulfill demand for 1996.     "I think there is going to be a significant slowdown from thestandpoint of undersea fiber optic sales," Schaefer says.  One case inpoint: Schaefer believes the sweeping SEA-WE-ME-3 network will not goforward.  He attributes this to changes in the organizational structureof France Telecom, the governing partner, which have led to questionsraised by the new management as to whether the resulting capacity willbe there to justify the very substantial capital investment.  Officialsfrom France Telecom would not comment when asked what the current statusof the project is.     Ando Corp.'s Michael Griffin believes 1996 will be "a strong year"for fiber optic test instrumentation equipment.  ...Worldwide Growth Strong: But Know Thine Area     The global fiber market is "going to be a very positive one in1996," says Ryan.  "Many nations are building out fiber-richinfrastructures for telephony and cable TV and in a lot of cases acombination of the two," he observes.      "The southern edge of South America--including Argentina, Chile andPeru--have become perhaps the most deregulated telecommunicationsmarkets on earth with a resulting upsurge of infrastructure buildout,"says Ryan.  "I would expect to see a lot more of that occurring invarious different regions."     In order to take advantage of that, most of the major vendors have"beefed up their ability" to provide for this market, says Ryan.  "Thereare terrific global opportunities," he adds.     "Most nations outside of a small club of advanced nations haverelatively little telecommunications infrastructure," says Ryan.  Thegap between developing nations and wealthier nations will increasesubstantially if these poorer nations do not put in new infrastructure. And that translates into more fiber in the ground, Ryan believes.     Texscan's Coppock sees continuing strong markets in Europe andLatin America.  While the market for cable TV in the United Kingdom isconsolidating, Coppock sees "a continuing build there that's allupside."  That's because, they have just turned on their 1 millionthsubscriber in a nation of 48 million people.  "Clearly, there is a lotof cable passing to be done."      Italy is going to be a huge market for cable TV if the nationapproves Socrates, Telecom Italia's vast cable TV project, Coppock says. Spain and Portugal also represent opportunities for cable TVinfrastructure incorporating fiber.     With regard to Latin America, Coppock notes that "there has been aconsolidation in Chile.  Last year there were maybe 10 players, nextyear there will be two or three."  He identifies Argentina as acontinuing strong market.      Zogby believes that "international growth will continue to berobust."  He identifies Germany, Chile and Australia as nations thatwill continue to  aggressively install fiber.  China, India and otherAsian nations are accelerating fiber optic deployments.  Zogbyidentifies Japan as a strong market and believes that Argentina andMexico also will grow substantially.  Middle East fiber optics activityalso is up.     "We see much higher growth, particularly in Asia," says Montgomery. For some components, Electronicast predicts growth of 100 percent peryear or higher; in others, it predicts growth of 30 percent.     International growth is being spurred to some extent by AT&T andMCI hoping to assume a global presence, says Mattei.  One example is MCIin Mexico. He believes the amount of fiber going in during 1996 willrepresent a larger increase than it did in 1995.      "The country that is the most advanced in the use of fiber isFrance," says the RHC source requesting anonymity.  "France has usbeaten hands down in the use of fiber.  They are the most advanced interms of nuclear power at around 85 percent; they are the most advancedin terms of fiber at around 65 percent." The nation is very active inusing fiber to deploy smart cars and smart highways.     Andrew Corp. is involved in joint ventures in Russia, says Glick. "We see opportunities in Russia," he notes, particularly as thesituation stabilizes there.  "There is also major activity in China andIndia, particularly Shanghai and the coastal areas," Glick believes.     "In Europe, things are happening a little more rapidly on theregulatory front than perhaps people had thought," says Crowe of MFSCommunications.  There may be as many as five consortia in Germany whocould put fiber in the ground, he adds.  With regard to deregulation ofEurope's PTTs on Jan. 1, 1997, Crowe believes that "we may see somethingsimilar to what we saw in the United States after equal access where wesaw an explosion of fiber capacity being put in," although he notes thatsuch developments are subject to regulatory developments that are"perilous to try to forecast."  ...1996 Drivers: Telecom Reform, Cable-Telco, Internet, TechnologyImprovement      Interviewees identified a variety of factors that will propelmarket growth in 1996, including telecom reform legislation, thestruggle between cable TV companies and telephone companies to gainlarger market share, increased capacity requirements resulting fromdemands for Internet access and technology improvements that will drivenew installations.     ADC's Zogby lists drivers for growth as including cable TV fiber-to-the-feeder and two-way network upgrades; regional Bell operatingcompany cable TV overbuilds; second-tier competitive access providergrowth; overall fiber optics-based, high-capacity-service demands;increased local competition and the advent of local exchange carriers inthe inter-exchange carrier market; and more aggressive fiber opticsdeployment by utilities.     BellSouth's Mims sees increasing levels of fiber going into thetelco regions as "a natural evolution."  As you deploy more of aparticular technology, such as fiber, the cost structures come down asthe costs to your vendors come down.  Chisholm notes that the increasedfunctionality that fiber can provide is a major plus as telcos studytheir networks.     "It is clear that the line between local and long distance is goingto disappear," says MFS' Crowe.  Indeed, it has been clear for some timethat customers don't buy local and long-distance services because theywant to.  When the interexchange carriers move into the local exchangethat is going to mean additional construction and a good portion of thatwill be fiber.      AT&T Corp.'s plans to enter the local exchange represents wonderfulnews for consumers and the economy, Crowe believes.  From the point ofview of AT&T and the Bell operating companies, he believes it wasinevitable.  "From MFS's perspective it is great, in the short-to-mediumterm it is a customer for us," says Crowe.  "It will be quite a whilebefore AT&T is able to deploy enough switches to carry all of its owntraffic," he predicts.     Rick Jones, executive vice president of Broadband TechnologiesInc., believes telecom reform in the United States will be a big driverthat will cause telephone companies to build facilities in a variety ofspots.  "There will be quite a bit of attention in the local exchangebut also elsewhere," adds Jones.  "While 1996 will not be the year forhuge shipments, it will be the year people sort out what is going on andmake large orders," Jones believes.     The Internet is having an impact, says Nortel's McFadden.  "A lotof companies are putting people on the Internet on a day-to-day basis aspart of doing their job and that certainly is a dramatic shift fromthree years ago." McFadden believes that deregulation and privatizationsare going to drive the number of second, third and fourth operators in alot of countries and competitive access providers are going to get evenstronger.      "The boom of the Internet will drive fiber optic deployment,"predicts Sunil Tewarson, manager of new business development for AT&TNetwork Systems. Tewarson notes that the U.S. government is going to behanding over the network to private companies, that the performance isgoing down below acceptable levels.  "For it to perform at the levelpeople accept, it will require higher speeds and that will drive fiberdeployment," says Tewarson.      Technology improvements will also play a role in acceleratingfiber, says Tewarson.  "In Bell Labs, we have tested the same fiber upto speeds of 80 Gbps, 2000 channels of broadcast TV," he notes.  "Thereis definitely a big technology push."  ...Wireless Seen As Representing An Opportunity      Like it or not, wireless communications is having a growing impactthroughout the world.  While that will detrimentally affect fiber'sgrowth in some instances, it also may be an opportunity.     Electronicast's Montgomery notes that some Asian nations deployingwireless or personal communications require wireless antennas every 300-400 feet that will be linked to fiber.      "Copper-based systems can't provide the bandwidth required tohandle all the PCS volume," says Glick.  "You need fiber."      As the result, Andrew Corp. is developing products that includeboth fiber and copper in the same cable to the antenna (see relatedinformation, p. 2).     "Instead of pulling two separate cables, you can install one cableand solve the problem of powering the antenna from the local baystation," says Pat Estenes, senior product manager at Andrew Corp.  ...1996 Business: Partnering to Continue, Growth of CAPs, (Re)-Empowering AT&T     It was clear from the learned responses of our interviewees thatmuch thought has been given to what business moves will be undertaken inthe coming year.  Much of that depends on, as Ryan defines it, on "theminutiae" contained in telecom reform legislation, if it does becomelaw.     There seems to be no question that roles will be changing rapidlyas shown in this anecdote from Ando's Griffin about two companies doingbusiness in 1996: "Today, I am your competitor; tomorrow, I am your co-marketing partner; the week after next, one of us will buy the other;and we will divest next month."           The general consensus was that there will continue to bepartnerings, such as the Sprint-Deutsche Telekom-France Telecompartnering and the rumored alliance between Nynex and Bell Atlantic.     "Companies such as ourselves don't have all the resources to get toevery customer," says Nortel's McFadden.  "It is very hard for onecompany to cover the whole waterfront on technology developments.  Youcan't afford to be limited by your own internal technologicalcapabilities.  There are going to be a lot more partnerships and a lotmore strategic use of these partnerships."          Our anonymous RHC source predicts there eventually will be animplosion where only a few carriers eventually will be left standing. That jibes with comments from BBT's Jones, who says "the shaking willbegin in 1996, but the shake out will come later."     Jones analogizes the situation to airline deregulation, "wherethere were a number of mergers and a few companies that went out ofbusiness as the landscape changed."  One common partnership willprobably be interexchange carriers and cable TV operators.  He alsobelieves there will be more partnering among the RHCs.     AT&T will be a formidable foe as it enters the local exchange wasanother consensus view. "I don't know if it is scary or provides anopportunity," says Scientific-Atlanta's Wilk.  "AT&T recognition istremendous. If they can partner with the right providers, they are in anabsolutely tremendous position to capture a significant share not onlyof the interactive data market but also of local telephony.  I thinkAT&T is really something to watch next year."     Officials from the AT&T systems and technology company--which hasabout $20 billion in annual revenues--generally refused to comment forthis report, claiming they are in a quiet period until after the companybecome public, expected about March 15.  AT&T Services, with about $50billion in annual revenues, will remain a public company.  The thirdcompany, GIS, the so-called computer company, also will not have apublic offering.        The systems and technology company--which includes Network Systems,Microelectronics, Global Systems, Bell labs and Consumer Products--hasdecided to create Network Cable Systems, which will combine its opticalfiber, fiber cabling, copper cables and fiber optic apparatus productsinto one unit.  Units will include Norcross, Ga.; AT&T of Shanghai FiberOptic Co. Ltd.; Litespec Inc.; LYCOM A/S; AT&T Finolex Fiber OpticCables Ltd.; AT&T of Beijing Fiber Optic Cable Co. Ltd.; AT&T Fitel Co.;AT&T Yakazi Fiber Optic Cable Co. Ltd.; AT&T Network Systems DeutschlandGmbH; AT&T Network Technologies Co. Ltd. (Bangkok, Thailand); AccessNetwork Technologies (Fuquay-Varina, N.C., a joint venture withRaychem); AT&T ELECON Telesistemas C.A. (copper facility located inVenezuela); AT&T of Tianjin, China; AT&T Network Systems Australia; andAT&T Network Cable Systems Ireland.   ...Strong CAPs Seen Consolidating By Acquisition     The competitive access providers (CAPs) are expected to continue toaggressively plow fiber into the ground--and to consolidate for furtherstrength.     Brooks Fiber President Young said his company will announce anacquisition in coming weeks.  "Even though 1996 will not be a gangbusteryear in revenues, it will be a gangbuster year in capital expenditures,because all of us are going to be putting in switches to go after thebiggest piece of the local dialtone market," Young confides.  BrooksFiber will install 8 to 10 switches in 1996 because that is all thestates will allow them to install. The company has the capability toinstall 20 switches next year.      As we went to press, Brooks announced that it intends to investmore than $20 million in building and operating two new fiber opticnetworks in Stockton, Calif., and Jackson, Miss.  The company now willserve 20 cities.     "MFS is eating up other little CAPs," says Electronicast'sMontgomery.  CAPs are going to be very aggressive to position themselvesagainst the cable TV companies.  "They are doing this with fiber opticsdeployment such as OC-3 and OC-12 SONET equipment."     1996 will be an important year for software, several sourcesobserved.  "You are going to see more integration of fiber opticproducts into large scale network-management, software-driven systems,"Coppock believes.  "Software is going to be a big component."     In the undersea market, Schaefer predicts there may be furtherconsolidations, such as Alcatel's earlier purchase of STC's underseaunit.  Siemens also is trying to break into the fiber optics underseabusiness--with limited success to this point.  It is also questionablewhat happens to AT&T's underwater unit, known as SSI, which Schaefersays has been the subject of industry gossip that it may be sold.     [This is part one of a two-part series on forecasts and trendsanticipated in the fiber optics industry in the coming year.  FIBEROPTICS NEWS interviewed more than 20 industry leaders to compileinformation for this report.  Part two will run in our next issue, datedJan. 8, 1996.]Back to Headline List CopyrightFIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996FIBVER OPTICS DIGEST     Colombia's national telecommunications company has announced thatit has signed contracts with Mitsui & Co., Sirti SpA, Alcatel Cable SAand Siemens AG as part of its fiber optics build.  The contracts areworth a total of $112 million.     Columbus, Ohio-based utility contractor Gudenkauf Corp. isinstalling optical fiber cable together with the city.  The network willoffer high-bandwidth for power users and providers, supplying voice,video and data.  The second phase of the network will entailinstallation of 48-strand fiber cable traveling 6.62 miles andconnecting City Hall with Ohio State University and the Greater ColumbusConvention Center.  (Jeff Gudenkauf, 614/488-1776.)     NTT has unveiled two fiber-related Track II procurements.  Theseinclude "Optical Fiber Cables and Fiber Jointing for Aerial AccessDistribution Network" with filing deadline of Jan. 26, and "OpticalFiber Cables and Fiber Jointing for User Distribution Network," withfiling deadline of Jan. 25.  (NTT America, Shingo Ieda, 212/808-2232.)     Net sales of fiber optic products continue to increase for ADCTelecommunications.  It announced that fiber sales represented 41.3percent of total sales for the quarter ending Oct. 31, up from 35.6percent for the year earlier period.  The company reported net income of$18.7 million, compared to $12.8 million last year.  (Aimee Gallogly,612/946-3338.)     C-COR Electronics Chairman and CEO Richard Perry has announced thatthe company's second quarter financial results will not meet expectedlevels. It still does not have a corporate president, following thedeparture of Daniel Finch. The company has received an order to supplyequipment to Titus Communications Corp. as part of a 1,050 mile hybrid-fiber coax build in Japan.        Fiberguide Industries unveiled a new line of custom, single-fiber,high-powered assemblies that are custom made.  The high-poweredassemblies are avail-able in a variety of sheathings and lengths. (Richard Landreth, 908/647-6601.)     Hanh Lu has joined Lasertron as senior staff engineer fordistributed feedback lasers.  He formerly had worked at Bell NorthernResearch Ltd.     Stephanie Marshall has been named to the board of Tellabs Inc.  Sheserved as executive director of the Illinois Mathematics and ScienceAcademy.     Brian McCann has joined the board of directors of Super VisionInternational Inc..  He has spent more than eight years at 3M, where hehas been employed in the fiber optic division.      The New Orleans City Council has voted to let LeveeComm ofLouisiana build a perimeter fiber optics network for the city.  Thewould-be carrier is still attempting to raise revenues for that purpose,according to reports.      Galileo Electro-Optics Corp. gained a net profit for the first timein the last five years, the company says in its 1995 annual report. Ithad a profit of $1.1 million compared to a loss of similar value theyear before. Galileo also had the greatest commercial sales as opposedto military sales for the period and the best productivity, as measuredby sales per employee.     Luxtec Corp., a maker of fiber optic lighting and optical systems,lost $6.1 million in the last quarter of fiscal 1995, compared to a netincome of $36,281 last year.  Primary reason for the loss was completionof the CardioDyne acquisition, which involved a $5.1 million write-off.Back to Headline List CopyrightFIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996AT&T SCORES $10 MILLION OPTICAL FIBER CONTRACT WITH DEUTSCHE TELECOM     AT&T Corp. has received its largest contract involving opticalfiber yet from Deutsche Telekom, a $10 million deal in which the cablewill be used largely to upgrade east German infrastructure.  Roughly 90percent of the cable will be installed in what was formerly East German,according to AT&T.     AT&T Network Systems fiber cable manufacturing facility inAugsburg, Germany, will produce fiber optic cables to fill the order.     Denmark-based LYCOM A/S, an AT&T subsidiary, will manufacture andsupply single-mode fiber to the Augsburg facility.  AT&T's Norcross,Ga., facility also will supply single-mode fiber for the project.Back to Headline List CopyrightFIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ALCATEL GETS APPROVAL FOR SONET MULTIPLEXER FROM AT&T     AT&T has approved Alcatel's 1603/12 SM synchronous optical networkmultiplexer with AT&T's ACCUNET T155 service.  The Alcatel multiplexeris one of the first tested by AT&T operating at the OC-3 rate, accordingto Alcatel.     While it unclear how much business the approval will generate,Alcatel spokesman Mike Newsom told us the approval "is a major deal. They can't deny us anymore," said Newsom.     The multiplexer offers carriers the option of an OC-3 or OC-12configuration in a single, compact shelf, says Joe Bass, Alcatel's vicepresident and general manager of lightwave products.  "The 1603/12 SMcan even operate as an OC-3 and OC-12 system at the same time,interfacing an OC-12 line rate through one high-speed direction and OC-3through the other high-speed direction of the same shelf."     Test results showed that the unit can operate as a terminalmultiplexer, an add/drop multiplexer in either a linear or ringconfiguration, an optical hub and a repeater as defined by the AccunetT155 service specifications.Back to Headline List CopyrightFIBER OPTICS NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ALCATEL SCORES SDH CONTRACT WITH UNISOURCE PARTNERS IN EUROPE      Alcatel has signed a contract of unknown price to providesynchronous digital hierarchy equipment to the Unisource partners.  Theyrepresent telephone concerns in The Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland,and Spain.     Alcatel believes the deal represents an important step in theconstruction of a major pan-European infrastructure.     The contract covers supplies, engineering, installation andcommissioning, with deliveries to begin in 1996.     The Unisource partners include Telia of Sweden, PTT Telecom of theNetherlands, Swiss Telecom PTT and Telefonica of Spain.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-20IA086-000622-B037-22http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te100.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045815 text/html 53662HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:56:17 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:35 GMTContent-length: 53475Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te100.html Sample Issue Copyright HIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNet JANUARY 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES LEAD ARTICLE Cable Modems and the Future of Broadband (1108 words) ATM FVC Offers New Networking Products (815 words) Warp 10 and Rogers Team Up to Deliver ATM Turnkey Solutions to Desktop Users (231 words) StrataCom Offers SVC Switching (453 words) Cascade Delivers ATM Switch for Testing (178 words) MFS Network Links Financial Industry Experts for CNNfn (248 words) Thompson Deploys Distance Learning Project Developed by Sprint (210 words) Frame Relay ECI Telecom's Telematics Unit Launches Multiservice WAN Switch (41 words) Router-Based Networks Gandalf Technologies Makes Advanced Version of Router Available (351 words) Cisco Announces New Management Strategy (104 words) Newbridge Launches Token-Ring to ATM Internetworking (108 words) Connectware Signs OEM Agreement with MPR Teltech Ltd. (69 words) MCNC Tests RFC 1577 Classical IP Over ATM (271 words) 100 MBPS LANS NPI Extends Development Agreement with Sun to Supply FDDI Adaptors (242 words) Asante Releases NuBus Adaptor (202 words) NetVantage, HP Enter Alliance to Integrate 100VG AnyLAN Technology (53 words) HIPPI AND FIBRE CHANNEL Special Effects Company Buys NetStar's GigaRouter (176 words) COMPANY NEWS SMC Intends to Sell Business Unit to Cabletron (238 words) N.E.T. and Cisco Announce Agreements (410 words) Digital Link Releases Lower than Expected Fourth Quarter Results (157 words) NetStar and E-Systems Form Alliance (196 words) Cisco Names Pioneer as Systems Integrator (63 words) Cisco Invests in OSI (256 words) Alantec Merges with FORE; Launches ATM Suite (202 words) Cabletron to Acquire SMC Switching Division (137 words) Cabletron and Northern Telecom Announce Relationship (55 words) Larscom and BellSouth Team Up to Provide Network Access Solutions (53 words) CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Cable Modems and the Future of BroadbandThe hot topic at the recent Western Cable show was cable modems.  Building onRF-to-Ethernet technology that has been around in one form or another sincethe days of so-called broadband LANs, these modems, from a variety of vendors,promise to provide residential users with access to the Internet and on-lineservices at speeds in the tens of Megabits per second.  This is a quantum leapup from the ISDN "modems" that are becoming popular among the most devotedfans of the Net and an even bigger leap from the conventional modems that mostof us having been using to access online services for the last decade and ahalf.Cable Modems - The State of the Art?The cable industry sees cable modems as a way that they can compete with thetelephone companies in the burgeoning Internet market.  But not quite yet.ISDN terminal adaptors are here now and are getting cheaper by the day.  Cablemodems are only just beginning to appear, with many not slated to be on themarket until the middle of this year.  The exhibit on page 2 lists many of thevendors that have - or will soon have - cable modem products.At the same time, cable modems are only marginally standardized.  Most suchdevices use IEEE 802.3/Ethernet MACs and 10Base-T between the PC and themodem.  In addition, first-generation modem equipment appears to bestandardizing on 64-constellation QAM (Quadrature Amplitude Modulation)receivers, combined with QPSK (Quadrature Phase-Shift Keyed) transmitters.This means that, for the most part, cable modems can be used only in cablenetworks that are adapted for specific modem products, while you can move yourISDN adaptor from one ISDN service to another - although sometimes not withoutdifficulty.Various groups are promising standards for cable modems before the end of thisyear.  Among the standards makers for modems are CableLabs, the DAVIC group,IEEE 802.14 and an industry group called the Broadband Link Team, whichconsists of AT&T Network Systems, Hewlett-Packard Company, Hybrid Networks,Inc., and Intel Corporation.  But for the time being, if you want high-speedaccess to the Net or to AOL, Prodigy or CompuServe, buy an ISDN terminaladaptor!Cable Modems - the Killer App for ATM?As the exhibit on page 3 shows, despite the fact that cable modems are earlytechnology, a significant number of trials are already underway for cablemodems, with some of the largest MSOs actively involved.  From the perspectiveof someone interested in high-speed networking, however, the most importanttrial may be that of at home, which has grasped an important truth about cablemodems.  If thousands of residential users are going to access the Net asmulti-megabit speeds, there is going to be an immediate demand for aspecialized high-speed backbone to support them.  The old slow and steady IProuters will just not cut it.Essentially the objective of @Home is to help cable companies around thecountry to build revenues based on data services access using cable modems.Its activities include systems integration and business process reengineering- for example, to retrain customer support staff to handle new kinds ofdigital services.At the core of the @Home program is @Home's intention to build a nationalbackbone which enable operators to supply multimedia services to cable modems.@Home would therefore function as one of the major Internet backbonefacilities, but one which was optimized for the requirements and capabilitiesof cable modem users.  Facilities on this backbone would, however, beaccessible to all Internet users to the degree that this was possible usingdial-up POTS or ISDN facilities.The @Home architecture is designed to provide a strong distribution ofresources, so that there is not too much demand on the Internet backbone.This distribution is achieved through a hierarchy of regional data centers,hubs and headends.  Since most modern cable network architectures are based ona series of hubs, the architecture is not in itself unique.  However, the@Home architecture is more geographically spread out than that envisioned bythe typical local operator and specifically incorporates ATM.  This ultimatelyreflects the belief of @Home management that future multimedia services usingcable modems could overwhelm the Internet as currently constructed.The @Home backbone will connect users to multiple sources of content.  @Homeis not directly involved in supplying content, although it is known to havesupplied advice to those developing specialized content for cable-based dataservices.  Nor is @Home committed to any particular modem supplier.  However,as noted above it is using Motorola modems in a trial and we were told that itwould also support LANCity and telephone modems.  Eventually, as standards aredeveloped, @Home hopes to be able to support any and all modem products.In order to access the @Home backbone, cable systems will have to comply withcertain requirements.  These are:- 6 MHz channel capacity - this is now standard for most cable systems- HFC (hybrid fiber/coax) architecture - this is emerging as thearchitecture-of-choice for advanced cable systems, but it is by no meanscommon yet.  Nor has HFC entirely eclipsed its rivals - fiber-to-curb and ADSL- Two-way capability - this is still a rarity in the cable world- Special headend equipment determined by modem type.@Home believes that it will provide backbone service for about one millionhomes by 1997.  @Home's economic calculations are also interesting inunderstanding the market aspects of cable modem service.  According to thesecalculations, it would cost cable operators about $500 to provide aconnection, from which they would receive payment of approximately $30 permonth of which $10 per month would go to @Home.  @Home would also chargeinformation providers for storing information on the @Home servers.The two major financial backers of @Home are TCI and Kleiner Perkins, Caufieldand Byers, venture capitalists who have previously been involved withfinancing for Netscape Communications and Sun Microsystems.  With that kind ofbacking, @Home should clearly be treated seriously.  For the cable industry,the success of its new high-speed cable modems will depend on timing.  Can theMSOs come to market with offerings based on their HFC architectures, beforethe telcos also deploy HFC and similar modems.But from the point of view of high-speed networking, it will be difficult toput the cable modem genie back into the bottle.  These new products could bewhat drives ATM into the core of cable networks and also what makes ATM thekey technology for the Internet backbone of the future.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996FVC Offers New Networking ProductsFirst Virtual Corp.  (FVC) is offering products allowing business users toparticipate in enhanced desktop multimedia collaboration (DMC).  Using PCsequipped with videoconferencing equipment and FVC's products, users cancollaborate on projects as though they were in the same room.  Examples ofDMC:- A New York City advertising executive shows her clients a final cut of theirtelevision commercial.  She is sitting at her PC in New York while her clientsuse a PictureTel room-based videoconferencing system in Dallas.  Each party,using four separate on-screen windows, can simultaneously view each other,collaborate on the media schedule created as an Excel spreadsheet (passingediting control back and forth) and view the actual video commercial, withoutany degradation of audio or video quality.- A doctor in Denver consults with a pediatric oncologist in Boston about apatient's diagnosis.  He shows the specialist the child's test results,patient record and X-rays, while discussing a course of treatment.  Each partycan review this information in concert, with all of the multimedia windowsopen and running concurrently.- An international retailer's facilities team based in Chicago views a videotaped store site with their team in Beijing.  Both parties can simultaneouslyannotate construction estimates and review blueprint drawings while viewing arealtime video tour of the new facility.  This application brings the Beijingsite to the retailer's desktop in Chicago.FVC's products all operate in conjunction with its Multimedia OperatingSoftware (MOS), an ATM-Forum standards-based "middleware" that enablesout-of-the-box Windows applications to transparently leverage ATM's QoScapabilities.  MOS guarantees high-speed access to applications, resulting inmultiple streams of voice, video, text, graphics and images on desktop.FVC's new FIRST-Multimedia switches deliver ATM to the desktop at switchedEthernet prices.  They are built with a stackable/modular architectureallowing for a variety of scalable configurations and can scale to supporteight to 24 users per switch, 120 users per stack, and can further providescalability through the backbone.  The FIRST-Multimedia switches cost $300 per25 Mbps ATM port.  They are available now and can support multimedia throughmodular options including 25 Mbps ATM for the desktop, Ethernet, token-ringfor LAN access, and 155 ATM OC-3 for server of backbone switch access.Additional modules will be available in the first half of this year to supportFast Ethernet, SCSI, ISDN/T1 connections and NTSC for live video feeds.The FIRST-Multimedia switch complies with ATM Forum UNI 3.0 and 3.1 switchedvirtual circuit signaling and LAN emulation standards to ensureinteroperability with existing LAN data applications and other vendors' ATMproducts.  These include switches and adaptors from IBM, Cisco, Bay, FORE, UBNetworks, AT&T, Adaptec, Efficient and Sun.  Because the switch issoftware-based, users are assured of an easy migration path as standardsevolve.The FIRST-Multimedia Gateway server has been enhanced to include PRI/T1support.  The Gateway server is an ATM-Telecom Gateway that distributes remoteH.320 videoconferencing streams for the Telco WAN to the desktop over a localATM network.  It adds ISDN PRI and T1 WAN rates, enabling room-system qualitywide-area videoconferencing and greater capacity for multimedia traffic andusers.  The FIRST-Multimedia Gateway server enables desktop videoconferencingclients to communicate through the server instead of a direct ISDN line forlocal and WAN conferencing.  This allows ISDN lines to be shared among PCs,eliminating the need and cost of running a separate ISDN line to each desktop.The FIRST-WWW server enables Internet users to cache data, graphics and videostreams off of the Web in the FIRST-Multimedia storage server. This storagecache helps facilitate fast access and playback by any users on the ATM or LANnetwork. Users can now store and share commonly-used video streams, as well asdocuments that incorporate video, data and images using standard Internetbrowsers.In addition to being QoS manager for out-of-the-box applications running overATM, MOS now enables live video streams to be encoded into MPEG-1 realtime andthen distributes them to various desktops within the organization using ATM'spoint-to-multipoint features.  PC users can receive broadcast video whileperforming any network activity.FIRST-H.320 introduces development capabilities via a software developer'stool kit for store and forward of H.320 streams.  This will allow applicationssuch as video mail and video session storage.  Videoconferencing users willenjoy the same benefits as voice mail users and be able to leave a videomessage.PictureTel and FVC's partnership have allowed incorporation of room systemsinto the network.  Multiple room systems, such as PictureTel's Venue*2000systems can be connected to each other or to desktop systems through an ATMnetwork.The family of FIRST-Multimedia switches is available this month and range from$7,000 to $16,000 based on configuration options. The Gateway server will alsobe available this month for $12,000. FVC's other new products and pricing willbe available in the first quarter of this year.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Warp 10 and Rogers Team Up to Deliver ATM Turnkey Solutions to Desktop UsersWARP 10 Technologies Inc.  (WARP:  CDN) and Rogers Network Services (RNS), adivision of Rogers Cablesystems Limited, have entered into an agreement todeliver affordable ATM solutions to desktop users in select cities acrossCanada.  Under the agreement, Rogers has become the "vendor of choice" inproviding ATM access to WARP 10 customers in metropolitan areas includingOttawa, Toronto and Vancouver.  WARP 10 and Rogers Network Services will worktogether to develop and manage all issues associated with network integrity,service availability and software development.  WARP 10's ATM turnkey solutionsolves the problem of transmitting large and cumbersome data and image filesbetween remote LAN sites using an integrated hardware and software package.This solution allows users to move 100 MB files in seconds compared to hourson modems or by courier.  By combining Rogers Network Services' high-speed ATMpipeline and WARP 10's ATM turnkey solution, clients will be able to transportand route LAN traffic and simultaneously run numerous multimedia applications.This will allow users to freely send data, video and graphics from one PC toanother at the speed of light, over fibre optic cables.  WARP 10's initialusers will be the graphics, publishing, printing and the video and multimediamarkets.  Other opportunities to be developed include financial markets,medical imaging and engineering where technical information and image filesneed to be transferred as rapidly as possible.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996StrataCom Offers SVC SwitchingTo address increasing user requirements for more robust ATM networks,StrataCom today announced the availability and full support of switchedvirtual circuit (SVC) switching to automate connection setup andconfiguration.  ATM SVCs provide three key benefits for carriers and endusers:  scalability, flexibility and ease of use.  StrataCom expects tocommence beta-testing of ATM SVCs with select customers in the first quarterof this year.  In addition, StrataCom has unveiled ATM signaling and securityfeatures that give users more flexibility and control across their ATMwide-area networks.  These new features give companies the ability to preventunauthorized access among users.Available as a system software upgrade, StrataCom's ATM SVCs will support ATMuser-to-network (UNI) interfaces ranging from T1/E1 (1.544/2.0 Mbps) and T3/E3(45/34 Mbps) to OC-3/STM-1 (155 Mbps).  StrataCom ATM SVC signaling alsoincludes compliance with both ATM UNI 3.0 and 3.1 with translation betweenthese standards.  The company also said it will support ATM SVC signaling forATM Frame UNI and ATM Inverse Multiplexed interfaces with the delivery ofthese products in the first quarter of 1996.  StrataCom also announced supportfor the Interim Inter-Switch Signaling Protocol that provides interoperabilitywith other vendor's ATM switches and the Interim Local Management Interfaceprotocol for ATM connection management.While permanent virtual circuits or PVCs must be pre-established and manuallyconfigured, SVCs make use of ATM signaling information within each ATM cellallowing connections to be automatically setup on-demand by switches as ATMcalls are requested by the user.  While router architectures aggregate manyusers' traffic, the use of ATM SVCs permits a separate connection for eachpair of users and each application.  This allows quality of service guaranteeswhich are essential for multimedia communications.  Though PVCs remainattractive for customers with a limited number of interconnected devices, asmany more users come online - as is evidenced by the growth of the Internet -SVCs become a critical requirement.  SVCs significantly reduce networkadministration by eliminating manual configuration of connections whileincreasing the flexibility by which devices can be added to the networkproviding quicker connectivity to all other devices.New ATM Security Features.  Through the use of address screening (source anddestination), customers will now be able to specify, by port, a list of ATMaddresses from which users are allowed (or not allowed) to receive or initiateSVC calls.  This feature will become a mandatory requirement in publicnetworking environments where large numbers of users from different companiesare connected into the same ATM service having access to all other ATMconnected devices.  StrataCom will also implement additional ATM securitymechanisms specified by the ATM Forum's new Security Working Group.Visit StrataCom's home page at http://www.stratacom.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Cascade Delivers ATM Switch for TestingCascade Communications Corp.  (NASDAQ:  CSCC) has delivered its Cascade 500ATM switch to four organizations for beta testing, including PSINet Inc.  andLDDS WorldCom.  Featuring quad-plane architecture andquality-of-service-capable routing software (via Cascade's Virtual NetworkNavigator), the Cascade 500 delivers end-to-end ATM quality of service,guaranteeing simultaneous network transport of data and multimediaapplications.  Seamlessly integrated with Cascade's standards-compliant B-STDXmultiservice switches and manageable by CascadeView, the Cascade 500 providesa solution for cost-efficient and easy-to-administer high-capacity networks.Designed as a 16-slot chassis system, the Cascade 500 is a non-blocking ATMswitch with a flexible 2.5, 5 and 10 Gbps capacity.  It supportsnext-generation speeds of 45, 155 and 622 Mbps and high density on a singleplatform, supporting 56 OC-3c/STM-1, 112 DS3/E3 and 14 OC-12/STM-4 ports.Pricing/Availability. With general availability in the first quarter of thisyear, the Cascade 500 is priced based on system configuration, with entry-levelpricing starting at $25,000 and typical systems averaging around $150,000 to$200,000.Cascade's World Wide Web address is http://www.cscc.com; PSINet's Web site isat http://www.psi.net/.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996MFS Network Links Financial Industry Experts for CNNfnMFS Communications Company (MFS) is providing the communications network tosupport CNNfn - the financial network.  Combined with ProSharevideoconferencing technology from Intel, MFS and CNNfn will create a virtualnewsroom - called "inter.face" - where financial experts, industry leaders andmarket movers can be interviewed live on camera from their places of work byCNNfn journalists.  MFS' ATM network will provide high-speed communicationsbetween the CNNfn New York news studio and major commerce hubs for livebroadcast.  CNNfn and MFS, using Intel ProShare videoconferencing technology,will link investment strategists, management consultants, economists,academics, industry executives and market influencers with the CNNfn anchorsin New York on a virtual on-call basis.  Each of CNNfn's guest experts willhave a mini-studio located at their workplace with a camera, monitor andcomputer connected to a LAN in the building.  MFS equipment will switch thetransmission from the building over MFS' metropolitan SONET-based fibernetwork, across the MFS wide-area ATM backbone network to CNNfn's New Yorkstudios.  MFS is supplying a key part of the financial network through itsoperating company, MFS Datanet.MFS' data network transports a broadcast quality interview to CNNfn forimmediate transmission over cable and satellite networks or over the Internetto desktop computer networks.  The financial network is scheduled to have 12hours of original programming each day from 7 a.m.  to 7 p.m.  (ET).  Plansfor 1996 include CNNfn expansion to additional major business, technology,academic and financial centers in the U.S.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Thompson Deploys Distance Learning Project Developed by SprintThompson multimedia S.A.  and Sun Microsystems Inc.  have announced the firstdeployment of their end-to-end interactive digital television solution in adistance learning pilot project developed and funded by Sprint.  OpenTV,specifically designed as an interactive television operating environment, isthe centerpiece of the solution from the Thompson Sun Interactive Alliancethat provides Sprint video-on-demand to 103 classrooms in eight schools in theLaguna Salada Union School District in Pacifica, Calif.  The Sun MediaCenter1000E server, being used to deliver more than 200 hours of digital videoprogramming, is providing video server technology in an elementary schoolclassroom.  With an interface designed so that the teacher can easily choosethe grade level and subject matter, each classroom has an RCA 32-inchtelevision and a Thompson digital decoder (settop box) that allows the teacherto interact with the programming using a standard remote control.  With thefull VCR-type controls provided by OpenTV, teachers can easily customize theirlesson plans to the needs of the students - rewinding and repeating complexmaterial or pausing the video to allow for discussion time or a closer look ata particular screen.  And because all of the video is coming from a centralserver, any class can view any video at any time.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996ECI Telecom's Telematics Unit Launches Multiservice WAN SwitchTelematics is offering a new carrier-class switch designed for frame relayconcentration and multiservice access.  The new PCP 800 switch offers acapacity of 84 ports and a throughput rating of 24 Mbps.For more information, see http://www.telematics.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Gandalf Technologies Makes Advanced Version of Router AvailableGandalf Technologies Inc.  (NASDAQ:  GANDF) has announced the availability ofan advanced version of the XpressConnect LANLine 5242i edge router.  This newsoftware release supports more users per remote site and simplifies routerinstallation while providing operational cost savings to Internet serviceproviders and companies who connect teleworkers, branch or small offices.  Theaddition of SPX spoofing, the increased number of LAN nodes supported and theXpress Setup Windows configuration tool makes this a cost-effective andeasy-to-use router.  The new version of the edge router software includes thefollowing key benefits:Ease of use: The Xpress Setup Windows configuration tool allows customers toeasily configure the edge router in a Windows environment in four easy steps.This tool guides the user through the set-up by prompting for informationregarding the user's network environment.Cost savings:  SPX spoofing minimizes the use of switched wide area services.This saves on usage charges for companies who utilize such applications asLotus Notes, Btrieve, and other vendors' database applications.Internetworking Capacity: The capacity enhancement enables companies to supportbranch offices with up to 75 LAN nodes. This offers companies increasedflexibility and investment protection as their needs expand.Multiple Site Access:  By supporting as many as 10 known IP destinations, theedge router is suited to users who need to access data from differentlocations.The new edge router software builds upon existing features including datacompression, interoperability, and network management.  The edge routersupports Gandalf's 8:1 data compression and the industry standardpoint-to-point and PPP multi-link to allow interoperability in multivendornetworks.  Using SNMP, network administrators can not only monitor but alsoconfigure and control remote devices over the network.  To ensure usabilityand upgradability, this new version of the edge router software can bedownline loaded to remote locations over the network.  The new XpressConnectLANLine 5242i edge router software is part of the standard product offering,and existing edge router users can receive a free upgrade by calling1-800-GANDALF and requesting the new edge router 2.1 software.  Reach thecompany via the Internet at http://www.gandalf.ca.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Cisco Announces New Management StrategyCisco has outlined its strategy for managing multi-layer switchedinternetworks and unveiled an integrated suite of management applications andembedded network agents that will reside within the Cisco IOS.  The CiscoWorksfor Switched Internetworks software will include numerous applications forviewing and managing switches from logical and physical perspectives.Software for managing virtual circuits on ATM networks is expected to beincluded in the release.  Promised features include the ability to generatetopology maps of an ATM network that provides link management andtroubleshooting capabilities.  The software is expected in the first quarterof this year.Reach the company via http://www.cisco.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Newbridge Launches Token-Ring to ATM InternetworkingNewbridge Networks has launched an ATM edge device designed forinternetworking token-ring LANs and ATM backbones.  The Newbridge VIVID BlueRidge edge device, designed for use with the VIVID workgroup switch, performspacket forwarding into the ATM fabric for up to 10 token-ring ports at fullwire speed.  The edge device performs LAN emulation server, broadcast unknownserver and LAN emulation configuration server functions.  It can operate at 4Mbps or 16 Mbps per port for both UTP and STP.  It can be configured with asecond, redundant OC-3 155 Mbps uplink.  List price, including LAN emulationsoftware, is $18,500.  The company's Internet address ishttp://www.newbridge.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Connectware Signs OEM Agreement with MPR Teltech Ltd.MPR Teltech Ltd.  has signed an OEM agreement to use Connectware's PCI ATMadaptor card technology as the ATM interface for its next-generation WAVEvideo communications terminal.  Connectware's ATM adaptors feature a custom,single-chip SAR processor that incorporates ABR service.  MPR Teltech isoffering a modular, networked video platform that uses ATM to provide videoand audio quality comparable to broadcast television.  Online addresses arehttp://www.mpr.ca; http://www.connectware.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996MCNC Tests RFC 1577 Classical IP Over ATMMCNC, a North Carolina nonprofit corporation, and North Carolina StateUniversity have set up a wide-area testbed of RFC 1577 classical IP over ATM.The tests stress proper address resolution, routing/forwarding of packets,interface performance and overall application performance of TCP/IPapplications being handled with RFC 1577.  Reach MCNC at http://www.mcnc.org.SONET and SDHCANUS 1 Now in ServiceCANUS 1, the fiber-optic submarine cable linking the United States to Canada,is now in service, according to Charles Schmitz, Executive Vice President ofOPTEL Communications Inc.  OPTEL is a 50 percent owner of privately ownedCANUS 1 and implemented its landing in the U.S.  Connected with CANTAT-3 atPennant Point, Nova Scotia, the two cables form the 5,500-mile GlobesystemAtlantic, which is the first intercontinental link utilizing SDH technologybetween the U.S., Canada, Iceland, the U.K., Denmark and Germany.  Theadvanced technology deployed in Globesystem Atlantic provides a cost-effectiveplatform for new transport services.  These include B-ISDN, multimedia, ATMbandwidth-on-demand and broadband services as well as regular PSTN (PublicSwitched Telephone Network) traffic.  An agreement with Sprint providesoperation and maintenance of the U.S.  end of CANUS 1 along with terrestrialfacilities from Manasquan to New York, allowing interconnection of GlobesystemAtlantic with U.S.  telecommunication networks.  Sprint and Cable &Wireless/Mercury Communications Ltd., owners and operators of thetransatlantic PTAT 1 cable, will provide restoration via that cable'sManasquan, N.J., and United Kingdom landing stations.  Capacity on CANUS 1 isavailable on an on-demand basis through sale, short- or long-term lease or anIndefeasible Right of Use basis.  The cable is owned by OPTEL and TeleglobeCanada.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996NPI Extends Development Agreement with Sun to Supply FDDI AdaptorsNetwork Peripherals Inc.  (NPI) (NASDAQ:  NPIX) has extended its developmentagreement with Sun Microsystems Inc.  to supply next-generation FDDI networkadaptors for Sun SBus systems.  Sun Microsystems will incorporate the adaptorsinto its recently announced SunFDDI SBus Adapter 4.0 family for connectingSPARC systems, including new UltraSPARC-based UltraServer systems tohigh-speed (100 Mbps) FDDI networks.  The Sun FDDI adaptors offer directconnectivity to FDDI networks through NPI's wire-speed architecture.  Twoadaptor types are being introduced:  a single-attach and dual-attach SBuscard.  Dual-attach versions protect against network failures with FDDI's dualring topology.  The adaptors support Solaris 2.3 and later releases of theoperating system, as well as Solaris 1.1 and later 1.x releases.  The adaptorsinclude the SunNet Manager software proxy agent for FDDI management for Sunnetworks and use the FDDI SMT standard for monitoring FDDI nodes.  Protocolssupported include OSL, X.25 and TCP/IP.  Conformance to ANSI FDDI standardsensures interoperability with products from multiple vendors.NPI offers FDDI adaptors for popular bus architectures including EISA, ISA,MCA and PCI, as well as SBus.  When the adaptors are used with NPI'sconcentrators and EIFO workgroup switching hubs, shared servers can beclustered on an FDDI backbone to optimize server-to-server communications overFDDI while simultaneously providing Ethernet clients high-speed access to allFDDI servers.  The EIFO+ switching hub implements an IP fragmentation scheme(4,500-byte FDDI packets fragmented into multiple 1,500-byte Ethernet packets)performed at wire speed at each port.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Asante Releases NuBus AdaptorAsante Technologies Inc.  (NASDAQ:  ASNT) has released the AsanteFAST 10/100Adapter for NuBus, a high-speed adaptor connecting NuBus-based Macintoshcomputers to both 10BaseT Ethernet and 100BaseTX Fast Ethernet networks.  Theproduct is available now at a list price of $399 and an estimated street priceof about $310.  Asante's new card supports NuBus-based Macs, includingQuadras, Mac IIs, and most Power Macintosh computers.  It offers customers acost-effective and flexible way to migrate their LAN networks from 10 Mbps to100 Mbps high-speed networking as extra bandwidth is needed.  The AsanteFAST10/100 card is ideal for workgroups struggling to keep up with speed-intensiveapplications, such as desktop publishing, pre-press, digital video, medicalimaging, and more.  Customers in these markets typically need an effective wayto share, transfer and print large files.  The AsanteFAST NuBus card is thelatest in Asante's Fast Ethernet product line, which includes a manageable100BaseTX stackable hub, a 100BaseTX/FX hub, a non-intelligent/non-stackable100BaseTX hub, 10/100 bridge, management module, and 10/100 PCI adaptor cards.Asante also is offering volume discounts on five- and 20-pack combinations ofthe NuBus card, providing savings of up to $100 per card on bulk orders.  Themulti-pack pricing is shown at right.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996NetVantage, HP Enter Alliance to Integrate 100VG AnyLAN TechnologyNetVantage Inc.  (NASDAQ:  NETVA/NETVU) and Hewlett-Packard Co.  have enteredinto a strategic alliance to integrate 100VG-AnyLAN technology into bothcompanies' switches.  Customers of the two companies will benefit by enablingtheir applications to take advantage of switched 100VG solutions.  The goal ofthe solution is to significantly improve end-user response time.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Special Effects Company Buys NetStar's GigaRouterDigital Domain, a special effects company, has purchased a NetStar Inc.'s(NASDAQ:  NTSR) GigaRouter to accommodate its large computer storage andbandwidth requirements.  The GigaRouter is a media-independent, high-speednetwork router.  Its unique architecture allows up to 16 simultaneoustransfers at a data rate of up to 800 Mbps for each of 16 ports.  DigitalDomain - creator of special effects for such motion pictures as True Lies,Interview with the Vampire, and Apollo 13 - has installed the GigaRouter toprovide dynamic routing and improve the performance of its network, whichinvolves numerous photographic, computer graphic and other intermediateelements.  As the centerpiece of the Digital Domain network, the GigaRouter isbeing used to connect Silicon Graphics Power Challenge and Onyx workstationsto FDDI rings.  HIPPI to FDDI and ATM routing with the GigaRouter will betested later as Digital Domain moves to adopt ATM as an integral part of itsconnection to off-site computer servers and clients.  More information aboutNetStar and the GigaRouter can be found on the Internet athttp://www.netstar.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996SMC Intends to Sell Business Unit to CabletronStandard Microsystems Corp.  (SMC) (NASDAQ:  SMSC) has signed a letter ofintent for the sale of its Enterprise Networks Business Unit to CabletronSystems.  Under the terms of the agreement, Cabletron Systems would acquirethe business unit, including its products and technologies, for $77.5 millionin cash.  Over the past few years, the company's difficulties in deliveringand supporting the products from the Enterprise Networks Business Unit haveadversely affected SMC's overall operating results.  Thus, the companyanticipates that the successful completion of this transaction with CabletronSystems will have an immediate beneficial effect on SMC's profitability, whilesimultaneously helping Cabletron Systems achieve its business goals.  SMCplans to use the proceeds from this transaction to take advantage of therapidly growing demand for the semiconductor integrated circuit products ofthe company's Component Products Division and to continue to grow thecompany's other two System Products' business units.  The Component ProductsDivision is manufacturing capacity-limited, and the proceeds from thistransaction will allow SMC to significantly increase the levels of productionfrom its semiconductor wafer foundry suppliers.  As a further result of thistransaction, the System Products Division will be able to amplify its newproduct development efforts and strengthen its sales and marketing channels inthe expanding market for advanced desktop and workgroup networking solutions.The closing of this transaction is subject to the execution of the definitiveagreement and the receipt of regulatory approvals.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996N.E.T. and Cisco Announce AgreementsN.E.T.  and Cisco Systems Inc.  have announced two agreements - one to extendthe N.E.T.  license to the full suite of Cisco Internetwork Operating System(Cisco IOS) software, and a reseller agreement whereby N.E.T.  will resell andsupport Cisco's full line of enterprise-level internetworking products.  Ciscoand N.E.T.  currently have a successful router software license agreementdating since 1989 focusing on delivering internetworking expertise to bothcompanies' customers.  The N.E.T.  IDNX multiservice bandwidth managerequipped with the N.E.T.  LAN/WAN Exchange (LWX) module is a wide-areamultiservice platform featuring a fully integrated router based on Ciscosoftware.  This high degree of integration gives IDNX customersinternetworking connectivity to Cisco router networks for WAN applications.The relationship between Cisco and N.E.T.  now includes a reseller agreementwhereby N.E.T.  will sell and distribute the entire family of Ciscointernetworking products offered to enterprise-level customers.  N.E.T.  willadd value by helping customers design and integrate Cisco internetworkingproducts directly into IDNX multiservice backbone networks and offer contractservice direct from N.E.T.  The N.E.T.  LWX module optimizes internetworktraffic for the WAN to give N.E.T.  IDNX customers the added benefit ofintelligent bandwidth management of router traffic for maximum trunkutilization.  While being transported over the WAN, the router traffic can bemixed with frame relay traffic, other types of cell or packetized traffic andconventional circuit-switched traffic such as voice and video traffic to helporganizations save on long distance charges.  This attribute benefitsenterprise customers and global carrier/network service provider customersalike.  As a result, Cisco networks concentrating large volumes of LAN-basedtraffic can interconnect with intelligent N.E.T.  IDNX networks that carry WANtraffic on high-capacity T1/E1 or T3/E3 digital service links.  In particular,LAN traffic can be carried on the same trunks as voice traffic, frame relaytraffic and ISDN traffic for network optimization, efficiency, and costsavings.The Cisco enterprise-level internetworking products include the Cisco 7000series of multiprotocol routers.  It also includes Cisco's access productfamily, which offers an extensive selection of platforms and software sets forregional offices, remote branch offices, and individual users.  The N.E.T.IDNX family of multiservice bandwidth managers consists of five models withnetworking functions that combine efficient multiplexing, intelligentcall-routing, LAN internetworking and routing, frame relay switching, ISDNsignaling and network management.  The IDNX systems are part of the N.E.T.Vista Architecture, a multiservice architecture for broadband and narrowbandwide area networks.  See N.E.T.'s Web site:  http://www.net.com for furtherinformation.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Digital Link Releases Lower than Expected Fourth Quarter ResultsDigital Link Corp.  (NASDAQ:  DLNK) has released lower than expected operatingresults for the fourth quarter ending Dec.  31, 1995.  The company attributedthe decline in net sales and net income to a weaker than expected demand fromcertain domestic carrier customers and to a worsening of the previouslyannounced slowdown in its SMDS and ATM product lines, which are soldpredominately internationally.  Based on information currently available, thecompany expects to report net sales of approximately $10.0 million and netincome of approximately $500,000 for its fourth quarter.  These resultsrepresent decreases from the comparable results in the third quarter endedSept.  30, 1995, and the fourth quarter ended Dec.  31, 1994.  These continueduncertainties internationally, especially in the SMDS marketplace, and weakercarrier demand are expected to adversely effect the company's operatingresults for at least the next two quarters.  Digital Link will report fourthquarter earnings on or about Jan.  24, 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996NetStar and E-Systems Form AllianceNetStar Inc.  (NASDAQ:  NTSR) and E-Systems Inc., a Garland, Texas-basedsubsidiary of the Raytheon Company (NYSE:  RTN), have signed an agreement toform a non-exclusive strategic alliance between the two companies.  Thestrategic alliance will solidify a business relationship in which E-Systemswill provide integration services for NetStar's GigaRouter and ClusterSwitchproducts to both companies' customer bases.  The GigaRouter ismedia-independent, high-speed network router that can support millions of IPpackets per second.  Unique to the GigaRouter is a gallium arsenidenon-blocking crosspoint switch that supports 16 concurrent transfers betweensimilar or different media.  The HIPPI ClusterSwitch is a 12-port HIPPIswitch.  Internetworking is the technology that allows diverse multiprotocolnetworks to interoperate with each other.  The strategic alliance willstrengthen NetStar's product development process by providing earlyinformation about market requirements for E-Systems customers and will giveNetStar's products access to E-Systems distribution system.  E-Systemscurrently participates in beta testing of new features of the NetStarGigaRouter and is using NetStar HIPPI ClusterSwitches as part of a jointventure with Lockheed/Martin involving commercial satellite imagery supportingenvironmental applicants.  More information about NetStar and its products canbe found on the Internet at http://www.netstar.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Cisco Names Pioneer as Systems IntegratorCisco Systems Inc.  (NASDAQ-NNM:  CSCO) has named Pioneer-Standard ElectronicsInc.  (NASDAQ-NNM:  PIOS) an authorized systems integrator, effectiveimmediately.  Under the agreement, Pioneer-Standard Electronics is authorizedto resell Cisco's full line of enterprise internetworking products, includingrouters, LAN and ATM switches, dial-up access servers and network managementsoftware.Pioneer news and product/service information is available at World Wide Website http://www.pios.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Cisco Invests in OSICisco Systems Inc.  has made a 4.4 percent equity investment in ObjectiveSystems Integrators Inc.  (OSI) of Folsom, Calif., a developer of networkmanagement software for service providers.  The announcement coincides withOSI's initial public offering of four million shares of common stock.  As aresult of the public offering, OSI has 29.7 million shares outstanding.  CiscoSystems is acquiring 1.3 million shares of OSI common stock (NASDAQ:  OSII) atthe initial public offering price of $19 per share.  According to Jon Shantz,vice president of service provider market at Cisco Systems, the two companiesplan to co-develop network management applications for Cisco internetworkingtechnology, which will enable service providers to quickly deploy new,enhanced internetworking services over their networks.The two companies plan to develop enhancements to OSI's NetExpert family ofgraphical user interface (GUI)-based development tools and managementapplications, which allow network analysts and engineers - rather thansoftware programmers - to create new network operations support and managementapplications or modify existing applications to support new services quicklyand easily.  NetExpert is designed to manage heterogeneous network devices,such as computers, transmission equipment and switches, regardless of thetransmission technology, management protocols and mediums used in the network.Customers use NetExpert for such diverse management functions as faultmanagement, provisioning, billing data collection, work crew dispatch, networktraffic reporting and performance analysis.More information on Objective Systems Integrator is available at World Wide Website http://www.osi.com. Cisco news and product/service information areavailable at World Wide Web site http://www.cisco.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Alantec Merges with FORE; Launches ATM SuiteFORE Systems will acquire Alantec Corp.  (NASDAQ:  ALTC) in a definitivemerger agreement.  Each outstanding share of Alantec will be converted intoone share of FORE.  Alantec will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of FORE; andits chairman and CEO, George Archuleta, will become a member of FORE's boardof directors.  The merger will provide FORE will a strong LAN switchingproduct portfolio and speed the deployment of ATM in the backbone.  The mergeris expected to be completed in March pending approval of both companies'stockholders.  Market analysts put the value of the stock swap agreement at$750 million.  Alantec has 11.7 million shares outstanding.  The combinedcompany reportedly will have 220 sales/support personnel and 290 engineers.In another development, Alantec has announced a series of ATM access modulesdesigned to integrate switched Ethernet, FDDI and Fast Ethernet traffic fromits PowerHub switching hubs with ATM networks.  The PowerCell modules provideits PowerHub switching hubs with edge-routing capabilities, allowingdistributed routing of IP, IP multicast, IPX, AppleTalk and DECnet protocolson any Ethernet, FDDI, Fast Ethernet or ATM segment.  The modules provide ATMSVC functionality using FORE's ForeThought LAN emulation and call signalingsoftware.Internet addresses: http://www.fore.com; http://www.alantec.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Cabletron to Acquire SMC Switching DivisionCabletron Systems has signed a letter of intent to acquire the EnterpriseNetworks Business Unit of Standard Microsystems Corp.  (SMC) for $77.5 millionin cash and the assumption of specified liabilities.  The acquisition willallow Cabletron to incorporate 10/100 Fast Ethernet capability into itsSynthesis product architecture.  SMC recently announced a TigerSwitch 100 FastEthernet switch, which offers 10/100 Mbps ports and a TigerSwitch XLE Ethernetswitch, which offers 10 Mbps ports with two Fast Ethernet uplinks.  SMC saidthat it was selling its switching division because it does not possess thesales and support organizations to successfully bring the new line of LANswitches to market.  SMC plans to focus on its components products division(VLSI semiconductor development) and on its systems products division(interface cards and hubs).  The company's online address ishttp://www.ctron.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Cabletron and Northern Telecom Announce RelationshipCabletron Systems and Nortel have entered an alliance to better integratetheir products; specifically, Caletron's Spectrum network management software,its MMAC SmartSwitch hub and Nortel's Magellan passport and Meridian 1 productlines.  The companies also agreed to standardize on each other's products fortheir own internal corporate networks.  Nortel's online address ishttp://www.nortel.com.Back to Headline List CopyrightHIGH-SPEED NETWORKING NEWSLETTER via NewsNetJANUARY 1, 1996Larscom and BellSouth Team Up to Provide Network Access SolutionsLarscom Inc.  and BellSouth Telecommunications Inc.  have entered aco-marketing agreement.  Under the agreement, BellSouth account teams willrefer customers seeking WAN access equipment to Larscom.  The agreement coversall of Larscom's T1/FT1 and T3/FT3 DSU/CSUs, multiple T1 inverse multiplexersand its Orion 4000 broadband access products.  Reach Larscom athttp://www.larscom.com.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-21IA086-000622-B037-57http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te46.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045836 text/html 25646HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:56:37 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:00 GMTContent-length: 25459Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te46.html Sample Issue Copyright IMAGING NEWS via NewsNet OCTOBER 9, 1991 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES BELLCORE REFINES VIDEOCONFERENCING TOOLS (419 words) VIDEOCONFERENCING INTEGRATOR DESIGNS FOR WIDE RANGE OF USERS (887 words) VIDEOCONFERENCING APPLICATIONS CREATE VERTICAL MARKET SEGMENTS (1107 words) INSURER'S VIDEOCONFERENCING CUTS TRAVEL TIME, BOOSTS TRAINING (526 words) MID-SIZED OFFICE BUILDINGS NEXT STEP IN BELL CANADA FIBER ROLL- OUT (276 words) NTT DEBUTS 3-D TV AT TELECOM '91 -- SANS GLASSES (371 words) CopyrightIMAGING NEWS via NewsNetOCTOBER 9, 1991BELLCORE REFINES VIDEOCONFERENCING TOOLSCHICAGO -- Bellcore, the research arm of the Bell companies, lastweek revealed two technologies under development in its labs thatwill enhance videoconferencing.One, called the "Video Window," is a special video room withlifelike audio and a curved wide screen, for displaying life-sizeimages of groups of from six to 12 people.The other is a computer program called Rendezvous, designed tocreate the "conversational props" that Bellcore believesvideoconferees must have in order to exchange graphicinformation.The two technologies, demonstrated here at the NationalCommunications Forum earlier this month, both arise from whatBellcore researchers say is a psychological assessment ofvideoconferencing user needs.Referring to the Video Window, Eric Addeo, Bellcore's districtmanager for visual services research, said researchers found thatvideoconferees "want to be able to see the person and have asense of eye contact."The Bellcore researchers emphasized that neither technology isfar from commercialization.  According to Addeo, the Video Windowcan run at speeds from 45 megabits per second to 384 kilobit persecond, a quarter of a T1 line.  Video Window, he added, is basedon the CCITT H.261 standard, codecs for which will be availableby late next year.Video Window's 64 Kbps voice channel, meanwhile, offers full-duplex audio that is unaffected by increases in volume, he added.In his presentation on Rendezvous, Bellcore's Louis Gomezdemonstrated the software in a application where two children inseparate homes connected their computers over phone lines andplayed the card game "fish."  Rendezvous allowed each player tohave a personalized display that showed only the faces of theirown cards, while also giving them a view of the common "pool,"where they discarded cards.In business videoconferencing, Gomez elaborated, Rendezvous couldbe used to create a conversational prop such as a shared "whiteboard," a part of each party's viewing screen where they couldmake real-time drawings or notes.The use of conversational props will lengthen telephone calls andincrease demand for broadband service, predicted Gomez, a managerin human-computer systems research.Addeo, meanwhile, emphasized the user friendliness of a VideoWindow room, which automatically connects with its remotecounterpart the minute its door is opened.Bellcore tests, he elaborated, showed users pleased with VideoWindow -- and willing to buy it.  Since Bellcore cannotmanufacture products, Addeo said the organization hopes it caninduce a telecommunications company to bring the technology tomarket.  To that end, Bellcore will hold a seminar on VideoWindow Oct. 10.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMAGING NEWS via NewsNetOCTOBER 9, 1991VIDEOCONFERENCING INTEGRATOR DESIGNS FOR WIDE RANGE OF USERSWhile TV news crews in Kuwait broadcast live reports on the Iraqiinvasion, General Norman Schwarzkopf was using satellite-basedvideo to ready American armed forces for the coming war.Schwarzkopf was using the live video link -- essentially, avideoconference -- to command American military forces during acomputerized war game, in which generals fought against asoftware "enemy" and no troops were deployed.The war game -- done strictly on computers to keep costs andpersonal risks low -- involved commanders at three U.S. Air Forcebases in northern Florida, one of them Schwarzkopf's commandpost.When Iraq invaded, the general ordered his personal staff ofcommanders, located "behind the lines" at a Tampa, Fla., airbase,to give him the "real stuff," according to Kenneth Lucas, seniorprogram manager at CAE Link, a designer of military trainingsystems.  A secure satellite link was set up between Tampa andthe general's field headquarters to feed maps and other graphicinformation to Schwarzkopf.CAE Link, whose name is more frequently associated with flightsimulators, designed that videoconferencing system -- the first,Lucas believes, to be used in a combat simulation.In the aftermath of the war game, Col. Dennis Foggy, chief of thesupport division of the Joint Warfare Center, which organized theevent, said he found "videoconferencing works well conjunctionwith war game simulation because exercize participants can seeand share data and information in real time, in color and withoutdelay."The videoconferenced portion of the war game was carried at 384kilobits per second and ran non-stop for 10 days with noproblems, the Joint Warfare Center said.  More recently, thesystem was run at a low 256 Kbps for a second simulated war game"with only minimum sacrifice to video quality," Foggy says.The American subsidiary of a Canadian aerospace firm, CAE Linkdesigns training systems, mainly for the military, and assemblescustom videoconferencing systems, largely for use in "distancelearning."  Distance learning uses videoconferencing technologyto link a teacher in one classroom with students in remoteclassrooms, often in areas too sparsely settled to have suchinstruction.Schools Via SatelliteAmong its distance learning clients are the Western KentuckyEducational Consortium, universities in Alabama, Tennessee andFlorida and the Nebraska State Telecommunications and EducationCommission, whose 11-site system is the largest the company hasinstalled to date and involves satellite broadcasts to someremote areas of the state.Another system put together by Binghamton, N.Y.-based CAE Linklets anyone anywhere in the United States study for a mastersdegree in instructional technology at Boise State University --without relocating to Idaho.  Students attend classes in theirhomes via computer conferencing.Systems integration is especially important in distance learningbecause off-the-shelf videoconferencing products usually aredesigned for corporate meetings, Lucas says.The equipment is often built into a roll-about cart and cannotprovide coverage to an entire classroom, where anyone maysuddenly ask a question, Lucas said.  A particularly thornyproblem in those settings is audio, since some students mayspeak-out too quietly or be located too far from a microphone,adds Operations Manager Rich Grace.CAE Link's distance learning systems are composed of equipmentfrom various suppliers, including PictureTel and VideoTelecom.The hardware is in turn matched with the right telecommunicationsmedium for the job, from T1 to switched 56 kilobit lines, orwhatever the customer already has in place.While educational institutions can design distance learningsystems themselves, Lucas said "the problem [for customers] isknowing what to buy -- we've been through that via trial anderror."Because of its training systems business, CAE Link employsinstructional designers, who can advise first-time distancelearning buyers on how to teach remotely, Lucas said.  One tip:have instructors teaching a classroom of students at thebroadcast site.To assist the activities of the company's training side,meanwhile, it hosts a videoconferencing room on the SprintMeeting Channel at the Alexandria, Va., headquarters of itsTraining Systems Division.In another intra-company synergy, CAE Link's national network offlight simulator support centers also support itsvideoconferencing systems.A typical distance learning network put together by the companyis its first installation, which which links a Navy classroom inNewport News, Va., with seven other classrooms in the East fromRhode Island to Florida.Switched Video SignalsUsing a "video PBX," which switches the signal to the appropriatesites, an instructor in one classroom can simultaneously teach atother sites, with cameras at each site giving him visual contactwith his students once a minute.  The satellite-based networkitself is encrypted and can link up to three classessimultaneously, Lucas noted.The network, which provides instruction to sailors andvideoconferencing for officers, last year made its firstbroadcast to a Navy ship, albeit one in port at the Norfolk, Va.,naval base.  There the signal went, via cable, from a dish on thedock to a classroom three stories below deck.In its final stages of preparation, though, is a new system thatwill take the company from the education into the medical sector.That system, which is expected to make headlines late this month,will use videoconferencing technology to let doctors to do a"remote diagnosis," a benefit to rural areas and other localeswhere there are few physicians.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMAGING NEWS via NewsNetOCTOBER 9, 1991VIDEOCONFERENCING APPLICATIONS CREATE VERTICAL MARKET SEGMENTSAs it matures, the videoconferencing market has become moresegmented, with vendors targetting specific industries fromeducation and government to pharmaceuticals.Market segmentation is "just starting to happen invideoconferencing, where different vendors' strengths indifferent market areas are becoming apparent..." observes JimPosko, marketing manager at AT&T Business Video.One supplier, Compression Labs Inc. (CLI), says in its latestannual report that its "base business has benefittedsubstantially from major thrusts made by CLI into selectedvertical markets such as government and education."What are the hot vertical markets?  Henry Grove III, vicepresident of the audio/video systems division of Peirce-PhelpsInc., a well-known systems integrator, cites pharmaceuticals,defense, finance, insurance and aerospace.Greg Cline, an analyst with Information Strategies Group inVienna, Va., sees vertical markets in government, executivecommunications, project management, distance learning, strategicdefense, comand and control, emergency management and lawenforcement.  And Dataquest Inc., the San Jose, Calif., marketresearch firm, cites retailing, transportation, electronics andcommunications.The university and distance learning markets are hot, and stategovernment is about to heat up, says Gail Cisel, a productmanager in charge of the state government, university andcorrectional facility markets for US Sprint.Sprint is about to announce videoconferencing support over theState Interconnected Government Network (SIGN), a program ofdiscounts on customer premise equipment and usage time, and guestspeakers with applications background that targets government.Market-Watching From AfarWithin a vertical market, videoconferencing is often used tomaintain contact with branch offices and across time zones.AT&T's Posko, for instance, notes that one investment house makes"morning video calls to London, where it gets updated on how theFar Eastern and European stock exchanges fared during the night.That analysis allows it to determine how to react as the WallStreet exchanges open."Insurance companies "being decentralized ... saw the usefulnessof videoconferencing to introduce new products and policies totake them to the field [offices]," Grove elaborates.  AmericanGeneral and Aetna, he says, have videoconferencing in over 40locations.Segmenting the market is not only done by industry, Groveexplains.  "There are applications that cross industries, such aslegal applications," he observes.  "You can find theseapplications in corporate legal departments, in law firms and incourts."Another way the market is segmented is by bandwidth.  KathleenFlaherty, vice president of large accounts at MCI CommunicationsCorp., says PictureTel's products and MCI's Switched 56 serviceare positioned to support the fastest growing market segment:meetings using videoconferencing speeds of 384 kilobits persecond and slower.Factors Of Size, SpeedAT&T's Posko also sees the market as segmented by bandwidth."There's group conferencing with a single screen used for smallgroups of one to four people that are highly interactive andspontaneous meetings, but use 112 Kbps.  Next is the departmentallevel with three to six people at each end.  It's more formal,used for project overviews, staff meetings and this type ofmeeting would be a bit higher bandwidth and probably include adual-screen setup."Corporate conferencing is next.  It's more expensive, uses dualor triple screens, is for up to 12 people and uses higherbandwidths too," he says.Other suppliers are pointing to a different advantage:application-specific public video rooms.  "A unique network hassprung up," says Todd Clayton, vice president of marketing forVideoTelecom."Depositions are usually taken by lawyers getting on planes withcourt reporters to visit witnesses in person for testimonies.But court reporter firms have set up a network called LINC [LegalImage Network Communications] to take video depositions," saysClayton, who envisions similar networks serving personnelrecruiters or real-estate brokers.(The Miami-based LINC network uses VideoTelecom codecs andconsists of rooms installed in the offices of about 20 differentindependent court reporters.)Another product differentiator, high resolution graphics, cutsacross markets horizontally, says Grove.  High-resolutiongraphics, he elaborates, are important to any industry "thatconducts meetings with a lot of spreadsheets, wants to displayhard copies, or looks at documentation of any sort ... ."  Thisincludes the Defense Department, insurance industry, and evenNASA, which has been using high-resolution graphics systemsbefore any launch, he says.NASA has had "interactive sign-offs with any top officials sincethe Challenger disaster," he adds.Tim McElgunn, an analyst at market researcher Datapro, saysvideoconferencing suppliers are increasingly making othercompanies partners in their vertical market strategy, seeking outthose with compatible corporate cultures.  "VideoTelecom, forinstance, is PC LAN- [and] data communications-oriented andtherefore goes after firms with the same mindset of technologyimplementation -- smaller firms with a PC orientation," heobserves.One set of partners with a key role are resellers, some of whomare doing the actual vertical marketing themselves.  "None of thevendors are huge," explains McElgunn, "so they rely on their Bell[company] contacts who jointly market their products to Bellaccounts.  Feedback from these resellers will tell vendors whatspecific features an individual industry wants."System Matches ApplicationVideoTelecom's Clayton, meanwhile, credits resellers with hisfirm's success in the education market.  "We have designed a userinterface that's tailored to instructor training," he explains."We were able to create a solution for their particular needs."One systems integrator Videoconferencing Systems, Inc. (VSI), ofNorcross, Ga., says it is targeting markets by exhibiting attrade shows, including the Computer and Office Systems Show inAtlanta.  According to Marketing Coordinator Norah Sowa, thecompany is aiming for the legal, state governments,pharmaceutical, medical and education vertical markets.Another partner in vertical marketing can be a helpful tradeassociation.  For instance, the Pharmaceutical ManufacturersAssociation, "helped the industry embrace [videoconferencing]technology several years ago," says Peirce-Phelps' Grove."Merck, Ciba-Geigy and a few others saw videoconferencing relateto the product development cycle [by] shortening it.  And if thatcycle is cut by even a week, these firms save a million dollars."For the future, Dataquest sees an expanded vertical market forvideoconferencing among more small and midsize organizations, whowill be attracted as the prices of these products decline andlower  speed transmission becomes more available.Reduced transmission costs can only expand the market said aspokesman for PictureTel, which is based in Peabody, Mass.  "Whenyou can sell videoconferencing to customers using two telephonelines that cost only $20 an hour from coast to coast at 112 Kbps,then you can sell lower down the line to [departmental]managers," the spokesman says."And distance learning applies here as well," he adds.  "We'refinding that 112 Kbps is great for educational systems that don'thave a whole lot of money to burn."Back to Headline List CopyrightIMAGING NEWS via NewsNetOCTOBER 9, 1991INSURER'S VIDEOCONFERENCING CUTS TRAVEL TIME, BOOSTS TRAININGIn the last three years, John Hancock Financial Services ofBoston has relied on first one, then two business television(BTV) networks to bring its 17,000 employees closer together.This company -- whose insurance business alone has $32 billion inassets -- has used an in-house television studio for more than 20years.  Yet by upgrading its equipment to handle livetransmissions, John Hancock's group and retail insurancecompanies and some of its other businesses have realized BTV'sadvantages -- savings in travel costs, reaching 30 times as manypeople for each class, and a decreasing need to take seminars onthe road to regional locations for weeks at a time.With its point-to-multipoint system, the company uses twosatellite networks for product update meetings, field salestraining, sales contest updates, recruiting and a wide variety ofcorporate communications events.  The company has held about 70broadcasts since 1988.This one-way video, two-way audio system can delivery full-motionvideo from corporate headquarters to 42 field offices.  Severalhundred people watching a broadcast can ask questions, eventhough they can't be seen on screen.John Hancock rents satellites by the hour or the half-day onlywhen needed.  The company owns neither a satellite or an uplinktransmitter.  Field offices have been equipped with satellitedishes on the roof or in a parking lot and electronics thatdescramble the picture and allow them to select the rightchannel.Usually 25 or 30 people at each office can watch a livepresentation on a 25-inch color TV, or tape it off the satelliteon a VCR."The typical format is about 80 percent live material, whichusually means [having] people in our studio talking," said FrankKing, John Hancock's general director of corporatecommunications, who manages the two satellite networks."People in the field can talk via a special telephone hookup fromtheir offices," he said.  "We also have pre-taped news segmentsor information about a new computer application, for example.Almost every broadcast has a live question and answer period atthe end."The company invested in BTV network equipment rather than two-wayinteractive videoconferencing because it was more economical, andit was a natural fit for linking its distant locations.  Thecompany is also adding about 100 new satellites in thecontinental United States to the system."We have a single headquarters in Boston and our 17,000 employeesand retail sales organizations are spread over great distances,which dictated a point-to-multipoint set up," King said.  "In thevast majority of cases, we don't need to see the field people; wejust need to hear them."John Hancock management currently is weighing the pros and consof having videoconferencing rooms that could accommodate two-wayvideo as well."Since we do not have regional headquarters organizations,there's no crying need for an interactive video system.  Even ifwe decide to do it, we wouldn't do away with BTV," King said."The difference would still be the ability to hold two-waymeetings with fewer people as opposed to bringing a broadcast toseveral hundred in more than 100 locations."Back to Headline List CopyrightIMAGING NEWS via NewsNetOCTOBER 9, 1991MID-SIZED OFFICE BUILDINGS NEXT STEP IN BELL CANADA FIBER ROLL-OUTCHICAGO -- If a telco has deployed fiber to large officebuildings -- a typical first step -- its next step should be tofocus on medium-sized office buildings, rather than homes.  Atleast, that is the conclusion of Bell Canada, which expects tobegin deploying fiber to mid-sized office buildings in majorCanadian cities later this year.In the long term, Bell Canada wants to bring fiber to homes,rather than just to the curb, even though it expects this to bethe more costly strategy, said Bernard Chenevert, the company'sassociate director of network systems research.Bell Canada, however, lacks a major incentive that could promotethe deployment of fiber to homes.  For instance, it cannotbroadcast video, said Chenevert, who spoke at a panelpresentation on fiber implementation at the NationalCommunications Forum here last week.Were telcos not constrained by such regulation, Chenevert said itmight make technical and economic sense for a telco to use itsfiber network to distribute a cable TV operator's signals tohomes.Last year the company put its fiber-to-the-home plans onindefinite hold, aiming instead for mid-sized buildings having1,500 to 3,000 lines.  Tests have since shown the company canbring fiber to a mid-sized building for nearly the cost of usingcopper wire, he said.Besides supplying telephone service, the fiber Bell Canada isrunning to office buildings will be used to supportvideoconferencing, DS-1 services and data services, Chenevertsaid.  After it brings fiber to mid-sized office buildings, thenext step in Bell Canada's fiber deployment plan is to aim forlarge and medium-sized apartment buildings, he said.Back to Headline List CopyrightIMAGING NEWS via NewsNetOCTOBER 9, 1991NTT DEBUTS 3-D TV AT TELECOM '91 -- SANS GLASSESGENEVA -- I have seen the future and it nearly hit me in theface.  Well, it seemed to.Dancers writhed, flower arrangements twirled, swordsmen menacedme with their weapons.  All on television -- jumping out of thescreen.Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (NTT) is showing off three-dimensional television here at Telecom '91, the world's largesttelecom trade show.In two small booths, reminiscent of  the alcoves where AT&T'sPicturephone was demonstrated at the 1964 New York World's Fair,NTT displayed a three-dimensional, full-color, full-motiontelevision picture that can be viewed without special glasses.The screen is roughly the size of a 14-inch personal computermonitor turned on end, 15 inches diagonally to be exact.  Thewhole package, minus the electronics hidden behind the display,is about the size of a large carry-on airline bag.Don't look for this television in stores.  "This is only aprototype.  We think we can do much better," said NobujiTetsutani, senior research engineer in NTT's Visual MediaLaboratory in Kanagawa, Japan.  The required 4 megaHertz analogsignal, received by the TV via cable, requires too much bandwidthand has other limitations that now make it impractical as aconsumer product.The viewer must stand about three feet to four feet from thescreen.  Outside that range, the 3-D effect is lost.  Thetelevision's picture is bright and clear with approximately theresolution of a fair-quality home TV.Separate sets of pixels -- one for each eye -- and an unusual,full-length lenticular lens appear to release the dancers,flowers and swordsmen from the screen's bounds.  The lenssurfaces bend the light from the pixels so that each eye sees adifferent set of pixels.NTT says an infrared sensor detects head movements and adjuststhe images left  or right to compensate for head movement.  Inpractice, this works poorly.  When I moved, portions of thescreen dimmed momentarily.  When I moved two feet to the right ofthe screen, still sitting about three feet in front of it, themirage collapsed into a flat picture.The picture need not be viewed in darkness.  NTT said the deviceproduces  "compelling images in a bright room," although thebooths were dimly lit.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-22IA086-000622-B037-89http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te41.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045931 text/html 60470HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:56:58 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:00 GMTContent-length: 60283Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te41.html Sample Issue Copyright INFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNet January 12, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CONSUMER ONLINE AUDIENCE TOPS 11.3 MILLION USERS, UP 79% DURING 1995 (2647 words) INTERCHANGE OFFLINE NETWORK? (812 words) INTERCHANGE PARTNERS PREPARE TO MOVE THEIR CONTENT TO WEB (484 words) MUSCULAR ENTRANT INVADES INTERNET ACCESS MARKET (314 words) MICROSOFT AND NBC UNVEIL MULTIMEDIA ALLIANCE (602 words) BELLCORE HEADS TO THE WEB TO EXPAND NEW MEDIA REACH (303 words) PRODIGY FACES SURPRISING SETBACK (722 words) CompuServe SELF-CENSORS AFTER GERMAN OFFICIALS COMPLAIN (534 words) CAMELOT CORP. CUTS NORDIC INTERNET PHONE DEAL (357 words) Will 1996 Turn Out to be the YEAR OF THE GHOST SITE? (435 words) GE TAKING INTERNET CONTRACT BIDS (214 words) CONCENTRIC ROUNDS UP $25 MILLION (147 words) PRODIGY TARGETS GENERATION X (198 words) GET A VIRTUAL LIFE (272 words) Just Bits (622 words) CopyrightINFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CONSUMER ONLINE AUDIENCE TOPS 11.3 MILLION USERS, UP 79% DURING1995By Gary H. Arlen, Senior Contributing Editor     Expanded marketing campaigns by the leading consumer onlineservices during the fourth quarter, plus brisk response to thelaunch of the Microsoft Network (MSN), brought the consumer onlineaudience to 11,304,200 customers at the end of 1995 - a staggering78.9 percent increase above the 6,320,650 tally at the end of 1994. During the fourth quarter of 1995, for the second consecutiveperiod, the subscriber base grew at a rate of 15 percent.     As the biggest online services get bigger, smaller ventures(mostly ones with regional or specialty focus) continue to survive,validating that niche services with unique content and reasonableprices can survive, if not thrive.  The six largest national/globalonline services now represent 96.9 percent of the customer base, upfrom 92 percent three months ago.  The three largest operatorsalone reach 10.1 million users, or 89.3 percent of the totalaudience.     America Online Inc. (AOL) continued to fuel the growth at an18 percent pace; the company expects to pass the 5 million usermark by early February - benefiting (as are all the majoroperators) from the sign-ups by consumers who got new computers ormodems during the recent holiday season.  MSN jumped 200 percent inthe October-November-December period, to 600,000 users.     Not only has the subscriber base grown, so has the usage.  AOLlast month marked the first time its single-day accesses exceeded1 million hours - a benchmark accompanied by denied log-ons andslow processing, as many users have noted.     CompuServe Inc.'s growth was boosted by strong overseasincreases, especially in Europe, where its subscriber base climbedby 25 percent.  AOL is expected to begin registering offshore usersthis year, either directly or through its alliances in Europe,Australia and other regions.     Among the largest systems, Prodigy Services Co. droppedslightly, amid reports by IISR sources that its parent companiesare seeking to sell (or possibly give away) the operation.  GEnie,which has been unable to attract a buyer in the last severalmonths, continues to limp along at about 70,000 users.Dramatic Changes On the Way     The year-end tally comes just as the nature and direction ofonline services is about to change dramatically.  The onlineindustry's relationship to Internet services (beyond offering WorldWide Web and Internet access) still is being refined.  In addition,existing operations will be overhauled, starting with this month'smigration of Delphi Internet Services Corp. into parent companyNews Corp./MCI Online Venture's Web-based "iGuide" service.     Online newspapers and banking services also are showingincreasing vitality.  Several publishers are abandoning or cuttingback their traditional online services (notably the Los AngelesTimes backing off from Prodigy) to concentrate on Web sites.  Othermajor publishers, notably The New York Times, are preparing fortheir imminent Web debuts while maintaining online presence (suchas @Times on AOL, in this case).     USA Today stopped charging for its proprietary service as itconcentrates on its Web site.  The St. Louis Post-Dispatch'sPostLink system, one of the earliest online newspaper services,closed at the end of December to be replaced by a Web site duringthe next few months.     Nearly 40 major banks are just starting to roll out servicesbased on the software deals made last year to build home bankingsystems based on Microsoft Corp.'s "Money," Intuit Corp.'s"Quicken" or Meca Software LLC's "Managing Your Money" financialprograms.  The pioneering banks still are leery about revealinginitial sign-up responses.Around the Online Circuit     Delphi Internet (which has existed in various incarnationssince 1982), officially will be absorbed this month by "iGuide,"the Web-based service that has been developed by News Corp./MCIOnline Ventures.  Existing customers have been invited toparticipate in a beta test of the new service.  Since Delphi itselfhas done no promotion since early 1995, attrition has lowered theuser base.     Prodigy's 7 percent drop in users comes despite a newmarketing campaign aimed at finding younger, hipper customers; thedecline indicates that customers are churning off at a faster pacethan new ones are signing on.  Part of the problem with measuringProdigy's precise audience is the company's acknowledgment that itreaches about 1.6 million homes; Prodigy also contends that eachhousehold has about two users, up slightly from the 1.8 average ofthe past few years.  A company spokesman insists that the company's"official" tally is "more than 2 million users," even though thedata suggest that just over 3 million customers (1.6 million homeswith two users each) access the service.     Prodigy officials also decline to discuss the company's futureownership status.  Independent sources indicate that IBM Corp. andSears, Roebuck & Co. have been unable to find any buyers forProdigy.  Sears even attempted to unload its interest to IBM. There even have been indications that the broker representingIBM/Sears has offered to "give away" the service to another onlinecompany if a suitable arrangement could be developed for IBM/Searsto own a share of the acquiring entity.  None of the companiesinvolved will discuss the 1996 outlook for Prodigy.     GEnie's fate is similarly fuzzy, although parent GeneralElectric Information Services Co. is trying to spruce up theoperation before a sale.  Connection speeds of up to 28.8 kilobitsper second (Kbps) were introduced in late 1995, and full Internetaccess has been implemented.  Earlier in the year, GEnie introduceda new graphical user interface and eliminated prime-timesurcharges.  The company claims it has the "biggest group of loyalmembers" among the nationwide online services - a selling point inits effort to find a buyer.     CompuServe is adding 200,000 subscribers per month and now hasreached 4,000,000 subscribers.  Of these, 200,000 are in the UnitedKingdom and 300,000 elsewhere in Europe.  The company said it"plans to double" the United Kingdom figure in the next 12 months,and has added machine translation capabilities to translateelectronic mail, forum messages and other documents betweenEnglish, French, Spanish and German at the user's request.     ImagiNation Network (INN) has been testing lower weekday ratesfrom 7 a.m. to 6 p.m. for its subscribers who do not use preferredaccess nodes of parent company AT&T Corp.  The special rates, whichbegan Nov. 22, 1995, are scheduled to expire Jan. 15.  INN isevaluating whether to continue the lower rates or adopt anothermarketing incentive.     Reuters Money Network will introduce several new servicesduring the coming months as part of an overall upgrade of theservice; details are not yet available.     New York Online has stopped promoting its current onlineservice as it makes the transition to a Web site, due to debut atthe end of January.  Web content will be updated daily.  Thecompany now calls its 2-year-old online service "an intermediatestep" to the Web and "more of a brochure."     Mnematics Videotex Inc. has added points of presence inRockland and Orange counties, New York, expanding the reach of itsmetropolitan New York City service.     In addition to operating its own stand-alone service, MPGNetprovides interactive multiplayer games on the MSN; the company saidthere are other providers of games to MSN but that only MPGNet hasinteractive games.     SeniorNet has 78 centers across the country and currentlyserves about 5,000 subscribers.  The service, long available viaAmerica Online Inc. (AOL), now also is accessible on the MSN andvia its Web site at www.seniornet.org.     PSINet Inc., which recently launched a regional radioadvertising campaign for its consumer Internet access service, iscompiling an aggregate subscriber total for its three systems -Pipeline USA, Pipeline New York and PSI InterRamp.  The companywill not break that count into each component service.Community Services Grow Slowly     Although the big push toward the Internet has not hindered thecreation of new regional and local services, most are includingInternet access in their offerings.     The Well has put its conferencing system on its Web site,which can be accessed at www.well.com.     Hawaii FYI is "renovating" its service and logs about 160,000minutes of use per month.  It has created a Web site, and bridgedthe service with its Internet server Jan. 2.  Its subscriber baseof 15,000 "has been stable for about a year."     Greater New Orleans Free-Net, which began in 1994 under theaegis of the University of New Orleans, has become an independentnonprofit organization and now reaches more than 12,000subscribers.  Three major groups fund the organization:  theChamber of Commerce of New Orleans and the River Region, the NewOrleans Public Library and nine parish school boards.  The serviceis text-based only; graphics are available only for contentproviders that must also be nonprofit organizations.     Heartland Regional Net (which has dropped its "free-netappellation) now counts 8,500 subscribers, of whom 1,900 log oneach day.  It offers an enhanced level of service for users whocontribute $35 per year.  That fee covers two-thirds of its userbudget; 69 percent of those using the enhanced service sign upagain in succeeding years.     National Capital Freenet of Ottawa celebrated reaching the50,000-subscriber mark with a ceremony attended by the mayor ofOttawa and other government officials.  The service expects to havea Web site in operation by the end of the second quarter.     Toronto Free-Net is developing a Web site through Lynx andGopher; it will be available in the first quarter.Newspapers Finding More Web Homes     USA Today Online has dropped all charges for its onlineservice, and it no longer main-tains a subscriber count.  Its Website (www.usatoday.com) contains 15,000 pages and is designed to besupported by advertising revenues.  The Web site is averaging 1.6million hits per day.     TimesLink, the online service of the Los Angeles Times,dropped its presence on the Prodigy platform Dec. 31.  TimesLinkwill offer its current base of about 17,000 subscribers theopportunity to participate in a beta test of its new Web site, nowunder development and due to be available to the public late in thefirst quarter.     Houston Chronicle Interactive (HCI), the cyberarm of theHouston Chronicle, unveiled a partnership with Prodigy in Novemberin an attempt to leverage the best of both the online and Webworlds.  HCI, a Web-based service, promotes Prodigy as thepreferred method to access its Web site, and receives a bounty foreach new Prodigy subscriber it generates.  For its part, Prodigymaintains an HCI-branded area on its service, allowing its membersto access the HCI Web site and providing the Texas newspaper witha higher profile than possible on the Web alone.  The two companieswill share revenue based on traffic in the HCI Web site and theHCI-branded area on Prodigy.     Mercury Center, the online service of the San Jose MercuryNews, uses as its subscriber number the figure for all AOLsubscribers in the Mercury News circulation area.  The servicedeclines to disclose the number of hits on its own Web site.     Electronic Trib, the online service of the AlbuquerqueTribune, has added business news from Financial Times.  The servicefeatures prices of the 1,600 most active stocks on the New YorkStock Exchange and 3,000 of the largest mutual funds.     Access Atlanta is redesigning its 1996 Olympics Web site anddeveloping new home pages, the first of which will go online byMarch.     PostLink, the online service of the St. Louis Post-Dispatch,closed Dec. 31.  It is to be replaced by a Web site during the nextfew months.     StarText, the online service of the Ft. Worth Star-Telegram,started its Web site in December (www.startext.net).  Rates are$19.95 if StarText is the sole Internet provider and $4.95 forreaders who use another Internet provider.     Tampa Bay Online developed a College Bowl Game packagecovering all the New Year's weekend bowl activities.  It alsolaunched a Web site at www.tampatrib.com.     Fred the Computer, the online service of the Middlesex News,has 2,200 subscribers to its free service.  That figure representsreaders who have logged on through any of the six newspapers in theMassachusetts region served by the parent Community NewspaperCompany.  The service has doubled the number of news groupsrequested by local customers, and it currently is developingInternet projects.  Content includes news, Usenet and e-mailInternet access.Telebanking Services Added in Some Regions     Citibank on the PC, the free online banking service ofCitibank, quietly rolled out in Florida; service is being promotedto customers in Dade, Broward and Palm Beach counties and thecities of Clearwater and Madeira Beach.  Heavy promotion is slatedfor the coming months after a low-key, unpromoted "live test" thatbegan last fall.     Bank of America's "HomeBanking" online service is beingupdated to integrate into commercial online and Internet services. The Internet package can be reached at www.bankamerica.com.  AnAOL-accessible version will debut by March; when that occurs, theproprietary service, which has not been marketed for years, will berestructured and promoted.     Chase Direct, the heavily promoted online banking service ofChase Manhattan Bank, has received 110,000 telephone queries and7,400 e-mail inquiries about the service, and has mailed out 31,000information kits.     US Order has teamed with Colonial Data Technologies Corp. tointroduce Telesmart 4000, an analog display services interface(ADSI) telephone with several advanced functions.  The phone can beused to send e-mail via the Internet, pay bills and bankelectronically, type and send messages directly to pagers, shopfrom catalogs electronically and receive advanced new forms ofCaller ID from telephone companies.  It can access electronicdirectory assistance to search national databases and visuallydisplay telephone numbers and addresses.Outlook for 1996     Aside from the fate of GEnie or Prodigy and or the shiftingstatus of the MSN, there is no reason to believe that the industrywill not continue to grow and its market presence expand in 1996.     The largest services - AOL and Compuserve in particular - willremain strong even as they try to weigh the trend toward Internetand Web-based services and cement their relationships with contentsuppliers and customers.     At the same time, content suppliers are trying to determinethe best - and most valuable - outlets for their material.  Thegenerally small fees paid by commercial online operators may exceedthe pittance generated via the Web's current financial structure. Hence, some information providers may choose to stay with andsupport online ventures because of the known (albeit small) revenuethey generate.     And meanwhile, although brokerage firm Stratton Oakmont agreedto drop its $200 million libel suit against Prodigy (see story, p.8) for remarks made about the company on one of the company'sbulletin boards, the judge handling the case rejected Prodigy'sattempt to reargue his finding that Prodigy is a publisher and thusresponsible for all content on its bulletin boards, so the suittechnically is still alive.  However, the telecommunications reformbill pending in Congress contains a clause that protects onlineservices from libel suits such as that filed by Stratton Oakmont,and, if passed, that effectively would nullify the judge's attemptto set a dangerous and expensive precedent for the online industry.     This also will be the year the heavy hand of government willbe felt by the online services.  There has been a well-publicizedyearlong battle on the part of some members of Congress to curballegedly obscene material online.  But also looming are efforts byfederal lawmakers and regulators to control online shoppingservices and ban online gambling outright.  Moreover, a number ofstates are considering levying taxes on users of online services,a move that could turn operators into tax collectors and dampenconsumer demand for online services.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996INTERCHANGE OFFLINE NETWORK?       AT&T Corp. plans to take its Interchange Online Network, anelegant, albeit it woefully undersubscrib-ed proprietary publishingplatform, offline.  AT&T's New Media Services division will insteadredirect its online efforts at developing Web-based services.     "The Interchange Online Network as we know it today will phaseout over the course of the next year," said Michael Kolowich,president of AT&T New Media Services.  By that time, he said, "theWeb will be a superior environment to online services."      Kolowich's comments were made during a teleconference toannounce that AT&T's fledgling online service for professionals,AT&T Business Network, will be available as a Web-based service bymidyear.  By the close of 1996, Kolowich said, the Web will replacethe company's Interchange Online Network as the principle means ofdistribution for the service, which will be known as AT&T BusinessNetwork Version 2.Business Network Moves to Web     Exactly how much access to "Version 2" will cost has not beendisclosed, nor is it clear how much of Interchange's look and feelwill be retained in cyberspace.  The current Interchange-basedservice costs $39.95 a month for 10 hours of use, and $2.95 foreach additional hour.  The Business Network offers Internet access,the Netscape Navigator Web browser, and content from the likes ofDow Jones & Co. Inc., Dun & Bradstreet Corp., Cable News Networkand others.       Whether New Media Services will charge for full access to itspending Web-based service or adopt a pay-as-you-go approach alsohas yet to be determined.  Although "Version 2" will be availableto anyone with Internet access and a Web browser, Kolowich said,New Media Services plans to market the new Business Network servicetogether with AT&T's WorldNet Internet access service.     Although the Jan. 4 announcement was designed to center aroundthe migration of the Business Network to the Web and all itsinherent advantages, the real news was the fact that Ma Belleffectively has given Interchange the kiss of death.  Along withInterchange, New Media Services also has abandoned itsmuch-explained-yet-much-misunderstood strategy of acting as aproprietary publishing platform for other online services, abusiness model that failed to bear much fruit, or attract manysubscribers.     Indeed, since Interchange was launched last June, the combinedsubscriber base of its various services that include  Ziff-DavisInteractive, The Gartner Group, the Washington Post's Digital Inkand Star-Tribune Online only numbers in the several tens ofthousands (AT&T won't say exactly how many), which is about as manycustomers as America Online Inc. signs up in a good week.     Kolowich said all of Interchange's "publishing partners" alsoplan to launch Web-based services, and added that AT&T issupporting their endeavors to that end.  The Gartner Group, forone, announced just such a move earlier last week, and theStar-Tribune released a similar statement hours after the AT&Tannouncement (see story, p. 4).  When all AT&T and its "partners"have abandoned ship for the Web, AT&T will pull the plug onInterchange, a bleeding-edge product before the advent of the Web.Taking a Write-Off     Although New Media Services repeatedly has stressed itscommitment to open standards and Web-based products since itsinception little more than a year ago, the unit was in fact builton a proprietary foundation - Interchange's software - for whichAT&T now is paying the price.  Kolowich acknowledged AT&T will betaking an undisclosed write-off for Interchange, which the companypurchased from Ziff Communications Inc. for a reported $50 millionin late 1994.      An AT&T spokeswoman, however, stressed that New Media Serviceswill not be affected by the massive round of layoffs announced byAT&T last week.     New Media Services will release what is likely to beInterchange's final upgrade later this quarter, and an upbeatKolowich claimed the division has received more than 100,000requests for Business Network software in the past several weeks.     With the announcement, AT&T joins an expanding club of onlineservice providers whose best-laid proprietary plans were underminedby the phenomenal rise of the World Wide Web during the past year.       In December, Microsoft Corp. announced its intention toreposition its Microsoft Network as a Web-based service.  In lateNovember, Europe Online, which had planned to launch a servicebased on AT&T's software platform, prefigured its partner (and 9.8percent shareholder) by abandoning Interchange in the 11th hour andlaunching a Web-based service Dec. 15.  And in September, AppleComputer Inc. announced that its eWorld online service will becomean Internet-based service by midyear.     Although the "Big Three" proprietary online services continueto add subscribers at a dizzying pace, some industry watcherspredict they eventually may be relegated to a role as gatekeepersfor the Web, packing and selling easy access to a greater wealth ofinformation than they ever could hope to assemble on their own.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996INTERCHANGE PARTNERS PREPARE TO MOVE THEIR CONTENT TO WEB      Once a captain announces he is abandoning ship, it's onlynatural that his passengers won't be far behind.  So when AT&T NewMedia Services announced it would move its AT&T Business Networkonline service from its AT&T Interchange Online Network to theWorld Wide Web, it was not surprising to learn that its "publishingpartners" are plotting similar moves.     The Gartner Group Inc. unveiled plans last week - two daysprior to the AT&T announcement - to roll out a Web-based version ofits online service, @vantage, an online service offering analysisand advice for information technology executives, by the secondquarter of this year.  Although Gartner said it has no plans toabandon its presence on Interchange, at least while it exists, itmade clear that the future of the online world belongs to the Web.     "While AT&T Interchange Online Network, the platform on which@vantage was launched, is superior today, we expect the Internet tobecome the pre-eminent platform from a functionality perspective,"said Bruce Barlag, executive vice president of The Gartner Group'sInteractive Services.  "By the end of 1997, the Internet will bethe primary channel for the delivery of corporate information,ranging from research reports to marketing literature," added DaveTaylor, Garter's research area director for business operations.Related Announcements Follow     Another Interchange partner, The Star-Tribune Online, issueda press release just hours after AT&T's announcement.  "TheStar-Tribune announced two weeks ago that it would develop a WorldWide Web version of Star-Tribune Online as a companion to theInterchange version.  In response to AT&T's announcement, theStar-Tribune will speed the development of its World Wide Webedition."     Star-Tribune said the first version of its Web edition will beavailable in early February, while it maintains its presence onInterchange.  When the Star-Tribune no longer is available onInterchange, the Minneapolis-based service added, it will offermembers Internet access so they can connect to its new home on theWeb.     While the Washington Post's Digital Ink service issued noformal statement, vice president Fred Singer acknowledged that theservice is planning a shift to the Web as well.  Singer said theInterchange announcement was not a surprise.     "We see this as a natural evolution," he said, adding thatDigital Ink has been developing its Internet capabilities forseveral months and will continue to publish on Interchange untilits Web-based service is ready.  Singer would not say when exactlyDigital Ink will be available on the Web, adding that anannouncement will be issued when the time arrives.      In related news, on the same day AT&T dropped the bomb onInterchange, the Washington Post reported that Digital Ink editorand publisher Don Brazeal had resigned but said his departure wasunrelated to the AT&T announcement.     The Gartner Group is at (203) 316-6793; Star-Tribune Online,at (612) 673-4818; Digital Ink, at (202) 334-5310. Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996MUSCULAR ENTRANT INVADES INTERNET ACCESS MARKET       Whenever Internet executives gather to contemplate potentialnew competitors, the discussion invariably dwells on the dreadedBaby Bells, the seven local phone companies created when Uncle Samdismembered Ma Bell, a.k.a. AT&T Corp.     However, what many often overlook is the fact that America'slargest local phone company is not Bell.  Gee.  No, GTE.  And the$20 billion GTE Corp. just announced its intention to enter theInternet access business with its new cyberarm, GTE.net.     GTE's Intelligent Network Services (GTEINS) division willbegin offering GTE.net service to residential and businesscustomers in the Dallas-Fort Worth metropolitan area early thisyear.  GTE.net, which will be rolled out to additional U.S. marketsthroughout 1996, will offer World Wide Web access via NetscapeCommunications Corp.'s Navigator browser, which GTEINS justlicensed.More Than Just Internet Access     GTE.net services will be available for $24.95 per month forunlimited access, or $8.95 per month for five hours, with $1.95 foreach additional hour.  Business customers also can purchasededicated Internet access and a number of other options, includingWeb site, firewall, electronic mail, encryption and transactionprocessing services.  Access speeds will vary from 14.4 and 28.8 todedicated line speeds up to 45 megabits per second (Mbps) (T3) andintegrated services digital network (ISDN) lines at 128 kilobitsper second (Kbps).     "Entering the Internet access business is the first step GTEis taking to build a nationwide data network infrastructure thatwill allow us to enter new markets and develop new products andservices," said Bill Wall, general manager of GTE.net.  "These newservices will include virtual private business networks, specificbusiness Internet applications focused on education, lawenforcement and government plus other market segments underdevelopment.  Long term, we believe these services will become partof a broader integrated service offering that includes voice, dataand video services."     GTE is at (203) 965-2853. Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996MICROSOFT AND NBC UNVEIL MULTIMEDIA ALLIANCE       Microsoft Corp. and NBC deepened their corporate commitmentto one another last month, but fell short of exchanging vows, assome had predicted.  The media and software giants announced theformation of a joint venture to deliver news via broadcast, cableand the Internet.  Microsoft and NBC each will commit approximately$200 million over the next five years to fund the venture, whichincludes a new online service, MSNBC Online.     In addition, Microsoft will pony up an additional $220 millionfor a 50 percent interest in NBC's "America's Talking" cablenetwork, which is being repurposed as a 24-hours-a-day news networkand renamed MSNBC Cable.     The alliance is designed to leverage NBC's news gatheringoperation, broadcast and cable television outlets, and brand-nameawareness with Microsoft's software expertise, online service and"connection to the PC [personal computer] user."     The three-pronged approach apparently is aimed at consumerswith plenty of time on their hands, since the partners clearlyexpect viewers/subscribers to avail themselves of all three mediato stay informed.     The companies intend for viewers to look to NBC News forheadlines from around the world, tune in to the cable channel forin-depth analysis and click into the Microsoft Network (MSN) forcomprehensive information customized to the viewers' preferences.     "We are excited by the opportunity to work together in globalcommerce with the proven entrepreneurial capabilities of Microsoft,the most exciting company of this decade," said Jack Welch, chiefexecutive officer of General Electric Co., NBC's corporate parent.     "We will be working with NBC to create innovative interactivenews content and an integrated media experience," said Bill Gates,chairman and chief executive officer of Microsoft.  "Advances indigital technology will give people new control over news andinformation.  They will be able to watch breaking news on TV andthen be able to get more in-depth information on things of interestto them online." All Things to All Media?     NBC News, MSNBC Cable and MSNBC Online will work in unison,share content and cross-promote one another in an attempt to becomethe "leading source for news" in each of their respective media. The  MSNBC news services will be international in reach, due bothto the nature of the Internet and NBC's outright ownership orpartial interest in a number of broadcast and cable properties inEurope, Asia and Latin America.     MSNBC Cable will feature NBC News correspondents, livecoverage of world events and local coverage from NBC affiliates. MSNBC Online, which will be accessible through the MSN, willrepackage NBC and MSNBC content "to offer the ability to get a verybroad online view of news."  MSNBC Online also will be distributedby cable operators when high-speed cable modems become available.     "By linking the local, national and international newsgathering capability of NBC and its affiliates, as well as NBCNews archives, with Microsoft's technological leadership insoftware development and commitment to Internet online services,MSNBC will create a continuum of news delivery that meets viewerneeds at all levels," said Bob Wright, chief executive officer ofNBC.     MSNBC Cable will be managed by NBC News, while MSNBC Onlinewill be jointly managed by NBC and Microsoft.  The partners,however, took pains to emphasize the fact that NBC News will retain"complete editorial control and integrity" of news content ineither service.     So presumably, if the Justice Department forces Microsoft to"unbundle" MSN from Windows 95, or if NBC News suffers another"Dateline" scandal, viewers can turn on MSNBC Cable or log ontoMSNBC Online for all the unexpurgated, unburied and unwhitewasheddetails. Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996BELLCORE HEADS TO THE WEB TO EXPAND NEW MEDIA REACH       After 18 months of searching for new opportunities to expandits business beyond the Baby Bells, Bell Communications ResearchInc. (Bellcore) finally settled on the Internet as one ticket intothe new media market.  Leveraging its networking strength, Bellcoreis offering an in-house product line called Adapt/X, services andthird-party products to get companies into business on the WorldWide Web.     Bellcore announced its Internet focus and new applications atthe December World Wide Web Consortium conference in Boston.  TheAdapt/X products include online publishing, transaction, back-endinfrastructure and security components, and Bellcore will offerintegration and support services with these products, although theycan be purchased as stand-alone applications.     Bellcore also signed letters of intent with Sun MicrosystemsInc. and Netscape Communications Corp. to cooperate on software andconsulting services.  "We see a market window where we can put ournetwork knowledge to work," Ken Branson, Bellcore spokesman, said.     These are the first of many alliances Bellcore hopes to makewith leaders in the Internet market to exchange technology andestablish reseller arrangements.  Aside from its Adapt/X line,Bellcore wants to offer a wide range of products and services forlarge corporations that wish to create commercial Web sites forselling products and conducting business-to-business transactionson the Web.     As part of its arrangement with Sun, Bellcore will join thecompany's Independent Software Vendor program to receive advanceinformation on new technologies such as Java.  Bellcore also mayact as a system integrator for Sun in the future.     As part of its effort to go after high-end customers, Bellcorepartnered with marketing and advertising firm Adler BoschettoPeebles & Partners to handle design and content-creation services. The firm's ABP Interactive unit will work with Bellcore to offerpackage services to clients.     Bellcore is at (201) 829-2165. Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996PRODIGY FACES SURPRISING SETBACK        Although Prodigy Services Co. believed it finally settled thetroubling Stratton Oakmont lawsuit last October, the presidingjudge had other ideas.     In late December, New York Supreme Court Judge Stuart Ainrejected an attempt by Prodigy to reargue his May decision thatfound the online service liable as the publisher of defamatoryremarks directed at Stratton Oakmont, a New York brokerage firm,posted on one of the Prodigy bulletin boards.     The two parties were reconciled in October when Prodigyexpressed its regret at the remarks and Stratton Oakmont agreed todrop its $200 million libel suit (IISR, Nov. 3, 1995, p. 3). Further, Stratton Oakmont agreed to not oppose Prodigy's effort toreargue Ain's decision with additional evidence in an attempt toconvince the judge that it is not a publisher and thus notresponsible for the content of its bulletin boards.Former Policy Created Problems     Prodigy originally got itself into trouble over itssince-discarded but much-publicized policy of policing its bulletinboards.  Although the online service did once employ staffers toread every single piece of e-mail on its boards, that practice wasabandoned as unworkable in 1992 when the volume of mail began tohit 60,000 to 75,000 messages a day.  It was this change of policy(i.e., a conscious decision to not exercise complete editorialcontrol over its bulletin boards) that Prodigy hoped would changeAin's mind.     But in an unexpected turn of events, despite the fact StrattonOakmont dropped its suit, Ain rebuffed Prodigy's arguments.  "Thecourt finds that this is a developing area of the law, so thatthere is a real need for a precedent," Ain said, according to aReuters report.     If Ain's ruling stands, it may well set an expensive precedentfor the industry that could make the original $200 million suitseem like chump change by comparison.  For online services may nowbe held liable for every message posted by their subscribers, thenumber of whom varies by service but can total in the millions.     "The fact he views Prodigy as a publisher is a potentiallytroubling precedent for the entire industry," said Bob Smith,executive director of the Interactive Services Association.  "Ifany commercial online operator is responsible for all content, evenif it has no control over it, then that's a huge problem."     According to Brian Ek, Prodigy's vice president for governmentaffairs, the company has two options:  appeal Ain's decision or donothing.  And depending on what trans-pires in Congress on thetelecommunications reform bill, the latter may be the moreattractive option.     Although "it's pretty clear there is not much point in goingback to this particular court," Ek said, Prodigy's luck mightchange in appeals court.  For one thing, he said, the case involvestwo parties that no longer are involved in litigation.  Further, Ekasserted, Ain's denial had more to do with technicalities than thevalidity of the new facts presented.     "It is more of a procedural issue than anything," Ek said. "The judge admitted the facts were different, which certainly putsus in a better position."Waiting for Gingrich     However, doing nothing may be the best course and, as far asProdigy's legal fees are concerned, the cheapest.  The "do nothing"option is a gamble based on the final shape of telecommunicationsreform legislation crawling through Congress.     Ek said the legislation contains what he calls a "StrattonOakmont clause" that specifically removes liability for servicesthat make a good faith effort to apply rudimentary control overcontent.     "If this bill goes through, Stratton Oakmont will become afootnote," Ek said, noting that such a law would pre-empt any statelegislation to the contrary.     However, that's a big "if," especially given the fact thattelecommunications reform has taken a back seat to the budgetbattle in recent weeks.  And time is a luxury Prodigy can illafford, since the clock is running on the opportunity to file anappeal.  Ek said Prodigy probably will reach a decision within thenext week, adding that the rest of the industry hopes it will optto do nothing.     "None of the other services are anxious for us to throw moredollars at this one," Ek said.  "Everybody is looking at thelegislation going forward." Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CompuServe SELF-CENSORS AFTER GERMAN OFFICIALS COMPLAIN       CompuServe Inc. continues scrambling to devise atechnological fix that will allow its almost 4 million non-Germanmembers to regain access to more than 200 sexually explicitInternet news groups.     On Dec. 28, in response to an order by the government ofGermany, CompuServe suspended access through its service to thecontroversial news groups, according to spokeswoman Daphne Kent. Bavarian law enforcement officials, Kent said, told the world'ssecond-largest online service that the content of the news groupswas illegal under German law.     Since then, CompuServe officials and the public prosecutor'soffice in Munich have traded denials in the media about who saidwhat.Just Following Orders?     Last week, authorities in Bavaria, Germany's most conservativestate, issued a statement claiming that they only had askedCompuServe to "scrutinize" a list of potentially troublesome newsgroups, and that it was the online service's decision alone to denyaccess to the groups.  CompuServe maintains it was merely followingorders from Bavarian prosecutors who specified exactly which newsgroups were illegal and therefore to be blocked.     However, given the fact that under German law executives areheld personally responsible for the actions of their companies,CompuServe may well be playing it safe in order to prevent its topmanagement from spending any time in a Bavarian cellblock.     Complying with the German order forced CompuServe to deny itsentire worldwide customer base of more than 4 million users accessto the smut-based news groups, prompting an outcry among bothsubscribers and the entire Internet community at large, whichaccused the service of cybercensorship.     CompuServe meanwhile is trying to devise a method of blockingaccess to questionable content on a country-by-country basis, butcannot say when such a solution will be ready.  Kent would notspeculate as to when, or even if, access would be restored, butsaid the company is "always concerned" that blocking access toinformation could cost the company customers.  Kent said no otheronline service was similarly restricted and said "we were likelytargeted because of our size." No Other Service Targeted     Although somewhat smaller than its chief competitor, AmericaOnline Inc. (AOL), CompuServe has the greatest overseas presence ofany consumer online service.  In Germany it claims 100,000 members. The number is insignificant, however, in comparison to the morethan 1.8 million individuals who use the Internet in Germany andwhose access to the same news groups is harder to restrict,depending upon their method of access.     AOL, which recently launched a German online service withGerman publisher Bertelsmann AG that relies heavily onInternet-based content, has yet to encounter any similardifficulties.  AOL spokeswoman Pam McGraw said the company isinvestigating the CompuServe issue, but has yet to receive anynotification from the German authorities.     "To the best of our knowledge, we have not received anyrequests from the German government," she said.     However, McGraw added, AOL offers users the ability to blockaccess to news groups, which may be its saving grace.  AlthoughCompuServe's Internet division offers Internet access software withthe ability to block access to adult content, the company'sflagship online service does not offer the same capability. Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CAMELOT CORP. CUTS NORDIC INTERNET PHONE DEAL       Camelot Corp., a holding company whose subsidiary, ThirdPlant Publishing, "publishes" DigiPhone, a software product thatallows users to place phone calls over the Internet, is trying toestablish a presence in what is arguably Europe's mostInternet-centric region, Scandinavia.     Camelot has penned a deal with Copenhagen-based TelepartnerA/S to distribute its DigiPhone and DigiPhone Deluxe softwarethroughout Denmark, Norway and Sweden.     In exchange for exclusive distribution rights, Telepartner hasagreed to pay Camelot $1 million in the form of 2.7 percent of itsshare capital.  Camelot also secured the right to acquire a further7.3 percent of Telepartner for approximately $2.7 million. Telepartner, which is valued at $37 million based on thesetransactions, intends to offers its shares to the public on theCopenhagen Stock Exchange by March 1997.  Should this proposedinitial public offering (IPO) fail to take place, Camelot has theright to request that Telepartner buy back its 2.7 percent stakefor $1 million in cash.     In addition, Camelot Chairman and Chief Executive OfficerDanny Wettreich also was appointed a director of Telepartner, atelephone database services firm with more than 500,000 companieson file.  "Telepartner's marketing expertise in Scandinavia and itsaccess to corporate clientele will ensure a speedy marketpenetration in this very important European region," Wettreichsaid.Other Camelot News     In other Camelot-based news, the company reported growingrevenues for its quarter ended Oct. 31, even as losses increasedslightly.  Revenues rose to $527,144 from $350,479 one year ago,while the company reported a loss of $798,693 for the quarter,compared to $644,787 during the same period in 1994.  Camelotattributed its results to start-up costs for its various divisions.     Camelot's Third Planet Publishing began shipping DigiPhoneinto retail stores, and expects to record larger sales in the nextquarter.  By the end of October, Camelot had opened five Mr. CD-ROMStores as part of its goal to launch 100 of the specialty retailoutlets by the end of 1996.  Camelot Distributing also is in thebuilding stages, as the company hired personnel and exploredrelationships with retailers.     Camelot is at (214) 733-3005. Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996Will 1996 Turn Out to be the YEAR OF THE GHOST SITE?       Microsoft Corp. Chairman Bill Gates has been known to beright on the money, and in his latest book, "The Road Ahead," hisanalogy that compares the Internet and multimedia feeding frenzy tothe American gold rush may be a harbinger of things to come.     Unfortunately, as a new study by International Data Corp.(IDC) notes, after the gold ran dry in the 1800s, ghost towns wereleft behind.  The research and consulting firm predicts that 1996will be a "year of disappointment" for investors and corporationsin the online marketplace, reflecting sluggish development of asignificant consumer base.  In addition, 20 percent of the Fortune500 companies that have commercial Web sites will close or stopmaintaining them, resulting in "ghost sites."Lots of Interest, Not Much Content     IDC also said the leading online information service providerssuch as CompuServe Inc., America Online Inc., Prodigy Services Co.and the Microsoft Network will realize more than 50 percent oftheir revenues from offering access to the World Wide Web by themiddle of 1997, and that two of the four services will struggle forsurvival.     "Though we predict the overall growth in online subscriberswill continue to be very strong, we expect 1996 will show a highturnover rate as users underwhelmed by the content on the Webcancel their subscriptions and turn on their TVs," said Frank Gens,senior vice president of research at IDC.  "Still, 1996 will be astrategic investment year for businesses that expect to compete inthe growing electronic marketplace, because during the next fiveyears, the number of wired (i.e., online) users will rise to morethan 200 million, and by 2010, it will exceed 1 billion."     Financial services companies, retailers and publishers willbail out in the initial "hangover" period, Gens said, leaving thedoor wide open for new leadership and the downfall of currentgiants.  However, IDC predicts Microsoft will have a great 1996,and its revenue will not be affected by potentially weaker holds onthe industry it may have with technology such as object linking andembedding (OLE) and Visual Basic.     Gens also forecasts that manufacturers of Internet appliances,which allow users to access online information, will slash pricesin half by the end of 1996.  "The game console crowd is alreadyslicing away at the pricing for simple Web surfing devices," hesaid.  "Within two years, Internet appliances will emerge asgiveaways - [from] less than $100 to free - by businesses that wantcustomers to access their online services."     IDC is at (508) 935-4282 or http://www.idcresearch.com. Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996GE TAKING INTERNET CONTRACT BIDS       Seeking to streamline its operations, General Electric Co.launched the GE Trading Process Network (TPN) last week to letsuppliers bid for GE contracts over the Internet.  TPN primarilywill use electronic mail to solicit bids from outside contractors,and GE hopes to conduct about $1 billion in transactions over thenetwork this year.     This would quadruple the amount of online business-to-businesstransactions GE already handles through a private electronic datainterchange (EDI) network run by subsidiary GE Information Services(GEIS), which was roughly $250 million last year.     GE will distribute the TPN software to suppliers that will beable to receive information from the World Wide Web and submit bidsfor projects through e-mail.  The GEIS unit has been promoting thisbrand of electronic commerce for online trading between companiesas part of the International Business Exchange (IBEX) project,officially launched last September with AT&T Corp., Dun &Bradstreet Corp., the Global Business Alliance, the U.S. Chamber ofCommerce, Chase Manhattan Bank and other partners.     IBEX is promoting an electronic mail-based service forcompanies to solicit and bid on contracts online.  While GEIS isinvolved in this effort, its parent company opted for a proprietarysolution instead of IBEX for handling its in-house suppliers.       GE is at (203) 373-2039. Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996CONCENTRIC ROUNDS UP $25 MILLION       Internet access provider Concentric Network Corp. has secureda $25 million private offering though Montgomery Securities, aninvestment bank specializing in high-tech firms.  Proceeds from theoffering, which were raised through a group of institutionalinvestors, will be used to expand Concentric's network throughoutNorth America and to fund further sales and marketing efforts. With a frame relay network encompassing 214 points-of-presence,Concentric enjoys alliances with Netscape Communications Corp.,Intuit Inc. and Ameritech Corp.     "We believe the key to success in the Internet access businessis to align the business with unique content and to offer 'virtualprivate networks' that provide affordable access to the contentwhile maximizing reliability, performance and security," said ToddDagres, senior technology analyst for Montgomery Securities.  "Webelieve Concentric is pursuing such a strategy as evidenced by itsrelationships with Intuit, Sirius Publishing and others."     Concentric is at (408) 342-2808. Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996PRODIGY TARGETS GENERATION X       Prodigy Services Co. apparently is trying to shed its imageas the leading family-based online service by broadening its appealto attract a more tragically hip audience.  Prodigy has acquired anundisclosed interest in SonicNet, a Sunshine Interactive Networkdivision and producer of a World Wide Web site devoted toalternative music and other cultural content for the nose-ring set.     The move marks Prodigy's first investment in a Web-basedcontent provider, and was carried out under the aegis of its new"Wildflower Partners" division, which, like America Online Inc.'s"Greehouse" program, supports promising content providers withmoney and distribution.  Under the agreement,  SonicNet willprovide Prodigy with original and exclusive content, includingcelebrity chat sessions, marketing and a seamless link toSonicNet's home page.  Prodigy will finance SonicNet's effort todevelop content, enlarge its staff and expand into new areas. SonicNet content includes chat areas with alternative rockanti-heroes, the "Loser's Guide to New York" and links to "rockin'sites on the Web."       In other Prodigy-based news, the service recently won theInformation Industry Association's Online Access 1995 HotShotsAward for the Best Consumer Web access.     Prodigy is at (914) 448-8000; SonicNet, at (212) 741-5106. Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996GET A VIRTUAL LIFE       Internet addicts who do the lion's share of their socializingonline soon may have even less reason to pry themselves away fromtheir machines and venture outdoors.  PSINet Inc. and Worlds Inc.annouAnced an agreement that will bundle the latter's 3-Dinteractive Internet applications with the former's Internet accessservice.     Under the agreement, PSINet's Pipeline service will bundleWorlds Inc.'s Worlds Chat - a 3-D chat environment that allowsusers to interact via cartoonlike alter egos known as "avatars" -as well as AlphaWorld, another 3-D environment in which residentscan own land and build on it, among other things.     Details of the deal, which the companies claim is "pushingforward the future of online social interaction," were notdisclosed.       PSINet can be reached at (703) 904-4100; Worlds Inc., at (415)281-1300.Individual Launches Financial Service     Individual Inc. announced the addition of a new service Jan.9.  Alert, a customized, "intra-day," Internet-based financial newsservice.  Alert is designed to pull breaking stories from majornews wires and deliver them via the Internet to the e-mail boxes ofcustomers.  Alert allows customers to track up to 40 publicly heldcompanies per profile without any limit on the number of storiesdelivered each day.       "There is a definite need for many of our customers, such asthose in public and investor relations, to track breaking newsstories throughout the day," said Yosi Amram, chief executiveofficer of Individual.       Alert is available for individual users at $215 per year, or$1,000 per year for workgroups of up to 10 users.       Individual can be reached at (617) 273-6000. Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION & INTERACTIVE SVCS. REPORT via NewsNetJanuary 12, 1996Just Bits     Breaking News...     ...  Sit tight and sell high.  Top executives at AmericaOnline Inc. enriched themselves late last year with an insiderselling spree, unloading approximately 415,000 options after asix-month lull, The Wall Street Journal reported.  According totracking firm CDA/Invest, AOL executives including Chairman SteveCase (95,000 options), President of AOL Services Ted Leonsis(40,000 options) and Chief Financial Officer Len Leader (40,000options) cashed in their shares at prices from $38.45 to $40.13,taking advantage of the 83 percent rise in AOL's share price sincethe last round of insider selling six months ago.  Some analystsspeculated that the sell-off represented a hedge against thenot-too-distant future, when AOL and other online services will beforced to compete with the World Wide Web rather than each other. Whether or not that's the case, they've certainly socked awayenough for a few rainy days.  You do the math....     ...  More Web-based casualties?  Following the axing ofInterchange (see story, p. 3), other changes may be in store forAT&T Corp.'s other online ventures.  Although a spokesman said noalterations were planned for the company's Imagination Network, hesaid AT&T and General Magic Inc. were investigating the feasibilityof transforming the proprietary Personal Link messaging serviceinto an Internet-based product....  Angry over the budget impasse? President Clinton, the nation's first cyber-savvy leader, hasreceived a death threat via the Internet, according to a Reutersreport.  An e-mail message originating from a university insouthern Taiwan reportedly said:  "President Clinton, when you areout for a visit, we will assassinate you."  As if he didn't alreadyhave enough problems here in Washington.New & Noteworthy...     ...  A kinder, gentler Internet?  The McKinley Group said itintends to flag Web sites devoid of adult-based or X-rated contentthough its Magellan Internet directory (http://www.mckinley.com). McKinley intends to place a "green light" icon in the listing ofWeb sites it reviews as a sort of seal of approval to steer uses to"safe sites."  If nothing else, McKinley's approach should helpInternet surfers in search of smut avoid wasting time in fruitlesssites....  Dow Jones & Co. Inc. and the New York Times InformationServices Group have reached a content-sharing agreement.  As ofJan. 1, subscribers to the Dow Jones News/Retrieval online servicewill be able to access full-text archives of The New York Times asfar back as 1981....  Microsoft Corp. and NBC (see story, p. 6) areteaming to cash in on the Super Bowl advertising frenzy with aWorld Wide Web site that will sell interactive ads and offer SuperBowl-based content.  The only announced advertiser to date is, um,Microsoft, but executives hoping to drum up interest from otheradvertisers at a press conference said they expect the site willgenerate "millions and millions" of hits.  Maybe during thecommercials?  Point your beer-soaked, salsa-stained mouse athttp://www.superbowl.com.Over the Transom...     ...  Germany, which has suffered more than its share of badpress this century, has managed to alienate much of cyberspace aswell by ordering CompuServe Inc. to block access to questionablenews groups on the Internet (see story, p. 9).  And to add to theSturm und Drang, a San Francisco gay rights group said it hascalled for a boycott of two German-brewed beers to protest theInternet censorship.  The blocked discussion groups include topicssuch as homosexuality and AIDS....  Need to know the relative troopstrength of Myanmar vis-a-vis Burkina Faso?  Check out the CIA'sWorld Factbook 1995, now available for the first time on CD-ROM. The Windows- and Macintosh-compatible CD-ROM boasts currentgeographic, political, socioeconomic, cultural and militaryinformation on more than 250 countries, and is available for $30 athttp://www.fedworld.gov/ntis/ntishome.html.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-23IA086-000622-B037-124http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te132.html 205.156.212.5 19970122045954 text/html 33131HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:57:57 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:29 GMTContent-length: 32944Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te132.html Sample Issue Copyright THE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNet APRIL, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES AT&T OFFERS TOLL-FREE DIRECTORY (78 words) LOOK INSIDE APPLE, OTHER COMPUTER FIRMS (33 words) HOW TO GET LEGISLATIVE HISTORIES (101 words) TEN THOUSAND DATA FILES FROM FEDWORLD (118 words) SEARCH THE U.S. GOVERNMENT MANUAL (89 words) FEDERAL GOVERNMENT INTERNET SITES (988 words) DIRECTORY OF TOLL-FREE BULLETIN BOARDS (54 words) ZERO-IN ON COMPANY NEWS FROM NEW JERSEY (104 words) RESEARCH REPORTS ON EMERGING COMPANIES (53 words) A NOTE ABOUT GUEST BOOKS (73 words) DIRECTORY OF MARKET RESEARCH FIRMS (67 words) ANALYSES OF INFO TECHNOLOGY ISSUES (56 words) WEEKLY HEALTHCARE INDUSTRY NEWS (79 words) RETAIL GIANT JOINS THE WEB (37 words) INFO-RICH SITE FROM TINY LIECHTENSTEIN (50 words) DIRECTORY OF BELGIAN INDUSTRY ASSOCIATIONS (78 words) NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY INFO FROM FORMER USSR (47 words) DAILY CZECH NEWS VIA E-MAIL (32 words) SHARE YOUR FAVORITE INTERNET RESOURCE (29 words) INFORMATION ON SOUTH AFRICAN COMPANIES (93 words) TOP STARTING POINT FOR RUSSIAN RESEARCH (111 words) OFFICIAL HOME PAGE OF ANGOLA (35 words) STOCK EXCHANGE OF THAILAND (71 words) IT'S A ZOO OUT THERE (184 words) CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996AT&T OFFERS TOLL-FREE DIRECTORYDirectory assistance via telephone costs money.  If you're trying to find a toll-free number for a specific company, make the free AT&T Toll-Free 800 Directory on the Web at "http://www.tollfree.att.net/dir800/" a first choice. You can use the built-in search engine to locate a specific company, yellow-page category, or geographic location.  You can also use the service much like a traditional yellow-page directory, browsing by category.  They range from "Abdominal Supports" and "Abortion Alternatives" to "Zippers" and "Zoos."Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996LOOK INSIDE APPLE, OTHER COMPUTER FIRMSA Perspective on Finances provides a detailed look at current developments within Apple.  It also provides valuable and highly current news relating to other computer hardware, software, and service companies.  It's at "http://www.halcyon.com/kegill/mac/finances/finances.html".Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996HOW TO GET LEGISLATIVE HISTORIESIn IFR's "Directory of Key Federal Government World Wide Web and Gopher Sites," on page 5, we list the Library of Congress' Thomas.  It's the place to go for: Full text of congressional legislation.Full text of the Congressional Record.Congressional Record index.Bill Summary and Status for the 104th Congress. These resources are among your best sources for tracking the legislative history of any bills pending or passed by either or both houses of Congress. Get step-by-step instructions on how to use this resource at the Legislative Research with Thomas site.  It's on the Web at "http://www.clark.net/pub/lschank/mythomas.txt".Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996TEN THOUSAND DATA FILES FROM FEDWORLDThe FedWorld FTP site, a service of the Commerce Department's National Technical Information Service, may now be accessed through an easy-to-use intermediary Web site, located at "http://www.fedworld.gov/ftp.htm". From here you can locate-through a search engine or browsing-more than 10,000 data files produced by federal government agencies.  A directory index is updated daily. Especially valuable at this time of year, both for businesses and individuals, is the extensive collection of Internal Revenue Service forms and instructions.  Other extensive collections include those offered by the Federal Aviation Administration, Department of Commerce, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Office of Management and Budget, Treasury Department, and Securities Exchange Commission.  Other federal government agency offerings are also included.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996SEARCH THE U.S. GOVERNMENT MANUALSome researchers overlook the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), considering it a repository of historical rather than current information. But tucked within NARA's Web site is a highly useful information resource, the 1995/96 edition of The United States Government Manual.  You can reach it directly at "http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/nara001.html". A built-in search engine lets you search for exact phrases.  You may also use "AND," "OR," and "NOT" for locating precisely the information you seek. The Manual contains detailed descriptions and contact information for every federal government agency.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996FEDERAL GOVERNMENT INTERNET SITESEXECUTIVE BRANCH Executive Office of the President White House Office    "http://www1.whitehouse.gov/WH/Welcome.html"National Performance Review    "http://www.npr.gov/" Cabinet-Level Departments Department of Agriculture    "http://www.usda.gov"    Agricultural Research Service        "http://www.ars-grin.gov/ars/ars.html"    Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service        "http://www.aphis.usda.gov/"    Economic Research Service        "http://www.econ.ag.gov/"    Graduate School        "http://grad.usda.gov/"    National Agricultural Library        "http://www.nalusda.gov"    Natural Resources Conservation Service        "http://www.ncg.nrcs.usda.gov/"    Undersecretary for Research Education, and Economics        "http://www.reeusda.gov/ree/"    Undersecretary for Rural Economic and Community     Development        "http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/" Department of Commerce    "http://www.doc.gov/"    Bureau of the Census        "http://www.census.gov"    International Trade Administration        "http://www.ita.doc.gov/"        Global Export Market Information System (GEMS)            "http://www.itaiep.doc.gov/"    National Institute of Standards and Technology        "http://www.nist.gov"    National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration        "http://www.noaa.gov/"    National Technical Information Service        "http://www.fedworld.gov/ntis/ntishome.html"    National Telecommunications and Information Administration        "http://www.ntia.doc.gov"    Patent and Trademark Office        "http://www.uspto.gov" Department of Defense    "http://www.dtic.mil/defenselink"    Advanced Research Projects Agency        "http://www.arpa.mil/"    Defense Acquisition and Technology        "http://www.acq.osd.mil/HomePage.html"    Defense Finance and Accounting Service        "http://www.dfas.mil/"    Defense Information Systems Agency        "http://disa11.disa.atd.net/"    Defense Logistics Agency        BosniaLINK            "http://www.dtic.dla.mil/bosnia/"        Defense Fuel Supply Center            "http://www.dfsc.dla.mil/"    Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board        "http://www.dnfsb.gov/"    Department of the Air Force        "http://www.af.mil"        Air Force Academy            "http://www.usafa.af.mil/"        Air Force Office of Scientific Research            "http://web.fie.com/fedix/afosr.html"        U.S. Air Force in Europe            "http://www.usafe.af.mil"    Department of the Army        "http://www.army.mil/"        Airfields and Pavements Division            "http://pavement.wes.army.mil/"        Army Financial Management and Comptroller            "http://www.usace.mil/usace.html"        Army Missile Command            "http://wwwsun.redstrone.army.mil/"        Army Research Laboratory            "http://info.arl.army.mil/"        Army War College            "http://carlisle-www.army.mil/usawc/usawc.htm"    Department of the Navy        "http://www.ncts.navy.mil/"        Naval Command, Control, and Ocean Surveillance Center            "http://www.nosc.mil/"        Naval Observatory            "http://www.usno.navy.mil/"        Naval Postgraduate School            "http://www.nps.navy.mil/"        Naval Research Laboratory            "http://www.nrl.navy.mil/"        Naval Sea Systems Command            "http://www.navsea.navy.mil/"        Naval Undersea Warfare Center            "http://www.nuwc.navy.mil/"        U.S. Naval Academy            "http://www.nadn.navy.mil/homepage.html"    U.S. Marine Corps          "http://www.usmc.mil/" Department of Education     "http://www.ed.gov/" Department of Energy     "http://www.doe.gov/"     Argonne National Laboratory          "http://www.anl.gov/"     Bonneville Power Administration          "http://www.bpa.gov/"     Brookhaven National Laboratory          "http://suntid.bnl.gov:8080/bnl.html"     Columbus, Ohio, Area Office          "http://www.ofo_cl.doe.gov/"     Energy Sciences Network          "http://www.es.net/"     Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory          "http://fnnews.fnal.gov/"     Idaho National Engineering Laboratory          "http://www.inel.gov/"     Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory          "http://www.lbl.gov/LBL.html"     Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory          "http://www.llnl.gov/"     Los Alamos National Laboratory          "http://www.lanl.gov/Public/Welcome.html"     National Renewable Energy Laboratory          "http://www.nrel.gov"     Oak Ridge National Laboratory          "http://www.ornl.gov/"     Office of Environmental Management          "http://www.em.doe.gov/"     Office of Environment, Safety, and Health          "http://www.eh.doe.gov/"     Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management          "http://www.rw.doe.gov/"     Office of Fusion Energy          "http://wwwofe.er.doe.gov"     Office of Nonproliferation and National Security          "http://www.nn.doe.gov/nn/"     Pacific Northwest Laboratory          "http://www.pnl.gov:2080/"     Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory          "http://www.pppl.gov/"     Sandia National Laboratories          "http://www.sandia.gov/"     Superconducting Super Collider          "http://www.ssc.gov/"     Yucca Mountain Project          "http://www.ymp.gov/" Department of Health and Human Services     "http://www.os.dhhs.gov/"     Administration for Children and Families          "http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/"     Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry          "http://atsdr1.atsdr.cdc.gov:8080/atsdrhome.html"     Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition          "http://vm.cfsan.fda.gov/index.html"     Centers for Disease Control and Prevention          "http://www.cdc.gov/"     Food and Drug Administration          "http://www.fda.gov/"     Health Care Financing Administration          "http://www.hcfa.gov/     Indian Health Services          "http://www.tucson.ihs.gov/"     National AIDS Clearinghouse Web Site          "http://cdcnac.aspensys.com:86/"     National Institutes of Health          "http://www.nih.gov"          National Cancer Institute               "http://www.nci.nih.gov/"          National Center for Biotechnology Information               "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/"     National Health Information Center          "http://nhic-nt.health.org/"          National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute               "gopher://gopher.nhlbi.nih.gov"          National Institute on Aging               "http://adobe.nia.nih.gov/"          National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism               "http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/"          National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases               "gopher://gopher.niaid.nih.gov"          National Institute of Diabetes & Digestive & Kidney Disease               "http://www.niddk.nih.gov/"          National Institute on Drug Abuse               "http://www.nida.nih.gov/"          National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences               "http://www.niehs.nih.gov/"          National Institute of Mental Health               "gopher://gopher.nimh.nih.gov"          National Library of Medicine               "http://www.nlm.nih.gov/"     Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion          "http://nhic-nt.health.org/"     Public Health Service          "http://phs.os.dhhs.gov/phs/phs.html"     Substance Abuse & Mental Health Services Administration          "http://www.samhsa.gov/" Department of Housing and Urban Development     "http://www.hud.gov/" Department of Interior     "http://info.er.usgs.gov/doi/doi.html"     Minerals Management Service          "http://www.mms.gov/"     National Biological Service          "http://www.nbs.gov/"     U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service          "http://www.fws.gov/" Department of Labor     "http://www.dol.gov/" Department of Justice     "http://www.usdoj.gov/"     "http://gopher.usdoj.gov/offices/executive.html"     Bureau of Justice Statistics          "http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/"     Federal Bureau of Investigation          "http://www.fbi.gov/"     Partnerships Against Violence          "gopher://pavnet.esusda.gov:70/" Department of State     "http://dosfan.lib.uic.edu/index.html"     Counter-Terrorism Rewards Program          "http://www.clark.net/pub/heroes/"     Travel Advisories          "http://www.stolaf.edu/network/travel-advisories.html" Department of Transportation     "http://www.dot.gov/     Bureau of Transportation Statistics          "http://www.bts.gov/"     Federal Aviation Administration          "http://www.faa.gov/"          Alaska Region               "http://www.ak.net/faa/:          Center for Advanced Aviation System Development               "http://www.caasd.org/"          Center for Aviation Systems Reliability               "http://www.cnde.iastate.edu/faa.html"          FAA Academy               "http://www.ama500.jccbi.gov/"          Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center               "http://www.mmac.jccbi.gov/"          FAA Technical Center               "http://www.tc.faa.gov/"          Office of Environment and Energy               "http://aee.hq.faa.gov/"          Office of System Capacity and Requirements               "http://asc-www.hq.faa.gov/"          Technical Center               "http://www.tc.faa.gov/"     Federal Transit Administration          "http://www.fta.dot.gov/"     U.S. Coast Guard          "http://www.webcom.com/~d13www/welcome.html"          Marine Safety, Security & Environmental Protection Office               "http://www.starsoftware.com/uscgnmc/nmc" Department of the Treasury     "http://www.ustreas.gov/"     Internal Revenue Service          "http://www.irs.ustreas.gov/prod/"     U.S. Customs Service, South Florida Office of      Investigations          "http://www.gate.net/~customs/" Department of Veterans Affairs     "http://www.va.gov/" Administrative Agencies Central Intelligence Agency"http://www.odci.gov/cia/" Commodity Futures Trading Commission     "http://www.cftc.gov/cftc/" Consumer Product Safety Commission     gopher://cpsc.gov/" Environmental Protection Agency     "http://www.epa.gov/"     Contracts and Grants          "gopher://gopher.epa.gov:70/11/Info" Export-Import Bank of the United States     "http://www.exim.gov/" Federal Communications Commission     "http://www.fcc.gov/" Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation     "http://www.fdic.gov/" Federal Election Commission     "http://www.fec.gov/" Federal Emergency Management Agency     "http://www.fema.gov/" Federal Energy Regulatory Commission     "http://www.fedworld.gov/ferc/ferc.html"Federal Trade Commission     "http://www.ftc.gov/" General Services Administration     "http://www.gsa.gov/" National Aeronautics and Space Administration     "http://www.nasa.gov/"     Headquarters          "http://www.hq.nasa.gov/"     Ames Research Center          "http://www.arc.nasa.gov/"     Dryden Flight Research Center          "http://www.dfrf.nasa.gov/dryden.html"     Goddard Space Flight Center          "http://pao.gsfc.nasa.gov/"     Jet Propulsion Laboratory          "http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/"     Johnson Space Center          "http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/"     Kennedy Space Center          "http://www.ksc.nasa.gov/"     Langley Research Center          "http://www.larc.nasa.gov/"     Lewis Research Center          "http://www.lerc.nasa.gov/"     Marshall Space Flight Center          "http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/"     Missions Operations Laboratory          "http://astro-2.msfc.nasa.gov/"     NASA Procurement          "http://procure.msfc.nasa.gov/nasaproc.html"     Space Shuttle Home Page          "http://shuttle.nasa.gov/"     Stennis Space Center          "http://www.ssc.nasa.gov/" National Archives and Records Administration     "http://www.nara.gov/" National Endowment for the Humanities     "http://www.neh.fed.us/" National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak)     "http://www.amtrak.com/" National Science Foundation     "http://www.nsf.gov/" Nuclear Regulatory Commission     "http://www.nrc.gov/" Peace Corps     "http://www.peacecorps.gov/" Securities and Exchange Commission     "http://www.sec.gov/" Small Business Administration     "http://www.sba.gov/" Social Security Administration     "http://www.ssa.gov/SSA_Home.html" Tennessee Valley Authority     "http://www.tva.gov/" U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency     "http://www.acda.gov/" U.S. Information Agency     "http://www.usia.gov/" U.S. International Development Cooperation Agency     Agency for International Development          "http://www.info.usaid.gov/" U.S. Postal Service     "http://www.usps.gov/" U.S. Sentencing Commission     "http://www.ussc.gov/" U.S. Trade Representative     "http://www.ustr.gov/" LEGISLATIVE BRANCH U.S. House of Representatives     "http://www.house.gov/"     "gopher://gopher.house.gov/" U.S. Senate     "http://www.senate.gov/"     "gopher://gopher.senate.gov/" General Accounting Office     "http://www.gao.gov/" Government Printing Office     "http://www.access.gpo.gov/" Library of Congress     "http://www.loc.gov/"     Legislative Server          "http://thomas.loc.gov/" JUDICIAL BRANCH Supreme Court of the United States     "http://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/supct.table.html" U.S. Courts of Appeals     "http://www.law.vill.edu/Fed-Ct/fedcourt.html#usappeals" Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts     "http://www.uscourts.gov/" Federal Judicial Center     "http://www.fjc.gov/"Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996DIRECTORY OF TOLL-FREE BULLETIN BOARDSThe 1-800 BBS Directory, located on the World Wide Web at "http://wormhole.map.com/%7Esfinc/bbsdctry/", provides telephone numbers and few-word descriptions of toll-free electronic bulletin boards throughout the United States.  Entries range from ADA-9X featuring messaging and files and ADIC, an anti-drug service to WTIE providing waste information and ZDI Author U/L Center offering shareware author support.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996ZERO-IN ON COMPANY NEWS FROM NEW JERSEYFor business researchers, one of the major boons of the World Wide Web is easy and quick access to the electronic pages of local newspapers.  For the first time, they're as accessible as the best-known national and international dailies and weeklies. For company information, they often scoop their larger-circulation relatives and as a rule provide more in-depth coverage. One recent addition to the growing Web collection of locals is BUSINESS News New Jersey.  Its electronic home is at "http://www.njbiz.com/" and provides the full text of highly focused articles on specific companies in that state and many other business-related news and feature items.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996RESEARCH REPORTS ON EMERGING COMPANIESThe Future Superstock provides profiles of and news on small- to medium-sized firms whose securities are publicly traded.  It's at "http://www.futurestock.com/index.htm". Currently included are entries under hypercategories covering technology, food and beverage, industrial, mining and exploration, and oil and gas stocks. Users must sign a guest book, but access is free.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996A NOTE ABOUT GUEST BOOKSAn increasing number of sites are requiring users to provide information in "guest books" before linking to the information provided.  There's generally nothing apparently wrong with this. But IFR readers should be aware that in many cases this is a prelude to soliciting paid subscriptions.  Some sites will start by offering free access then-after an adequate user base is achieved-contact registrants to indicate that future access will require an annual subscription fee.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996DIRECTORY OF MARKET RESEARCH FIRMSAlthough not comprehensive, the Directory of Marketing Research Companies is a useful starting point for those seeking services such as statistical analysis, focus groups, phone surveys, convention research.  It's located on the Web at "http://www.technometrica.com/directr.htm". Each entry provides the organization's name, address, phone and fax numbers, a contact name, and a brief description of services offered.  Hyperlinks are also provided for in-depth information on each firm.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996ANALYSES OF INFO TECHNOLOGY ISSUESThe Defense Technical Information Center and Battelle hosted an "Information Technology SummIT" last year.  The proceedings of this conference are now available through a Web page at "http://www.dtic.mil/summit/". Presentations cover topics such as the Department of Defense's plan to link its laboratories through the Internet, on-line analysis tools, search engines, computer security, and many others.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996WEEKLY HEALTHCARE INDUSTRY NEWSYou can receive weekly news updates on U.S. healthcare industries and Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulations from the home page of F-D-C Reports.  It's at "http://www.fdcr.com/". Select from three topical newsletters:  Prescription Drugs and Biotechnology News, Medical Devices and Diagnostics News, and Nonprescription Drugs and Nutritional Supplements.  You'll be provided with the highlights of articles contained in each newsletter. For audio buffs, sample F-D-C's Pharmaceutical News Briefing on Tape, "WAV" files from the past three months.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996RETAIL GIANT JOINS THE WEBAmes Department Stores now has a storefront on the Web at "http://www.amesstores.com/". The new site offers financial information on the firm, news releases, a corporate description, and a wealth of consumer-oriented information-even a few bargain offerings.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996INFO-RICH SITE FROM TINY LIECHTENSTEINLiechtenstein News, at "http://www.news.li/", delivers up-to-date news plus information on the banking industry, trades and businesses, gold, finance and taxes, the job market, and much more. The top ten items from the country's official newspaper, Liechtenstein Vaterland, are translated into English and included at this Web site each week.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996DIRECTORY OF BELGIAN INDUSTRY ASSOCIATIONSTap into the Federation of Belgian Companies, on the Web at "http://www.vbo-feb.be/", for an extensive directory of member associations covering virtually every major industry in that country from banking and brewing to tobacco and wood. Each entry provides the association's name, industry served, address, and phone and fax numbers.  Although not hyperlinked, these sources can be contacted by traditional methods for membership lists; market, product, company, and industry information; referrals to other information sources; and much more.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996NUCLEAR  TECHNOLOGY  INFO  FROM  FORMER USSREx-USSR Nuclear Technologies and the World, on the Web at "http://www.ida.net/users/pbmck/xsovnuc/exs_top.htm", focuses on policy issues relating to the management of Soviet nuclear technology, reactor safety, spent nuclear fuel, radioactive waste, and other topics.  It covers all relevant republics of the former Soviet Union from Armenia to Uzbekistan.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996DAILY CZECH NEWS VIA E-MAILRadio Prague E-news is a service that delivers English-language news from the Czech Republic to your computer every weekday.  To subscribe, send e-mail to "robot@radio.cz".  In the Subject line, state "Subscribe English".Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996SHARE YOUR FAVORITE INTERNET RESOURCEDo you have a favorite home page, e-mail list, gopher or ftp site, or other Internet resource?  Let us know by sending a message to the editor at "research@researchers.com".Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996INFORMATION ON SOUTH AFRICAN COMPANIESThe home page of the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE), at "http://www.jse.co.za/", offers a well-organized assortment of information on companies whose securities are traded on that South African exchange. Included is a directory of each listed company including company names, addresses, and names of each firm's transfer agent.  Another directory provides names, addresses, and phone and fax numbers for each JSE member securities broker/dealer.  Access to the full text of all recent press releases issued by JSE is also provided. You'll also find market statistics, stock quotations, and links to related sites.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996TOP STARTING POINT FOR RUSSIAN RESEARCHNavigate to Russia is a pleasant surprise.  It's an amateur effort by a Russian student in Norway, Evgueni Broussilovski, yet it rates with the best professionally produced sites for those seeking a starting point for research relating to Russia or Uzbekistan. A to-the-point main menu offers hyperlinks to "Russian Media On-Line," "Russian Universities and Institutes," Russian Web Servers and Business Sites," a "Sensitive Map of Russia," and "Non-Business Sources Outside Russia."  A link to a similar main menu for Uzbekistan is also provided. IFR found each of the links to be up to date and extensive in its coverage.  The Web site is well worth a visit at "http://www.hibo.no/stud/sh4/russia.html".Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996OFFICIAL HOME PAGE OF ANGOLAAngola's new official home page on the Web, located at "http://www.angola.org/angola/", offers a weekly updated news briefing relating to that southern African country, business and economic links, some basic references on Angola, and much more.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996STOCK EXCHANGE OF THAILANDThe Stock Exchange of Thailand, at "http://www.set.or.th/", is one up on U.S. securities exchanges-it offers no-cost real-time stock quotes.  The New York Stock Exchange and other securities markets in the United States provide quotes for free via various on-line resources, but with a 15-minute delay. At the Thai site you'll also find a directory of members, a list of companies whose securities trade on the exchange, economic statistics, and more.Back to Headline List CopyrightTHE INFORMATION FREEWAY REPORT via NewsNetAPRIL, 1996IT'S A ZOO OUT THERESpring hasn't quite sprung yet in many parts of the country.  But after surviving what for many has been a cabin-fever-filled winter, folks are itching to take advantage of the first Spring-like days. A popular early Spring mini-outing is a trip to the zoo.  And you can get a taste of it and plan your itinerary via the World Wide Web. A first stop could be the San Diego Zoo.  It's located at "http://www.sandiegozoo.org/", and its home page features descriptions and photos from many of its attractions. Another western must is Portland, Oregon's Metro Washington Park Zoo.  You'll find its photo gallery packed with pictures of some 50 attractions.  Click on over to "http://www.caboose.com/a1topics/portland_zoo/". Moving East, drop in at the Pittsburgh Zoo for an excellent section on wildlife and information on its "Kids Kingdom," especially designed for youth-and the young at heart, too.  It's at "http://keyselections.lm.com/info.html". If your taste leans toward the aquatic, don't miss Sea World at Busch Gardens.  In addition to an extensive photo index, this electronic zoo boasts a wealth of educational material.  It's at "http://www.bev.net/education/SeaWorld/homepage.html".Back to Headline List WT03-B12-24IA086-000622-B037-144http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te81.html 205.156.212.5 19970122050019 text/html 47831HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:58:19 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:56 GMTContent-length: 47644Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te81.html Sample Issue Copyright ENHANCED SERVICES OUTLOOK via NewsNet FEBRUARY 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES CONGRESS TO CONSIDER CALLER ID BLOCKING BILL (642 words) PAC TEL SEEKS INTER-LATA MESSAGING WAIVER (748 words) ALABAMA APPROVES LIMITED TRIAL OF TWO-WAY LMS (530 words) PRODIGY: POTENTIAL ROADBLOCKS MAY IMPEDE SUCCESS (872 words) U S WEST ANSWERS CRITICS OF ELECTRONIC WHITE PAGES WAIVER (404 words) AT&T UNVEILS 'VOICEMARK' NATIONAL MESSAGE DELIVERY SERVICE (681 words) CONSUMER GROUPS COUNTER RHC CLAIMS ABOUT INFORMATION SERVICES (516 words) PENNSYLVANIA COURT TO REVIEW BELL OF PA.'s CALLER ID TARIFF (776 words) U S WEST TESTS OCTEL's MADE-FOR-TELCO VOICE MESSAGING SYSTEM (543 words) BELL ATLANTIC REQUESTS MASSIVE PROTOCOL-CONVERSION WAIVER (387 words) NEWSBRIEFS Pac Bell Drops Voice Mail Prices (142 words) BellSouth To Sell Voice Mail Gear (103 words) Ameritech Expands VoiceQuest (107 words) Common Carrier Rules Approved (313 words) CopyrightENHANCED SERVICES OUTLOOK via NewsNetFEBRUARY 1990CONGRESS TO CONSIDER CALLER ID BLOCKING BILLA U.S. senator has proposed a bill that would require telephone companies tooffer subscribers the ability to block display of their telephone numbers tosubscribers of caller ID, one of the custom local area signaling services(CLASS).Sen. Herbert Kohl, D-Wis., said the Telephone Privacy Act of 1990 "balancesthe privacy interests of callers and call recipients."  Hearings on the billare expected this spring before the Senate Subcommittee on Technology and theLaw, chaired by Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt.  Kohl is a member of thatsubcommittee."The underlying principle of my bill is simple:  The caller should continue tohave a choice about whether to disclose the caller's own phone number andaddress," Kohl told reporters last week.  He said a provision of the billwould exempt caller ID blocking of originating numbers on calls to "911" orother emergency services.A freshman senator who a staffer said has a "personal interest" intelecommunications technologies, Kohl expressed his views on caller IDrecently in a letter to the editor of the Washington Post and in an op-edpiece in Newsday, the Long Island, N.Y., newspaper.A spokesman for Bell Atlantic, which has introduced caller ID in New Jersey,Maryland and Virginia, called the blocking requirement "inappropriate."  "Theservice loses its value with blocking," he said.But Kohl's bill was endorsed by Pennsylvania's Consumer Advocate, DavidBarasch, who is leading the fight for caller ID blocking in an appeals courtchallenge to a Bell of Pennsylvania tariff.  The tariff was approved by stateregulators in November and stayed by a state appeals court judge in lateDecember.  (See story on page 11)The measure also won the support of Gary Leonard, chief of the Alexandria,Va., Police Department, who said he represents an association of police chiefsin northern Virginia.  While acknowledging the service's public safetybenefits, Leonard said caller ID impairs his police department's ability tooperate.Leonard, whose suburban Washington, D.C., community has a pervasive problemwith illegal drug dealers, said he is aware of more than one undercoveroperation that was "blown" because tipsters were afraid a telephone call wouldreveal their identities.Many police departments have programs that "work on the basis of anonymity,"said Leonard, adding that caller ID is "a big turn-off to this kind ofsupport."  He said an offer by C&P Telephone of Virginia to make call blockingavailable to the police would be counterproductive, since the specialtreatment would tip off suspects with caller ID that the police are involved.In other developments on the caller ID front, New York regulators inmid-January ordered Rochester Telephone to offer per-call or subscriptionblocking to caller ID as part of an upcoming three-month experimental trial ofcustom local area signaling services (CLASS)."Customer privacy is very important," Peter Bradford, chairman of the New YorkState Public Service Commission, said in approving the trial with a per-callor all-call blocking provision.  Callers in the 12,000 line exchange wherecaller ID is being trialed may punch in one of two codes; one to block numberdisplay on an individual call, and another to block display on all calls.A Rochester Tel spokeswoman said the telco agreed to offer the two "privacyoptions" after being urged to do so by state regulators.  "Our intention wasto be able to test this feature to the fullest," she said, adding that theblocking requirement "certainly is going to impact the test results."The spokewoman said Rochester Tel will evaluate the test before filing anactual CLASS tariff later this year.In a related development, Florida regulators on Jan. 30 ordered Southern Bellto provide caller ID blocking on a limited basis to law enforcement anddomestic abuse agencies.  The BOC's CLASS tariff took effect Feb. 1.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED SERVICES OUTLOOK via NewsNetFEBRUARY 1990PAC TEL SEEKS INTER-LATA MESSAGING WAIVERBidding to gain parity with existing messaging providers, Pacific Telesis hasrequested a Consent Decree waiver allowing Pacific Bell to provide voice andelectronic messaging services between LATAs in California.Pac Tel's "limited waiver request" would permit its BOC to select carriers tohandle messaging traffic among California's 10 LATAs and incorporate longdistance charges in bills issued to end users.Pac Bell now offers voice messaging to business customers in the Sacramento,San Francisco, Los Angeles and San Diego LATAs, and residential voicemessaging in Milpitas and San Pedro.  After customer-specific trials, the BOCexpects to roll  out electronic messaging in September."It is critical to the success of these new services that Pacific receive awaiver of the decree to allow it to select interexchange carriers associatedwith Pacific's provision of messaging services and to include the cost of(long distance) services in Pacific's prices," Pac Tel said."Without this waiver, existing and potential customers of Pacific's messagingservices will soon determine that Pacific's services are not easily accessibleand usable," the Bell regional holding company (RHC) said.Pac Tel said the decree "may be interpreted as imposing two practicalobstacles to providing efficient service": 1) equal access provisions requirecustomers to select carriers for long distance communications, and 2) the longdistance carrier is permitted to bill its customers directly and separately."Without relief from these requirements, a user outside his or her home LATAtrying to retrieve or deposit voice messages will incur costly per-minute longdistance charges," the RHC said.  "And users trying to retrieve or depositelectronic messages from outside their LATA must learn a nine-step set ofprocedures that will be very difficult for most consumers to master."Pac Tel's filing expresses particular concern that the decree'scarrier-selection and billing requirements may impose higher costs on users ofits messaging services than on users of competing services.No One-Number SolutionThe RHC notes that many voice messaging providers allow their customers toavoid long distance charges by offering access to messaging systems through asingle "800" number.      "However, since the decree may be read to prohibitPacific from selecting a single (carrier) to provide 800-number interexchangeaccess, without a waiver Pacific will have to connect its messaging equipmentwith all (carrier) 800-number providers that Pacific's customers may select,"the RHC said.While an equitable solution, the use of multiple long distance carriers wouldboost Pac Tel's costs by requiring development of new billing software andprocedures, as well as the purchase of enough messaging equipment tointerconnect all possible 800 providers, the RHC said."These incremental costs, when added to the prices for Pacific's messagingservices, can be expected to severely dampen customer demand," Pac Tel said.For instance, the RHC said, a two-minute inter-LATA call to Pac Bell's voicemessaging service would cost 50 percent more than a similar call to "two majorproviders."Addressing electronic messaging, Pac Tel said students at Santa ClaraUniversity normally used a five-step procedure to gain access to Pac Bell'selectronic messaging service in the San Francisco LATA, but had to go throughnine steps to send or receive messages from outside the LATA."Experienced computer users with sophisticated portable personal computers maynot be daunted by the complications (carrier) selection poses for use ofPacific's electronic messaging services," the RHC said. "However, the averageconsumer will find it difficult to deal with these complications."Pac Tel went on to explain how carrier selection would increase the company'scosts when electronic messages are forwarded from one LATA to another, and howadditional costs are incurred in the usage of voice or electronicstore-and-forward technology.Blocking Not FeasibleSimply blocking subscriber access to long distance messaging would avoid theproblems raised by carrier selection, the RHC said, "but it would also blockthe potential for success and widespread public adoption of Pacific'smessaging services."  Pac Tel estimates that 13 percent to 14 percent of itscustomers' messaging would cross LATA boundaries."These boundaries should not arbitrarily and unnecessarily affect and distortthe evolution of competition in the market for messaging services," thecompany said."Denial of Pacific's request may not kill these services," the RHC said inconclusion.  "However, it will result in higher-priced, less-functional,less-convenient messaging services that fail to adequately serve the customersthe court hoped would benefit from these new services."Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED SERVICES OUTLOOK via NewsNetFEBRUARY 1990ALABAMA APPROVES LIMITED TRIAL OF TWO-WAY LMSThe Alabama Public Service Commission (PSC) has allowed South Central Bell tooffer an experimental two-way measured service tied to certain network callingfeatures used by enhanced service providers (ESP) such as telephone answeringservices.Florida regulators approved a similar tariff filed by Southern Bell inNovember 1988 (ESO December 1988).The Alabama decision (docket 21071) came in response to the BOC's petition tointroduce two-way measured service as a condition for subscribing to fiveunbundled basic service elements (BSE).  An ESP wanting to purchase one ormore of the BSEs would be required to purchase a two-way measured local accessline that measured incoming calls as well as outgoing calls.South Central Bell initially will offer the services in the Huntsville, Ala.,area with expansion to other Alabama communities as demand develops.The BSEs provide specialized forwarding, message relaying andcall-transferring capabilities for voice messaging providers.  The PSC notedthat South Central Bell and ESPs were at odds over the need for tying the BSEsto two-way measured service.South Central Bell contend that without two-way measured service, the adventof new voice messaging services will cause increased usage over its localnetwork and create costs that won't be recovered through the rates paid by theESPs.The ESPs, supported by MCI,  claimed the opposite.  They said two-way measuredservice will increase their network access costs by 100 percent to 800percent, killing off many providers.  They also said the two-way measuredservice is unnecessary because voice messaging will make the local networkmore efficient, because a far higher proportion of calls will be completed onthe first attempt and average holding times will be reduced.Smaller ESPs said volume discounts in the proposed two-way measured tariffsgive South Central Bell's own voice messaging services an advantage over theservices of non-affiliated providers, and give other large voice messagingcompanies an advantage over all the small fry.The PSC concluded that neither side produced sufficient evidence to provetheir claims.Regulators also noted that a number of state-federal jurisdictional issuesremain unresolved in the FCC's open network architecture (ONA) proceeding onthe BOCs' obligations to provide equality of access for all affiliated andnon-affiliated ESPs. The final decisions on these issues, the PSC said, couldhave an impact on the South Central Bell's proposal.While the BSEs South Central Bell proposes might be beneficial for ESPs, theyare optional.  Voice messaging companies, the PSC said, can continue to usetheir present access arrangements if they do not want to pay the bidirectionalmeasured rates.The regulators concluded that, given the jurisdictional uncertainties aboutONA and the total divergence of views on the tariff, a market trial is theonly sensible course.The one-year trial will be limited to exchanges in the Huntsville area andwill run until mid-January 1991; the rates proposed in the BOC's filing  willbe the rates for the trial.  The PSC said it "is hopeful that the trial willprovide data to help both the company and this commission determine the propertariff treatment of services that support the provision of enhanced services."Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED SERVICES OUTLOOK via NewsNetFEBRUARY 1990PRODIGY: POTENTIAL ROADBLOCKS MAY IMPEDE SUCCESSAfter spending untold hundreds of millions of dollars to get their Prodigyvideotex venture off the ground, IBM and Sears can expect to see operatingprofits from Prodigy within a few years and their investment paid off by thelate 1990s, company officials told reporters at a Washington, D.C., briefing.Membership and usage levels have surpassed Prodigy's initial expectations,with 200,000 members out of a potential universe of 8 million to 10 millionhouseholds equipped with personal computers having 512 kilobytes of memory.Prodigy projects that its computer universe will exceed 35 million homes by1996, making its $9.95 a month (or $89.95 a year) service a huge hit with ababy boomer generation too busy to get out of the house.Membership fees are just the tip of their revenue base, officials say, notingthat "the lion's share" of their money will be made from transaction andadvertising fees provided by over 200 advertisers, merchandisers and directmarketers. Prodigy is currently running over more than 750 different programson its menu.Sales of Prodigy kits, many outfitted with 1200-or 2400-baud modems, also is asubstantial, albeit short-term, source of revenue.  The kits have become thetop item in most computer software stores, retailers report.Company officials are recommending the 2400-baud modem for better graphics andreasonable program speeds, but continue to offer a  sizeable number of1200-baud modem kits still in retail stores.Prodigy's blue sky projections as a profitable, state-of-the-art service maybe threatened by the FCC's open network architecture plan, officials say.Even more daunting to Prodigy, these officials said, are telco ambitions toforce enhanced service providers (ESP) to pay measured rates for both incomingand outgoing calls, the officials added."From our perspective, there's a fundamental problem with ONA," said Sandra G.Weis, Prodigy's director of government affairs.  "It doesn't pave the way toequal access, or even try to approximate equal access.  Instead of achievingmodularity, the FCC has chosen a model that continues the bottleneck."Safeguards For Equal AccessThat's a big problem for Prodigy, Weis says, because Prodigy wants to servecustomers over an ever-more-powerful, transparent network.  "We needsafeguards that would relieve the bottleneck over time, with approximatehere-and-now equal access," she says.  "We need to prevent cross-subsidies,and protect against discrimination."Although  many ESPs have focused on co-location of their equipment in telcocentral offices,  Weis thinks such an emphasis is at least partly misguided."Co-location is just one tool to approximate equal access," she says.  "We aregoing to need stronger safeguards."While ONA is of prime concern to Prodigy, a bigger threat to Prodigy's successis perceived to be inherent in telco pricing, particularly exemplified bySouthern Bell's bi-directional message rates approved in Florida and Alabama,and pending in Georgia."It's a fundamental tension between ESPs and telcos," acknowledges AllisonLash, Prodigy's program manager for state government affairs. Noting thatProdigy's flat fee is largely based on customers using their computer'sintelligence to complete transactions rather than a Prodigy mainframe, Lashsays the Southern Bell proposals would probably sink the pricing concept,while impeding a network evolution to higher transmission speeds.Higher transmission speeds are a key part of Prodigy's game plan. According toSirajul Islam, Prodigy's manager of communications technology, the companyhopes to transmit at 9600 kilobits per second, a speed that would allow higherquality graphics and sound.  With such features, Prodigy could become "like aradio that would be left on all day," he says."Affordable pricing is a key goal," says Weis.  "Right now, our average  linecosts $35.  But the proposal by Southern Bell would cost about $200 for thesame service.  We recognize that Southern Bell wants to solve its problem withvoice technologies.  But we can see this as being used for new technologies."The telco doesn't just want to  move in an evolutionary pattern," she adds."We feel it wants to break out of the gate.""The company has to spend tremendous resources worrying about access charges,"adds Islam.But a Southern Bell spokesman doubts that the company's tariff would ever beapplied to anything but voice messaging.  "It's not necessary.  We don'tforesee that," he said when asked about the bi-directional measured rate beingapplied to data services.The spokesman said Prodigy's main concern appears to be Southern Bell'stransition to measured service in certain areas.  Prodigy denies that, saying"measured service was not a problem per se."Even while telcos are the source of Prodigy's greatest worries, they are alsothe source of Prodigy's greatest hopes.  The company is hoping that recentdeals with Rochester Telephone and Nynex to provide transmission andmaintenance facilities (and marketing in the Rochester Tel deal) will convinceother telcos to help spread the service faster, and also to save money."Since the Nynex agreement, we've had additional contacts with other telephonecompanies," said Islam, who declined to elaborate.  He dismissed Nynex'sconcern that it might be limited in the degree of marketing activities itcould do for Prodigy."Everything that Rochester is doing a Bell operating company could do," hesaid.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED SERVICES OUTLOOK via NewsNetFEBRUARY 1990U S WEST ANSWERS CRITICS OF ELECTRONIC WHITE PAGES WAIVERU S West has answered critics of its request for a Consent Decreeclarification or waiver to offer on-line directory assistance information asan "exchange access" service throughout its 14-state region.U S West sought the clarification last month in response to a request from anunnamed long distance carrier.   Since then, AT&T, which supported U S West'sefforts, filed a tariff to provide electronic directory assistance servicestarting Jan. 18.Information available through U S West's electronic white pages, including thesubscriber's name, address, telephone number, ZIP and area codes, would be"obtained and updated daily from the same databases the company's BOCs use toprovide directory assistance, U S West said.To CompuServe's objection that the database includes ZIP codes and permitsaddress and telephone number searches, U S West replied that Judge HaroldGreene already has approved the company's waiver to provide subscriberinformation when the caller provides either the address or telephone number."The only question raised by U S West's (electronic white pages) request iswhether the same information, using the same search categories, can bedivulged by a U S West computer rather than by a U S West operator (using acomputer)," the company said (emphasis in original).As for CompuServe's objection to the inclusion of ZIP codes, U S Westquestions "why ZIP code information, an integral part of a person's address,should not be included with a person's address."U S West dismissed Dun & Bradstreet's contention that delivery of formatteddirectory assistance data requires a waiver as "mistaken."  The company saidformatting "is a function U S West must perform" to provide electronic whitepages, and one that may be required by the decree.To ADAPSO and CompuServe's point that electronic white pages is an informationservice, U S West answers that it may be one or the other.  "If the calleruses the directory information to make a call, the service is atelecommunications service; if the caller uses the information for otherpurposes (e.g., to verify an address), the service is an information service."Finally, Dun & Bradstreet's concern that provision of electronic white pages"not cross the line" to electronic yellow pages is misplaced, U S West said."U S West's (electronic white pages) service will involve only directoryinformation ... classified advertising and other information will not beavailable," the company said.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED SERVICES OUTLOOK via NewsNetFEBRUARY 1990AT&T UNVEILS 'VOICEMARK' NATIONAL MESSAGE DELIVERY SERVICEBeating its long distance competitors to the Touch-Tone punch, AT&T has raisedthe veil on the first nationwide public voice messaging service.VoiceMark, which for now is being marketed only in the Southeast, gives anyonewith a telephone and a Visa, MasterCard or AT&T charge card the ability tosend a recorded message to a direct-dialed number across the city or aroundthe world.Callers to a toll-free number follow step-by-step instructions to record andsend a one-minute personal message.  The message can be deliveredautomatically to any telephone number or person-to-person, with an attendantintroducing the recording.AT&T charges $1.75 for automatic message delivery or $2.50 forperson-to-person service, including toll  charges.  Callers do not have tosubscribe to the service or buy any special equipment.In fact, AT&T clearly expects most VoiceMark users to be "impulse" buyers:people whose tight schedules and urgent need to exchange information requiresthat they convey messages quickly and conveniently."You no longer have to endure the frustration and time delays associated witha telephone that's busy, friends and associates who aren't home, or time-zonedifferences," said Karen Antonucci, AT&T's marketing manager for VoiceMark.However, users of the service do have to endure a complicated eight-stepprocedure lasting at least two minutes in order to send a one-minute message.(For sophisticated users, AT&T provides the option of skipping overinstructional messages by pressing the "#" sign.)A VoiceMark call to the toll-free number (800 562-MARK) is greeted by anautomated female voice, which instructs the caller to dial a code (*H) toobtain information on pricing and conditions.  The same code also summons anattendant.The user then is instructed to enter a Visa, MasterCard or AT&T card number.After a pause, the VoiceMark system requests the card's expiration date,explaining that a January 1990 date should be entered "190."After verifying the billing information, VoiceMark inquires whether the callerwants to humanize the message's introduction by recording the caller's name,or leave the message anonymous.  If the caller wants his name included in themessage, the system replays the name and asks whether the caller would like tore-record it.VoiceMark then asks for the area code and number of the recipient, thenrepeats it for verification. The system asks whether the caller would like areply message, and whether the caller's message should be deliveredautomatically or person-to-person.  The caller then is prompted to record themessage after a "beep."If the caller selects automatic delivery, the VoiceMark system will dial theintended recipient repeatedly over the next two hours, an AT&T spokesman said.Algorithms designed by AT&T Bell Labs and built into the  equipment will causeVoiceMark to dial more frequently if the number is busy than if there is noanswer, he said.The caller also can designate a delivery day and time, and whether VoiceMarkshould continue delivery attempts for one, two, three or four hours, thespokesman said.  If the caller selects person-to-person delivery, an attendantwill personally introduce the message to the recipient specified.One flaw revealed during a test of VoiceMark by Enhanced Services Outlook wasthat at no time did the automated system explain how a user was to retrieve areply message.  A VoiceMark attendant told a reporter he would have to dialthe "800" number, enter his credit card number and request information on thestatus of previous messages.The AT&T spokesman said VoiceMark was subjected to numerous "customer trials"before its rollout in Atlanta.  "We feel like what we've got out there is whatwe want," he said.During the initial marketing period, only AT&T customers associated withBellSouth's BOCs, Southern Bell and South Central Bell, are permitted tocharge their calls to their AT&T telephone calling card, according to aVoiceMark attendant.  There are no geographic restrictions for callers wishingto charge the service to their Visa or MasterCard numbers.The spokesman declined "for competitive reasons" to say when AT&T might marketthe service nationally.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED SERVICES OUTLOOK via NewsNetFEBRUARY 1990CONSUMER GROUPS COUNTER RHC CLAIMS ABOUT INFORMATION SERVICESChallenging claims that the Bell regional holding companies (RHC) must befreed to "jump-start" the Information Age, two powerful consumer organizationssay ratepayers would pay a heavy price for RHC participation in a"centralized" information services infrastructure.The Consumer Federation of America (CFA) and the American Association ofRetired Persons (AARP) say information services are developing rapidly andshould continue to grow as more the personal computer (PC) becomes a commonresidential appliance."Lifting (Consent Decree or telco/cable cross-ownership) barriers on localtelcos ... would not provide any significant new services," Gene Kimmelman,CFA's legislative director, told reporters last week in Washington, D.C.But permitting the telcos to develop a fiber-optic-based network -- includingfiber to the home -- in order to deliver video services will cost ratepayersat least $250 billion, or $5 a month per subscriber more on average over thenext 33 years, according to a CFA/AARP study. The report, called "Expandingthe Information Age for the 1990s: A Pragmatic Consumer Analysis," wasprepared by Mark Cooper of the Citizens Research public interest group.The report criticizes the centralized, single-wire system based onfiber-optics often suggested by the RHCs as the ideal infrastructure fordelivering voice, data and video information.  Such a system would concentratecomputing power within the network and allow users to access informationthrough low-cost terminals, similar to Frances Minitel."We don't think the Information Age is broke," said Kimmelman.  "If it werebroke, centralizing wouldn't fix it."Southwestern Bell and U S West already have adopted such a strategy in theirdeployment of videotex gateway terminals in Houston and Omaha, Neb.,respectively.The CFA/AARP report favors a "decentralized" system with more than one networkdelivering information services to the home."With the price of (PCs) falling, consumer demand growing and computerliteracy increasing, U.S. investment in centralized network-based intelligenceand dumb terminals would be a costly waste of resources," the study concludes.In either a centralized or decentralized environment, low-income, rural andnon-profit groups will not be able to afford information services withoutprograms designed to subsidize the costs, according to CFA.The CFA/AARP study was quickly criticized by BellSouth and the Alliance forPublic Technology (APT), a non-profit group "concerned with makingcommunication and information services more affordable and available to thepublic."BellSouth criticized the study as containing "a number of blatantmisstatements.  It is just plain wrong to suggest that the informationservices now enjoyed by countries such as France also are available in theUnited States.  It is inaccurate to claim that installing fiber optics -- aprocess BellSouth began before 1980 -- will drive up local phone bills."APT said the "so-called study" by CFA and AARP "condemns 60 percent of theconsumers who they recognize will not have PCs by the end of the century tosecond-class status in the new information age...."Such an approach is anything but pragmatic," APT said.  "It is inherentlyelitist and will exclude most consumers from the benefits of the informationage."Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED SERVICES OUTLOOK via NewsNetFEBRUARY 1990PENNSYLVANIA COURT TO REVIEW BELL OF PA.'s CALLER ID TARIFFA Pennsylvania judge has issued a partial stay of Bell of Pennsylvania'scaller ID tariff, saying legal and public policy issues raised by the stateConsumer Advocate and other groups require resolution before the servicebecomes available.In postponing the Jan. 9 effective  date of the BOC's tariff, CommonwealthCourt Judge James Crumlish Jr. said petitioners had made a "substantialshowing" that caller ID falls within the state Wiretap Act's definition of a"trap and trace device."Crumlish added that petitioners had met the legal burden of showing caller IDmay cause "irreparable injury" without the stay, and that the stay will notadversely affect the public interest.  The partial stay permits Bell of Pa. tooffer caller ID to "emergency service providers."Oral arguments in the case are set for Feb. 7.  In a brief filed with thecourt, however, Bell of Pa. countered that the appeal would "create a newlegal right to make anonymous phone calls."BOC: Reject Claims"The (petitioners') claims under the Pennsylvania Wiretap Act should berejected because they are contrary to the plain language of the statute andthe opinion of the Attorney General. ...  All that the act requires toprovider caller ID service is the consent of the called party who purchasesthe service."Caller ID permits the called party to view the caller's originating telephonenumber on a display unit before answering the phone.  Opponents of the servicein Pennsylvania say it is illegal, or not in the public interest, for Bell ofPa. to offer caller ID without giving callers the option of blocking displayof their numbers by punching a code before dialing a call.An administrative law judge (ALJ) at the Pennsylvania Public UtilityCommission (PUC) in September recommended caller ID with per-call blocking,saying the service appears to violate the Wiretap Act's prohibition onrecording telephone numbers without the consent of both the calling and calledparties.On a 3-1 vote, the PUC approved caller ID in November, but withheld thegeneral availability of per-call blocking.  State regulators ordered Bell ofPa. to make blocking available to law enforcement authorities anddomestic-violence agencies, as well as individuals associated with suchagencies who are certified by authorities.In approving the partial stay, Crumlish said the petitioners "have made asubstantial showing that caller ID service falls within the Wiretap Act'sdefinition of a 'trap and trace device.'"  An exception in the law does permitrecording of "electronic communication" but, as Crumlish notes, "thatexception specifically limits this privilege to a 'provider of electronic orwire communication service.'"Crumlish further notes that "irreparable harm" may result to such individuals."The record is entirely devoid of evidence suggesting the most minimalguidelines, such as who might qualify for certification and how much timewould be necessary to effect certification," he said."Moreover, the commission's order failes to set forth basic provisions ofnotice, hearing and appeal," Crumlish said.  "Thus, individuals who are to beprotected must rely on the unfettered discretion of law enforcement officialsin order to obtain protections that the commission acknowledges arenecessary."Arguments 'Persuasive'Although his opinion addresses the stay alone, the judge's view of caller IDclosely parallels that of the ALJ.  Crumlish said he "finds persuasive" theALJ's opinion that "other Bell services currently available on a per-callbasis -- such as Call*Trace, Call*Block or Call*Return (Bell Atlantic'sservice marks) -- used in conjunction with local Message Unit DetailedBilling, offer harassed customers essentially the same ability to remedyabusive calls."Thus, because the pervasive nature of the intrusion here -- the disseminationof one's telephone number without his consent to the general public -- is outof proportion to the marginal benefits caller ID provides, this (judge) findsthat applicants' request presents no harm to the public interest," Crumlishsaid.Led by Consumer Advocate David Barasch, these groups argue that the generalavailability of unrestricted caller ID would violate Pennsylvania'santi-wiretap law and state constitution, as well as harm the public interest.The availability of a blocking option and the caller's decision not to punchin the blocking code would amount to "consent," according to the petitioners-- Barasch, the AmericanCivil Liberties Union, the Pennsylvania Coalition Against Domestic Violenceand the Consumer Education and Protective Association.A Bell of Pa. spokesman said the BOC is "confident" the Commonwealth Courtwill permit the introduction of caller ID without the blocking feature.  "Thejustice system works, and after it's over we're going to offer caller ID," thespokesman said.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED SERVICES OUTLOOK via NewsNetFEBRUARY 1990U S WEST TESTS OCTEL's MADE-FOR-TELCO VOICE MESSAGING SYSTEMAbout 500 employees at U S West's Advanced Technology Center in Englewood,Colo., are trying out a voice-message system said to be the first expresslydesigned to allow local telcos to serve residences and small businesses.Previous and competing products are designed for private use on customers'premises or by answering services, according to the manufacturer, OctelCommunications of Milpitas, Calif.Octel is one of four vendors of voice messaging technology now being used intrials and commercial applications by BOCs around the country. U S West andBellSouth have chosen the company for their commercial products.Southwestern Bell and Bell Atlantic have chosen Boston Technology as theirprimary vendor of voice messaging products.  Nynex is using equipment producedby Centrigram, in addition to Octel gear, in its voice messaging rollout inBoston.  Pacific Telesis is using Octel in its residential applications, butDigital Sound equipment for business offerings.Octel's Sierra system ultimately will be able to accommodate 2,304 ports andserve half a million customers, Octel says.  An interim version with 72 portswill be ready for delivery to the general market in April, and a 144-portmodel will be produced in the third quarter of 1990,  said Dan Patyk, Octel'sgeneral manager of telephone company business development.The product's chief attractions are low initial cost, allowing telcos to testthe service before investing heavily; simplified voice prompts, and ruggeddesign suited to telco central offices, Patyk said.He noted that voice mail systems made for businesses offer a variety offeatures such as listening to the message before it's sent, confirmation thatit has been sent and marking for delivery only to the person to whom it isaddressed.By comparison, although the Sierra can add features, its initial offeringshave been kept deliberately simple.  And customers can dial help lines if theyhave trouble.U S West has tested other Octel systems in Denver, Phoenix, Omaha, and Boise,Idaho.  The Bell regional holding company (RHC) received a comparablyefficient interconnection waiver for those trials in December 1988.As one example of custom design for telco use, Patyk noted that the many diskdrives used to store information in the Sierra are modular.  When one developsfaults --  as all disk drives eventually do -- a technician simply pulls outthe old drive and inserts a new one.Sierra adheres "to the Bellcore Network Equipment-Building Systemsguidelines," said Robert Cohn, Octel president and chief executive officer.In addition, the hardware can be monitored remotely from a centralnetwork-management center.One secret to Sierra's capacity is the inclusion of up to 18 Intel 80386computer processing chips in each 144-port unit.  Another is the capacity tolink modules with a 100 megabits-per-second fiber-optic link. In addition, the2,304-port version will be able to store 10,750 hours of messages, the makerclaims.Components, including line cards and telephone interface cards, can bereplaced without shutting down power to the system, Octel said.The equipment works with both analog and digital trunks, and can service asmany as 144 central offices, Octel said.Prices start at $370,000 for the 72-port model.  The base price of the144-port version is $545,000.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED SERVICES OUTLOOK via NewsNetFEBRUARY 1990BELL ATLANTIC REQUESTS MASSIVE PROTOCOL-CONVERSION WAIVERBell Atlantic has asked the Justice Department for a Consent Decree waiverthat would allow it to offer computer protocol conversion independent of itsvideotex gateway.  Buyers could choose the service they need for privatenetworks."Bell Atlantic does not concede that the conversions at issue here areinformation services," the Bell regional holding company (RHC) said. "BellAtlantic believes that all these conversions are already permitted becausethey simply allow a wide variety of terminals and computer systems tocommunicate with each other over the telephone network."As such, they are used 'for the management, control or operation of atelecommunications system ... or service' and are, therefore explicitlyexcluded from the decree's definition of information services," the RHC said.Specifically, the RHC wants the waiver to allow it to convert electronic mailmessages into printed form.  "For example, such a conversion could allow anasynchronous terminal in a store that sells lottery tickets to communicateefficiently with the central computer that runs the lottery system," BellAtlantic said.In all, the RHC wants to convert messages among 17 different data transmissionformats:  1) asynchronous protocols used by personal computers and many otheroffice devices, 2) X.25  packet switching, the basis of Bell Atlantic's PublicData Network, 3) X.75, which permits communication between two packet switchednetworks, 4) high-level data link control, allowing synchronous datatransmission over point-to-point, multi-point, switched or unswitchedfacilities, 5) IBM 3270 binary synchronous protocol, between IBM computers andIBM terminal cluster controllers, 6) IBM System Network Architecture/Synchronous Data Link Control, which would allow communication between IBMcomputers in multiple remote locations, 7) IBM 2780/3780, an old synchronousprotocol used for batch communications, 8) Burroughs Data Link Control, theBurroughs version of number 4, above, 9) Digital Equipment Corp.'s DataCommunications protocol, 10) Sperry Universal Data Link Control, the same as4, 8, and 9, 11) X.400 electronic mail, the international standard forelectronic mail, 12) transmission control protocol/ internet protocol, 13)Ethernet, a popular variety of local area network protocol, 14) token ring,also a LAN protocol, 15) dual-queue, dual-bus, metropolitan area network,  16)Fiber Distributed Data Interface, a 100 megabits-per-second, fiber optic,token-ring LAN, and 17) electronic mail to fax hard copy.Comments are to be directed to the Justice Department by Feb. 7.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED SERVICES OUTLOOK via NewsNetFEBRUARY 1990Pac Bell Drops Voice Mail PricesPacific Bell says tests of residential voice messaging services in twoCalifornia cities have been rousing successes, but have convinced the companyto lower service prices."More than 95 percent of our trial customers have been very happy with thePacific Bell Message Center," said Kris Kenworthy, Pac Bell product manager.But customers said the price is too high: $7.50 a month in Milpitas, near SanJose, and $6 a month in San Pedro, near Los Angeles.Pac Bell set the price of voice messaging at $4.95 a month.The company has been testing  residential voice mail service since March.  Itreceived approval of its comparably efficient interconnection plan from theFCC in February 1989. Pac Bell says it will offer the service in SanFrancisco, San Jose and other Bay-area towns by the end of the year.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED SERVICES OUTLOOK via NewsNetFEBRUARY 1990BellSouth To Sell Voice Mail GearBellSouth has renewed for two years its existing contract to sell a full rangeof voice processing equipment made by Digital Sound Corp. of Santa Barbara,Calif., the two companies announced recently.BellSouth's two BOCs, Southern Bell and South Central Bell has been sellingDigital Sound's equipment since 1986.  "The VoiceServer product line is nowserving many BellSouth customers and we expect significant expansion of thisbase over the next two years," said Robert Kelly, Digital Sound's senior vicepresident of sales.Digital Sound's product line includes voice mail, automated attendant, voicebulletin board and interactive voice response products for businesses.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED SERVICES OUTLOOK via NewsNetFEBRUARY 1990Ameritech Expands VoiceQuestAmeritech Audiotex Services will add audiotex processing facilities using itsVoiceQuest system in Milwaukee, Indianapolis and Detroit by mid-April, thecompany announced recently.  The company already operates a Chicago gateway.The unregulated Ameritech subsidiary will process calls to sponsor-paid "800"numbers and caller-paid intra-LATA "900" numbers.  The company had beenawaiting approval of intra-LATA 900 tariffs before starting up the "specialtygateways," according to an Audiotex Services spokeswoman.In a related development, Audiotex Services is promoting its Chicago "976"audiotex service by offering information providers who sign up by April 1 a1-ounce gold coin and waiving the monthly minimum usage charge for six months.Back to Headline List CopyrightENHANCED SERVICES OUTLOOK via NewsNetFEBRUARY 1990Common Carrier Rules ApprovedThe New York Public Service Commission has approved a set of generic rulesdefining the obligations of telephone companies and other common carriers.The new rules require telcos to provide their publicly offered voice and datatransmission services on demand and on similar terms to similarly situatedcustomers.  The rules require that telephone companies must provideinterconnections for other private and public networks.On the subject of video transmission, the rules provide that if telcos beginto offer common carrier video services, the telcos must have enough capacityavailable for any video content provider who wants to buy video transmissionservice.  The rules also require that the telcos treat all video contentproviders equally.The rules require that the component functions and elements making up atransmission service be "segregable" to the fullest practical extent.The rules declare that telecommunications common carriers have no control overthe content of lawful communications and cannot impose unreasonablerestrictions on network use solely because of content.  In return, the rulesabsolve telecom common carriers from any legal liability for damages caused bythe content of messages they carry.But when carriers learn of content controversies, they are obligated to informthe content providers and complaining parties about the appropriate complaintmechanisms.Where laws require restrictions because of message content, the law is to beadministered by carriers in the least restrictive manner the law allows.  Therules require that end-users be given the capability to block services whenthey find the content to be objectionable, unless such blocking is technicallyimpossible or prohibitively expensive.The decision to adopt these rules was not unanimous.  Commissioner GailSchwartz, in a dissenting opinion, said the rules were too vague to be ofvalue and offered the potential for conflict with other proceedings such asthe commission's ongoing activity on open network architecture.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-25IA086-000622-B037-188http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te34.html 205.156.212.5 19970122050106 text/html 140410HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:58:41 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:03 GMTContent-length: 140222Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te34.html Sample Issue Copyright INFORMATION WEEK via NewsNet January 1, 1996 Issue 560 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES EDITOR'S NOTE/LETTERS Letters: Surf's Down (119 words) Letters: Intelligent Choice (109 words) Letters: Development Made Easy (98 words) Letters: Voice And Video (61 words) Letters: Net Shakeout (42 words) Letters: Coming Back (63 words) Editor's Note: Prognostications -- Looking Ahead (369 words) HOT TRENDS FOR '96 Introduction: The New High-Tech Landscape --Tools for building powerful virtual enterprise networks are now on the horizon (260 words) HOT TRENDS FOR '96 -- ELECTRONIC COMMERCE Online Transactions: Pouring Cash Into The Internet -- In 1995, companies learned what they could gain by doing business online. Now they're ready to make investments (1241 words) HOT TRENDS FOR '96 -- GROUPWARE Lotus Notes: Sharing The Workload -- Notes put Lotus Development ahead of the field in groupware. Will Notes 4 keep Lotus in front? (1728 words) HOT TRENDS FOR '96 -- NETWORK MANAGEMENT Directory Services: Finding The Way -- Directory services will help guide technology managers through an enterprise filled with important information (1857 words) HOT TRENDS FOR '96 -- OPERATING SYSTEMS Windows NT: Bringing In The Best Windows -- Disdained when it first came out, NT gets second looks (1683 words) HOT TRENDS FOR '96 -- SERVERS Multiprocessor Systems: PC Multiplier -- Windows NT teams with fast PC servers to bring symmetric multiprocessing into the corporate mainstream (1705 words) HOT TRENDS FOR '96 -- MICROPROCESSORS High-Speed Processors: Plugging In 64-Bit Chips -- Systems based on superfast processors are on the horizon (1585 words) HOT TRENDS FOR '96 -- COMMUNICATIONS Voice Messaging: A Smart Service -- Wildfire has unveiled an electronic assistant that can answer, forward, and identify calls-while still sounding human (1092 words) HOT TRENDS FOR '96 -- WIRELESS Paging Systems: New Wireless -- As paging technologies evolve, companies gain low-cost ways to deliver information to mobile workers (1186 words) HOT TRENDS FOR '96 -- MULTIMEDIA Interactive System: Media Circus -- More apps, low prices draw business to multimedia tent (1067 words) HOT TRENDS FOR '96 -- APPLICATIONS DEVELOPMENT Visual Tools: Constructing Better Visuals -- Low-end visual development tools will use new operating systems to offer high-end features (1756 words) HOT TRENDS FOR '96 -- INTERNET TOOLS Programming Languages: Java Makes The Web Perform -- Sun's fledgling programming language for the Internet is drawing a crowd of client-server software developers (1617 words) CAREERS Hot Skills In '96 -- Internet, client-server, and networking experts top lists of the most wanted (433 words) In Short: Sporting A Promotion (55 words) In Short: On A Health Kick (90 words) In Short: A First For Witco (55 words) COLUMNIST The Secret CIO: What's Hot Versus What's Not -- 1996 promises hype, chic trends, and maybe even some really useful tools (614 words) Desktop Agenda: The Parts Bill Left Out -- Microsoft bugs help exhume deleted material from The Road Ahead (606 words) FINAL WORD Object Technology: Make Software Fit Business -- Business software should be designed to help users do their jobs-not dictate their actions (719 words) CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Letters: Surf's DownIn response to your request for predictions of what will behot in '96, I offer the following: The Internet hasn't peakedyet, but you can almost hear the sound of the firewalls slammingshut as companies find out that surfing is about as productiveinside a company as it is on the beach.Big corporations will abandon the Net in droves as they figureout the economic benefits of creating a non-public, more securebackbone of their own.Watch for some big players to figure this out early. Also, CompuServeand Prodigy will merge. Or will Delphi buy one or both?Steve GibsonIS ManagerU.S. Postal ServiceTampa, Fla.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Letters: Intelligent ChoiceI see interest in topics traditionally associated with artificialintelligence experiencing a resurgence in 1996 as people tryto get more value out of their data warehouses. The urge toexperiment with data mining will be the primary spark behindthis resurgence.However, more people will experiment with agents, case-basedreasoning, fuzzy math, genetic algorithms, and neural networksas they try to better understand what they have stored in theirwarehouses.Rather than one or two products benefiting from this increasedinterest, a variety of technologies will see a modest upswingin sales.Larry GreenfieldPresidentLGI Systems Inc.Northfield, Ill.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Letters: Development Made EasyIn 1996, I see applicational development in HTML taking off,removing one of the biggest problems that all businesses havein developing for hybrid networks.Products such as Next's Web-Objects will sell tremendously ascorporations realize that age-old problems like remote administrationand remote software distribution are no longer needed on sucha scale, as only servers need to be updated. Also, finishedapps will be viewed by management or any person interestedin the product by simply installing Netscape.Bruce JonesChief Technical ArchitectAT&T Wireless ServicesKirkland, Wash.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Letters: Voice And VideoI predict the hot items in 1996 will be cellular voicemail pagers,cellular video pagers, digital video disks, and Internet homepages that let you send an alphanumeric message to someoneinstead of always having to call services such as SkyTel todo so.Brian CoxLaboratory ManagerScripps Research InstituteLa Jolla, Calif.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Letters: Net ShakeoutI believe 1996 will be a shakeout year for the Internet market.New services will force the small and regional internet serviceproviders out of business.Michelle SaundersPrincipal Systems EngineerPacific BellOakland, Calif.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Letters: Coming BackMy predictions include the re-emergence of Geoworks Ensemblemixed with a tightly integrated Internet package and an XTas the $500 Internet box.More emphasis will be paid to the "Net" in Internet, resultingin apps being written for the network and less emphasis onWeb browsers.Ashley MarcellinePresidentNetExpress Internet ServicesThornhill, OntarioBack to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Editor's Note: Prognostications -- Looking AheadBy:Joel DreyfussI'm not sure when journalists were first asked to put down theirnotepads and gaze into a crystal ball; maybe they were neverasked at all. I suspect that the ritual of predicting the bigdevelopments of the New Year began when some people in my professionstarted taking themselves much too seriously. Somehow, predictingis in danger of becoming an annual event even in our offices,where we work hard to keep journalistic egos tightly leashed.But there's no danger that you'll confuse the editors of InformationWeekwith traveling-sideshow fortune tellers. Our prognosticationsare based on solid research and knowledge of the industry.And we made them for two reasons: The first is that everyoneenjoys reading somebody else's predictions, if only to reinforcetheir own feelings of intellectual superiority. But there'salso a second, practical concern: All of us spend so much timerunning just to stand still that a look forward can help usput things in perspective. Our list may even spur you to alteryour technology implementation plans for 1996.What's InsideThis special issue spotlights the technologies and productswe believe will be making news in 1996. As senior editor JosephC. Panettieri points out in his introduction, many of the productsfeatured will help bring us closer to the idea of the virtualcorporation.Directory services, advanced network operating systems, groupware,and Java, among others, all help make geographic location irrelevantin today's business world. The concept of corporate headquartersmay soon be obsolete. The Internet-that unavoidable, dislocatedentity-may connect us wherever we are, and even whether ornot we want to be connected.This issue of InformationWeek is unique in several ways. We'vecreated some nifty interactive links with our Web site (http//techweb.cmp.com/iwk). Each hot technology listed here willhave a Web resource center to bring together stories we'vedone on the subject, and links to related sites. There willalso be some threaded chats and ballots seeking your opinion.Finally, all the illustrations are by the renowned artist,Gahan Wilson, His peculiar view of the world seemed just rightfor our flight of fancy into the very near future.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Introduction: The New High-Tech Landscape --Tools for building powerful virtualenterprise networks are now on the horizonBy:Joseph C. PanettieriLooking for 1996's hottest information technology trends andproducts? The view starts here. Today's technology landscapeis littered with tools for building tomorrow's virtual enterprisenetworks. Technologies that were still being tested last yearsuch as visual development tools and groupware-will be thebasis for crafting the new enterprise structure.The means are at hand to build communications systems that spanmultiple companies, ease information retrieval, and fosterelectronic commerce.For instance, all eyes are on SunSoft's Java scripting language,which promises a new generation of Internet applications.After anemic starts, Microsoft's Windows NT and Novell's NetWareDirectory Services should finally provide the needed infrastructurefor distributed network systems. A new version of Lotus Noteswill ratchet up expectations for groupware and could make orbreak IBM's $3.5 billion takeover of Lotus Development.A new generation of client-server development tools will givetechnology managers plenty of muscle to build new systems.Among the products to watch are Borland International's Delphiand Microsoft's Visual Basic.Multimedia-ready desktops will provide the delivery vehiclefor applications built using these tools.Given the hardware demands of such sophisticated client-serversystems, many corporations will turn to robust multiprocessorservers. Also, the testing cycle will begin on systems usingnext-generation 64-bit chips.There is a plethora of new products on the technology landscape.The destination is clear: virtual networks that offer anywhere,anytime information access within and among companies.The following pages of this special issue suggest how best toget there.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Online Transactions: Pouring Cash Into The Internet -- In 1995, companies learned what they could gain by doing business online. Now they'reready to make investmentsBy:Clinton WilderPredicting that electronic commerce will be hot in 1996 is abit like predicting that the Super Bowl will be this month'sbig media event. To anyone even remotely familiar with thetopic, it's obvious.If 1995 was the year that the Internet and the World Wide Webbecame household words, 1996 is the year that those words willbecome gospel to thousands of business and technology managersaround the world. The Web, no longer the sole province of academiciansand Generation X Net surfers, is fast becoming a viable mediumfor companies in all industries to post information and takeorders. In addition, 1996 will see technology advances thatwill make businesses more comfortable conducting financialtransactions online."In terms of absolute growth, business-to-business commerceonline will grow faster this year than business-to-consumer,"says Torrey Byles, director of electronic commerce for BISStrategic Decisions, a market research firm in Santa Clara,Calif. "As corporate procurement managers get more familiarwith the Net, that will really drive electronic commerce activity.Because the Net is global, they're beginning to realize thewhole world is their oyster in terms of sourcing."Several technology areas hold the key to enabling and spurringthe growth of electronic commerce, and all will get significantattention from vendors in 1996.  That attention will result innew products and services, new alliances, and, undoubtedly, newinitial public stock offerings.  Among the hot technologies willbe:  Sun's Java scripting language, groupware p.  18), electronicdata interchange (EDI) on the Internet, security, and a newhardware platform commonly called the Internet PC.EDI could be the "killer" application that drives more businessesonto the Internet. That's why Net vendors are seeking to cashin. Premenos Corp. in Concord, Calif., led the way in 1995with its Templar software that protects EDI packets on theNet. And competition looms. Larger EDI players such as IBM,General Electric Information Services, Sterling Software, andHarbinger have announced major Internet initiatives or formednew Internet divisions. "1996 will be a good year for EDI andthe Internet to get married," says Byles of BIS Strategic Decisions.Of course, electronic commerce won't catch fire unless securitystandards are in place. Security experts expect to see morenews reports about obscure flaws discovered in standard encryptionalgorithms. There will be continued squabbling between theVisa-Microsoft and MasterCard-Netscape-IBM alliances over securecredit-card transaction standards. But experts also expectto see real advances toward industrial-strength security thatwill enable commerce. "Security is still the bugaboo, but alot more people now perceive the viability of electronic commerce,"says David Sims, technical manager of IT at Schlumberger Inc.in Sugar Land, Texas. "Now that MasterCard and Visa are onboard, you'll see a lot of progress."Despite the current lack of security and infrastructure to ensurethe safety of large-scale financial transactions on the Internet,hundreds of companies are moving quickly to make online commercea reality. On Jan. 11, AMP Inc. in Harrisburg, Pa., a $4 billionmaker of electronic components, will go live on its Web site(http://www.connect.amp.com) with an online catalog of 35,000parts. Using a search engine called Step Search from SaqqaraSystems Inc. in Sunnyvale, Calif., the site will let customerssearch in five languages against AMP's Oracle7 database forspecs, prices, and availability of electric connectors, sockets,and hundreds of other parts in the AMP catalog. Customers willbe able to order samples or place complete orders, then trackthe status of those orders on the Web.AMP's decision was strictly a business investment. "Our executivesare very conservative here," says Jim Kessler, director ofglobal electronic commerce at AMP. "A lot of what's out thereon the Web today was motivated by emotion; we weren't goingto do that. We looked at hard dollar savings, and there wasmore than enough justification." AMP is banking on its Website to put a significant dent in its annual $6 million to$10 million catalog print production costs, increase the productivityof its sales force, and reach new markets.Companies such as AMP, General Electric's plastics division,and National Semiconductor have elected to host their onlineparts catalogs on their own Web sites using third-party technology.In Nat Semi's case, the technology is Java, making it one ofthe first significant business applications written in theSun language. Nat Semi, in Santa Clara, Calif., developed aparametric search engine to let its customers find the chipsthey need online.But other large companies have chosen a different route: usinga Web hosting service to deliver product data to their customersand distributors. Honeywell, Rockwell International's AllenBradley unit, and Square D are among 4,000 companies that haveposted home pages on Industry.Net (http://www.industry.net),a Pittsburgh service that intends to be a one-stop shop forbuyers seeking manufacturing components.Tom Jones, Industry.Net's VP of marketing, sees the serviceas a way for firms to get started in online commerce. He predictsbig changes in attitudes over the next 12 months. "I don'tthink [business has] the confidence at this point that theInternet is a place to do millions of dollars in secure transactions,"says Jones. "But that will change. As companies put their publicdomain information on the Net, and see the type of trafficand the types of quality customers they get, they'll get muchmore comfortable."Electronic commerce also represents a huge opportunity for largecorporations to blur the lines between being a user and a vendorof information technology. That often involves partnershipswith large vendors or systems integrators. The Walgreen drugstorechain, for example, sells its network technology for automaticfilling of doctors' prescriptions to IBM, which in turn sellsthe network capability to other customers. "We have a wholenew breed of partners that are also our customers," says DennieWelsh, general manager of global services at IBM.On the consumer side, use of the Web for information will continueto expand in 1996 but actual purchases over the Net will growmore slowly and be more niche-oriented. The best bets for growthwill be information-based products. Heading the list are onlinepublications and software; the latter already enjoys solidgrowth on Web sites such as the Internet Shopping Network andCyberSource's software.net. "The best consumer products tosell online are [those] that can be investigated, purchased,and delivered over the Net," says Mike Homer, Netscape's VPof marketing.Another boost to online consumer activity this year will bethousands of new customers choosing to bank electronically.Although Microsoft and Intuit called off their blockbustermerger in 1995, they're being just as aggressive in going afterthe electronic banking market separately (IW, Dec. 18, p. 14).Once customers are comfortable with electronic banking, they'llbe more inclined to pay for products and services electronically."In1996, we'll see electronic banking laying the groundwork fora comfort level for electronic payments," says Richard Crone,senior VP and co-director of electronic banking at Home Savingsof America in Irwindale, Calif. "People will first get thedegree of comfort and familiarity by electronic bill-paying."But brace yourself: The electronic commerce era is still new.Twelve months from now, 1995 will seem calm by comparison.-- with additional reporting by Bruce CaldwellFor more on electronic commerce see our Resource Centers athttp://techweb.cmp.com/iwkBack to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Lotus Notes: Sharing The Workload -- Notes put Lotus Development ahead ofthe field in groupware. Will Notes 4 keep Lotus in front?By:Stephanie StahlWhen Lotus Notes 4, the 1996 release of the innovative LotusDevelopment groupware product, was demonstrated a year ago,a number of the software's loyal, almost cult-like users stoodup and applauded for more than 10 minutes.There's no question Notes 4 is hot-and much more than an incrementalupgrade. It includes dramatic improvements in scalability,ease of use, programmability, Internet access, management,and more. But Notes 4 also will face much more competitionthan its predecessors did.Lotus-now a unit of IBM-began selling Notes in 1989, and singlehandedlycreated a new category of computing called groupware. It tookthe market and rival vendors a few years to truly understandwhat groupware is all about, allowing Lotus to fly solo.Now, however, corporate America's desire to collaborate on documentsand share information across networks has other vendors anglingfor a piece of the action. Software giants such as Microsoftand Novell, as well as a slew of small, nimble companies, arebreathing down Lotus' neck with their own groupware products.While none can claim to do exactly what Notes does-with itsapplication development, replication, and other sophisticatedfeatures-many products provide some of the collaborative featuresusers are thirsting for.The numbers speak for themselves: By 1997, the groupware marketis expected to grow to nearly $4 billion, up from $1.3 billionin 1994, according to First Albany Corp., a research and investmentbanking firm in New York. With increasing competition in thegroupware market and sluggish sales of its other products,Notes 4 could very well be the most important product everfor Lotus."Release 4 is Lotus' only product," says Giles McNamee, an analystwith First Albany, which is also a Notes user. "Everythingelse is decaying. It's just a question of time before theyfinish shoveling the dirt over the other products."But for Lotus to continue to reign in the groupware market,it must push Notes deeper into the mainstream. The companyis banking on Notes 4, which will make its official debut atLotus' annual user group meeting in January, to help it stayahead of the pack."It's the most important thing they've got," says Jeff Held,managing partner for the Center For Technology Enablement atErnst & Young in New York, a large Notes user. "Notes 4 couldput them way ahead of any competitor if they have a successfulrollout."For starters, Notes 4 has a much-improved user interface. Itincludes drag-and-drop icons, the ability to open multiplewindows, a multipane screen, and more."There is nothing intuitive about using Notes Release 3.x,"says McNamee. "Everything must be learned. The menus are confusingand deeply hierarchical. It may be a DOS lover's idea of acool application, but for a Mac-trained person, the interfaceis nothing short of lame."Lotus agrees there's ample room for improvement. "We are ona mission to make Notes applications more accessible to a broadrange of people," says Tim Dempsey, director of Notes productmarketing at Lotus.More Users, Less SpaceAs Notes becomes a foundation for critical, enterprise-wideapplications, users will require improvements in scalabilityand manageability. With Notes 4, Lotus has come up with waysto host more users per server, take up less network bandwidthper user, and have fewer administrators watching the network.Lotus claims that Notes 4 running on multiprocessor platformscan support up to 1,000 active, concurrent users per servercompared to approximately 100 to 200 users per server on Notes3.x platforms.Notes 4 is based on a 32-bit multithreaded architecture thatexploits symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) and increases processorsupport to six from two. This SMP support means more simultaneoussessions per server and increased replication capability."With a multiprocessing, high-speed architecture, we will beable to get many more users on a server," says Held. Ernst& Young, which has about 100 users per Notes server, has deployedabout 200 servers throughout the enterprise, and is only abouthalfway finished. The fewer servers the firm will have to managein the future, the better, Held says.Lotus also has included some new management tools in Notes 4to allow centralized administration of the Notes network. Oneprovides a common graphical interface for simultaneously managingseveral servers from a single console. Another allows administratorsto centralize policymaking and to delegate specific administrationtasks. A third tool lets administrators make changes to anyserver, regardless of its location.Lotus developers also have made big strides in making Notesmore flexible for travelers. "Some of the [biggest payoffsin] applications involve mobile users," says Dempsey. "Lifeneeds to be made easier for them."To that end, Lotus has made managing location profiles easierin Notes 4. Users can create multiple location configurations,such as "home" or "hotel," each with information on dialingrules, home servers, replication, and more.After that, all they need to do is pick one of the locationsfrom a status bar and Notes accommodates that environment.Users also can determine how they want to replicate informationand decide whether they want to receive all new documents orE-mail messages or just a certain subset. "This provides userswith a much higher degree of control over how they want toget information back and forth," says Dempsey.Replication also has been improved to include field-level capability.With Notes 4, when a user goes to replicate a document, onlynew changes are transmitted. Previously, the entire documenthad to be transmitted on the network, taking up valuable bandwidth."Even if one letter had changed in a document, the whole thingwould have to be replicated," says Held. "[Field-level replication]will be a great improvement for a large Notes network."Notes 4 also has a function called "Server PassThrough" thatenables users to make only one call to access multiple Notesservers. With earlier releases of Notes, users might have tomake multiple calls just to get all the information they need.Server PassThrough also allows Notes clients on a LAN to connectto servers running different network protocols.Noting The NetIn addition, Notes 4 helps users take advantage of one of theindustry's hottest new developments-the Internet. The software'sserver version performs as both a Notes server and a Web server.It includes native support for key Internet protocols, includingHTML, HTTP, and Java. The groupware also includes the InterNotesWeb Navigator, a feature that enables users to incorporateInternet-based information into their core Notes applications.Unlike simple Web browsers, which provide access to the Web,InterNotes Web Navigator allows users to import Web documentsdirectly into Notes.Users can take advantage of all of the inherent capabilitiesin Notes for getting information off the Net. For example,they could use Notes' searching and retrieval capabilitiesand agent technology to find and import data from the Web.An agent-software that performs a rule-based function on theuser's behalf-could be built to automatically retrieve informationfrom a competitor's Web site and import the data into a Notesdatabase containing competitive information. Notes could thendistribute the information to the company sales force.InterNotes Web Navigator translates standard Web HTML documents,including forms, tables, photos, graphics, hyperlinks, andURLs into Notes. Once a document is pulled into Notes, theWeb links are still live."Today, when you pull information from the Web and put it intoa document, its life as a part of the Web is over," says Dempsey."With [InterNotes Web Navigator], all of the links are stillavailable when you open up a document in Notes." So, from aNotes document, users can jump to Web sites with the clickof a mouse.Notes users can also pull FTP, Gopher, Usenet, and other Internetinformation that exists beyond the Web into Notes applications.The Navigator resides on the Notes server, eliminating a needfor TCP/IPon every client. Administrators can deny access to specificsites.While some pundits see the Web's global reach and informationaccess capabilities as a significant threat to Notes, Lotusinsists there is a market for both.Products such as InterNotes are examples of how the two cancomplement each other, Lotus says. "Notes is tailored for thebusiness user," says Ray Ozzie, the mastermind behind Notes."We don't see a direct threat today. We see nothing but opportunitiesfrom the Internet."For developers, Notes 4 includes Lotus-Script, a cross-platform,Basic-compatible, object-oriented programming language. "Notesis really an elaborate development environment in which userscan build workflow and groupware," says First Albany's McNamee."Currently, the scripting is so complicated and arduous thatonly well-trained, fully dedicated developers can build applications,says Held. "LotusScript should greatly expand the number ofpeople who will write applications for Notes."It's In The (E-)MailAs the line between groupware and messaging blurs, Lotus isimproving the E-mail capabilities in Notes. Notes 4 has anintegrated client-server messaging engine with a more intuitiveinterface based on cc:Mail, Lotus' hot-selling E-mail system.This provides dramatic improvement over current mail capabilities,users say. Adds Lotus' Dempsey: "We want to make it a mindlessexperience to do Notes mail." Like previous releases of Notes,Notes 4 runs on a wide variety of operating systems, includingNT, Unix, and OS/2, as well as on Digital Equipment's Alphaplatform. Lotus enters 1996 with slightly more than 3 millionNotes users-a far cry from the 20 million that Lotus' formerCEO, Jim Manzi, set as a goal for 1997.But even if the company can't achieve that target-and despitefears about how well historically bureaucratic IBM will developthe software-one thing appears certain: Notes 4 will be hotenough to help Lotus maintain its reputation as the premiergroupware vendor and compete against the toughest competitionit's ever faced. Upgrade: Lotus Notes Navigators (top) allowusers to instantly access graphical Notes data or other appsby clicking on text or a picture. Developers can use workflowapplications (bottom) to build formula-based options into thedesign of Notes forms.Net gains: Notes' Ozzie sees 'nothing but opportunities fromthe Internet.'For more on groupware see our Resource Centers at http://techweb.cmp.comiwkBack to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Directory Services: Finding The Way -- Directory services will help guide technology managers through an enterprise filled with important informationBy:Caryn GilloolyMost information technology managers have a data center fullof technologies that are used almost every day, technologiesthey can't imagine living without-E-mail and antivirus software,for example. In 1996, IT managers are going to add a new technologyto that list: directory services.Actually, directory services are not so new. Novell includedNetWare Directory Services in its release of NetWare 4.1 operatingsystem more than a year ago, and Banyan Systems Inc. has offeredits directory service for close to 10 years. Outside the networkoperating system market, more than a half-dozen other vendorshave offered directory services for almost as long.But it's only recently that computer vendors and users havestarted to understand directory services.With Novell still encompassing more than half of the LAN market,its directory service seems to have gotten more attention thanall other products combined."Novell has helped educate the market on the importance of adirectory service," wrote Charles Phillips, an analyst at NewYork brokerage Morgan Stanley & Co., in a recent report.Yet many customers still don't understand what directory servicesare and how they can benefit organizations. But 1996 just maybe the time to learn: It's the year Novell's directory servicewill become widely deployed, as well as the year in which Microsoftwill come on strong with its own directory service.Before defining what a directory service is, it's necessaryto define the term directory. A directory is a collection ofinformation-a repository-that usually is specific to one particularapplication. It holds all the information relating to thatapplication, such as user-login data and user-access rights.Just about every application on a network has its own directory.The trick is to make the directories work together, which iswhere directory services come in.With a directory service, all applications can share the samedatabase of user and network information, and it is unnecessaryto replicate the data throughout the network. "Customers havea whole gamut of directories, from crude to sophisticated.Something has to manage those directories," says Jay Seaton,director of worldwide product marketing for the directory solutionsbusiness unit at Banyan in Westboro, Mass. "The directory serviceshould be viewed as a common service that makes things easyto find when you have hundreds of thousands of objects on yournetwork."All-In-OneUsers agree that getting all that information in one place isessential. "A comprehensive directory service is what companiesneed to get all the data under one structure-that's where thekey is," says John Bullivant, systems manager at J.P. Morgan& Co., a brokerage in New York.The larger the network, the more important a single structurebecomes. "Any company that wants to have an enterprise solutionhas to get into directory services," says Robert Anderson,a marketing and communications executive at Control Data Systems,a systems integrator in Minneapolis. "Directory services arekey to any kind of information tracking."While many directories exist in the largest companies, few suchcompanies have implemented any sort of directory service, primarilybecause the choice of products is still small and the technologyrelatively immature.The market today is segmented into two types of offerings: LANbased directory services and enterprise directory services,says David Cappuccio, VP and research director at Garter GroupInc., an information technology advisory firm in Stamford,Conn.On the enterprise side, there are companies such as ControlData, Unisys, and ICL Ltd. On the LAN side, the leaders areNovell with NDS and Banyan with its StreetTalk directory service.IBM, despite its mainframe heritage, also competes in thismarket with its Directory and Security Services for OS/2 LANServer and Warp Server. Traditionally, LAN-based directoryservices have come bundled with the network operating systemand, consequently, have done little more than provide servicesfor one particular network operating system.But things are starting to open up. Banyan set the stage inearly 1993 when it announced its Enterprise Network Serviceproduct line. ENS is a separate package made up of Banyan'smessaging, security, and directory services unbundled fromits Vines network operating system. ENS already is availableon NetWare, several different Unix platforms including IBM'sAIX, and Microsoft's Windows NT.Banyan took the idea a step further by announcing UniversalStreetTalk. The company will make its directory services codeavailable to anyone who wants to implement it."This is notjust a set of APIs [application programming interfaces]," saysSeaton. "This is literally giving them the directory."Novell followed suit in September by saying it will publisha set of APIs that would let NDS act as the directory not onlyfor NetWare networks, but also for those based on Microsoft'sWindows NT, IBM's OS/2, and others. "We're going to put NDSon all other platforms that make sense," says David Clare,a product manager at Novell.Even Microsoft has decided to get into the directory servicesgame. Today, Microsoft doesn't really have a directory service.There are domain-based services included in NT, but they don'tcompare with an industrial-strength directory services suchas NDS. Microsoft says it will ship a true directory servicesometime in 1997 with Cairo, a major upgrade of NT. But itwon't be Microsoft's sole directory; a different one-but upwardlycompatible with Cairo's directory-is expected in Exchange,the company's messaging and groupware product that is slatedto ship in the first quarter of 1996.To resolve any potential application conflicts, Microsoft inSeptember announced the Open Directory Services Interface-itsown directory services API. With ODSI, applications developerscan write to a single API, and their application can accessany directory service that also interfaces with ODSI. Thatway, applications can be written independently from any specificdirectory service and developers won't have to choose a winner.Other vendors such as Novell initially agreed to support it,but they now seem to be backing away from their commitments.Standards bodies also play a significant role in directory services.The Open Software Foundation's Distributed Computing Environment(DCE) includes specifications for building an enterprisewide,distributed directory service, along with specifications fordistributed security, distributed mail services, remote communications,and more. While Novell says it will make its directory interoperatewith DCE systems, IBM's directory is based on the DCE specifications.The advantage: DCE can run on all platforms, from the lowestend PCs to the highest-end mainframes-all of which IBM offer."The one thing IS really wants is a name service that dealswith the whole IS structure-scalability to all platforms,"says Gary Gunnerson, technology chief at USA Today's InformationNetwork in Arlington, Va.DCE also can bring its other services-in addition to directoryservices-across such a range of platforms. "DCE provides onesecure logon to all systems, including mainframes and Unixmachines," says Lisa Laing, a network systems analyst at McGillUniversity in Montreal. IBM's DCE directory service is expectedto be available soon.This cross-platform view is where the enterprise offerings havethe advantage. Companies such as Control Data Systems, ICL,and Unisys offer directory service products based on X.500,the International Standards Organisation's framework for developingan enterprise directory service. Like DCE, X.500 spans platforms.But X.500 has become more of a gateway solution, a common wayto connect other directory services. "X.500 has the opportunityand is the only standard out there to be the Esperanto of thedirectory world," says Tim Sloane, director of electronic messagingat the Aberdeen Group Inc., a consulting firm in Boston.Until recently, the LAN- and enterprise-based directory servicemarkets were separate. But the two are starting to come togetheras LANs become more enterprisewide, and as enterprise-basedproducts begin to reach down into individual network segments.Also fueling this convergence is the introduction of directoryservice tools specifically designed to bridge that gap.A Leg UpThe merging of the two markets will get an added boost whenapplications begin to stretch from LAN to enterprise networks."Directory services has always been behind-the-scenes infrastructuretechnology," says Banyan's Seaton. "But as it starts to beintegrated into the applications, the value becomes much moresignificant."Many customers already understand the significance of directoryservices. "For our purposes, we needed one place for all thenetwork information," says Niraj Patel, network and telecommunicationmanager at GMAC Mortgage, a NetWare 4 customer in Elkins Park,Pa. "We went to NetWare 4 because of NDS. It's great to havea central NDS server to do all of the management."Until two years ago, W.R. Grace & Co. used Digital Equipment'sPathWorks network operating system. But PathWorks didn't havea directory service, so the company decided to look for somethingelse, according to Jonathan Prigot, supervisor of technicalsupport at the Boca Raton, Fla., chemical company. Grace choseNetWare 4. "Since we were looking at a corporate network operatingsystem to bind the company locations into a cohesive whole,directory services was high on our list," Prigot says.With the system in place for more than a year, Prigot says henow appreciates the full benefits of NDS: "It organizes myresources wonderfully. I get a complete diagram, includingwho's on what server and what resources are being used." Gracestill has Hewlett-Packard OpenMail E-mail boxes for employees,but Prigot says he plans to bring even those mailboxes underNDS. "We plan to integrate in as much as possible," he says."Our ultimate plan is to have one massive directory structurebased on NetWare." But most companies don't have the benefitsof a directory service. For many, installing one is simplytoo daunting a task. "It's imposing," says John Miller, a formerdata communications specialist at HealthCare Compare Corp.in Downers Grove, Ill. "[Our] people are comfortable with NetWare3.11 and 3.12. They're taking classes [on NetWare 4], but that'sabout all they're doing."Some customers see it differently. "For four years we had tofigure out how to manage 100 NetWare servers without a directory,"says Chuck Rush, global networking manager at fast-food franchiserMcDonald's Corp. in Oak Brook, Ill. "What we have works now.Since nothing's broken and nobody's screaming, we're goingto wait."Yet even companies that don't yet have directory services seethe benefit. "It's worth moving to directory services. It'sgot a lot to offer," says Miller of HealthCare. "You have totake a long view. The short view says everything is workingfine. But with a long view, you're no longer managing one server,you're managing one network."Even more compelling is the potential for what directory servicescan do once the technology and market has matured. "You'lluse directory services to store electronic forms and use itas an information database for calendaring, scheduling, andeven workflow processes," says Control Data's Anderson. Novell'sClare agrees: "Directory services is going to be the heartof the network, from the departmental LAN to global networks."For more on network management see our Resource Centers at http//techweb.cmp.com/iwkBack to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Windows NT: Bringing In The Best Windows -- Disdained when it first cameout, NT gets second looksBy:Joseph C. PanettieriFlash back to the summer of 1993: jurassic Park was smashingbox-office records.A new First Lady was trying to reinvent the American healthcare system. And technology managers were scratching theirheads over Microsoft's 32-bit operating system, Windows NT.Microsoft chairman and CEO Bill Gates was bullish on his newproduct, boldly predicting NT would sell 1 million copies inits first year.But the brash Mr. Gates would be proved wrong. Corporationssimply weren't willing to deploy an unproven operating systemthat required loads of memory and lacked networking and applicationsupport. Insiders say Windows NT sold less than 400,000 copiesits first year.Zoom forward to today. While millions of consumers just unwrappedPCs employing Microsoft's Windows 95, corporate America isset to ring in the new year with a new look at the 30-monthold NT. "Just about every company we've spoken with has spentthe last two years piloting NT," says Bob Sakakeeny, an analystat Boston consulting firm Aberdeen Group Inc. "Those pilotswill turn into deployments this year."Microsoft won't disclose NT's installed base, but observerspeg it at between 2 million and 4 million units. One by one,corporations are entrusting their department workstations andservers to NT, betting that there's life for Microsoft beyondthe traditional desktop PC.According to more than one market research firm, monthly NTServer sales have topped 30,000 units since last summer. Thosetaking the NT plunge read like a Who's Who of corporate America the Aluminum Co. of America (Alcoa), Charles Schwab, Chevron,General Electric, J.C. Penney, Kmart, MCI, and Sprint, amongothers.Experts say NT is enjoying success especially in three key verticalmarkets: retail, finance, and energy. For example, "Chevron,Pennzoil, and Lyondell are moving to NT with a vengeance,"says Mike Brule, president of Technomation Systems Inc., asystems integrator in Houston that works closely with oil companiesand helped Amoco Corp. install an NT network. Amoco is usingNT for a custom application that helps company engineers estimatethe cost of potential oil explorations.Getting FocusedComputer hardware vendors have not lost sight of this trend.Digital Equipment is training hundreds of engineers to supportWindows NT on systems employing both its Alpha RISC (reducedinstruction set computing) microprocessors and those from IntelCorp. Says Tim Miller, strategic marketing manager for Alphaat Digital, "Our long-term operating system strategy is onethat's processor-independent, driven by NT moving down intothe mainstream."Late last year, NetFrame Systems Inc., a leading maker of serversrunning Novell NetWare, hedged its bets and began shippingfault-tolerant four-way multiprocessor servers preloaded withNT. Likewise, NEC is preparing multiprocessor NT Servers poweredby Silicon Graphics Inc.'s forthcoming MIPS R10000 chip.While Microsoft's most recent iteration of Windows, Windows95, is expected to become the mainstream desktop operatingsystem, adoption has been slow on the corporate side. Instead,NT may represent Microsoft's best shot at securing a seat inenterprise networks. That's because the 32-bit NT supportssymmetric multiprocessing, pre-emptive multitasking, and multiplehardware architectures, including Intel and several RISC chips the PowerPC from Apple, IBM, and Motorola; Silicon Graphics'MIPS line; and Digital's Alpha series.Windows NT may have been slow out of the gate, but it alwaysshowed promise. For example, NT's initial release was stableand contained few "showstopper" bugs capable of crashing anentire server. That allowed NT to survive until its first upgrade,version 3.5 (code-named Daytona), shipped in September 1994.NT 3.5 quickly won praise from corporate testers, who citedits enhanced connectivity to TCP/IP and NetWare networks, extendeddial-up features, and a growing catalog of application support.Microsoft followed in mid-1995 with the release of NT 3.51,the first version of NT to run on the PowerPC.This year, Microsoft will upgrade NT with the Windows 95 userinterface, an enhanced E-mail inbox known as Exchange Client,and support for TAPI, a programming interface for buildingapplications that are integrated with telephone systems.In 1997, Microsoft hopes to ship the long-delayed NT upgradeknown as Cairo. That upgrade will support an object-orientedarchitecture in the form of Network OLE and a new object filesystem that will enable information retrieval across distributednetworks. After Cairo, there may be a 64-bit version of NT,sources say.Two Systems In OneWindows NT, like Unix and OS/2, can serve two operating systemfunctions. Its 32-bit engine and graphical interface make itappropriate as a standalone workstation operating system. Becauseit is a stable, multiprocessing, networking system, it alsoperforms well as a server. In fact, NT has had its best successso far as a departmental network server. Many companies areusing Windows NT for simple file and print services, as a databaseserver, or as an applications server."NT is clearly gaining momentum," says Larry Shaw, a clientserver architect at Seattle retail giant Nordstrom, which hasmore than 170 NT Servers. "NT has taken off," says Bob McDowell,VP of Microsoft's enterprise customer unit. As a result, somecompanies are making the switch from older, established operatingsystems to NT.Countrywide Mortgage of Pasadena recently migrated more than40 servers running Lotus Notes and supporting more than 3,000users to NT. Those servers had run Notes on top of OS/2. ButNotes scales better on the Microsoft operating system, sayinsiders at Countrywide.NT offers several distinct advantages as a server, includingsystem and management add-ons Microsoft has developed to workwith it. Pennzoil this year plans to deploy the popular R/3client-server software from SAP AG on NT and SQL Server, Microsoft'senterprise database system. "Using NT and SQL Server is a greatway to avoid integration headaches," says Britt Mayo, directorof information technology at Pennzoil in Houston.Microsoft has found success marketing NT and SQL Server togetherbecause SQL Server leverages the familiar Windows interfaceand uses setup routines that are similar to Microsoft's desktopapplications. In fact, International Data Corp., a market researchfirm in Framingham, Mass., says annual sales of NT databaseservers surpassed those of IBM OS/2 database servers in 1995,and predicts that NT will surpass NetWare in that categorythis year, making NT the No. 2 database server behind Unix."Microsoft has successfully targeted the database server marketwith NT," declares Dan Kusnetzky, research manager for Unixand advanced operating environments at IDC.Just ask Nordstrom, which uses NT and SQL Server to route clothingto its nationwide stores. Also, Alliant Food Service, formerlya division of Kraft Foods, is using Microsoft's Systems ManagementServer along with NT and SQL Server to distribute softwareelectronically across its network.Reaching OutNT's appeal has begun to extend beyond database servers. A handfulof enterprise applications is finally available for the operatingsystem, including Computer Associates' Unicenter managementplatform, Lotus' Notes groupware, IBM's CICS transaction processor,and Microsoft's own BackOffice, a suite of server applicationsfor NT that includes database, messaging, mainframe gateway,and systems management software.This year may see NT proliferate on the desktop as a powerfulalternative to Unix as a workstation operating system. Morethan 40 companies, including MCI and Hewlett-Packard, eachplan to deploy NT Workstation on more than 10,000 PCs. Thatproliferation will be helped by an outpouring of 32-bit productivityapplications for Windows 95, including programs from Microsoft,Starfish Software, and Lotus, many of which have been certifiedto run on NT. "NT is gaining more and more applications support,"says Kusnetzky.FirePower Inc. of Menlo Park, Calif., is among the first vendorsto sell NT-based PowerPCs, and more hardware support-from RISCand Intel system vendors-is on the way. Compaq Computer, Dell,and others this year are expected to introduce NT systems poweredby Intel's latest chip, the Pentium Pro.NT is expected to be more widely used than Windows 95 on thePentium Pro, because the chip is optimized for operating systemsthat are fully 32-bit. Windows 95 contains some 16-bit codeto ensure compatibility with Windows 3.x applications.In addition to new NT hardware platforms, significant softwarefor NT from Microsoft also will hit the market this year. Firstup is Gibraltar, Microsoft's just-released Internet serversoftware for NT. Gibraltar is causing a stir among NT users,and aims to challenge Unix's popularity as a doorway to theInternet. "I can't wait to get my hands on Gibraltar for testing,"says NT user Matt Merrick, VP of information systems at MerrickPrinting Co. of Louisville, Ky.Incoming UpgradeAlso coming is the long-delayed Exchange Server, Microsoft'sNT-based messaging and groupware upgrade to MS Mail Server.Exchange Server isn't expected to match the groupware capabilitiesof Lotus Notes, but it does promise to relieve the scalabilityheadaches companies encounter with MS Mail.Analysts say NT's momentum should carry throughout the year,but the competition is not sitting still.Novell shipped the first SMP version of NetWare 4.1 in December,and IBM this quarter is expected to release OS/2 Warp Server,which will combine its LAN Server network operating systemwith the easy-to-use Warp operating system. "Warp Server technologyis strong, and its systems management features are powerful,"says IDC's Kusnetzky. "But its superior technology could beconsidered a moot point; OS/2 is lagging in corporate mindsharebecause of Microsoft's marketing expertise with NT."One place Microsoft clearly trails IBM is in the area of enterpriseservices and support. In an effort to compensate, Microsoftlate last year opened NT support centers in Europe and in Asia,allowing the software giant to offer global 24-hour supportfor multinational companies. Microsoft has more than 1,000employees trained on NT, and has recruited AT&T Global InformationSolutions, Digital Equipment, and Hewlett-Packard to help supportNT globally. These developments indicate NT is poised to establishitself on corporate America's department workstations and servers.For more on operating systems see our Resource Centers at http//techweb.cmp.com/iwkBack to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Multiprocessor Systems: PC Multiplier -- Windows NT teams with fast PC servers to bring symmetric multiprocessing into the corporate mainstreamBy:Brian GilloolyHow can symmetric multiprocessing, a technology that's beenaround for years, be hot for 1996? Because, thanks to the proliferationof Microsoft's Windows NT and the raw power of Intel's PentiumPro processor, low-cost, high-performance, reliable PC-basedmultiprocessing servers will finally become a familiar componentof the corporate enterprise.For years, technology managers shunned SMP servers because ofunreliable operating systems, high cost, and unproven promisesin performance. But according to vendors and industry marketresearch firms, 1996 will see an explosion of SMP server sales,outpacing even the huge expansion of the overall server market.Customers like USAir Group Inc.'s operations research divisionseek to leverage the price-performance advantages of x86-basedSMP servers. Lloyd Blauen, Unix LAN administrator for USAirin Arlington, Va., says the company has begun installing severalSMP-based IBM PC servers and plans to add more across the operationsresearch division once the SMP version of IBM's OS/2 Warp isavailable early in January. "Warp SMP is pretty robust," saysBlauen, "and there are applications we're writing that definitelyrequire SMP power."Like USAir, many companies kicked the SMP tires in 1995. JamesMcDonnell, marketing manager for Hewlett-Packard's NetworkServer division, says it's significant that customers now seemto be less skittish about SMP technology moving into the newyear. "1995 was the year for pouring the foundation, and in1996, the studs go up," McDonnell says.Ready To RollPC makers say the crucial testing stage for SMP servers is nearlycomplete, and pent-up demand is about to be satisfied. "A lotof large corporate customers have deployed servers in a pilotenvironment and are now ready to blast it across the enterprise,"says John Thompson, director of systems platform marketingfor Compaq's systems division.That paints a bright future for this technology. Dave Ellenberger,VP of corporate marketing for Data General Corp. in Westboro,Mass., anticipates at least 30% growth in the low-end SMP servermarket this year.Gene Austin, VP of marketing for Compaq's systems division inHouston, is even more bullish. He believes the overall x86based server market will grow about 50% this year, while theSMP segment will balloon 60% to 75%"The Pentium Pro will drive a lot of it because you get multiprocessingsystems in the $15,000-to-$20,000 range in powerful boxes,"says Austin. "It's cheap horsepower."Price point aside, Austin says information technology managersare more willing to install SMP servers because the operatingsystems are "a lot stronger."Compaq should know. Out of 600 sites that have installed SAP'sR/3 client-server financial system on Windows NT-based SMPservers, about half are using the Houston manufacturer's hardware.David House, general manager of Intel's enterprise computinggroup in Santa Clara, Calif., agrees that today's more robustoperating systems will help speed adoption of SMP. "The operatingsystem, where the rubber meets the road, is much better athandlingSMP today," he notes.Compaq says users are responding in kind. "We're not havingto do too much convincing on NT being robust enough," saysCompaq's Thompson.Customers are finding that the performance, security, and reliabilityof the 32-bit software are adequate for running many enterpriselevel applications, Thompson says. "Any SAP site is a bet-yourbusiness site," he adds.There will be 2.4 million SMP servers-both x86 and RISC (reducedinstruction set computing)-shipped worldwide this year, accordingto International Data Corp., a market research firm in Framingham,Mass.But it is the low-cost, high-volume equation that Intel is pushingwith its Pentium Pro chip and motherboard strategy that willexpand the x86 SMP server market.The high-end SMP server industry is "largely still proprietaryand still fragmented," says Steve Smith, an analyst with brokeragePaineWebber in New York. But Intel's approach will change that."If you take the volume side of the equation and leverage thatfor the entire industry, that's what is different now," hesays.Also, for the first time, servers are being optimized for multiprocessing."The hardware and software are being designed to do a specificfunction, and when you add Lotus Notes or some other workgroupapplication, you get a machine designed top-to-bottom as awhole solution," says Michael Coleman, general manager forthe IBM PC Co.'s server business. "That's what people are gettingexcited about."Fred DeBoer, network services director for Advanced TechnologyLabs, a Bothell, Wash., manufacturer of diagnostic ultrasoundequipment, says his company plans to roll out an SMP versionof Novell's GroupWise messaging system, known as GroupWiseXTD, on low-cost NetFrame 8540 servers by the mid 1996."Businesses are realizing that SMP isn't technology we shouldbe into, but rather technology we better be into," says DeBoer.NT's RoleCorporate customers also are becoming more comfortable withrunning enterprise-level applications on PC-based SMP serversas they see more successful deployments by their peers."Four years ago, less than 10% of x86-based servers were runningOracle. Now it's more than 40%," says Larry Ellison, CEO ofOracle in Redwood Shores, Calif.The advancement of Windows NT is crucial for the expansion ofthe low-cost x86-based SMP server market-and vendors say corporateAmerica is responding. Kevin Roberts, product manager for highperformance PC workstations at Advanced Logic Research Inc.in Irvine, Calif., says about 15% of all machines AdvancedLogic ships are loaded with Windows NT. That figure is expectedto grow to 40% by mid-1996 and to nearly 50% near year's end.Financial firms, comforted by the security features they findin Windows NT, are among the early adopters of the operatingsystem.Combined with what HP's McDonnell calls "the midyear kicker"of the Windows 95 interface being built into Windows NT, SMPservers will become more popular in general business-productivityenvironments. "That helps because it adds more [support] tothe message," McDonnell says.Compaq's Thompson says the company ended 1994 with several WindowsNT Server installations in the 50-unit range. Now, he says,Compaq is logging orders for 1,000 or more NT Servers, about70% of which are two-way or four-way SMP servers.One of the clear advantages Windows NT has over Unix in an SMPserver environment is its lack of complexity. "Unix could usea friendlier interface," says ALR's Roberts. "Unity among allthe different flavors of Unix would be a nice start."The Pentium FactorBut just as the acceptance of new, robust software will helpexpand the SMP server market, hardware factors in heavily.HP's McDonnell refers to Intel's Pentium Pro processor as "apivotal product," not only because it is a high-performancechip at a relatively low cost, but because it will help drivex86-based SMP servers higher into the enterprise. So the foundationfor moving upscale has been set. Pentium servers such as HP'sNetServer LS and Compaq's ProLiant 4500 are solid platformsfrom which corporate America can now migrate upward to twoway and four-way servers.Data General, which for years has focused on SMP servers onthe Motorola 88000 platform, made a wholesale conversion toIntel's Pentium and Pentium Pro to capitalize on high-volumesales opportunities in the future. "We expect the low end ofserver computing to be defined by the Intel architecture,"says VP Ellenberger. He adds that while the Unix-versus-WindowsNT debate continues, Data General will offer its DG-UX operatingsystem as well as NT."One of the desirables in the SMP space has always been lotsof shrink-wrapped applications," says Ellenberger. "Unix hasnever lived up to this, and probably never will. But as [ashift to Intel's high-volume SMP motherboard] concept occurs,software vendors see more volume for a port."PC makers for years have fought the characterization of PC-basedservers as weak and unmanageable. Most have been used as nomore than file-and-print servers, where the need for multiprocessingis minimal.But beginning early in 1995, vendors began paying more attentionto the management side of server technology, and software likeIBM's NetFinity, Compaq's Insight Manager, and HP's NetManagerbecame the competitive selling point for the servers."This brought about a change in the use of PC servers," saysIBM PC Co.'s Coleman. IBM plans to create an end-to-end enterprisesecurity blanket for its server line in 1996 by integratingNetFinity server-management software with NetView systems-managementtechnology. "Right now, it's not seamless, tightly integrated,or fully functional," adds Coleman. "We'll integrate severalproducts in stage one into a workgroup product."Coleman says products like IBM's SystemView, which provide fullyintegrated system management, enable customers to eliminatesome of the middle layers of management software to save moneyand give the system administrator greater control over theentire corporate enterprise.With this higher level of management and availability, customersnow have more confidence in the ability of SMP servers to handlevital business applications. Frank DeVito, information systemsmanager for Rogers and Wells, a large New York law firm, saysthat with real estate at a premium and a small network administrationstaff, it's now crucial to be able to consolidate servers intolarger SMP models and have iron-clad server-management tools."We can run more NLMs [NetWare Loadable Modules] on the samebox without it taking a toll on the horsepower of the CPU,"says DeVito.Rogers and Wells already has deployed several Compaq ProLiant4500 servers in an SMP configuration running Windows NT SQLServer, and it plans to take the rest of its half-dozen orso ProLiants to SMP when NetWare is boosted to that level."We're looking forward to more multiprocessing database applicationsin NetWare once we're able to scale beyond a single processor,"says DeVito.With the robustness and reliability of Windows NT and the cheaphorsepower supplied by the Pentium Pro, IT managers are findingsingle-processor systems fast becoming an arcane and expensiveway to approach client-server computing in the corporate enterprise.In simple terms, that means 1996 is shaping up to be a blockbusteryear for low-cost SMP servers.For more on servers see our Resource Centers at http://techweb.cmp.comiwkBack to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560High-Speed Processors: Plugging In 64-Bit Chips -- Systems based on superfast processors are on the horizonBy:John FoleyIf you consider yourself leading edge because you just upgradedto 32-bit software and left the 16-bit world behind, thinkagain. An entirely new generation of systems, based on superfast64-bit microprocessors, is about to hit the streets.Power users can expect to see big advances in microprocessorperformance in 1996. Two giants in the world of RISC (reducedinstruction set computing) processors, Sun Microsystems Inc.and Hewlett-Packard, introduced their first 64-bit chips latein 1995-and systems based on those chips will be rolled outthis year. IBM and Motorola plan a midyear release of the PowerPC620, a 64-bit version of their jointly developed microprocessorline.Two veterans of 64-bit computing, Digital Equipment and SiliconGraphics' Mips Technologies subsidiary, also plan upgradesthat will significantly boost their already powerful devices."Users are very hungry for them," says John Logan, a VP withthe Aberdeen Group, a research and consulting firm in Boston."We can already see the advantages with Digital's Alpha." Thenew chips aren't for the timid. They offer raw speed, hugememory cache, and support for very large file systems-and costup to 50% more than 32-bit chips. Initially, Sun and HP willoffer their chips-the UltraSparc I and the PA-8000, respectivelyonly in their top-of-the-line workstations and servers.By the year 2000, however, 64-bit chips will become the norm."The move to 64-bit processing is as inevitable as night followingday," says Mike Lambert, VP of technical strategy with X/Open,the independent standards organization in Menlo Park, Calif.Is 64-bit-ness worth the migration headaches-applications needto be rewritten or recompiled to reap maximum benefit-and theextra cost? If sales of Digital's 64-bit Alpha chip are anyindication, a growing number of users think so: Digital's Alphabusiness grew by 77% in fiscal 1995, which ended in July.Experts say two factors-graphics-intensive computing and theneed for heavy-duty databases-are driving 64-bit technology.Typical examples: Pharmaceutical giant SmithKline Beecham inPhiladelphia is tapping Alpha systems to store and analyzedata in an application that involves simulating molecules.Pratt & Whitney in East Hartford, Conn., has deployed a clusterof Alphas for jet-engine design.The Milwaukee Journal/Sentinel chose two Alpha-based serversto replace two Unisys V-380 "light" mainframes. Peter Stockhausen,the newspaper's VP of information technologies, says his companyalso looked at IBM's AS/400 minicomputer and an HP midrangesystem. "The HP and IBM were fairly comparable to each other,"he says. "Digital was significantly faster in total throughput."The Journal/Sentinel now runs its customer-service databaseand billing system on the Alpha servers. Bottom-line benefitsinclude faster access to customer records and better customerservice.A major advantage these new chips offer is that 64-bit computingbreaks through the 4-Gbyte memory limit of 32-bit systems.Digital's Alpha Server 8000, for instance, supports 14 Gbytesof memory. The larger cache makes it possible to process hugechunks of data on a single chip."With 64 bits, you can have one big application running in memory,"says Patrick Smyth, director of marketing with Digital's Unixbusiness segment in Maynard, Mass. "That translates into dramaticallyimproved performance and much shorter response times," he adds.Record-Breaking BenchmarkThe proof behind these performance claims? In December, Oracleannounced a record-breaking benchmark of 11,456 tpmC (transactionsper minute based on the C set of benchmark tests created bythe Transaction Processing Performance Council in San Jose,Calif.) for its Oracle7 database. The benchmark was set usingan eight-processor Alpha server running Digital's 64-bit Unixoperating system.Another technical barrier that's smashed by a 64-bit architectureis file size. A 64-bit file system can handle much larger filesthan a 32-bit system-a decided advantage as images and videobecome part of a file system.But sheer speed is the most talked-about advantage of a 64-bitworld. Chipmakers are already one-upping each other with claimsof world-leading performance. On Nov. 2, HP announced releaseof the PA-8000, billed as having "the highest performance availabletoday," 8.6 SPECint95 (a measure of CPU Integer performanceby Standard Performance Evaluation Corp. in Manassas, Va.).Less than two weeks later, Digital announced sampling of itsAlpha 21164, touted as "the world's fastest and highest performancemicroprocessor," at 11 SPECint95.Living In The Real WorldExperts warn users not to get caught up in the benchmark brouhaha."We discount the meaningfulness of a spec number [because]it doesn't reflect what a real-world application with realworld data is like," says Steve Schick, a spokesman for MipsTechnologies in Mountain View, Calif. Mips' redesigned 64-bitchip, the R10000, will go into production in January."The better measure is when you get down to real applications,"agrees Arthur Goldberg, executive VP with HAL Computer Systems,a Campbell, Calif., subsidiary of Fujitsu. HAL just began shippingworkstations based on its own Sparc-compatible 64-bit chip,the Sparc64.In other words, technology managers should try before they buy.But regardless of the processor, it's fair to expect a majorperformance improvement when pumping an existing applicationthrough a 64-bit machine. A typical example: HP says 32-bitapplications will run 70% to 100% faster on its PA-8000.There are important differences in 64-bit platforms. SiliconGraphics Inc., for instance, is the market leader in "floatingpoint" performance, important for 3-D and graphical applicationssuch as animation. Silicon Graphics' customers include Disneyand Ford Motor Co. With the R10000, says Schick, Silicon Graphicsis concentrating on "reducing bottlenecks that hang up a processor,"rather than devoting all of its attention to the sheer speedof the chip. The goal is improved database performance. "We'vebeen running database trace code, and so far it is proved outthat there's a huge difference in performance," says Schick.Silicon Graphics attributes the R10000's performance improvementsto two techniques: dynamic scheduling and nonblocking caches.The former improves processor efficiency by "reordering" instructionsto suit the execution resources of the chip. The latter keepsthe processor active rather than waiting for data it may laterneed to complete an operation.Sun is challenging Silicon Graphics with the UltraSparc I, whichit bills as "the world's first general purpose microprocessorto deliver on-chip support for MPEG-2 decode." MPEG-2 is anindustry standard for broadcast-quality video.Digital and HAL Systems, on the other hand, concede the highend graphics niche to Silicon Graphics. "We don't pretend tothink we can compete with them in the entertainment businessat the high end," says Bill Glazier, Digital's director ofworkstation marketing in Maynard, Mass.Digital has its own bragging rights. It is one of the few 64bit chip suppliers with a 64-bit operating system, DigitalUnix. Sun's Solaris and HP's HP-UX are 32-bit operating systemsthat have been tuned for 64-bit chips but are unable to takefull advantage of the 64-bit architecture. In addition, Digitalsells Microsoft's 32-bit Windows NT operating system for theAlpha.Rich Sevcik, VP and general manager of HP's systems technologygroup in Cupertino, Calif., acknowledges that 32-bit softwarecannot take full advantage of 64-bit hardware. "You can increasethe clock rate [of the application], but that has nothing todo with 64-bit-ness," he says.No Need To RushHP has promised to deliver a 64-bit version of HP-UX in thesecond half of 1996. Once done, applications still need tobe written or recompiled to run in 64-bit mode. "There arevery few 64-bit apps in the world," says Sevcik. "In commercialenvironments, we're not going to see 64-bit applications forthree to five years."Indeed, for most organizations, there's no need to rush into64-bit computing, says Sevcik. Fewer than 5% of current HPsystems ship with the maximum 4 Gbytes of memory, evidenceof untapped potential on 32-bit systems. The extra power of64-bit processors, he says, is mainly needed for high-end databaseapplications. "If you're doing something like decision support,it's worth paying for the large memory," says Sevcik. "You'llget some benefit from that."Graphics-intensive computing is the other big strength of 64bit chips, making them a good match for the real-time multimediaapplications soon to appear on the World Wide Web. However,PowerPC partners IBM and Motorola, and PC chip giant Intelagree with HP's analysis-that 32-bit chips will continue tomeet the needs of most users. In fact, the 32-bit PowerPC 604is nearly as powerful as the 64-bit PowerPC 620.This is a dilemma that has caused IBM and Motorola to delaythe 620's release until mid-1996. They hope to widen the performancegap between the two processors over the next six months.Intel and HP are partnering on a 64-bit architecture that combinesthe two dominant chip technologies: RISC and CISC (complexinstruction set computing). The partners have yet to announcea microprocessor based on the HP-Intel Architecture, but expertsexpect a 64-bit chip, called the P7, in 1997 or later. Untilthen, Intel will be pushing Pentium Pro, a 32-bit processorreleased in November.Long-term planners have their sights set on the new generationof 64-bit chips and beyond. "Today's move toward 64-bit filesystems and 64-bit processing are just stages in the evolutionof information technology," says X/Open's Lambert. "It is importantto recognize this and not develop solutions for 64-bit thatare not sufficient for 128-bit and beyond."For more on microprocessors see our Resource Centers at http//techweb.cmp.com/iwkBack to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Voice Messaging: A Smart Service -- Wildfire has unveiled an electronic assistant that can answer, forward, and identify calls-while still soundinghumanBy:Mary E. ThyfaultThe hottest, hippest new must-have for the upwardly mobile professionalis the Wildfire Electronic Assistant. If you don't have oneor at least know somebody who does-that's likely to changethis year. If your job depends on your phone, Wildfire canchange your life.The system, offered by Wildfire Communications Inc. in Lexington,Mass., runs on a server that handles all incoming and outgoingvoice communications, no matter where you are. Users dial anumber to access their own pre-programmed Wildfire Assistant.Then, a computerized female voice-which doesn't sound computerizedat all-uses voice recognition technology to prompt users throughthe management of their incoming and outgoing voice communications.Beyond handling voicemail, the system, at the user's voice request,can quickly return calls to people who left a message. Duringa Wildfire session, the system will even interrupt itself toannounce and connect the user to incoming calls.Wildfire can forward calls to any phone and tell hotel operators,"I'm looking for John Doe." Like any good assistant, it letsusers screen calls on the fly or by using a preprogrammed list.If you don't answer a call, Wildfire can tell you who is callingby sending a message via a pager.The real power of Wildfire will be evident as virtual workgroupsgrow more common. For example, Wildfire can let a developer,contractor, and real estate agent communicate as if they wereusing the same office voicemail system and personal assistant.If the real estate agent and contractor called their WildfireAssistants at the same time, they could connect and talk toeach other from two distant pay phones.Wildfire also can call users in a restaurant during a long lunch,reminding them that it's time to move on to the next appointment."It's the beginning of the growth of machines talking to peopleon behalf of people," says Paul Saffo, a Wildfire user anddirector of the Institute for the Future in Menlo Park, Calif.It's also addictive. Says Rick Smolan of Sausalito, Calif.,"If I had to choose between my car and Wildfire, I would probablygive up my car." Smolan is president of Against All Odds Productions,which just produced the book, The Passage To Vietnam. Whileassembling the book, his Wildfire Assistant called him everyday in Vietnam with messages, then dialed all his outgoingcalls, saving expensive hotel phone charges. "It's like havinga little person following you around," Smolan says. "At a payphone, I can get things done in minutes that used to take anhour."That's because Wildfire helps eliminate voicemail tag. Currently,about 75% of all calls fail to connect with the intended recipient,and most end up in voicemail, the company says. At the sametime, Wildfire enables time-pressured professionals to politelyscreen out all non-urgent phone calls.It also helps juggle demanding clients and dual professionallives. Take Chris Gregory: By day, he's director of sales andclient services for Video-It in Culver City, Calif., the country'soldest post-production house. By night, he does commercialvoiceovers for products such as the Ginsu knife, Nordic Trackexercise machines, and Packard Bell computers. Missing a callcan cost Gregory $300 to $1,000. "If I don't get back to someonein five to 10 minutes," he says, "they're dialing someone else."A few months ago, Wildfire began licensing companies to offerthe Wildfire Electronic Assistant as a dial-in service, eliminatingthe need to buy a $50,000 server. Wildfire has licensed theservice to three bureaus that offer the service for as littleas $39 a month, though heavy users are more likely to spend$150 to $250 a month.Licensees include Advanced Communications Inc. in Effingham,Ill., which targets Wildfire to sales and marketing entrepreneurs;Milcom Corp. in Wilmington, Mass., which is marketing to NewEngland and Northeast professionals; and Virtuosity, whichalready counts N.Y.P.D. Blue co-executive producer and directorMike Robins as a user, is targeting the capital of hip: LosAngeles.Purchasing a service instead of a $50,000 server is catchingon like ... well, let's just say that Wildfire co-founder Nickd'Arbeloff believes "it's possible that the service businesscould overwhelm the server business fairly quickly." One reasonmay be that those people who can't drop $50,000 for a server"may well be more in need of Wildfire than their corporatecounterparts" who have support staff, he says.Quick ResponseWildfire seems to work well for CambridgeCAD Technologies Inc.,a four-person Apple and IBM reseller that is on call constantlyto provide customer support. "It's critical that we respondto our customers quickly, and this is much better than pagersor portable phones," says Dan Tully, executive VP of the Cambridge,Mass., company."It frees us so that we don't have to have somebody in the officeconstantly." At about $8 a day, it's also cheaper than a receptionist.But Tully says the potential loss of revenue from missed callsfar outweighs the subscription cost. "There's really nothingto compare it to," he says.Wildfire already has generated a lot of interest. In the pastyear, more than 60,000 callers have heard a demonstration ofthe service by calling the company's "800-Wildfire" demo line.The company expects to have service bureaus in the 10 largestmetropolitan areas by the second quarter of 1996, with nationalcoverage and several thousand users by year's end. Cellularproviders AT&T and Pacific Bell will integrate the technologyinto their service in 1997, and Wildfire is in discussionswith other carriers.What's next? How about networking Wildfire servers togetherand letting multiple Wildfire Assistants schedule and set upconference calls? In the future, Wildfire will handle all communications,including E-mail and faxes. Someday, you may even be able toprogram your assistant by dialing in through the World WideWeb.Further down the line, Wildfire may provide assistance at homemonitoring the baby's room, turning off the oven, or tellingthe temperature outside. Or you may use Wildfire in your car.But Wildfire isn't for everything- when it comes to voice recognitionfor television remote controls, d'Arbeloff believes the thumbis faster. But in other cases, once someone's gotten used toWildfire, it's hard to let go. Says Saffo, "It already seemslike a foreign idea for me to take a phone call without firstknowing who's on the other end."For more on communications see our Resource Centers at http//techweb.cmp.com/iwkBack to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Paging Systems: New Wireless -- As paging technologies evolve, companies gainlow-cost ways to deliver information to mobile workersBy:Jill GambonSkytel Corp. was ahead of its rivals when it rolled out thefirst two-way paging service last September. But the companycan expect plenty of competition this year as several companiesintroduce their own two-way paging and voice messaging serviceson the much-hyped narrowband Personal Communications Services(PCS) networks, thus bringing anytime, anywhere communicationa step closer to reality.As those PCS networks come on line, paging products, long deridedas low-tech gadgets, are starting to gain respect and win overcorporate users. PCS networks operate at higher radio frequenciesthan cellular and use twice as much radio spectrum as one-waypaging. They offer two-way messaging, voice, and even fulldata transfer services. As the technology evolves, companiesenvision pagers becoming a low-cost alternative for deliveringkey business information to mobile workers.The information systems department at Global Marine Inc., anoffshore drilling contractor in Houston, has been using SkyTel2-Way for several months to keep LAN technicians in contactwith the help desk. SkyTel's service lets technicians answermessages with preprogrammed replies like "stuck in traffic"or "I'll call in 15 minutes." They can also send an up-to-500character E-mail message by connecting the device to a HewlettPackard palmtop computer.Constant ContactGlobal Marine technicians, who roam among three buildings, nolonger have to find a phone to answer a page. "What I likeis the response capability," says Gary Garrison, the company'stelecommunications manager. "If you're in a meeting, you candeal with a problem without having to get up and use the phone."It is precisely this ability to stay in constant contact andeasily exchange information that SkyTel and its rivals hopewill drive demand for their services. SkyTel and others haveinvested heavily in building PCS networks. SkyTel got a headstart when it won a Pioneer Preference award from the FCC in1991 to develop the first two-way messaging service. Sincethen, 10 companies-including SkyTel-have paid more than $617million for the nationwide narrowband PCS licenses the FCCauctioned in July 1994.The rollout of two-way paging and voice messaging comes at atime when paging's popularity is at an all-time high. Some34 million Americans carry pagers, up from 27.3 million lastyear, according to Dorothy Salmon, a paging analyst with MTAEMCI, a telecommunications consulting firm in Washington. Salmonexpects demand to grow by 25% to 30% a year during the nextfew years.Some companies already use one-way paging networks to deliverlimited amounts of information. The New England Medical Centerin Boston uses software from Data Critical Corp. of Redmond,Wash., to transmit EKG files to doctors over one-way pagingnetworks.The advent of two-way messaging should increase the capacityfor sending and requesting information, permitting bigger,more complex files to be exchanged, says Craig Kairis, VP ofbusiness development for Data Critical. "There's more bandwidth,so we will be able to do more faster," he says. Particularlypromising is the potential for PCS networks to access and querythe corporate database, Kairis adds.Trials In The OffingWith the network infrastructure nearly built, many carriersare getting ready to roll out trials. Sometime in the firstquarter, Paging Network Inc. (PageNet) in Plano, Texas, willbegin testing its voice-messaging service in San Francisco,Dallas, and New York over its PCS network. Dubbed VoiceNow,the service promises to transform a pager into a pocket-sizedanswering machine for about $20 a month. PageNet subscriberswill listen to digital voice messages by holding a pager totheir ear. By mid-year, PageNet plans to launch trials of atwo-way data messaging service in Atlanta. Like SkyTel, PageNet'sservice will let subscribers send pre-programmed messages orreply to a page by selecting from a menu of responses. By 1997,the company expects to offer more robust data transfer, likesending spreadsheets over its PCS network.PageMart in Dallas also plans to launch trials of its voicemessaging and two-way paging service this year. The companyexpects subscribers will eventually use the data service toconduct transactions such as airline and hotel reservationsor to order theater tickets. PageMart is aggressively courtingsoftware makers to integrate wireless messaging with enterpriseapplications such as E-mail."The [PCS] spectrum is considered a wide-open frontier. Thesoftware will give it its personality," a PageMart spokeswomansays. To prime the pump, the company released a software developer'skit last June. PageMart is working with the software companiesto target vertical markets like field service and field sales.AirTouch Communications of Dallas also is developing a two-waymessaging service that is expected to debut this year. Anothersupplier, PCS Development Corp. of Greenville, S.C., is expectedto begin trials of a voice messaging service over its two-waynetwork in Atlanta in the first quarter and in Boston in thesecond quarter. The company expects to have nationwide voicemessaging and two-way data messaging by 1997.The investment community is also getting involved. In November,PCS Development announced it raised $55.5 million in a privateequity offering, the largest venture-backed private equityfinancing in 1995, according to Securities Data Corp., a Newark,N.J. research firm.For its part, SkyTel is improving its pager's design and betterintegrating its network with enterprise applications such asdatabase querying. The company is readying beta versions ofits software developers kit and is upgrading the pager withpen input capabilities to make it easier to generate messages,says Doug Brackbill, SkyTel's senior VP of advanced applications.Some envision the day when pagers equipped with infrared portswill enable wireless file transfer between pager and PC. Updatedspreadsheets or word processing documents sent to a pager couldbe transferred via infrared to a laptop or PC for viewing orprinting. Notebook makers are expected to build two-way pagingcapabilities into their machines, eliminating the need to connectthe pager to the notebook to transfer files. "It's so obviousthat two-way paging should be built into notebooks," says IraBrodsky, president of Datacomm Research in Wilmette, Ill. "Alot of the voicemail phone tag and hunting for phones wouldbe avoided."Motorola, developer of the Reflex two-way paging protocol, haslicensed its technology to Texas Instrument's semiconductordivision, so notebooks with two-way paging capabilities couldbe on the market by year's end, says Larry Conlee, corporateVP and director of worldwide markets for Motorola's advancedmessaging systems division. Brodsky also expects paging capabilitieswill soon be better integrated into personal digital assistants,creating a market for information services like traffic updatesand travel and entertainment reports to be delivered over PCSnetworks.One looming issue, however, is dueling standards. While manypaging companies are basing their systems on Reflex, AT&T hasdeveloped a TCP/IP standard, known as Pact (Personal Air CommunicationsTechnology). "The fact that AT&T would invest energy and timeto come up with their own standards underscores how importantthis market is," says Motorola's Conlee.For more on wireless see our Resource Centers at http://techweb.cmp.comiwkBack to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Interactive System: Media Circus -- More apps, low prices draw business to multimedia tent By:Mary HayesFor consumers, the definition of multi-media is easy: cool PCgames, CD-ROM videos, and CD-quality music played on a PC orMacintosh. But business and technology managers are still strugglingto define multimedia and what multimedia technologies meanto their enterprises. To many technology managers, "multimedia"is a code word for flashy, yet unnecessary, devices and applicationsthat are too pricey to be truly useful.Business attitudes about multimedia should begin to change in1996. Advances in technology and lower costs will help businessPCs evolve from tools that create and manipulate static, textbased information to integrated communications systems thatincorporate sound and movement while encouraging user interaction.More businesses will begin to use desktop videoconferencing,computer-based training, interactive catalogs, and other multimediaapplications."It's important for the information technology community tothink outside the box," advises Philip Dodds, president ofthe Interactive Multimedia Association, a trade group in Annapolis,Md. "Multimedia applications will develop from areas we'renot even thinking about-things we haven't used a computer forbefore." That's why, in Dodds' view, businesses need to becomemore creative in encouraging the daily use of PCs.Several factors will help drive multimedia into mainstream corporateAmerica. The vendor community is working hard to improve suchstill-immature technologies as video compression. More softwareand hardware companies are banding together and promoting openmultimedia standards. Systems manufacturers are building moresystems pre-loaded with multimedia hardware, obviating theneed to spend corporate dollars for add-on software.But perhaps the biggest force in multimedia in business is thedeclining price of systems that have sufficient computing powerto run multimedia applications. Pentium-based PCs were sellingearly in 1995 at an average of $2,200; by early 1996 they willbe priced at least $500 lower. That's important, because whilemost businesses use a version of Microsoft Windows on the desktop,most multimedia Windows applications don't work well on PCsthat run on microprocessor platforms less powerful than Pentiums.Price wars broke out among makers of Pentium-based systems inthe last quarter of 1995 and are expected to continue into1996. Intel, which produces the Pentium chip, says it willcut prices again on Feb. 1, which should continue to fuel systemprice drops.Also, computer manufacturers now build systems with multimediain mind. For example, in October IBM unveiled its PC SeriesModel 330 containing a 75-MHz Pentium microprocessor with 8Mbytes of RAM and a 540-Mbyte hard drive for $1,660-just afew hundred dollars more than a powerful 486 PC system. ThatPentium PC ships with 2 Mbytes of video RAM and a CD-ROM drive.Hugh Hendrick, IS manager for the City of San Mateo, Calif.,notesthat even budget-crunched municipalities are now buying Pentiums."Most new systems we're buying are Pentiums," says Hendrick."They're so cheap." But how many of these Pentium PCs includemultimedia? That depends on the cost of add-on hardware, saysHendrick. "As these features become more common and you seemore bundles, people will get more motivated," he adds.Growing TrendSeveral manufacturers already have announced multimedia bundlinga trend that should grow in 1996. Tatung Co. of America Inc.in Long Beach, Calif., recently rolled out the Uniq 5510, a100-MHz Pentium PC with Super Graphics Video Array (SVGA),a Creative Labs sound card, a CD-ROM drive, 16 Mbytes of RAM,2 Mbytes of video RAM, a 540-Mbyte hard drive, and a softwareutility that sets resolution and color depth. Total price:$2,688.In December, Sigma Designs Inc. in Fremont, Calif., announceda deal with Zenon Technology Inc. to pre-install Sigma MPEGaccelerator cards in Zenon's Pentium systems. Because it includesstandard Motion Pictures Experts Group (MPEG) video-compressiontechnology, Zenon's $2,000, 75-MHz Pentium Interactive MPEGsystem (which comes with 16 Mbytes of RAM, a 1-Gbyte hard drive,and quad-speed CD-ROM drive) can process TV-quality video andCD-quality sound without add-on cards.Some vendors are bundling multimedia hardware and software.Compaq says it will ship PCs with ProShare, Intel's desktopvideo- and teleconferencing software, by late 1997. The twocompanies say they need nearly two years to figure out howbest to bundle conferencing and keep systems costs low.Several manufacturers are jointly developing open standardsfor multimedia technology. One of the most important is theadoption of the MPEG video-compression standard, which is beingpushed by the MPEG consortium, a group sanctioned by the InternationalStandards Organization in Paris. MPEG helps networked systemsmove large video images more easily and eliminates the jerky,unpolished look of video that runs on PCs. The more vendorsthat adopt MPEG technology, the lower the cost and the morecompatible various systems will become.Microsoft's Windows 95 desktop operating system is expectedto gain MPEG support this year. But industry observers noteone major problem with MPEG software: It requires that themicroprocessor do most of the work, making the technology suitableonly for high-end Pentium machines. Thus, the adoption of MPEGsoftware rests on the affordability of those systems.But MPEG's real growth will come from corporate acceptance ofvideoconferencing."These systems are almost as common as acopy machine for global companies," notes Dusty Sykes, a consultantat Vanguard Communications in Morris Plains, N.J.Eric Goldreich, IS manager at law firm Sheppard, Mullen, Richter& Hampton in Los Angeles, plans to purchase a Concord videoconferencingsystem from PictureTel Corp. in Danvers, Mass., early in 1996.Notes Goldreich, "If I have just 10 lawyers who don't haveto fly from San Francisco to L.A. for a meeting every month,the system pays for itself." The cost of operating Concordabout $2,800 a month-is "less than it was a few years ago,"says Goldreich.In 1996, businesses can expect more portable conferencing systemsat more affordable prices. Analysts predict systems makerswill start to market PC notebooks with color LCD screens, highquality sound, and CD-ROM drives in the $2,000 price range.Improved video on portable systems may affect how some salesand marketing professionals work. Soon, business will experimentwith video presentations or videoconferences on the road.After all, as more workers install multimedia Pentium or PowerPCmachines at home, the more they'll come to expect the powerand glitz of multimedia at work.For more on multimedia see our Resource Centers at http://techweb.cmp.comiwkBack to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Visual Tools: Constructing Better Visuals -- Low-end visual development toolswill use new operating systems to offer high-end featuresBy:Sean GallagherOnce upon a time, visual development tools could be categorizedeasily. At the low end were tools like Microsoft's Visual Basicand Powersoft Corp.'s PowerBuilder. Developers could use theseproducts to quickly build desktop applications or front endsfor databases, but such products lacked management tools andfacilities for large team development. At the high end, toolssuch as Forte from Forte Software Inc. and Dynasty from DynastyTechnologies Inc., could build three-tier applications andhad the enterprise architecture that the low-end tools lacked,but carried a hefty price tag.But 1996 will see those class distinctions fade away as thelow-end tools of yesterday gain many of the features of enterpriseclass development tools. New releases of PowerBuilder, VisualBasic, Borland International Inc.'s Delphi, and Gupta Corp.'sCentura-a 32-bit successor to SQLWindows-will ship this year,putting new power into the hands of Windows developers fora fraction of the price of their heavyweight cousins.Two major new technologies will push these tools into the worldof full-scale enterprise development: standard object modelsfor both the desktop and distributed environments, and structuredmethodologies for building large-scale applications. At thesame time, built-in compilers will make the performance ofthese tools closer to that of third-generation languages (3GLs)like C++Visual tools are coming of age partly because operating systemsare finally up to the task. Visual Basic 4.0 and the upcoming32-bit releases of Delphi version 2.0, PowerBuilder 5.0, andCentura will run as native applications on Microsoft's Windows95 and Windows NT operating systems. Besides being more stablethan Windows 3.1, these operating systems offer an object modelfor applications to interact with-Microsoft's OLE 2.0 objecttechnology.OLE controls (OCXs) are now the standard components for assemblingVisual Basic applications. Since all the development toolsbeing written to the Windows 95 standard will be able to useOCXs, the OCX market is likely to explode this year, givingapplications everything from database access controls to builtin Internet functionality.The OLE object model also turns OLE 2.0-compliant software-includingapplications written in Visual Basic 4.0 and the upcoming visualtools-into components that can be embedded in or linked toother OLE 2.0 applications. This level of application integrationcomes at a price: Many developers consider OLE too big andtoo slow. But it opens a number of possibilities to users ofvisual tools, including a means to partition client-serverapplications.Distributed OLEThe first visual tool to take full advantage of OLE 2.0 wasMicrosoft's Visual Basic 4.0, introduced in September. Thecenterpiece of Visual Basic 4.0 is its remote automation objecttechnology, based on Microsoft's distributed extension of theOLE object model. This technology will be released separatelyin 1996 as Network OLE.The distributed extension to the OLE standard supports communicationsbetween applications and objects across a network as thoughthey were running on the same machine. OLE automation objectsthus become server applications, pushing visual tools intothe realm of multitier client-server development.Three-tier client-server applications are partitioned into clientand multiple server components to ease management headachesand to increase performance. Most of the business logic computingis handled by a shared object running on an application server,while the client is reduced to handling little more than howthe data is entered and displayed.Network OLE will make communications between application serverobjects and client front ends part of the same interprocesscommunications structure that handles communications betweenWindows applications on the same computer. Network OLE willuse an established technology to do this: remote procedurecalls (RPCs)Gupta's SQLWindows and other visual development tools have hadthe capability to pass RPCs for some time, but they often requirecoding in C or C++ to fully exploit RPCs. Network OLE wrapsRPCs in an easily digestible form, removing much of the painof developing with it.So far, only Visual Basic leverages this technology directly.But other visual tools can use Visual Basic as network plumbingby acting as remote automation objects for Visual Basic applications.Once Microsoft makes distributed OLE part of its operatingsystem, any OLE-supporting tool will be able to hook into NetworkOLE.Microsoft also is teaming with Software AG to port OLE integrationto Unix, VMS, and MVS systems. But some vital elements aremissing from Microsoft's object model-for one, it lacks a tool,such as an object broker or an object repository, to managethe networked objects.Visual Basic also lacks a built-in methodology for designingcode, and despite its new version-control capabilities, itstill strikes high-end developers as too undisciplined in itsframework for large-scale development. Also, because VisualBasic uses a run-time interpreter rather than compiled binarycode to run its applications, it suffers a performance hitthat is worsened by OLE 2.0's sluggishness.The next release of Visual Basic will address some of theseissues by adding a compiler. In addition, Microsoft will initiatea partner program for third-party developers of management,computer-aided software engineering (CASE), and distributedtools.Delphi was touted by Borland during its initial developmentas a Visual Basic killer. While it hasn't swept Visual Basicfrom the field, Delphi has won over many Microsoft customersand established a niche for building fast, tight, desktop databasecentric applications.What made Delphi hot in 1995 will make it hotter in 1996. Itmanages to balance the flexibility and power of an object-orientedprogramming language with the speed of a rapid applicationsdevelopment tool, and it has strong database integration features.But Delphi has also grown into something more. The next releaseof Delphi-version 2.0-will take further advantage of its ObjectPascal language's 3GL roots in the 32-bit realm and leapfrogmany of the enterprise features of Visual Basic. There willbe three versions of the tool: Delphi Desktop for individualdevelopers, Delphi Developer for professional LAN-based developers,and Delphi Client/Server Suite for client-server developers.The developer and client-server versions will include both developmentmanagement tools often associated with the high end of theapplications development market: an object repository for sharingreusable forms and other objects, a data dictionary for standardizeddata types, direct support for Intersolv's PVCS version-controlsoftware, and a source-code library of visual controls.Another new feature incorporated into the two high-end versionsof Delphi will be the Open Tools API, an applications programminginterface that's designed for integrating Delphi with CASEtools, version-control systems, and third-party experts (asBorland calls its automated helpers). The client-server editionalso will include tools specific to the world of two-tier development.One of these is SQL Explorer, which allows developers to browseand edit the configuration of domains, triggers, and storedprocedures on any supported database server.But when it comes to three-tier computing, Borland has decidedto let others manage the details. The Scotts Valley, Calif.,company has not implemented its own application partitioningarchitecture; instead, it will exploit Microsoft's NetworkOLE for three-tier client-server applications.Three PlatformsPowersoft's PowerBuilder 5.0, which will ship before the summer,adds both application partitioning and the capability to compilecode. PowerBuilder also brings with it the best inherent crossplatform capabilities-it's the only visual tool of the fourthat can deploy applications on Unix and the Macintosh, aswell as on Windows.At the same time, PowerBuilder's limitations fall somewherebetween Visual Basic's and Delphi's-it is neither as flexibleas Delphi nor as easy to use as Visual Basic. This will changewith its upcoming support of Microsoft's OLE 2.0 and OCX standardsand its growing library of objects.Powersoft, rather than rely on Microsoft to provide the plumbingfor three-tier applications, is building its own multiplatformmodel for distributed objects. Within PowerBuilder 5.0, developerswill be able to deploy PowerBuilder objects on Windows NT,Unix, or Macintosh and use Powersoft's own object request brokerto establish communications between applications and distributedobjects. Powersoft's Practical Application Partitioning strategy,which revolves around its object request broker, will let PowerBuilderdevelopers move objects to application servers, compile themas executable programs on the server platform, and manage connectionsbetween applications and objects through a transport objectrunning on a designated server. While this method of objectbrokering is proprietary, the Concord, Mass., company has designedits architecture to plug into a standard Common Object RequestBroker Architecture (Corba) system in the future.PowerBuilder 5.0 will compile to native binary code by firstgenerating C code, then passing that code behind the scenesto the Watcom 32-bit C compiler. While this will give PowerBuilderapplications better performance, developers won't be able toaccess or modify the generated C code to tune or debug it.Gupta isn't moving its SQLWindows platform to the 32-bit environment.Instead, the Menlo Park, Calif., company is rewriting its 16bit product, creating a completely new underlying architecture.Gupta is hedging its bets in some ways. The company will continueto offer its 16-bit SQLWindows 5.0 product for two-tier clientserver development and will incorporate many Centura features.Centura will be positioned as a higher-end product than SQLWindows,with Gupta's sights set on competing in the same arena as Forteand Dynasty. In December, Gupta announced a partnership withOpen Environment Corp. of Boston to produce a three-tier technologyfor its SQLWindows and Centura products. The three-tier product,called QuickRPC, will let Gupta applications use Open Environment'sthree-tier and Distributed Computing Environment applicationarchitectures. Gupta also will provide connections betweenits development tools and transaction processing monitors suchas Novell's Tuxedo. To automate the partitioning of Centuraapplications, Gupta will provide a three-tier wizard, similarto the wizards in Microsoft's desktop applications.Centura will include an open object repository and data modelingand source code management capabilities. Gupta is teaming withRational Software Corp. to incorporate Rational's Rose CASEtool into the 32-bit product, and is building on the team developmenttechnologies of Gupta's TeamWindows product.The Centura language, like SQLWindows, will be fully objectoriented. Gupta will expand its current partial compilationto compile all object code into dynamically linked libraries,and users will be able to build fully compiled OCXs-none ofthe other tools currently does this.As these once low-end tools push into three-tier computing,they may make good on some long unfulfilled promises from structuredtools-and at a lower price.For more on applications development see our Resource Centersat http://techweb.cmp.com/iwkBack to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Programming Languages: Java Makes The Web Perform -- Sun's fledgling programming language for the Internet is drawing a crowd of client-serversoftware developersBy:Jason LevittImagine if the cost of maintaining client software on your corporatedesktops were reduced to a fraction of its current level. Whatif your networked applications automatically came in versionsfor Windows, Macintosh, and X Window? Perhaps you'd like torun your client application no matter where you were or whatmachine you happened to be using.This could be the near future of client-server software on theInternet if Sun Microsystems Inc.'s Java programming languageachieves its potential. Not bad for a product that was originallydeveloped as an embedded language for consumer appliances andwas virtually unknown a year ago. But with an Internet-crazyindustry hungry for adding portability, two-way interactivity,and flexible content to the rather static pages of the WorldWide Web, Java is the right technology at the right time.Java (it's not an acronym; the name was chosen to convey a senseof liveliness and interactivity) owes much of its notorietyto Netscape Communications Corp., whose decision to licensethe Java run-time interpreter for inclusion in Navigator 2.0,the most widely used Web browser, created enthusiasm amongdevelopers. Although there are no shipping commercial applicationsbased on Java, or even a release version of the software developmentkit for creating such applications, companies such as Applix,Eastman Kodak, Mitsubishi, Toshiba, and Starfish (headed byex-Borland International chairman Philippe Kahn) are all aggressivelypursuing Java software development and integration with theirexisting products. Additionally, such companies as Borland,IBM, Macromedia, Metrowerks, Microsoft, Netscape, Oracle, SiliconGraphics, and Spyglass have licensed source code for the Javarun-time interpreter so they can create clients capable ofexecuting Java applets, applications written in a subset ofthe Java language designed for use in Web pages. Individualsand small developers are also making their presence known byposting their Java applets on Sun's main Java Internet site(http://java.sun.com)Portability and security-both at the top of the informationsystems manager's most wanted list-were important considerationsin Java's development.Java applets are highly portable, reducing both maintenanceand time-to-market for multiplatform applications. Developersneed to write the application only once. A single compiledapplet will run identically on any platform that has a Javaenabled browser.Java applet portability is accomplished through the Java runtime execution environment and the class libraries used forapplet programming, which isolate the applets from architecturespecific knowledge of the execution platform. For example,applets don't know if the screen they're writing to is managedby Windows or MacOS; they simply write to a display objectthat has generic screen attributes. Although generic objectslimit the developer's ability to access platform-specific features(such as advanced screen drawing on the Macintosh), using genericobjects increases portability. To support a new platform, onlythe Java run-time execution environment needs to be portedto the new platform.Java is an interpreted language. But unlike most interpretedlanguages, which are executed directly from source code, Javaapplets are compiled into an architecture-neutral bytecodeformat, which is smaller and more efficient to interpret thansource code. Once compiled, the applets sit on the Web serverwaiting for a Java-enabled browser to download them. When theapplets are downloaded to the browser, the run-time interpreterinside the browser executes the applet code.To quell the security concerns of users, Sun has placed limitsand controls on the resources available to applets. For example,an applet is permitted to establish network connections onlywith its originating host, and it cannot create new processes.Local file system access is very limited, but there is no agreementamong browser vendors on how to restrict file system access.Sun's HotJava browser uses Access Control Lists to limit filesystem access, while Netscape's Navigator 2.0, which is stillin beta, allows no access at all. Kim Polese, marketing managerfor Java, concedes that Sun has not reached an agreement withNetscape on security implementation details. "We're workingwith Netscape [and the other Java licensees] to have more browserconsistency with the security options that are available,"Polese says.Java-enabled browsers assume that any applet is untrusted, andso they first pass the applet through the Java Bytecode Verifierto ensure that it doesn't violate any security rules. Theythen run the the Java Class Loader to verify that the appletdoesn't try to spoof an existing class or otherwise try toextend the applet in a bogus manner.Unfortunately, simply specifying these two security mechanismsisn't satisfying potential Java users. Companies need assurancesthat all Java-enabled browsers will faithfully adhere to thesecurity measures. So to further placate Java security worriers,Sun has instituted a Java-compatible logo, which is enforcedcontractually with the licensees of the Java run-time interpreter.Products from licensees must pass a test suite to ensure thatall applets will run with everyone's interpreters, and interpreterswill faithfully enforce security precautions.What's BrewingWhile it appears that many developers are taking a wait-andsee attitude toward Java, some, such as Applix in Westboro,Mass., are jumping in quickly. Applix, known for its ApplixWareoffice productivity tools for Unix and Windows NT-includingintegrated spreadsheet, E-mail, graphics, and real-time datacollection tools-claims to have developed the first Java-basedclient-server spreadsheet.Applix took the spreadsheet component of ApplixWare, which isnot a client-server application, and rewrote the user interfaceportion in Java, using Java's network communications abilitiesso that a client could communicate with the spreadsheet, whichwould be maintained and updated on a server. The calculationand data-access engines were left on the server to keep theclient side simple. The Java-based spreadsheet looks very muchlike the ApplixWare spreadsheet, but the Java version can runon any platform that has a Java-enabled browser.An additional benefit of this Java-based ApplixWare componentis simplified network updates of the application. Since Javaapplets are downloaded from the server before executing onthe client, updates can be made by simply updating the componentson the server. No intervention on the client side is necessary;when the client executes the applet, the current version isautomatically downloaded from the server."We have a range of customers who are interested in this networkcentric computing model where there is very little client-sidemaintenance," says Mark Yohai, director of Internet applicationsfor Applix. Yohai expects to offer a demo version of Applix'sspreadsheet applet soon from its Web site (http://www.applix.com) though he was unable to say when the product will be released.Starfish is making a Java applet out of the group-schedulingcomponent of its popular Sidekick networked contacts manager.The result will be that wide area, multiplatform, group schedulingis easily accomplished via the Internet. Then, even peoplewithout Sidekick can participate in group scheduling by downloadingthe applet and executing it in their Java-enabled Web browser."The big problem with workgroup products in the past," saysStarfish CEO Kahn, "is that you had to have the client programto participate, but the problem is that participants don'talways have the client program."Though both Starfish and Applix have offered convincing demos,users have yet to see any serious applications hit the market,despite the excitement over Java technology. Part of the problemis that most Java development tools are still crude. Some significantdevelopment tools have been announced, however.Symantec is offering Java support in Expresso, an add-on toolto its C++ development environment. Borland says it will deliverLatte technology, a visual programming environment for Java,in several stages, with the first commercial release scheduledto ship by June.Also, Natural Intelligence Inc. of Cambridge, Mass. expectsto ship its Applet Development Kit for the Macintosh, codenamed Roaster, in January. Roaster will include a Java compilerand an applet testing environment. Sun also expects its Javasoftware development kit for Windows 95 and NT and Solaristo ship in January, with Sun's Macintosh development kit goinginto beta about the same time.Too Attractive To IgnoreWith applications still to be delivered and nagging concernsabout security, Java has yet to prove itself. Nevertheless,the speed at which the technology is being adopted, coupledwith the promise of greatly reduced costs, are proving tooattractive to ignore.Java has no real competitors at the moment. But when Microsoft'sInternet publishing system becomes generally available in thefirst quarter of 1996, it will offer an alternate-though notnecessarily an incompatible-development choice. Microsoft hasannounced it will add Java run-time support to its InternetExplorer browser, though there is no indication that Microsoftwill add Java support to its Internet Studio design tool.Microsoft's strategy may have a number of advantages initially,mainly the ability to share downloaded OLE Controls (OCXs)with OLE-enabled applications on PCs. But unlike Java applets,OCXs are platform-specific, which puts a greater burden onthe developer to provide versions of OCXs for each client platform.Sun has already published on its Web site pertinent APIs andspecifications for both the Java language and the run-timeexecution environment. According to Sun's Polese, these specsallow developers to write Java interpreters or language implementations,therefore calming fears that Sun will be the sole source ofJava technology.New tools, such as the Expresso Grinder compiler (http://wwwipd.ira.uka.de~espresso), developed by Martin Odersky, a professor at theUniversity of Karlsruhe, Germany, that claims to translateJava programs into Java bytecode format much faster than thecompiler supplied by Sun, are proof that at least some of thespecs are usable.For more on Internet tools see our Resource Centers at http//techweb.cmp.com/iwkBack to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Hot Skills In '96 -- Internet, client-server, and networkingexperts top lists of the most wantedThe hot talent in information systems in 1996 will be peoplewho know the Internet, client-server computing, or networking,hiring executives say. Nudged out of the spotlight but stillmuch in demand will be SAP R/3 and Lotus Notes experts.The fortunate ones with the coveted skills may not only findit easier to land a job but could also wangle a higher salary.Plus, IS people with strong business ability could be in demandfor new hybrid posts.It's no surprise that the hottest area in computers-the Internetis creating demand for Internet skills. The supply isn't expectedto match the demand."IS organizations are looking for people experienced in workingwith the Internet, particularly regarding security issues andbuilding firewalls," says Vic Janulaitis, CEO of Positive SupportReview, an IS consulting firm in Santa Monica, Calif. OtherInternet skills in demand include familiarity with tools forcreating splashy Internet products.In the client-server arena, expertise in C++ programming stillwill be in heavy demand. But so will dexterity with other developmentlanguages and object programming tools.Mary Kay Cosmetics Inc. in Dallas, which is migrating from mainframeto client-server computing, is seeking expertise in VisualBasic, Forte, and Oracle software, says Trey Bradley, chiefinformation officer. He hopes to upgrade the skills of theexisting staff, but will look outside for hard-to-find peoplelike Forte developers.Meanwhile, Greg Scileppi, executive director of RHI Consulting,the Menlo Park, Calif., technical services arm of job-placementfirm Robert Half International, says he is getting heavy requestsfor workers with client-server skills such as expertise infront-end graphical user interfaces, relational databases,and help-desk support.Other IS organizations are looking for expertise in older softwareon new platforms-for example, IBM DB2 database software onWindows NT.State Street Bank of Boston is searching for "networking expertisethat runs the gamut, including peer-to-peer networking," saysCIO David Sexton.Job experts say it isn't unusual for a programmer who wouldotherwise be paid $50,000 to $60,000 a year to see an extra$10,000 to $20,000 tacked on for rare skills.Pat Roberts, president of Professional Training Services Inc.in King of Prussia, Pa., says some of her large corporate clientsare creating roles for people with "exceptional business, operational,and technical understanding."Some companies are appointing liaisons between business unitsand the IS organization. Roberts says these posts are oftenfilled by someone with "good people and business skills" fromthe IS organization, or someone with solid technical skillsfrom the business unit.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560In Short: Sporting A PromotionHerman's sporting goods Inc. in Carteret, N.J., promoted itstop information systems executive, Michael O'Neal, to executiveVP and chief operating officer. O'Neal, who joined Herman'sin 1990, had been VP of logistics and information services.Taking over O'Neal's IS duties is Michael Worral, senior VPof strategic planning and business reengineering.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560In Short: On A Health KickTwo health-care companies have named chief information officers.NovaCare Inc., a King of Prussia, Pa., provider of rehabilitationand nursing services, appointed Steven Wise VP of informationsystems and CIO, succeeding Paul Ross, who the company saysis leaving to pursue other interests. Wise joined NovaCarein 1993 as director of systems and programming. Meanwhile,Genesis Health Ventures Inc. in Kennett Square, Pa., namedMarc Rubinger to be the geriatric health-care provider's firstCIO. He had been VP of decision support at Genesis' SharedMedical Systems unit.Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560In Short: A First For WitcoChemical Maker Witco Corp. in Greenwich, Conn., made RonaldEdelstein its first chief information officer. Edelstein, whojoined the petroleum products manufacturer in 1991, had beenWitco's general manager of information systems. Witco saysit decided to create the CIO post because "the use of data"is the manufacturer's "most important variable."Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560The Secret CIO: What's Hot Versus What's Not -- 1996 promises hype, chic trends, and maybe even some really useful toolsBy:Herbert W. LovelaceEven if you are not paying attention to the calendar, it isstill easy to notice when the end of a year is reached. Forgetthe traditional indicators: holiday parties and general ledgersystem problems. The new year is signaled by magazines' guessesabout what the next 12 months will bring. Reading these predictionstakes your mind off of worrying whether you held down Decemberspending enough to avoid blowing the annual systems budget.It would be fascinating if the magazines also wrote about howaccurate their past projections have been. For instance, whateverhappened to CASE and expert systems? And how many times canyou read about the coming of asynchronous transfer mode? Youget the idea.Another approach would be to compare Chic Hot with Actual Hot.Chic Hot is what we talk about when we go to meetings withother chief information officers. Actual Hot is what we'rereally doing. In 1995, reengineering and data warehousing wereChic Hot. If we changed a system to combine two reports wecalled it reengineering, and any use of existing informationwas called data warehousing.In 1996, reengineering and data warehousing should continueas strong contenders in the Chic Hot category. Joining themwill be objects and the ever-popular Windows 95-which willprobably win the Lovelace Verbiage Ratio Award. The LVRA goesto that product with the highest ratio of printed word to corporateuse. With the exception of Dow Chemical rolling out Win95 andFord doing what they call a test (on more machines than mostof us possess), the consensus of my friends has been that it'snot ready for prime time, but will still garner as much mediafervor as the O.J. Simpson trial.Actual Hot is more difficult to predict, but it is clear thatSAP's R/3 software will continue to gain momentum. If you haven'tyet considered it, take a look; your boss will expect you tobe able to explain why it is, or is not, good for your company.Lack of familiarity with R/3 could be a career-limiting move.Crawling FruitThe Internet hype will start to bear fruit as businesspeoplelook for ways to move knowledge of their products onto theNet and gain an edge on their competition. The entire classof tools that addresses Internet security will be big. Badthings can happen to good people without proper firewalls andcarefully considered security plans. Java, one true applicationof object technology, should be really hot. Java, if you havenot had a chance to investigate it, is a programming languagethat, among other things, can embed animation into HTML pages.Finally, World Wide Web spiders and people who know how to usethem will become big late next year. A spider, which is a programsuch as Lycos that goes out on the Net to find the informationyou want, is essential to using the Net intelligently. MetaCrawler,which automatically searches other spiders, is really interesting,although it opens all sorts of ownership and other legal issues.Hope you had a happy New Year. Cindy and I relaxed in frontof the fireplace, and I did not even dwell on Kratmeyer's requestthat we install a Win95 data warehouse in International Operationsto support his reengineering effort. I wish he would stop readingairline magazines.Herbert W. Lovelace is chief information officer at a multibilliondollar international company. Herb practices his day job underan alias, and frequently changes the names of colleagues mentionedin these columns in order to protect the guilty. He can bereached at secret@cmp.comBack to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Desktop Agenda: The Parts Bill Left Out -- Microsoft bugs help exhume deletedmaterial from The Road AheadBy:Stephen ManesEverybody's making predictions, so here's mine: History willrank Bill Gates as an author right up there with one of hispersonal favorites-Robert James Waller, the man who wrote TheBridges Of Madison County. No one with a heart could possiblyremain unmoved at the poignant images in Bill's book The RoadAhead (Viking, 1995). I almost shed a tear as I read this:"Stallion, she thought, as his fingers eagerly caressed bothbuttons of her Microsoft mouse. Stallion, she knew, as allat once he manfully manipulated the Control, Alt, and Deletekeys of her Microsoft Natural Keyboard."Actually, that passage didn't make it into the book. But asI reported in The New York Times, security lapses in Microsoft'sOLE object technology make Office files suck up deleted datafrom your hard drive unless you're using Windows NT (Microsoftissued a fix for the problem on Dec. 6). Besides, when youuse the "fast save" option with Microsoft Word, your deletionsstay in the file.I predict that thanks to these amazing "features," sources maysoon treat us to portions of the book that were deleted beforeit reached the presses. Before you curse Microsoft for causingyour deleted rants to reappear in E-mail messages you've sentacross the Net, give thanks that its incompetence may havekept alive the parts of Bill's book that he left out.In the book itself, for example, Gates is stingy with credit.His fellow billionaire Paul Allen receives his due for helpingdevelop the original Microsoft Basic, but the "third man" onthat project, programmer Monte Davidoff, isn't mentioned. TheParts Left Out will reveal that Gates actually cited everyonewhose work he borrowed, but the bibliography was mysteriouslyomitted at the last moment.The book explains some of the electronic novelties of the hugehouse Gates is building, such as pictures and music that canfollow guests around like an obsequious puppy. The Parts LeftOut will disclose the shocking news that although most of thehouse's systems are based on Windows NT, the windows themselveswill be controlled by a variant of IBM's OS/2 system that didso well with airport baggage in Denver.Shirts And SuitsIn The Road Ahead, Gates writes that "Soon there will be computerizedshirt-making machines that will obey a different set of instructionsfor every shirt ... It is conceivable that within a few yearseveryone will have measurements registered electronically soit will be easy to find out how well a ready-made item willfit, or to place a custom order." The Parts Left Out will revealthat every article of clothing Gates has worn since 1991 wasproduced by a top-secret Microsoft system that also cuts andstyles his hair.The book discusses a "full bodysuit" that can reproduce tactilesensations. The Parts Left Out will disclose that Microsofthas had a prototype under development for years. Programmerswho volunteered for the project will declare they have experiencedbliss-for the first time in their lives.Gates writes that he thinks of a "wallet PC" as a "new SwissArmy knife" that will serve as "a camera, a pocket tape recorder,a cellular phone, a pager, concert tickets, a map, a compass,a calculator," and "perhaps a loud whistle to summon help."The Parts Left Out will show that the only part of the prototypethat works is the whistle, though breakthroughs are expectedin nail-file and scissors technology.Stephen Manes is co-author of Gates: How Microsoft's Mogul ReinventedAn Industry (Touchstone/Simon and Schuster)Back to Headline List CopyrightINFORMATION WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996  Issue 560Object Technology: Make Software Fit Business -- Business software should be designed to help users do their jobs-not dictate their actionsBy:Robert MorisonThe Internet is dramatically changing our view of informationaccess. As Net users, we are learning to find the informationwe want, or even suspect exists, using generic tools. Thisinformation-centric model is gathering momentum as we enterthe new year.Yet most corporate information systems aren't built to participatein the flow of new information, or to capitalize on the creativityunleashed by it. As corporations, we're still tied to the predetermineddata regurgitated by cumbersome applications whose design centersare actually automation, not information.This situation cannot continue; the business world is changingtoo fast. The purpose of business software is overdue for radicalrethinking. To date, software has been used to organize informationto automate processes. Instead, software should organize informationfor communication and understanding, creating a model of thebusiness that can be used in many ways. Implementing this changeis a primary challenge for IS organizations in 1996 and beyond.What's wrong with today's business software? Take a simple example a telephone call to a mail-order outfit. A typical sequence I'm put on hold ... I listen to canned sincerity telling mehow important my call is to them ... a representative thenasks for the customer codes on the mailing label ... I saythe catalog is in my wife's name and was sent to our formeraddress, and therefore does little to identify me ... I'm askedto supply credit-card information, address, and phone number ... I'm finally allowed to name the item I want ... it's outof stock.What's going on? The rep's work has been automated. The companydesigned the "best" way to handle orders, then implementedit in software. Now, the rep is enslaved by a system that isunfriendly to customers, demeaning to the rep's intelligence,and ultimately unproductive.Do your systems also impose one right way of doing things ona variable world? Let's face it: There is no single best wayof doing anything-and there's no longer any such thing as astable transaction-processing system.Ugly ComplexityThe focus of business software must change to give people usefulpackets of information and functionality. Software shouldn'ttry to impose order; it should model the business in its uglycomplexity.When the business changes, you use the model differently ormodify only what needs to change. Software shouldn't dictateworkers' actions; it should model their domains and respecttheir intelligence in deciding how to act. That way, my mailorder rep could build an order that satisfies us both.The technology for creating this software is, of course, objectorientation. These tools provide a natural means for organizingsoftware into useful packets, which is important because itencourages business modeling. Paradoxically, the only way tobuild a large, dynamic business model is bottom-up, learningabout the business and the model as you go.These notions of software are overdue for implementation. Foryears, we've been fooling ourselves that we're making progressby dabbling in object technology and implementing option-ladenapplications. But we're still reautomating.We won't turn the corner until we change the approach. So here'sa New Year's resolution: All new software must model ratherthan automate; it's the only way to cope with business change.We must also change the intent. We shouldn't aim to "get itright," but simply to "get it."Technological advance-increasing processor and communicationspower, multimedia, the Internet-is creating an exciting newvenue. But without redefining their software, corporationscontinue playing catch against the stoop. We can't imaginewhat the business world will be like when people have accessto robust business models. But it'll be different, it'll beexciting, and companies that create models early and well willenjoy a competitive advantage.Robert Morison is a senior VP at CSC Index in Cambridge, Mass.,where he directs research programs in business and technologymanagement.Do you have an original or entertaining perspective-or juststrong views-on an information systems topic of wide interest?Send articles (about 750 words) to Final Word editor Mike Faden.Contact him via E-mail at mfaden@cmp.com or send submissionsto Mike Faden, InformationWeek, CMP Publications, 2800 CampusDrive, San Mateo, CA 94403. IW cannot return unused submissions.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-26IA086-000622-B037-232http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te08.html 205.156.212.5 19970122050210 text/html 113657HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:59:30 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:09 GMTContent-length: 113469Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te08.html Sample Issue Copyright INTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNet May 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES INTERNET AND TELECOMS MERGER ANNOUNCED (424 words) NET FOCUS (504 words) HARDWARE ALLIANCE MEANS NEW INFRASTRUCTURE SOLUTIONS (219 words) MASS MARKET IN INTERNET TELEPHONY? (235 words) UK NAME REGISTRATION SHAKE UP (541 words) THE BATTLE OF THE BROWSERS (400 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW PRODIGY LOSES MARKET SHARE (112 words) NETCOM'S FIRST (547 words) SEARCHING SUCCESS FOR DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORPORATION (214 words) AVIS RENT-A-CAR (351 words) A GERMAN PRESENCE (400 words) TECHNICAL AND MEDIA EVENTS CATALOGUED ONLINE (278 words) PRE-EMPLOYMENT SCREENING ARRIVES (327 words) GET WEBBED UP ON CANADIAN DOCUMENTS (177 words) CONFERENCE REPORT INTERNET LINES THROWN OPEN IN SAN JOSE (2259 words) INTERNET SHOPPING - TWO CONTRASTING APPROACHES (1318 words) INTRANETS - THE NEW GROWTH PHENOMENON (1524 words) YAHOO FLOATS HIGH ON STOCKMARKET (207 words) LYCOS RECORDS GROWTH IN VIEWING FIGURES (176 words) DATA TRANSMISSION, DATA COMPRESSION AND THE WEB (3465 words) HOME OR AWAY - THE WEB SITE DILEMMA (788 words) INTERACTIVE COMMUNICATIONS - THE INTERNET LEAP FORWARD (1435 words) PUBLICATIONS REVIEW SMALL BUSINESSES RELUCTANT TO JOIN WEB (177 words) PATTERNS OF DEVELOPMENT FOR THE WORLD WIDE WEB (479 words) VIDEO NETWORKING TAKES A STEP FORWARD (218 words) CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996INTERNET AND TELECOMS MERGER ANNOUNCEDCommercial Internet service provider UUNET Technologies and telecomscarrier MFS Communications Company are to merge in a $2bn deal whichwas announced on 30 April 1996. This agreement creates a combinedorganisation with 50,000 business customers worldwide, served by 4,200employees making it the most significant deal to be made public duringthe prolific Internet World show at San Jose, California.Until the announcement, UUNET Technologies, the longest-established ofthe major commercial Internet access providers, had been seen primarilyas a partner of the Microsoft Corporation, but it now appears that thecompany will back the link. Bill Gates, chairman and CEO of Microsoftsaid: 'We are highly supportive of this merger with MFS, since thecombination of a facility-based telecoms carrier with a high qualityInternet service provider offers the potential for high bandwidthavailability at lower costs for end-users.'Under the terms of the agreement, UUNET shares will be converted intoMFS common stock at the rate of 1 to 1.777776. The resulting $2bn (at30 April close of market) valuation is one of the highest yet achievedby a specialist Internet company in public flotation or merger deals.It comes even though UUNET, like the majority of specialist Internetservice providers, has been running at an operating loss for the largerpart of its history. Once again this confirms the general performanceof the Internet-related stocks as a premium commodity to investors.The combined company arising out of this deal will be strongly placedto exploit the increasing synergies occurring between Internet andtraditional telecoms operations. The business will possess some 543Internet points of presence (288 outside the US), putting it among thebest-developed Internet service operations in the world. This will besupported by a substantial telecoms infrastructure. James Q Crowe,chairman and CEO of MFS, in a prepared statement, indicated four majorareas of benefit to the growth of Internet-related business resultingfrom the merger:- Savings on UUNET's expenses for local communications services, whichrepresented over 40% of the company's network expenses.- Combining purchasing power for international and domestic leasedcircuits, thus reducing expenses.- Improved operating margins through the collection of co-carrierpayments for dial-up Internet access.- Improved sales performance for Internet activities.Many commentators on the Internet have felt for some time that thespecialist Internet service providers such as UUNET, Netcom and PSIwere unlikely to prove sustainable businesses without the support oflarger parents, or full integration into existing, relatedorganisations.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996NET FOCUSWelcome to a new venture in Internet information publishing. Internetfor Business, published by FT Telecoms and Media Publishing, is a movetowards putting Internet-related factual information into the hands ofthe business strategists and decision makers who will play a key rolein shaping the usage of these global network systems in coming years.The Internet already attracts more column inches than perhaps any othersingle area of new technology development, which is saying somethingquite extraordinary given the importance of other technological fieldsin modern society. Not all of this publicity has been positive, ofcourse, but there seems to be a wide-reaching consensus regarding theimportance of the Internet's future role in the global communicationsindustry. Surprisingly, the majority of readily available printedinformation about the Internet focuses mainly on consumer applicationsand services. Attention is given to commercial implications andapplications, but much of this coverage is hidden away in specialistpublications. It also shows an unhelpful tendency to wrap its contentin the technical mysteries and burgeoning jargon of the Internetsector.Internet for Business aims to change all that. The newsletter willfocus on the facts, presented as far as possible in lay terms, or withclear explanation of technical terms and jargon. Internet for Businesswill provide you with clear, unbiased and objective accounts of allthat is important in understanding the Internet sector whetherconcerning new technologies, protocols and standards, typical oroutstanding business applications, company news or share performances.For the sake of complete impartiality, coverage will be given tocommercial online services such as CompuServe and Delphi, in additionto the Internet proper. However, it is expected that the blurring ofthe boundaries between these organisations and specialist InternetService Providers will accelerate in 1996 and thereafter, leading to aconvergence of operation and activity across the network providers.The Internet remains a young technology, in commercial activity atleast, and many of the companies pioneering the commercial applicationof the system remain under-capitalised and inexperienced in the globalmarketplace. The pace of change is quite extraordinary, and manyinitiatives which look exciting today are likely to prove impracticalor unconvincing in the real world. For every Netscape Communicationsthere will undoubtedly be many failures, and ultimately the existingmajor players in the computing and telecoms industries are likely tohold the upper hand.Nonetheless, the Internet, or something which emerges from it, will bea permanent feature of our commercial and personal lives, and willcontinue as a means of building new markets, developing new profitcentres, and changing and streamlining business operations. Internetfor Business will assist its readers in tracking Internet growth anddevelopment, and in pinpointing the real opportunities for theirorganisations and backers in coming years.The editors of Internet for Business, Andrew Parker and Ray Attwood,can be contacted by e-mail at intforbus@pearson-pro.com or through theoffices of the publishers, whose details are given on the back page ofthis issue.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996HARDWARE ALLIANCE MEANS NEW INFRASTRUCTURE SOLUTIONSLate April saw the announcement of the takeover of StrataCom, a leadingsupplier of telecoms switching equipment, by Cisco Systems, a marketleader in the manufacture and supply of internetworking equipmentincluding routers and LAN switches. According to Cisco, the newrelationship will provide an integrated combine, able to provide end-to-end solutions across public, private or hybrid networks. The moveclearly represents a gearing up by Cisco to meet the expected futuregrowth in telecoms, Internet and Intranet technology.The acquisition of StrataCom was carried through under an offer ofshares in Cisco common stock, in exchange for all outstanding sharesand options of StrataCom. With Cisco's common stock valued at a littleunder $50, the total value of the transaction was in the region of$4bn. Final confirmation of the deal is due by late June 1996.Of most interest in Internet applications is the new group's integratedability to handle the advanced switching technologies which are at theheart of state-of-the-art Internet network systems. The two companieswill have highly-developed expertise in the design and implementationof Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) and frame relay high-speed WANswitching equipment. These technologies are being increasingly adoptedby Internet service providers to offer far more robust and flexibledata communications technology, especially to corporate users.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996MASS MARKET IN INTERNET TELEPHONY?One of the most appealing, and yet controversial products to belaunched for Internet users in recent times has been Internettelephony. A number of software companies have launched products whichallow Internet users with sound-enabled computers to make two-waytelephone calls over the Internet, throughout the world, for the priceof a local call (or free if they are attached to a corporate Internetaccess).This technology is soon to be delivered to a mass audience by NetscapeCommunications, which has announced that an Internet telephony utilitywill be integrated into the next generation of its browser software.The new Netscape browser, to be called Atlas, will include anapplication called CoolTalk, which provides the telephony capability.Initially users will only be able to call other users who are currentlyonline. CoolTalk will operate with modems at data rates as low as9,600bps.Internet telephony has been controversial among the Internet communitysince early versions of the software were bandwidth intensive,blanketing out the more bandwidth-efficient activities such as Webtraffic and e-mail. In some cases Internet service providers even wentso far as to ban the process from their networks.However, improving audio compression technology appears to be makingthe technology more acceptable across the Internet. And it represents agenuine threat to established telecommunications companies across theworld, especially to their high-priced international telephoneservices.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996UK NAME REGISTRATION SHAKE UPA new structure for the registration and administration of Internetaddresses in the UK was announced in mid-April by Dr W Black, thenominated manager of the .uk space within the overall structure ofdomain names on the Internet. The change involves the establishment ofa non-profit company to take over the day-to-day processing of domainname registrations in the UK, and of a steering committee of industryrepresentatives to oversee its operation. Membership of the steeringcommittee is open to all organisations with a legitimate interest inthe name registration process, and will be subject to an annualmembership fee. A system of name registration charges is also proposedto defray the operating costs of the new establishment. All newInternet sub-domain names, the core of the Internet addresses used fromday-to-day by all types of user, will incur the charges, althoughspecial arrangements may be made for educational and other non-profitorganisations.These changes, which will bring the UK into line with other countriessuch as Germany, Japan and the commercial domain in North America, havereceived a mixed response from within the Internet industry in the UK,with some suggesting that the planning and decision-making process hadbeen undertaken with insufficient publicity and consultation. Lack ofinformation on the changes seems to have caused widespreadmisunderstanding of the proposals, including some suggestions that themove represents an exploitative change attempting to bring more controlof the UK Internet back into the hands of UKERNA, the Government-established company which controls the operation of the UK's academicnetwork, JANET. This has been fuelled by the fact that Dr Black, who isan employee of UKERNA in his current role, has been designated as thefirst manager for the new structure.More realistically, it is clear that stabilisation and regularisationwas needed in this area. There are some 6,000 registered users ofInternet domain names in the .co.uk area alone (this being the domainname suffix allocated to UK-based commercial Internet addresses). Thisnumber is increasing by 100 every week in second quarter 1996. It iswidely understood that current structures, where commercial Internetservice providers provide voluntary support to UKERNA in administeringname registration for specific sub-domains such as .co.uk, have begunto unravel under the pressure of expansion occurring in the Internet atpresent.Under the new system, a fixed rate of charging will apply to all newInternet address registrations - #100 for each new name registered,covering the first two years of operation, and #50 per year thereafterto cover the maintenance of the name in the register and central DNSstructures (the computers at the heart of the UK Internet which convertthe day-to-day use of textual forms of addresses into the numericInternet protocol addresses used in the operation of the Internetbetween computers and networks). Members of the Steering Committee willqualify for a significant discount on these full rates, on behalf oftheir customers, which they are able to pass on in full or in part. Itis intended to commence charging according to the stated scales for allnew name registrations after 31 May 1996. Recurrent charges forexisting names will begin on 1 June 1997.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996THE BATTLE OF THE BROWSERSIn almost simultaneous press announcements in mid-March 1996, Microsoftand Netscape Communications both trumpeted deals confirming close co-operation between their organisations and America Online (AOL), theworld-leader in the commercial online networks market.Organisations such as AOL, CompuServe and Prodigy have recently movedto offer far more flexible Internet access to their users, and haveshown a desire to integrate the best of Internet-specific software intotheir user interfaces. Given their large customer bases (AOL alone withover 5 million users worldwide), it is natural that fierce competitorssuch as Netscape and Microsoft should vigorously woo these companies.In the case of AOL, Microsoft seems to have achieved the moredefinitive relationship. AOL has chosen to integrate Microsoft'sInternet Explorer Web browser software seamlessly into its main userinterface, making it the main tool which AOL users will harness insearching across the World Wide Web. In return, AOL has achieved one ofthe goals long sought by the commercial network providers, theprovision of an easy access to its service for Windows 95 users, via afolder on the desktop of the operating system.Netscape, by contrast, has reached agreement that its Navigator browsersoftware should be integrated into the interface for GNN, a morespecialist Internet service operated by AOL. The browser will also bean option for AOL users generally. In return, Netscape will provide AOLwith a prominent presence within its own Web site.Microsoft thus appears to have obtained pole position with this majoruser base, regarding Internet applications, and will offer AOL usersthe benefit of its ongoing development of new Internet software toolsunder the ActiveX Technologies programme. These include utilities toprovide animation, 3d, and video to the Internet.Consolation for Netscape Communications comes in the form of a paralleldeal with CompuServe. Under this agreement, CompuServe is able todistribute the Netscape Navigator software to users of its CompuServeInformation Service, its core group of online customers, and to usersof the Spry Internet access service, recently acquired by CompuServe.These moves reflect the more general struggle between NetscapeCommunications, as the developer of the dominant browser for World WideWeb users on today's Internet, and Microsoft, the world's dominantsoftware company. Microsoft manifestly wishes to wrest away Netscape'smarket leadership in this field, and is moving forcefully towardsachieving that end.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996PRODIGY LOSES MARKET SHAREA recent survey by Odyssey, the San Francisco-based research firmindicates a shift in fortunes for the major online services.In its Homefront survey, Odyssey found that during the last two yearsthe market share of the four major online services, America Online(AOL), CompuServe, Prodigy and Microsoft show a dramatic improvement inmarket share for AOL, while similar figures for CompuServe remainedstatic.The big loser appears to be Prodigy, with a 50% fall in market share.Recent reports in the San Jose Mercury News, indicate a possiblemanagement buy-out of Prodigy from its owners IBM and Sears Roebuck fora sum thought to be under $100m.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996NETCOM'S FIRSTLaunching its new UK operation and UK Internet access services on 1 May1996, US specialist Internet service provider (ISP) Netcom became thefirst of the major independent ISPs from North America to start anoperation from scratch in the UK.One of the top three North America specialist access providers, Netcomhas come to the UK market late in comparison with major competitorssuch as UUNET Technologies and PSINet. Both these companies chose tolaunch into the UK market through acquisition of an existing localprovider. This latter approach has proved of mixed value to itsexponents.The UK launch for Netcom - its first outside North America - capped asatisfying early 1996 for the company, which saw its user base climbabove the 400,000 level in April 1996, and its first quarter revenuefor 1996 grow to $24.1m, a growth of 221% over the equivalent period in1995 (Netcom figures).Netcom has aimed high, in the creation of its UK operation, hiring over50 staff by the launch date, and establishing a nationwide network ofvirtual points of presence in collaboration with local telco Energis.Users throughout the country will therefore be able to access Netcom'sdial-up services via a local telephone call. Heading up this UK systemwill be new managing director David Clarke, who formerly had a strongtrack record in high-level management with Compaq, the successful PCmanufacturer/vendor.Among the more useful aspects of Netcom's service from day one will bea full 24-hour, seven days per week customer service facility, and arange of access services tailored to both business and consumer users.'We believe we are the only ISP in the UK market offering a trulycompetitive Internet solution,' said Clarke.It will be interesting to track the respective progress of the threemajor ISPs now active in the UK market over coming months.UUNET Technologies, the new owners of Unipalm - PIPEX, arguably themost effective of the indigenous access providers for the corporatesector, has major distractions in its own merger with MFS, reportedelsewhere in this issue, and in the delivery of Internet accessservices for the Microsoft Network in the UK and elsewhere. PSINet,having acquired the UK arm of Pan-European provider EUnet, has gonethrough a drawn-out process of infrastructure and staff re-development,to meet the high standards set by its service in the US. Consequentlyit has been seen to move backwards in the eyes of many commentators, interms of customer credibility and market performance. A full launch ofPSINet's consumer and commercial access services in the UK has stillnot been achieved, some seven or eight months after the EUnet GBacquisition took place.Given the relative position of these three major players, and the stillsmall scope of BT's Internet access operation, it may well be advisablefor business users at least to take advice on Netcom's services,despite their greenness in the UK market.Netcom may be found on the World Wide Web at http://www.netcom.net.uk.In addition to providing details on Netcom's UK operations andservices, the site provides a NetNews section, a Web search facility, adirectory of UK Web sites, customer support and frequently-askedquestions (FAQ) information.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996SEARCHING SUCCESS FOR DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORPORATIONDigital Equipment Corporation Alta Vista search for the World Wide Web,a latecomer in the field by comparison with other services such asLycos, Yahoo and Infoseek, received recognition of its effectivenessthrough receipt of an Industry Award for Outstanding Service from USpublication Internet World.The award, which was announced during the Internet World show in SanJose, recognises Alta Vista's immediate and widespread adoption by Webusers, since launching in December 1995.Identified as the most comprehensive search site on the Web duringInternet World's recent testing of search services, Alta Vista hasbecome a must-use tool for many Web surfers during its short history.Digital Equipment's own statistics tell the story, with the site nowreaching as many as seven million hits per day.Since inception, the index maintained for the Alta Vista site has grownfrom 16 million full text pages to 22 million (as at April 1996) withover 11 billion words. The index also covers more than 13,000 of theUSENET newsgroups available over the Internet.During Internet World in San Jose, Digital Equipment announced plans todevelop the search engines used in the Alta Vista sit into a family offast search tools to be marketed into commercial and consumer markets.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996AVIS RENT-A-CARhttp://www.avis.comAvis has become the latest of the major car hire companies to establishan interactive service on the World Wide Web. The site, known as theAvis Galaxy, is operated from the US, but offers a worldwide service.The most convenient aspect of the Web site is the facility to obtainfirm quotes, with a special Web users' discount, and to reserve carhire bookings, for journeys at home or overseas. A trial use of thesite obtained a discount-rate quote for hiring an intermediate car fora business trip in California, with the price stated in poundsSterling, since the quote was requested in the UK. When first seekingthis information, it was not immediately obvious how to obtain a pricequotation from the site, since the quotation service uses the sameinteractive forms as the firm car booking system. But closerexamination showed that users can click on an option requesting a pricequote rather than a firm booking.Apart from this quibble, the site appears to be well thought out interms of navigation, with tool bars at the foot of each page allowingaccess to other sections of the site, or a return to the home page.Users with the graphics capability of their browser switched off, orwith non-graphical browsers, are provided with text-based alternativesto the graphical hyperlinks which are structured into the site.In addition to the quotation and reservation service the Avis Galaxyalso provides information on special Avis services such as thecompany's Travel Partners scheme and Business Rate Plans, details oflocation of the company's main outlets, special offers, e-mail contactinformation and a number of other interactive services. Many of thenational Avis operations covered by the Web information providepictures of the cars available in their country, together with textualinformation describing their features.The site is configured to be accessed using the Netscape Navigatorbrowser, and like many of this type, offers the user the option todownload a copy of that software, if they do not already use it.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996A GERMAN PRESENCEhttp://www.government.de or http://www.bundesregierung.deThe Press and Information Office of the Government of the FederalRepublic of Germany has recently launched a Web site providing a rangeof information services for Web users. Details on the site are ineither German or English, with a straightforward navigational processenabling visitors to the site to select the language required. Sitecontent is heavily textual, overall, but this is perhaps appropriate tothe rather bureaucratic nature of much of the information.Users will find that they need to delve fairly seriously to get to moreinformative elements in the site, since the first few levels give verygeneral information which is neither searching nor loaded with factualcontent. However, users should persevere, since the site does rewardmore careful exploration. One of its most useful elements is a list ofGerman Web links under a number of potentially helpful categories,including: general information on Germany; news and media; travel;German Zip Codes (Search Engine); business and law; exchange programmesand research; culture and language classes; sport; German government;political foundations; and the EU and embassies.The general information category, for example, offers links to a rangeof more detailed sites, such as the Deutsche Welle, a government-supported media organisation, the German Foreign Office home page andthe site maintained by the Goethe Institute, the well-known Germancultural organisation.The business and law section offers links such as Germany's Top 500Firms - an alphabetical listing and a listing by size (in English),reports on German and European financial trends (in English) andBiz.Travel, a server with information on doing business in Germany andparticular German cities, with listings of Chambers of Commerce.Other interesting links include pointers to several news magazine andnewspaper Web sites, and a series of online travel services, some ofwhich provide online reservations and ticket sales.As with many Web sites, the power of this site is rather more in thefurther information which is accessible through it, rather than in theinformation which it provides itself.Anyone familiar with Germany, and doing business in that country, islikely to find this particularly true, and may well only pinpoint someof the linked sites as useful for future reference. However, newcomersto the country and its business practices are likely to find the siteitself more immediately useful.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996TECHNICAL AND MEDIA EVENTS CATALOGUED ONLINEhttp://www.zdnet.com/zdi/calendar/calendar.htmlThe ZD Net Trade Show Calendar is a new service offering a calendar oftrade events, worldwide, in the following categories: broadcasting andmedia; computer aided technologies; computer hardware/peripherals;entertainment industry; computer software/services; InformationTechnology; engineering; Internet/online services; publishing;telecoms.Extracts from the total calendar of events may be obtained using asearch form, which offers the ability to select a given country orcountries, any one or more topics, and a range of dates within whichthe events should fall. The search results are presented as a table ofevents, including their open dates, the city where they take place andgeneral subject coverage. A search may also be made for a single event,using all or part of its title. For each event listed as a result of asearch, a hypertext link takes the user to further details on the show,including venue information, event frequency, and in some cases detailsof visitor and exhibitor attendance at the previous occurrence of theevent.A test search was performed, retrieving all the events listed duringcalendar 1996 covering the topic of Internet. The resulting listincluded 16 trade exhibitions and conferences, with the major Internetevents such as Internet World International, Networld and Interop andOnline Information, general computing events such as Comdex/UK,Computers in Manufacturing and Software Development and morespecialised events such as ECTS, Manufacturing Week and MTQ - Testingfor Quality. The only obvious omissions were events which were launchedrecently and were not yet widely-enough publicised to have reached thisUS-based database (such as the new Internet '96 Show to be held inLondon in October).Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996PRE-EMPLOYMENT SCREENING ARRIVEShttp://www.informus.comUS data search specialist Informus is offering a full range of pre-employment screening services for US companies on the Web, launched inearly 1996. Companies which wish to use the service are required tosign up with Informus, and are then provided with an ID and passwordenabling them to access a full set of information services online.Informus places great stress on its security procedures, and thevetting of customer companies before it obtains access. In this wayevery measure is taken to ensure that only bona fide users are able toaccess the site, preventing inappropriate or exploitative use.Charges for the service are processed automatically online and the usercompanies billed accordingly. Informus stresses the immediacy ofinformation availability and the facility for highly selectiveinformation retrieval as the main benefits to users of working on theWeb. Company figures suggest that a typical search for a given jobapplicant would cost in the region of $20 - $70, depending on thenature of information sought.The Web site is currently configured to offer the active service,accessible only to registered users, plus a set of demonstrations,background information on the service and a registration utility forcompanies wishing to take up the system. An e-mail contact system isalso provided.Among the services available from Informus regarding job applicants'previous histories are: driving records; prior workers' compensationclaims; criminal history; employment records; educational records;credit ratings from ratings agencies; address detail confirmation;personal references vetting; and professional licence checking.Thus the site offers human resources professionals the opportunity, forexample, to check an applicant's claim to have a clean driving licence,or to examine claims regarding past salary and employment details oreducational and professional qualifications. The main areas of theservice currently used by subscribers, according to Informus, aredriving reports, criminal history information, address history,previous employment record and credit history.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996GET WEBBED UP ON CANADIAN DOCUMENTSMicromedia, a Toronto-based corporate information source, has launcheda new service on the Web to offer company and document trackingservices in the Canadian corporate sector. The service, known asCanadian Research and Electronic Documents Ordering Service (CREDO),offers searching across a 600,000-entry index of corporate filingscovering the Ontario Securities Commission and Industry Canada,together with selected documents from the Vancouver and Montrealmarkets.Users are able to search for individual documents or companies online,and to create personal information profiles which the CREDO servicewill then monitor for them. Under the latter option, an alert is issuedto the user each time a new document is obtained within the profileestablished.Once documents have been identified for the user, Micromedia is able todeliver copies to users in North America using same day or overnightdelivery services or three hour delivery locally in Toronto. Home andoverseas users may use the fax alternative. A full scale of charges foractual document access and delivery is published as part of the site.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996INTERNET LINES THROWN OPEN IN SAN JOSEThe Internet industry, along with its current and potential customers,descended in unprecedented numbers on San Jose, California at the endof April, for the 1996 Internet World conference and exhibition. Withover 350 exhibitors, and estimated visitor numbers in the region of40,000 according to organisers Mecklermedia, the event is once againthe largest Internet-specific trade show in the world. Ray Attwood andAndrew Parker were there...Based at the heart of Silicon Valley, still the creative engine of muchof today's computer industry, Internet World achieved an impressivearray of new product announcements, mergers and acquisitions. Some ofthe most important of these are described elsewhere in this issue,including our lead story on the merger of UUNET Technologies and MFSCommunications Company (see front page) to form one of the strongestoperations in the Internet field. The event has been so successful thatit has been transferred into the Los Angeles Convention Center for1997, the only exhibition and conference facility on the West Coast ofthe US able to handle the show's size and complexity. Mecklermediasources predicted a likely growth to around 500 exhibitors for 1997(citing the fact that a 75-strong waiting list for exhibit spaceexisted for the 1996 event), and to well in excess of 50,000 visitors.Internet World's development as an event is a true mirror of thedevelopment of the commercial Internet industry itself. Launched fouryears ago, the first West Coast event only attracted in the region of50 exhibitors, and less than a tenth of this year's visitor turnout.This has changed to such a degree that all the major players of the UScomputer industry were represented at the event in 1996, with the likesof IBM, Microsoft and Digital Equipment using the show as a platform tolaunch a plethora of Internet-related initiatives. Along with these,representatives of other major sectors such as telecoms were equallyactive, as exemplified by AT&T's launching of its new WorldNet globalInternet access service.Not even the arrival of summer-like weather, with temperatures soaringinto the 90s, seemed to discourage the eager Internet users throngingaround the booths. However, the major impact of the 1996 event onattendees was not so much in the new products and services to beidentified on a high percentage of the stands at the show. Instead thelasting impression created focused on two areas. One is a process ofconsolidation, as a host of companies active in the Internet sectorseek to build formal or informal alliances, merge or acquire within theindustry, and share technologies. Microsoft and Netscape, among severalothers, are major collaborators in the establishment of the SETprotocol for secure credit card transactions over the Internet andWorld Wide Web. Search engine and Internet search specialist Lycos haslicensed its core technology to Frontier Technologies for itsCyberSearch software product, a unique, browser-independent system forperforming Web searching and storing information on sites visited forfuture reference. Traveling Software, producer of the popular PC-linking package, Laplink, announced at the show its acquisition ofMilktruck Software, a pioneering start-up company developing offlineWeb browsing and Web site capture utilities. These are but a few of thedeals and agreements which the show brought to the attention of thewider world.The emerging force of IntranetsThe other major process within the Internet industry, highlighted atthe show, is the emergence of Intranets as a key focus of the marketingand product development activities of the Internet sector. Intranetsare treated more fully in a separate article in this issue of Internetfor Business. In brief, however, these represent the development ofInternet-based software tools and techniques to provide cost-effectiveand easy-to-use sharing of electronic information resources within thecorporate or organisational computer environment. This may be acrosseither local area networks or wide area networks. A new enthusiasm forIntranets has been driven by recognition among Internet developers thatmany medium to large-sized companies remain more open to innovativeinformation technology tools within their management informationsystems, rather than in communicating with the world at large. Equally,the tools available for the sharing of, for example, electronicdocuments over a corporate network have been relatively expensive up tothe present, and Internet-developed software tools often allow similarlevels of functionality at lesser cost. Thus a major marketingopportunity has been recognised by the wider Internet industry, and thefocus on Intranets has been consciously developed to allow clearrecognition by potential buyers of the different focus of productsoffered in this area. The term Intranet was omnipresent at San Jose,despite being seldom used across the industry up to late 1995.Internet World 1996 was clearly a resounding success for itsorganisers, and the buzz across the exhibit halls also suggested alevel of satisfaction among the exhibitors. It stands out as a stagingpost in the development of Internet business. The continuing sectionsof this article set out some of the more interesting changes, deals,products and services which were aired at the show.General Internet systemsMicrosoft Corporation, in a battery of announcements, focused mainly onits upgrading of the Microsoft BackOffice Server Suite version 2.0. Theenhancements launched during Internet World included built in messagingand groupware software, a high-performance Web server and an updateddatabase, all with inbuilt support for both Internet and Intranetactivity.Electronic forms specialists JetForm, of Falls Church, Vancouverannounced a new intelligent forms system for the Web. Delivering fargreater flexibility and complexity of operation than standard HTMLforms, JetForm's family of utilities will allow the implementation ofcomplex data retrieval processes over the Web for both Internet andIntranet environments. Included within the family of softwareapplications are a Server for creating and uploading forms, a formfiller client programme for end users and the Web Connectivity Pakwhich collects data from forms and delivers it to the server for dataprocessing.In a similar move, Decisive Technology Corporation of Palo Alto,California, launched its desktop survey software suite, under theDecisive Survey name. Decisive Survey software is designed to allowsurvey developers to create and implement e-mail mediated surveys overboth Intranets and the Internet proper.Reflecting a slow but steady move towards better multilingualcapability on the Web, and on the Internet at large, Israeli softwaredevelopers Accent Software introduced a multilingual plug-in for theNetscape Navigator Web browser. Using the Accent plug-in, surgers willbe able to view sites written in more than 30 different languagestranscribed correctly on screen, including the use of any specialaccents or scripts which may be required. The plug-in also enablesmultilingual configuration of all the operating information within theNetscape browser.Electronic commerce developmentsAmong the most eagerly awaited software utilities for the wholeInternet community is the Secure Electronic Transactions (SET) securecredit card transaction process. This protocol, sponsored jointly byMasterCard, Visa and several of the giants of Internet softwaredevelopment such as Microsoft and Netscape, will allow easy-to-use,secure processing of credit card transactions over the World Wide Web.Claiming to be the first software developer to implement SET fully,Terisa Systems of Los Altos, California, demonstrated its prototype SETsoftware solution, which processes credit card transactions in a three-way link between purchaser, credit card merchant and the banks'international financial transaction processing networks. Terisaconfidently predicts preliminary availability of its SET software, forinclusion into other developers' online systems, for June 1996.A more detailed examination of SET technology will appear in an issueof Internet for Business later this year.Intranet solutionsInmagic of Woburn, Massachusetts, launched Navigation Server, offeringa broad range of searching, indexing and cataloguing capability forcorporate Intranet systems. Building on search technology licensed fromsearch specialists Lycos, the new product allows users to search acrossand display on screen, not only HTML documents, but also information inword processor and spreadsheet formats. A further facility will be thecreation of HTML output dynamically from database material in nativedatabase formats.IBM announced a number of Intranet-related initiatives at the show,including a series of firewall and security products, Web productionand editing software, and the integration of its infoSage service intoLotus Notes. InfoSage is a news delivery service available overInternet and Intranet environments, drawing on news feeds fromorganisations such as Dun and Bradstreet, COMTEX and Information AccessCompany.A further announcement from IBM concerned the launch of Crytolopetechnology, a system allowing the encryption of individual messages ordocuments for transmission across Internet and Intranet services, withaccess only available to the authorised recipient.Internet news serviceThe Wall Street Journal announced its new Internet online service onthe Web, claiming it to be the first online news service to launch witha subscription/charging structure in operation from its inception.The Web site, known as the Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition,offers a basic range of services, including headline informationupdated several times a day, free of charge. Paying users will be ableto access more detailed information underlying the headlines, includingaccess to analytical and financial information compiled in theJournal's newsroom, and to create their own personalised news profiledrawn from the full range on the service, which will then be delivereddaily to their desktop computer.Subscribers who sign up with the service before 31 May 1996 will beable to use the full site free until 31 July. Thereafter, thesubscription will be $49 per year, or $29 for existing Wall StreetJournal subscribers.HTML editors, converters and Web site management suitesOne of the most notable changes in Internet software over the past 12months has been the vast upgrading of HTML features, allowing a wholehost of flexible services on Web pages. Among these are the ability tohandle details in table format, the Netscape-specific framestechnology, which allows the definition of several different spaceswithin one Web page, each of which may be scrolled through and changedindependently of the others.The downside of these changes is that many new codes and syntaxfeatures have been added to the earlier versions of the hypertext mark-up language (HTML) used to construct pages for publication on the Web.Fortunately for users, the software industry has kept up with thisprocess, and Internet World saw the launch of a range of new orupgraded utilities which allow point and click editing of HTML,compilation of HTML documents from templates, conversion of existingword processor or desktop publishing files into HTML and proving offinished HTML pages within a true or simulated browser display.Internet for Business will be publishing a more detailed examination ofthese utilities, and exploring their effectiveness for businesses onthe Web, in a later issue. Among the more interesting software in thisfield in San Jose were SoftQuad's new version 3.0 of its HotMetal ProHTML editor, the Spider HTML editor from InContext, and a piece ofsoftware named HTML Transit, from InfoAccess, which allows directautomatic conversion into HTML format from a range of word processorfile formats. Others active in this market include Adobe with itsPagemill product, IBM/Lotus with a new utility called The WebMaster'sApprentice, and Microsoft with its Front Page and Internet Assistantutilities.SoftQuad also showed beta versions of a new utility named Panorama Pro,which employs additional document mark-up technology, drawing on ISOstandards, to establish style sheets for HTML documents.This is a particularly interesting development, since style sheets forHTML have previously been an unrealised wish for much of the Webdevelopment community. Before Panorama Pro, the most likely candidatefor creating more controlled appearance of documents on the Web hadappeared to the Adobe's Acrobat and Postscript technologies.However, SoftQuad has achieved similar functionality with much moreefficient file sizes, and its system looks to be one worth tracking.Internet for Business plans to bring you up to date on this in a laterissue.Internet access servicesPSINet of Herndon, Virginia, took the opportunity of Internet World toannounce a new mobile Internet access service, WorldLink. WorldLink isa flat-rate service irrespective of the location from which it is used,providing what PSINet claims to be the industry's first master accountmanagement capability via the Web. Connection may be made via ISDN forbetween $29.95 and $49.95 according to bandwidth, or by modem.Networked Internet systemsComputer networking giant Novell announced an agreement with TCP/IPsoftware specialists Frontier Technologies Corporation, whereby Novellwill integrate TCP/IP functionality into its networking solutions. Thesystem will employ Frontier's SuperNFS client software for TCP/IPapplications, with operation available in several languages includingUS English, French, German and Japanese.Java toolsSeveral companies move the Sun Microsystems Java programming languagecloser to being the simple tool desired by average business andconsumer users by introducing Graphic User Interfaces enabling Javaapplication development without line-by-line code needing to bewritten.Among those in this field were PowerProduction Software of HermosaBeach, California, with its WebBurst Java authoring tool, and AimtechCorporation of Nashua, New Hampshire, with its Jamba Java authorisingsoftware. Such tools move Java firmly into the everyday applicationfield, and may well lead to a far wider implementation of realtimeprogramming applets (as Java routines are known) across the Web.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996INTERNET SHOPPING - TWO CONTRASTING APPROACHESA major area of commercial activity on the Internet has been theappearance of virtual shopping malls. These have met with mixed successand the dream of opening a store front to a global audience without theassociated overhead costs of traditional retail stores has not alwaysproved to be successful in its realisation. Indeed many stores in thevarious electronic malls have found sales of products to be meagre.While some malls have closed, others have changed their approach usingexperience gained in previous attempts, to modify or completely restyletheir retailing activity based on the experiences of Internet shoppers.After studying the way shopping is carried out on the Internet andgaining a clearer idea of the profile and buying habits of internetcustomers, more carefully-targeted sites are now appearing on the Net.Two examples of different approaches to retailing in this newenvironment can be seen by comparing the Internet Shopping Network,based in Palo Alto, California with Online Interactive which is centredin Seattle, Washington.The Internet Shopping Network was founded in June 1993 and is anestablished player by Internet standards. It is now a wholly-ownedsubsidiary of Home Shopping Network which has a 10-year track record ofTV shopping to its name. The purchase of ISN in 1994 was seen as ameans to expand Home Shopping Network's reach into cyberspace and gainaccess to the potential of a worldwide customer base.ISN's reorganisationOriginally operating as part of the plethora of online malls whichsprang up over the past two years - represented by a wide range ofdifferent products and suppliers - ISN has now re-organised its Website with changes in site navigation, graphics, format and contentaimed at providing a new approach from a redesigned Home Page andconcentrating on a well-defined and proven area of the online market.Not surprisingly this market sector is in retailing computer hardwareand software where ISN's experience has indicated the best results canbe found.Currently ISN offers over 25,000 products from more than 600 majorcompanies and makes use of a special feature called the 'DownloadableSoftware Store' to take advantage of the unique attributes which theInternet can lend to retailers. At this site a customer can gaininstant access to over 45 software product selections which may beinstantly purchased and downloaded direct from ISN to the user's owncomputer. Thus ISN users benefit from the major attraction of Internetshopping - convenience and speed. This is particularly useful whendealing with experienced computer users who make up a large proportionof the purchasers and who appreciate the advantages of a site modelledon new paradigms rather than trying to create a replica shopping mall.This profile will gradually change as more shoppers are found fromwithin the ISN links to AOL, Compuserve and Prodigy. These are serviceswhere customers will often tend to be less computer literate. Therecent addition of 'Power Search' and 'Subject Category' will help inthis case by producing a list of the most relevant product or productsdepending on a customer's interest. This type of service, using thespecific searching strengths available over the Internet, really beginsto demonstrate the useful way in which Internet retailing can be ofbenefit to less experienced computer users too. With the recentagreement to retail many of Microsoft's popular packages through theDownloadable Software Site, ISN will find an increasing customer baseamong this group.ISN customers of course need to register before transactions can takeplace and this requires an approved credit card, e-mail address, andbilling and shipping addresses. Once these details are received acrosswhat ISN claims is a secure network, then all future transactions canbe carried out using a membership code, with all credit cardinformation kept offline. ISN uses Netscape Commerce server forcommercial transactions with security features including serverauthorisation, data encryption, data integrity, and user authorisation.Another organisation with an agreement to sell Microsoft products isOnline Interactive, which will retail through its atOnce SoftwareStore, again highlighting the importance attached to convenience andspeed of service in Internet retailing.The company uses an online sales process based on a high speed Web sitefor marketing and downloading encrypted software from the Internet.After the desired software has been downloaded in encrypted form,Ziplock collects credit card data, and in a separate, modem-based call,directly routes the entire order to a secure proprietary network withno credit card information ever passing across the Internet. Afterauthentication is complete and credit card approval given, an unlocking'Key' is transmitted to the customer's computer. Ziplock then installsthe software, decrypting it to make it available for the customer'suse.A commercial twistIn addition to atOnce software, Online Interactive also operates theFreeShop Online, which takes the original ethos behind the operation ofthe Internet, i.e. free access to information, and gives it acommercial twist. The FreeShop is a means of providing direct marketingand advertising for consumer products and services which are promotedthrough free offers. This provides marketers with the ability to reacha large customer group for a low charge and for the customers to sampleproducts free of charge. Online Interactive claim that since itsinception FreeShop Online has generated more than one millionelectronic orders for over 180 companies. Recent evidence indicatesthat between 18-30% of visitors are buying as a result of free offersderived from the site.FreeShop claims to process demographic information and leads on a dailybasis by e-mail when a free offer is selected and in so doing allowsprompt interaction between suppliers and customers which they claimwill aid the formation of future customer loyalty. A twice weeklyconsolidated paper/label service is also available for fulfilmentpurposes. While statistical evidence is not readily available, FreeShopcurrently claims around 100,000 orders per month and rising among themore popular online retailers in its site.The offers are grouped in intuitive categories to allow easier and moreeffective browsing and it is again claimed that on average three clicksare usually sufficient to move the shopper from storefront to orderscreen thus alleviating one of the major design disadvantages of manyelectronic malls where endless web pages of ill-matching links nullifythe speed and convenience of shopping on the web. The popularcategories for the site are proving to be computing, magazines,finance, entertainment and fitness products.The effect of promotions on customer response rates is particularlyinteresting and can increase interest and acceptance of offers by up toten times. This is achieved by a mixture of chat lines, contests,spotlights and a club newsletter.FreeShop is designed primarily as a lead-generating facility fororganisations which operate direct marketing strategies. By operatingFreeShop in the context of services such as America Online, and theMicrosoft Network, Online Interactive gains access to many millions ofconsumer and business users. Companies promoting their products andservices through FreeShop normally follow up any leads generated by thesite by sending out free samples, catalogues or other promotionalinformation in the mail. However, a growing number of companies areresorting to delivery of electronic promotional information to FreeShopusers.These two contrasting versions of consumer retailing over the Internetare beginning to represent the way in which this medium can provide atruly useful and effective service to consumers. As technology developsand the experience of other electronic malls is put to practical usethe whole concept and presentation of such retailing will evolve fromthe current designs to show marked changes which no longer reflect thetransfer of outmoded and inappropriate concepts to the Web.Internet for Business will track further developments in this field andprovide regular updates on new developments.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996INTRANETS - THE NEW GROWTH PHENOMENONDuring the last two years, a great deal of attention has been focusedon the development of the Internet and in particular on the externaluses of the World Wide Web. As the Internet began its transformationfrom a medium used primarily by government departments, academics andresearchers to one with a commercial bias, the spotlight still remainedfixed on the comparative merits of different corporate Web sites andthe traffic which they generated.While the debate about 'hits' on a web site, together with the problemsof transmission times for graphics and worries over security alloccupied the media, a quiet but fundamental shift was beginning to takeplace within corporate structures. This involved the adoption ofInternet technology and the TCP/IP protocols on which it runs to formcorporate-wide networks 'Intranets'. Lacking in the immediate glamouror controversy that many Web sites have generated, this application ofthe Internet has been disregarded by many commentators. Instead theissues concerning the informative, PR, sales and marketing potential ofWeb sites have all been scrutinised and discussed with increasingfrequency. As this debate made headline news much less was said aboutthe ability of Intranets to perform vital business applications withincorporate structures.More haste, less thought...It is hardly surprising, therefore, that in the frenetic rush to placeinformation on the World Wide Web, many organisations have put up Webpages with little thought to strategic planning and the real benefitswhich might accrue to the company. The desire to claim a place outthere on the 'Net' and promote the company image with Web pages full ofhypertext links and colourful graphics has also outweighed the moreprosaic but beneficial use of a strategy which uses one or more serversto allow password entry for nominated staff, suppliers or customers, togain network access and use e-mail within corporate environments linkedto LAN-based information and interfaced with the Internet.However, recent statistical evidence does indicate that companies arenow realising what the Internet and its associated technologies canoffer, and this is leading to a change in approaches to strategicplanning as the potential of Intranets impacts upon corporate minds andbegins to show up in future growth predictions. Zone Research, based inRedwood, California, reports that during 1996 revenue from sales ofIntranet servers will outstrip those for general Internet use, and by1997/98 will exceed Internet server sales by a factor of three to fourtimes. In monetary terms this represents a private Intranet market in1997 of over $4bn, and approaching $8bn in 1998. It is thought thatover 50% of the world's largest corporations are now actively planningto develop their own private networks in Intranet form.Benefits of Intranet communicationsWith such a fast growing and lucrative market, many of the hardware andsoftware suppliers within the Internet industry are re-focusing theirsales and promotion efforts towards intranet applications. This changeof focus is set to become an established feature in future advertisingand marketing campaigns, and at events such as the recent InternetWorld Show in San Jose, California, where many companies were featuringbenefits of developing intranet communications. Digital EquipmentCorporation, for example, announced an Intranet strategy that willsupply its products and services as 'Intranet ready'. By providing a CD-ROM they can turn Open VMS, Digital Unix, or WindowsNT servers intoIntranet-ready systems, and in co-operating with Microsoft and Netscapeare ensuring that their customers will be presented with ready-madesolutions on Digital Platforms. Established browser software will besupplemented by firewall systems, to ensure secure connection of thecorporate Intranet to the Internet at large. For remote users Digitalwill then offer 'tunnelling' software utilities which allow authorisedindividuals to access information within the corporate Intranet, acrossthe firewall boundary.Promoting internal corporate networkingNovell's recent announcement of its new corporate Intranet servercalled 'Inner Web Publisher' is also indicative of the new emphasis nowbeing placed on specifically promoting internal corporate networking,and the move to integrate servers with software tools to make themseamless and easy to use. This can be seen by the recent agreementbetween Novell and SoftQuad to bundle HoTMetal Light (the freewareversion of SoftQuad's high end HTML editor, HoTMetal Pro) with Novell'sproduct and allow end-users the ability to take advantage ofincreasingly sophisticated Web authoring and publishing software.Intranets explainedWith so much effort now being focused on Intranets, therefore, it isappropriate at this stage to ask just what Intranets are, and why arethey so important? At its simplest an Intranet could be described as an'internal Internet' which allows employees secure access, often behindfirewall technology, to corporate information systems, but with theadded advantages of external links to the Internet itself. The benefitsof access to vast information resources which are so characteristic ofthe Internet can also be duplicated by the Intranet for distributinginternal company information. 'Information mining' has been a featureof Internet for some time as the research potential of huge remotedatabases has been realised.This situation is mirrored in many corporations where not only currentinformation, but also archive or 'legacy' information stored often inpreviously incompatible hardware and software systems needs to be madewidely accessible in-house. New Web applications can allow Intranets totie new applications and legacy resources into a seamless interface.Why is this so important? The importance of such a system can be seenfrom a number of viewpoints.In an increasingly competitive environment any company which can planand manage its communications effectively, and where appropriate,provide an interface with external customers and markets, will gainmaximum leverage from its information assets. In any corporate strategythis internal communications benefit of an Intranet should beconsidered as one of the first building blocks of any overall Internetstrategy, often before creating a public face using an external Website, which on its own may prove to be of dubious worth.The type of information which can be manipulated in this way indicatesthe real potential for companies to benefit from better use of theirown internal data, links with additional external data, and thecustomisation of this information as required for either internal usesor external purposes.Information can vary from general company announcements where a companymay, for example, mount its corporate policy manuals as Web sitesrather than print lots of copies of the document for physicaldistribution, to the provision of sales and performance data, personalemployee communications and highly secret management information.The amount and range of information which can be accessed is great butthe ability to reduce this quickly and easily to relevant core data asrequired, in a secure environment and at a fraction of the costpreviously associated with such an exercise, are the real reasons forthe interest in Intranets. An example of this application can be seenin the recent announcement from Inmagic a leader in text-basedtechnology which has licensed spidering technology from Lycos todeliver 'DB/Text Navigator Server', a new product that will allowspidering, searching, indexing and cataloguing of corporate Intranets.This will include the integration of Lycos' Web spiders with InMagic's'DB/Text WebServer' to provide a powerful search and publishing engine.Harnessing this technology, a corporate Intranet user will be able tostructure indexes and search processes for all users across the wholeinformation resources of the company. IBM is also using the Intranetfocus as part of its repositioning in this marketplace, and as a majorplank in gaining ground lost over the past ten years to majorcompetitors like Microsoft. New links announced by the IBM GlobalNetwork service to provide Lotus Notes for use in Intranets as well aspublic networks are an example of this and will form part of a moredetailed feature on IBM in a later issue of Internet for Business.Flexibility at a low costThe open standards that form the basis of Intranet technology allowcompanies a great deal of flexibility when adapting their owncommunications strategy without the historic need to consider costlyoptions for matching the current software and hardware they use.Together with an ever-growing acceptance by employees of the benefitsof using hypertext links to locate information and the relatively cheapcost of purchase, the advantages begin to mount up. An ability torecord better productivity levels while achieving cost reductions is apowerful incentive for companies to look carefully at the adoption ofIntranets.While these reasons alone would be sufficient to persuade manymanagers, the advantages become even greater when management andemployees link into external communications streams eitherasynchronously or in realtime with suppliers and customers or perhapssales personnel at geographically remote locations and across differenttime zones. Internet for Business will continue to explore the theme ofIntranets in forthcoming issues. Wherever possible examples of bestpractice will be highlighted, offering readers greater insight into thepractical benefits and organisational implications of adopting Intranetmethods.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996YAHOO FLOATS HIGH ON STOCKMARKETThe well-known Internet service company run by chief Yahoo Jerry Wangwent public in April with what seems an almost inevitable clamour forshares by all those expecting to make a killing from dealing in highprofile Internet companies.A total of 2.6 million shares started at $13 on NASDAQ before soaringto over $40 in one of the largest ever first day gains, according toindustry sources. As with many Internet companies (e.g. Netscape orEasynet in the UK) the share price exceeded expectations for a companywith only just over one year's trading to its name and a loss makingrevenue of under $1.4m. The result of all this activity was a marketcapitalisation of over $1bn.Yahoo is primarily an Internet-based search engine and directoryservice for a medium which is notoriously large, unstable and thereforedifficult to quantify and record accurately. It has since been imitatedby several other products and recently lost its premier place in theNetscape Web site as other competitors began eating into its market.This competition together with an unknown potential to gain advertisingrevenue has not deterred visitors who seem more impressed by the sixmillion hits per day which the service claims.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996LYCOS RECORDS GROWTH IN VIEWING FIGURESWhile much media attention has recently been given to the Yahooflotation, another company operating a search tool, Lycos, has alsobeen registering some strong gains.Incorporated in June 1995, and with a market capitalisation of around$250m this company has according to its president and CEO Robert Davis,recently recorded up 4.5 million viewings per day from a figure of 6.5million per month in mid-1995. The site now claims to have 100 separateorganisations advertising on it including Visa, Mastercard, Disney andHilton Hotels.Advertising rates are levied on either a subject or general basis andcharges vary from $20,000 per million viewings to $50,000 per millionviewings.Lycos, which now licenses its search software to 18 companies includingAT&T and Microsoft, has according to Davis, revenues growing from $215min the first quarter of its current financial year to $825m in thesecond quarter ending 31 January 1996. Its agreement to licensespidering technology to companies like InMagic for the burgeoningIntranet market should see continued growth figures.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996DATA TRANSMISSION, DATA COMPRESSION AND THE WEBThis article provides an explanation of some of the factors involved incausing slow response times on the Internet and explores the technologyof data compression, which is perhaps the most promising avenue ofdevelopment in resolving these difficulties.One of the thornier practical issues facing any organisation wishing todistribute information over the Internet is the question of datatransmission rates. All too often, when trying to view a Web site,information passes across the Internet so slowly that a page may takeseveral minutes to take shape on the user's monitor screen. This isespecially true where large quantities of graphical or textualinformation have been built into the site being viewed, because of theextra time taken to download this heavy content over the Internet.When designing a Web site, a clear conflict exists between the wish toprovide complex, visually appealing information and the need to createWeb structures which will transmit across the Internet, page-by-page,in acceptable time periods. The results of these conflicts are clear tosee across the Web. A year ago many Web sites boasted substantial,graphically complex home pages, often with well over 200 kilobytes ofinformation. This graphically-rich approach was then carried throughthe presentation of the whole site. By contrast, in second quarter1996, most well-informed Web producers have cut back on the graphicalcontent of sites, using smaller graphical images to enhance the appealof Web pages without making them the fundamental building blocks of theinformation. The perceived problems in this area are so severe thatmany players are waiting to see what technical solutions may evolve,before committing themselves to large scale online publishing activityacross the Internet.Limitations on data transmission ratesIt is often assumed that the speed with which data can be retrievedacross the Internet is basically tied to the speed of the accessavailable to the individual user. Thus the expectation is that a dial-up user with a 9,600 bps (bit per second) modem will always find datatransfer vastly slower than someone using a state-of-the-art 28.8kbps(28,800 bits per second) modem. Corporate users with 64kbps ISDNconnections, or Mbps leased line connections are seen as still betteroff.This is true to a certain extent. The average data transmission rateachieved in a given Internet transaction will generally be partlydependent on the speed of the final access stage. However, otherfactors come into play. Because the Internet works by sharing theavailable data transmission bandwidth (total amount of datatransmissable between two points over a given time) between all thetransactions occurring between any two points, the speed oftransmission achieved by any single transaction is dependent on theweight of traffic competing for the same route.Additionally, one must also take account of the loading on the server(source-end computer) which is providing the information to beretrieved. The busier the server, the slower its response to any givenrequest.Add all these factors together and one can see some fairly surprisingresults. So, for example, if a UK modem dial-up Internet user retrievesa 10MB file from a server in the US, it would be quite common for theaverage data transmission rate achieved across the whole transaction tobe only in the region of 1 to 1.5 kbps. This is well below thetheoretical transmission capability of the current state-of-the-artmodem, and would result in a total file transfer time in the order ofhours rather than seconds.The major benefit of faster access is that when the rest of the systemdoes speed up, the faster device can achieve faster transient datarates. This in turn achieves a higher average data transmission rateover the course of one large transaction, or many smaller ones,improving the overall efficiency of the system.Data compression techniquesThe data transmission efficiency of the Internet, and the Web inparticular, is dependent on a whole host of factors beyond the sheerspeed of connection operated by an individual user. Since this is true,and as data transmission can be a tediously slow process over theglobal networks, measures must be sought elsewhere which can increasethe overall efficiency of the system and individual transactions. Highon the list of technologies which may be adopted to this end is thetechnique of data compression.Most personal computer users will by now have encountered datacompression in some form. Utilities such as PKZIP or WINZIP have becomewidely used in compressing software and textual information, so thatthey may be transported more efficiently on disk, and many softwarepackages now require a fairly lengthy de-compression stage during theirfirst installation on a given computer. Such compression/de-compressiontechniques can equally be applied to graphics files, which take up sucha large proportion of the time taken in retrieving Web pages from theservers on which Web sites are mounted.The benefits of using data compression in preparing information formounting on the Web are manifold, with gains across the whole Internet.The Web now generates a substantial proportion of all Internet datatraffic. Any steps to reduce the file sizes, and thus the datacongestion across the system in total, make the whole experience ofInternet use more rewarding and more efficient. Equally, for anindividual organisation mounting a Web site, its users will begenerally far more comfortable in using the site when retrievingcompressed data.Some commonly available compression technologies have the ability toreduce graphics files down to between a tenth and a twentieth of theiroriginal size, without perceptible loss of quality on screen when thefiles are retrieved. Going back to our hypothetical 10MB file, thiswould mean that the retrieval time involved in calling the file acrossthe Internet at our average data rate of 1.2kbps would be reduced tominutes. Of course there is a small lag introduced because the clientcomputer receiving the compressed file has then to de-compress it,which is a finite process. However, the de-compression period isusually significantly less than the time saved in transmitting the fileacross the Internet, meaning that all sides obtain benefit from the useof compression.Compression standards on the InternetOf course there is one major rider to consider. Most compressiontechniques require the attendant de-compression utility to be availableto the end-user. This is certainly true of the majority of graphicscompression techniques which may be applied to images for the Web. Thismeans that a Web site developer must either find the means to provideeach user of the site with the de-compression software for theparticular compression technique employed, or that a compressiontechnology must be selected which is already widely used across theInternet.Until recently, the Internet had adopted as a de facto standard forgraphic image file compression a technology known as the graphicsinterchange format (GIF). So prevalent was the use of this techniquethat the term GIF had become almost synonymous with the term graphicalimage among Web users. GIF is a fairly straightforward compressiontechnique, designed specifically for use with network systems and forthe realtime transfer of graphics files. Its original developer was theCompuServe commercial network service, and from there it spread widelyacross the Internet. Most Web browser software utilities, up to thepresent time, include a GIF reader to provide their standard imageprocessing capability.But this useful and almost ubiquitous technology has come under threat,because the core compression technology employed is under patents heldby its original developers, the Unisys company in the US. Unisys tooksteps in late 1994 to enforce its patents, which in turn obligedCompuServe to put in place a licensing system, requiring any newsoftware developer using GIF processes to pay royalties on theirapplication. The response of the Web community, and Internet softwaredevelopers, has been to work up a new compression standard, which isseen as a full replacement for the GIF technology. This new compressionstandard is known as the portable network graphic (PNG, pronounced'ping'). The development of PNG has been undertaken by an internationalgroup of developers under the wing of the World Wide Web Consortium,W3C, based at MIT. W3C is the nearest thing there is to an overridingauthority controlling the protocols, standards and development of theWorld Wide Web, although it has no formal powers.PNG is still under development, but though still less prevalent thanGIF, is fairly commonly used by Web sites.The three most commonly available graphics compression techniques onthe Internet are as follows:- GIF - the Graphics Interchange Format developed by CompuServe;- PNG - Portable Network Graphics format;- JPEG - a graphics compression standard developed by an internationalstandards committee known as the Joint Photographic Experts Group(universally known as 'Jaypeg'). JPEG techniques are now available as abuilt-in feature of the Netscape Navigator Web browser, and arebecoming increasingly common as a means of reproducing graphical imagesfor Web applications.Before going into any detailed comparison of these methodologies, it isnecessary briefly to explain the difference between 'lossless' and'lossy' compression techniques. Lossless compression (as in GIF and PNGmethods) essentially defines the full image when it is compressed, insuch a way that repeated cycles of compression and de-compressionproduce an identical image each time.In lossy compression, the essential concept is that, for reproductionon a computer screen, or using a colour printer, the amount of detailavailable in any given electronic image file is actually greater thanthe human eye can resolve. Techniques have been developed such thatinformation can be discarded during compression, and still leave theimage of a sufficient quality to appear identical to human vision, whenit is de-compressed. Detailed pixel-by-pixel (a pixel being thesmallest indivisible element in the image) analysis would reveal thatsome of the pixels in the image have been changed, typically by someform of averaging process, so that the detailed definition of the imageis significantly reduced by such compression/de-compression methods.The benefit of this approach (as used by JPEG) is that substantiallyhigher compression ratios may be obtained from the same original data,by comparison with lossless compression. However, repeated cycles ofcompression and de-compression will result in substantial deteriorationof the image quality.Features desirable in image handlingIn presenting images on the Web, and allowing them to be downloaded byWeb users, a certain number of features are sought from the softwareemployed:1. Streamability - the technique employed should allow for the image tobe transmitted serially (that is bit-by-bit) across a network;2. Progressive display - the image being retrieved by the clientbrowser software is progressively built up on the monitor screen,either section-by-section, or as a progressively more detailed pictureacross the whole area of the image;3. Transparency - the ability to define one colour within the originalimage, or some defined portion of the image, as transparent. Thisenables the image to be placed against a background of differing colourin such a way that the background colour replaces the desired portionof the original image;4. The ability to store ancillary information, such as non-printingtext, within the data structure of the compressed file;5. Hardware and software independent operation;6. Lossless compression, for preference, since many applications ofgraphics transfer over computer networks may require images to be opento examination by computer systems, rather than just by the naked eye,or to be employed in processes such as print origination;7. The ability to handle colour palettes employed in typical personalcomputer monitor and software systems, such as the 256 colour palettedevised for early versions of Windows.Both GIF and PNG standards offer all these features, but PNG has anumber of other advantages.It also handles truecolour images - those which employ a colour-blending process to generate the areas of each colour across the image,rather than a defined colour palette, and a more sophisticatedgrayscale process.It offers a system called the alpha channel, allowing transparency tobe defined across the full image, rather than for a particular singlecolour from a palette, or particular part of the image. And gammacorrection is provided, allowing the image intensity to be adjustedaccording to the likely application to which the image will be devoted.More sophisticated error correction techniques are also found in PNG asis faster building of initial elements in the progressive display ofthe image across network links. Unlike GIF, PNG is now designed to bean open standard without legal obligation to pay royalties or licencefees to its developers.By comparison, JPEG is not designed to offer the same spread offunctionality as either the GIF or PNG standards. The compressiontechnique devised for the JPEG standard was seen as providing a first-rate means of processing truecolour photographic material, and complexhand-drawn artwork, along with more complex, naturalistic halftoneimages. JPEG is not well adapted for use with text, simple line artdrawings or any other simple outline material.When used with the type of image for which it was designed, however,JPEG compression is a very effective tool, achieving compression ratiosof up to 20:1, with no perceptible loss of quality when the image is de-compressed for on-screen viewing. Use of GIF on the same image wouldobtain something in the region of 3:1 compression, or perhaps a littlebetter. With an image containing constant variations in colour, JPEGwould also produce a more realistic image on de-compression, whereas aGIF de-compressed may show noticeable banding effects through itsfailure to define colour change graduations adequately. JPEG hasanother benefit, in that it is possible, in compressing an image forpresentation as part of a Web site, for example, to offset the qualityrequired in the application against the degree of compression applied.Thus, if only a very low resolution is required in the final image, onscreen, compression ratios of up to 100:1 are available. If very highresolution is required, by contrast, then compression may be limited tomuch lower ratios. This helps to make JPEG a very flexible tool for theWeb developer.The major downfall of JPEG on the Internet is that it is much lesswidely-integrated into the software utilities, such as Web browsers,which are used to 'unpack' images from their servers on the system.Many highly effective JPEG viewers and utilities are available, even inthe freeware domain. However, other than Netscape and a few others,most of the fundamental Internet tools require such JPEG viewers to beconfigured separately, making the standard rather more clumsy for theaverage Web or Internet user than GIF.It should be borne in mind, however, that this position is not likelyto be static. There is increasing pressure within the Internetcommunity to greatly enhance the ability of the Internet to handletransfers of graphical, audio and video information, and the moreadvanced compression techniques are likely to be increasingly adoptedas part of the means to achieve this.The future of online image handlingAll the techniques described so far essentially employ similarmathematical processes to achieve their compression effects. These relyon re-defining the image, pixel-by-pixel, so as to reduce the amount ofdata required to construct the image on screen on de-compression. Sinceearly 1996, a company called Iterated Systems has been making a wholly-different compression/de-compression technology available to Internetusers. This may offer significant benefits in performance in comparisonwith currently popular techniques, with the added advantage thatessentially the same technology can be adapted to process audio andvideo data streams.Iterated Systems, founded in 1987, has developed a compressiontechnology based in the use of advanced mathematical processes known asfractal transforms. Data is compressed by identifying such formulae todefine recurring elements in the image, so that large areas ofrepeating data can be replaced with the fractal definition, togetherwith codes to define position, colour, intensity and other necessaryparameters. Iterated is so confident of the quality of its technologythat it has publicly stated the goal of making its system the de factostandard on the Internet, and in any other TCP/IP network systems, suchas corporate internal information networks (Intranets).Fractal compression has already been widely adopted as a means ofefficient image storage and retrieval in CD-ROM applications. Among theusers in this environment have been Microsoft, in handling the 7,000images in its Encarta encyclopedia along with other multimediaencyclopedia developers such as Hutchinson and Grolier.A typical fractal compression process would reduce a 2MB file to acompressed form of about 40kB in size, representing a compression ratioof approximately 50:1. According to Iterated, this would be comparablein quality on de-compression with a JPEG file produced with a far lowercompression ratio. Hence the fractal technique potentially offers fargreater data transmission benefits and efficiency benefits, whileoffering at least equivalent image quality to other methods, and someinteresting additional features.By contrast with GIF and PNG, fractal image files (FIFs) loaddifferently when retrieved over a network. Instead of graduallyappearing in increasingly higher definition across the whole ultimatearea of the image, a FIF will appear first as a thumbnail-sized versionof the full image, at full definition, clearly showing the nature ofthe image from the start. It will then gradually expand up to the fullsize defined by the creator of the Web page. Additionally the file,once retrieved, can be handled in a more versatile manner than de-compressed files from other technologies. It is possible, for example,to zoom into given areas of a FIF at much higher ratios than ispossible with a comparable JPEG image, without the blocky qualityintroduced by the pixel-to-pixel boundaries in conventional images. Itis also readily possible to vary the colour depth of the image bothupwards and downwards after retrieval.Iterated Systems has released as freeware a utility called FractalViewer, which can be downloaded free of charge from its Web site. Thisallows users to retrieve and de-compress FIFs from the Internet.Fractal Viewer can be added as a plug-in to Netscape Navigator, thepopular Web browser, so that Netscape is able to retrieve FIFsseamlessly from Web sites. At the same time the company has madeavailable a utility called CoolFusion, which handles video and audiomaterial in a similar fashion. This is also freeware and also able tobe integrated with the Netscape Navigator. For developers, an imageprocessing tool called Fractal Image is available commercially, alongwith a shareware developers' kit.CoolFusion is perhaps the most exciting of these tools. At present itis not possible to comment on its effectiveness, since Iterated has yetto release any fractal-compressed video material for evaluation.However, if the levels of data compression predicted can be achieved,then the technology of realtime video transmission over the Internetmay be brought a large step forward. Iterated's people currently talkin terms of achieving realtime colour video transmission at datatransmission rates suitable for modem transmission. This currentlyremains well beyond the scope of the most widely-used video compressiontools on the market - either MPEG (for Motion Picture Experts Group), adistant cousin of JPEG, or Apple's QuickTime technology.A key tool for the future of the WebUntil such a time as the whole Internet can guarantee data rates in the64kbps range for every individual transaction, at least for Webapplications, compression technology offers the most promising routefor development of advanced data delivery systems such as sophisticatedgraphics, voice telephony and full-motion video in realtime. Since thetimescale for the achievement of widespread high-bandwidth connectivityis probably in years rather than months, it can be seen that anyorganisation looking to be involved in sophisticated Web informationdistribution should be fully conversant with the most appropriatecompression technologies available for its purposes. This article hasset out some of the current techniques, and pointed to one promisingarea of development. It is likely that Internet for Business willreturn to this theme frequently in future issues.Iterated Systems is on the Web at http://www.iterated.comMore information on PNG can be found at the World Wide Web Consortium'sweb site: http://www.w3c.orgFor a fuller description of JPEG compression, visit the news.answersarchive at rtfm.mit.eduBack to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996HOME OR AWAY - THE WEB SITE DILEMMAA crucial decision facing any organisation planning to establish itsown information service, or site, on the World Wide Web is whether ornot to invest in the equipment, software and human resources necessaryto manage such a system in-house. The alternative, of placing the siteon a remote server, managed by a hosting service, may appear at firstsight to have disadvantages in loss of control, and to require paymentswhich have no capital benefit to the site developer. However, on closerscrutiny, the matter is not so straightforward.The costs involved in setting up a Web site on an in-house, managedbasis are likely to be in the order of #10,000 to #15,000 for hardwareand software alone, even at the entry level. To this must be added thenecessary Internet access, rental of which from a service provider willbe in a similar order to the hardware and software costs, in the firstyear of operation.If a full-time Web site operator is employed (traditionally knownsomewhat onesidedly as a Webmaster), then a further outgoing in excessof #20,000 per year should be envisaged. This leaves aside any questionof investing in security or firewall software, to protect the site fromunauthorised intrusion or attempts to use it as a means to break intothe organisation's network, if any.In return for such investment, a Web site publisher will gain totalcontrol over the site, including its efficiency of operation andmaintenance, the regularity of updating, and the types of accessallowed to one or more different categories of user. If the site isconnected to the internal LAN it will also be possible to use it as theserver for an Intranet, an information service for the organisation'sstaff, using World Wide Web software and interfaces.Hosting a Web siteHowever, the level of investment indicated above may seem a large jumpfor any organisation, particularly among small businesses, if coming tothe Internet or Web for the first time. The alternative, which hasbecome increasingly popular in recent times, is to establish a Website, but to have it hosted on a remote computer, managed by, andinstalled at the premises of a service company.In this case, the owner of the site can still take direct control ofthe appearance, content and functionality of the Web site, evendownloading updated direct on to the server by using a remote Internetconnection. However, the hosting organisation will take responsibilityfor the Internet access required by the site, monitoring andmaintaining the function of the site, backing up its contents andsupervising the hardware. Equally, they will incur the capital costsfor the equipment and services needed.The costs involved in this process are often extremely reasonable. Atypical service of this nature in the UK is offered by Cambridge-basedInternet systems integrators, Electric Mail. This company offers twolevels of Web hosting service, WebSpace and WebSpace Light. WebSpace isthe top-level service, offering users the ability to operate a Web siteon Electric Mail's servers, with its own discrete address (known in theInternet field as a URL - Uniform Resource Locator). The basis chargesfor this service would amount to approximately #1,000 over the firstyear of operation, and somewhat less per year thereafter. WebSpaceLight, which registers an organisation's Web site as a sub-section(known as sub-domain) of Electric Mail's own Web site, is available forless than #200 per year.Hosting in the UK and abroadMost of the UK's leading Internet service providers will offer similarhosting services, among them companies such as Unipalm Pipex andPSINet. Similarly the same services are often available from Webproduction companies such as London-based Webmedia. An identicalpicture is seen, for example, in the US, where leading serviceproviders Netcom and UUNet offer identical or similar services. Veryoften the detailed arrangements for Web site hosting are published bythese companies on their own Web sites, including scales of chargeslevied.The cost/benefit equation in establishing a Web site may well be tippedheavily towards the outsourcing option, especially for smallercompanies or those embarking on experimental use of the Web. In-houseoperation really only makes sense if a major site is contemplated,fully-integrated with other information services operated by anorganisation, and requiring constant updating and supervision from theorganisation's own staff.Web hosting services are readily available in the UK and the US, andthis is equally true across all the countries where commercial Internetactivity is gaining acceptance. Anyone contemplating creating a Website, whether commercially-orientated or otherwise, is well-advised togive this option serious thought.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996INTERACTIVE COMMUNICATIONS - THE INTERNET LEAP FORWARDOut of the many disparate strands which are slowly emerging from thecommercial development and harnessing of the Internet, two levels ofpractical and creative thinking may be isolated. One is the tendencysimply to take existing methods of communication and presentation ofinformation from media such as television and the printed word, and totransfer them with little adjustment into Internet contexts such as theWeb.Meanwhile more imaginative and possibly more risk-oriented developersand implementers search for new information models which operate toobtain the maximum return from the particular strengths of the Internetmedium. The momentum towards this latter approach is slowly building,and numbers of companies are developing software which takes this styleaway from a few informed insiders and into the field of systematicapplication of available tools.In truth the differentiation between the more conservative applicationof traditional media approaches, and the exploration of newcommunications paradigms, is rather to be seen as a spectrum betweentwo extremes, and not as a pair of incompatible options. Sometraditional media techniques work effectively over the Internet, afterall. However, as with the evolution of television or radiobroadcasting, the development of commercial communications over theWeb, for example, will assuredly tend towards new models which are mosteffective in harnessing the medium. Insiders generally feel that thisprocess will take place far more rapidly than has been the case inprevious generations of media.What then are the strengths identifiable for the Web, which perhapsbest exemplifies the Internet as a tool for interactive communicationsbetween groups and individuals with commercial goals in view? It wouldbe rash to attempt to create an exhaustive list at this early stage inthe growth of the medium. However, a number of elements are alreadyclear:1. Flexibility - one Web site, with suitable control over categories ofaccess, can serve a range of different audiences, such as companystaff, shareholders, customers, collaborators, distributors, the press,government and official regulators and many more;2. Adaptability - information on a Web site is open to frequent updateand focusing at relatively low cost, by comparison with traditionalmethods such as printing.3. Interactivity - properly configured, a Web site can allow a trulybalanced, two-way communication process, whereby various audiences canreceive messages from the site owner and respond with similar force andprecision. It is also possible to allow mutual interaction between thevarious audiences which the site may address - between customers anddistributors, for example;4. Immediacy - information can be uniquely tailored to the needs ofvery narrowly-focused groups, and updated to match their changingresponses.Up to second quarter 1996, many organisations which have launched Websites have failed to go beyond the creation of electronic billboards.Information presented is essentially sales driven, relatively staticand offers little opportunity for users of sites to communicate orinteract. Web users in general tend not to respond positively to suchponderous content, preferring to spend their time in surfing siteswhich are far more active, interactive and fast-moving.Some of the tools which allow companies to build such interest into Websites include:1. Database interfacing software - allowing site visitors to searchcompany information relevant to their needs, and access the searchresults through their own Web browser interface. These tools createHTML pages dynamically according to the search results for the user,meaning that the underlying database may be left in its naturaldatabase environment, rather than being converted into HTML in total.2. Intelligent agents - utilities which allow users to specify, onceand for all or on an ever-changing basis, a range of information typesfrom within a site's resources which are particularly relevant to theirinterests or needs. The agent then delivers the relevant information asa selection from the total content of the site (an interesting currentexample is the Personal Times, the interactive version of The Times ofLondon, where users may define an information profile to confirm thematerial from the overall structure of the newspaper which they wish tosee each day.)3. Online forms - tools structured into the HTML mark-up of Web pagesto allow users to send information back to the Web site owner forfuture reference.4. Interactive offline discussion groups and online chat groups.Increasingly used in sites relating to consumer marketing, especially,these services allow communication, with or without some form ofmoderation by the site owner, between users of the site, whether withina particular group, such as current customers, or across groups, sothat, for example, customers are able to communicate with distributors,retailers, or other groups using the site.5. Online ordering and payment structures - the basic building blocksof genuine online commerce.6. Multimedia data-delivery software - allowing the presentation ofinformation through a Web site in audio, video and 3D forms.Web communications definedOne of the terms heard with increasing frequency in this field of Webcommunications is the word 'Pointcasting'. The major strength ofestablished media such as newspapers, radio and television has beenbroadcasting, the distribution of one fixed message, or a small rangeof fixed alternatives, to a large audience with defined commonalitiesof interests. The Web moves away from this model to give the marketingor corporate communications strategist a whole new toolkit.Pointcasting is seen as the process of establishing messages which arevalid to individuals or small discrete interest groups of relevance tothe site owner, and the updating of these messages to continue theirrelevance to those targets over time. Pointcasting relies on theharnessing of tools such as those outlined in the previous paragraph,to ensure that two-way communication is established between a Web sitecreator and the individual users, at a constantly relevant and fruitfullevel.One company which has begun to create software applications which aredesigned to address this technique in a simple, managed softwareenvironment, is Silicon Valley start up BroadVision. Preferring to usethe term one-to-one marketing, rather than pointcasting, since itsoffering focuses in the business development side of these new Webtechniques, BroadVision has launched a suite of software which willunderpin the development of these focused, interactive techniques inthe commercial Web environment. Called Broad-Vision One-to-One (tm),this is a software system which is designed to manage the entiremarketing and selling life cycle on the Web. Four areas offunctionality are offered;1. Community - the provision of dynamic information relevant to users,not always focused directly on the site owners' products and services.Interactive communication between users of the site is also delivered,where appropriate. This aspect of the software is designed to build acommunity of users, and deliver intrinsic benefits to them within thestructure of the site, encouraging their repeated use of theinformation.2. Profiling - data tracking utilities which allow the site owner toform detailed knowledge of each individual relevant to the products andservices dealt with by the site. This will, for example, remember allthe transactions entered into by a given user, giving the site owneruseful profile details for design of further interaction with thatuser.3. Targeting - intelligent-agent style functions, allowing the sitescontent to be delivered to individual users in a fashion which bestserves their short-term and long-term needs.4. Transaction processing - electronic ordering and sales, customerservices, EDI, reporting etc.This methodology bears comparison with traditional direct salestechniques. Leading exponents of catalogue selling, for example, havelong improved their sales performance by maintaining extensive databaseinformation regarding the tastes and buying habits of customers.However, the Web is more powerful still, since it allows the marketingprofessional to interact more frequently with a wider range ofaudiences, and to develop a more detailed understanding of the needsand wants of the individuals and companies' which buy their goods andservices.Software such as that provided by BroadVision, which is one of a numberof providers in this field, allows non-technical staff of companiesseeking to harness Internet marketing techniques to have direct controlof the strategy and information content of the process. Such toolspromise to have a similar revolutionary effect in the Internet field asdid desktop publishing software in the print-on-paper communicationsprocess. Once they are well-established, the whole process of marketingon the Internet should be moved up a notch in terms of accessibilityand effectiveness.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996SMALL BUSINESSES RELUCTANT TO JOIN WEBO'Reilly Associates have published the results of their recent surveyConducting business on the Internet. The full results are available forpurchase by contacting their Web site at www.ora.com.The companies surveyed were drawn from the Dun and Bradstreet databaseand divided into large, medium and small organisations. The responserates upon which the results were collected were 410, 406 and 214respectively. Large companies were classified as those with more than1,000 employees, medium-sized companies with 101 to 1,000 employees andsmall companies with less than 100 employees.While the results indicated that 51% of large companies in NorthAmerica currently use the Internet, only 8% of small companies takeadvantage of the network, and while a surprising 28% of large companiesplan no Internet access in the near future, this figure rises to 53%for medium-sized and 79% for small companies.Intranet activity was also monitored with 37% of large companies havingat least one internal Web site while external Web site activity wasregistered with 35% of large companies.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996PATTERNS OF DEVELOPMENT FOR THE WORLD WIDE WEBLatest figures from two of the world's leading research groups in thehigh technology sector shed further light on the development of theWeb, and on the use of software designed to support access andsearching across this global data structure. Data released reveals thecontinuing explosive growth of the Web as a means of publishing andaccessing data, and identifies clear winners and losers, up to thepresent date, in the battle for dominance in software development forWeb browsers.According to figures published by the International Data Corporation,the total number of users of the Web, across all sectors, will reachsome 30 million or more during 1996 up from under 10 million in 1995.These numbers are projected to reach well in excess of 120 million bythe close of the decade. In parallel with this growth, a shift in thebalance of the Web is forecast by IDC, with the percentage of Web usersworldwide being located in the US falling from nearly 80% in 1995 tolittle over 50% at the end of 1999.IDC's fellow research group Dataquest took advantage of the opportunityprovided by the Internet World show to announce a new service providingmarket insights over the Internet delivered through the World Wide Web.The service, entitled DQi (Dataquest Interactive), will offer high-value quantitative analysis and news on the IT industry (the siteaddress is: http://www.dataquest.com). Of special interest to Internetindustry analysts during the Internet World event was a new breakdown,published by DQi, of the use of various types of Web browser softwareacross the Internet sector. Statistics compiled by Dataquest wereobtained by monitoring the traffic on a wide range of Web sites whichpublish statistics on numbers of accesses and the type of browser usedby each visitor to the site.Using this basis for statistical analysis, Dataquest concludes that theNetscape Navigator Web browser, in all its versions, remains the mostpopular among Web users, with some 84% of all Web traffic beinggenerated by this browser. Netscape's nearest competitor in the Webbrowser market is now the Microsoft Internet Explorer, which has just7% of this market, although its user base is among the fastest growingof all the Netscape alternatives. Other browsers listed include theproprietary browser of America Online, with 3% of the market, and NCSAMosaic, the original graphical Web browser, whose various versions take1% of the market. The remaining competitors take a further 5% betweenthem. Among this latter group, and with the highest growth rate of all,is the Sun Microsystems Hot Java browser, developed to feature Sun'sJava online interactive programming environment.Dataquest will continue to track the browser competition, and manyother measures of the Internet and computing sector, publishing regularupdates on the Web site launched at Internet World.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET FOR BUSINESS via NewsNetMay 1, 1996VIDEO NETWORKING TAKES A STEP FORWARDGeneral Instrument Corporation, a technology integrator for interactivevoice, video and data delivery over computer networks, announced a newinitiative in video-enriched interactive services in early May. GI, aUS-based multinational, is launching a programme known as VideowareInnovation Partners, to establish key collaborations with other playersin the networking field for the delivery of its Videoware video-richdata service over broadband networks. The GI system, in collaborationwith its VI Partners, will allow network operators to deploy a high-speed turnkey system integrating hardware, network management, Internetand intranet access and multimedia services.Initially GI is concentrating on delivering services over itsproprietary SURFboard network, an end-to-end system delivering videoand data at 27Mbps to PCs equipped with its SURFboard adaptor cards.This network structure depends on cable outward links, with a standardtelephone return path. Hence the return data feed operates atnarrowband data rates only. Nonetheless, the company's solution is onewhich may be implemented immediately, over existing cable networks. GIplans to launch a two-way broadband system, harnessing AsynchronousTransfer Mode switching, based on the use of existing cableinfrastructure for both outward and return information.Partners in the Videoware Innovation programme include America Online,CompuServe, Dorling Kindersley Multimedia, Macromedia, ParamountPictures, Silicon Graphics, Sun Microsystems and Turner BroadcastingSystem.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-27IA086-000622-B037-268http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te122.html 205.156.212.5 19970122050237 text/html 56596HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:00:35 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:33 GMTContent-length: 56409Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te122.html Sample Issue Copyright INTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNet JANUARY 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES -DIFFICULT YEAR AHEAD FOR ONLINE SERVICE PROVIDERS (203 words) -DIGITAL INTRODUCES INTERNET RESCUE SERVICE (200 words) -CABLE ONLINE GOES FOR UK CABLE CO' NET SERVICE (230 words) -MICROSOFT FACES HOSTILE EUROPEAN RECEPTION AFTER EURO ONLINE VENDORS ALIGN (370 words) -DUTCH MOVE INTO UK INTERNET MARKET (140 words) -RETAILERS, TELECOMMS INDUSTRY SLOW TO TAKE-UP INTERNET (287 words) -CALL MADE FOR UNIVERSAL ELECTRONIC MAIL ACCESS (192 words) -GROWING CONCERN NOTED OVER USE OF INTERNET FOR BUSINESS USERS (308 words) -SENIOR BRITISH POLICEMAN HITS OUT AT INTERNET CRYPTOGRAPHY (148 words) -NET FINANCIALS AND LAN SERVICES INTRODUCED (320 words) -ALPHANET EXPECTS LEADERSHIP IN INTERNET FAX SERVICE OFFERINGS (159 words) -COLLEGES REPORT INTERNET PUBLISHING TIME SAVED (124 words) -NET DA SYSTEM TO BE INTRODUCED (120 words) -LOW COST NET SERVICES TO LAUNCH IN NEW ZEALAND (120 words) -STUDENT CHARGED WITH INTERNET TERRORISM (175 words) -NET BITS:BANNED BOOKS MAKE DEBUT ON THE INTERNET (63 words) -NET BITS:JEWELLERY TRADING SITE INTRODUCED (95 words) -NET BITS:FWD INTRODUCES FREE NET PHONE SERVICE NETWORK (100 words) -NET BITS:INDONESIA CONCERNED OVER INTERNET (92 words) -NET BITS:MICROSOFT NETWORK HITS 525K MILESTONE (129 words) -NET BITS:INTUIT CHIEF UNSURE OVER INTERNET BANKING PERCEPTION (92 words) -NET BITS:POL POT CRIME WEB SITE INTRODUCED (97 words) -NET BITS:NETCOM, PRODIGY IN SPAT OVER MARKETING (133 words) -NET BITS:NEW PRESTEL TO PROVIDE FREE INTERNET ACCESS (86 words) -NET BITS:SUPERSCAPE MAKES FREE VR WEB BROWSER (72 words) -NET BITS:TENAGRA MAKES INTERNET AWARDS (47 words) -NET BITS:UUNET MAKES MOVES FOR EUNET GERMANY (83 words) -TITTLETATTLE... (788 words) -NET PRODUCTS:ACCENT INTRODUCES MULTILINGUAL INTERNET BROWSER (50 words) -NET PRODUCTS:DYNAMO INTRODUCES DYNAMIC PAGE DEV TOOL (87 words) -NET PRODUCTS:DIVE INTRODUCES WORLDS SERVER (53 words) -NET PRODUCTS:MATSUSHITA ELECTRIC DEVELOPS NEW COMMUNICATIONS TERMINAL, TELEPHONE (105 words) -NET PRODUCTS:MECA INTRODUCE PORN BLOCKER (74 words) -NET PRODUCTS:ORA INTRODUCE NEW WINDOWS 95 BOOK (47 words) -NET PRODUCTS: PRISMA TO DEBUT INTERNET COLLABORATIVE SCHEDULER SYSTEM (125 words) -NET PRODUCTS: QUARTERDECK UPDATES INTERNETSUITE (179 words) -NET PRODUCTS:QUARTERDECK INTRODUCE NEW WEB AUTHORING, WEB COMMS TOOLS (144 words) -NET PRODUCTS:SCOPUS TO INTRODUCE CUSTOMER SUPPORT ACCESS (75 words) -NET PRODUCTS:US ORDER TO EXPAND SMART TELEPHONE RANGE (89 words) -NET PRODUCTS:WYND MOVES ONTO MAC PLATFORM (44 words) -ON THE NET (535 words) CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-DIFFICULT YEAR AHEAD FOR ONLINE SERVICE PROVIDERSINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-DIFFICULT YEAR AHEAD FORONLINE SERVICE PROVIDERSCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDNew research from TFPL says that 1996 is going to bea difficult year for the new online service providerswho are expecting to cash in on the European servicemarket.  The study compares the European market modelto the USA and notes that the main US services suchas CompuServe, America Online and Prodigy have hadsubscriber loyalty before the widespread use of theInternet whereas in Europe service providers facecompetition from the Internet as wekk as from freepublic teletext services, videotex services andlocalised online services.  Martin White, managingconsultant at TPFL, said: "Companies are tying totake advantage of the rapidly growing installed baseof PCs in both the business and consumer marketswithout fully understanding cultural issues aboutinformation use. You only have to look at the way inwhich the newspaper industry differs in each countryto see one example of the way in which onlineservices will have to adapt to each national market.-- the evidence from the French Teletel services isthat users are more inclined to use the services fortransactions, rather than just for information." Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-DIGITAL INTRODUCES INTERNET RESCUE SERVICEINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-DIGITAL INTRODUCES INTERNETRESCUE SERVICECOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDDigital Equipment Corp's Multivendor CustomerServices business unit has introduced a new serviceaimed at Internet users called the PC Rescue Service.Subscribers will be given access to a dedicatedhotline where technicians will solve any Netscape orMosaic Internet access problems and any PC hardware,software or peripheral problem for any major brand ofPC hardware and software, irrespective of what systemand network operating system used.  David Allen,marketing director of Digital's MCS unit, said: "Inour most recent research we discovered that more thanone in four people had difficulties in learning touse and understand computers -- many of these havebought a PC to access the Internet. Fourteen percentof people have also experienced major breakdowns andsystems crashes -- which proves the industry stillneeds to provide comprehensive support and rescueservices like PC rescue, if we are going to continueto have a satisfied and rapidly growing Internet usercommunity." Yearly subscription costs are GBP117.50with calls charged at GBP20 per incident. Members whojoin before March 1996, will receive 5 free calls -making membership almost free. Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-CABLE ONLINE GOES FOR UK  CABLE CO' NET SERVICEINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-CABLE ONLINE GOES FOR UK CABLE CO' NET SERVICECOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDYet another new Internet service provider has goneonline, although this company claims to have adifferent unique selling proposition to the rest.Cable Online, a business unit of cable TV andtelephony service vendors CableTel, is planning toleverage its business contacts within the cablesector to provide Internet services over the regularPSTN and cable phone networks around the UK.  Thecompany is confident of success and has claimed itwill be the number one Internet provider by the endof 1997 with the key being its massive supply ofbandwidth, access points, scalable system andsupport. Philip John, managing director of CableOnline said: "In partnership with CableTel, we haveput our considerable telecomms resources andexpertise behind the service and placed greatemphasis on customer care.  We're confident thatdisgruntled customers will move to us from otherservice providers and that we will also attract ahealthy number of 'newbies'." Untimed service will becharged at GBP12.95/month for dial-up access and freetechnical support is offered on a toll-free number. Anumber of local call points of presence are set to beintroduced with 90% UK local call penetration by mid-1996.ISDN and leased line services are also beingoffered although pricing information has yet to bereleased.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-MICROSOFT FACES HOSTILE EUROPEAN RECEPTION AFTEREURO ONLINE VENDORS ALIGNINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-MICROSOFT FACES HOSTILEEUROPEAN RECEPTION AFTER EURO ONLINE VENDORS ALIGNCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDMicrosoft Corp's presently lacklustre plans to movein the European online communications market with itsMicrosoft Network seems to have been hit for sixafter Germany's biggest media and telecommunicationscompanies joined forces with the world's largestonline services company to head off Microsoft.Deutsche Telekom AG, Bertelsmann AG, Axel SpringerVerlag and America Online have signed letters ofintent to cooperate in online service provision andoperation. While not everything is yet cut and dry asthe proposal will require tight scrutiny fromEurope's competition watchdog, many observers pointout that the EU is likely to be favourable to thedeal in view of the threat from Microsoft Corp. While Internet service providers around Europe willbe marginally affected by the service, the new groupplans to introduce mainly content-based services,placing it in direct competition with Microsoft'sMicrosoft Network and CompuServe.  A complex range ofstock swapping is set to take place between thepartners to strengthen the deal. Possibly to placatethe watchdogs, the companies have stated that theyhave no immediate intention to merge their ownextensive individual online services into one unit --although of course they have denied to rule this outas an option. Microsoft was also slated in a researchreport note from Goldman Sachs claims that failure byMicrosoft to  articulate an Internet strategy' could ...weigh heavily on investors.' Goldman Sachs & Co.cut its rating on the software giant.  Goldman hasremoved Microsoft from its recommended list for top-rated stocksand cut its rating from buy to moderateoutperformer. It is understood that the analyst cutthe stock because of Microsoft's failure to develop acompelling Internet strategy which could dampenupward movement in the stock during the next sixmonths, noting the expectation of an importantInternet strategy announcements from Microsoft inabout six months. Separately Microsoft has announcedthat it has released the beta version of itsMicrosoft Internet Information Server for Windows NT-- more commonly known as Gibraltar -- to around1,000 test sites worldwide and a second beta phase to15,000 sites before a 1Q'96 launch.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-DUTCH MOVE INTO UK INTERNET MARKETINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-DUTCH MOVE INTO UK INTERNETMARKETCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDOne of the first moves by a non-British company intothe UK Internet service provision market has beenlaunched.  KPN Multimedia has launched PlanetInternet UK -- KPN is a subsidiary company of PTTTelecom Netherlands -- who intends to invest overGBP10m in the next two years in the UK.  A formallaunch is set for April 1996. John O'Sullivan,marketing director of Planet, said that the companybelieves it will win business through its policy ofmaking the offering  jargon-free' and user-friendly. The company is offering a taster to its servicewhereby for a GBP4.99 fee access is provided untilthe new year. Once the service is launched theservice will be priced at GBP9.99 per month for fivehours and GBP.04p/minute thereafter.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-RETAILERS, TELECOMMS INDUSTRY SLOW TO TAKE-UPINTERNETINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-RETAILERS, TELECOMMS INDUSTRYSLOW TO TAKE-UP INTERNETCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDEuropean retailers are failing to take advantage ofthe real potential advantages of Internet-basedretail services such as remote shopping, promotionsand customer awareness, according to research carriedout by Cap Gemini Sogeti/Hoskyns. The survey polled46 of the top 200 retailers across Europe, notingthat while 90% are already connected on to theInternet or seriously considering its benefits, useof the Internet differs between retail sectors. Thefashion industry, for example, is failing to see thebenefits while mail order and wholesale ventures arebooming. Marc Peters, retail sector manager atHoskyns, said that despite the perceived advances,retailers are not yet utilising the full potential ofthe Internet and that current interest is mainlyexploratory.  Most of the companies who are trialingthe Internet have low expectations, with half-percentof turnover being the expected rate of return withintwo years and four percent over 10 years.  The surveypolled users on the main perceived barriers to nettrading with too few users topping the list at 59%followed by Internet users are not the target markets(57%), concerns over financial security (43%) andlack of delivery infrastructure (39%). Separately,telecommunications companies are failing to make themost of the Internet's WWW despite being at theforefront of most technical developments -- that isthe claim of a new survey conducted for WollongongGroup. Wollongong polled 300 businesses anddiscovered it was only the IT industry sector whichsees real commercial benefits from the Internet'sWWW. The survey, when split into industry sectors,noted that while 30% of respondents were from ITfirms, only 8% where from telecommunications-relatedcompanies.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-CALL MADE FOR UNIVERSAL ELECTRONIC MAIL ACCESSINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-CALL MADE FOR UNIVERSALELECTRONIC MAIL ACCESSCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDA call has been made by the Rand Corp in a new studyfor all Americans to be given equal access toelectronic mail. Rand says that private andgovernment policy makers should work together tobring all Americans -- irrespective of income -- ontothe information superhighway, enabling them to reapthe considerable benefits over time.  Rand highlightswhat it says is a growing number of  informationelite' parties which is made up of well-offindividuals with access to computers that cantransmit and receive e-mail.  According to Rand: "Ase-mail becomes more pervasive, as more commercial andgovernment transactions in the United States takeplace online, those information haves may leave thehave-nots further behind, unless we make concertedefforts today to provide all citizens with access tothe technology."  Amongst the ideas passed by Randfor getting the less well-off onto e-mail arerecycling of old (lower specification) computers andassociated software should be readily encouragedalong with the proliferation of public accessterminals, possible operating in the same vein as apayphone.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-GROWING CONCERN NOTED OVER USE OF INTERNET FORBUSINESS USERSINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-GROWING CONCERN NOTED OVER USEOF INTERNET FOR BUSINESS USERSCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDCorporate security staff are still concerned over theuse of the Internet for commercial purposes,according to the third annual Ernst & YoungInformation Security Survey.  Over half of the USfirms polled reported security-related financiallosses in the past year with 20 companies reportinglosses in excess of US$1m.  Out of the firms who hadgrasped the nettle and gone online, 20% reported thatan intruder had successfully or nearly successfullybreached security systems.  The overall level ofInternet security came under fire from 40% of userswho said they were dissatisfied with the inherent netsecurity and 87% of firms said that they would makegreater use of the Internet for corporate purposes ifthe security was improved. Candidly, most companiesadmitted that they do not have adequate tools orproperly trained personnel to defend againstinformation security losses. The report surveyed1,300 chief information officers and other seniorinformation executives. Other interesting findingsincluded that over 66% of sites encountered acomputer virus in the past year, a rise in the numberof security precautions taken and greaterintroduction of security tools. Ernst & Young hasalso reported that one out of every five companiesconnected to the Internet has reported an attemptedor a successful break-in to their company's networkin the past year and that 65% of firms gave beenaffected by a computer virus. A financial loss wasonly experienced in a  small portion' of companieshit by intruders of all kinds. Ernst & Young saidthat 66% of its respondents who are not using theInternet now and 83% of respondents who plan towithin the next year, said they would use theInternet for more business purposes if security wasenhanced.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-SENIOR BRITISH POLICEMAN HITS OUT AT INTERNETCRYPTOGRAPHYINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-SENIOR BRITISH POLICEMAN HITSOUT AT INTERNET CRYPTOGRAPHYCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDA senior British policeman has hit out at Internetcryptography systems, claiming that paedophiles areexchanging information about child abuse on the netusing the secure codes -- leaving police powerless todetect and investigate.  Det. Ch. Insp Barry Drewsingled out the PGP (Pretty Good Privacy) package asthe leading cryptographic package which is being usedperfectly innocently by millions of users worldwideand abused by paedophiles looking at continuing theirsick trade. "Some people are sending porn down theInternet together with the instructions as to how touse encryption to safeguard yourself. You need toknow the key to unscramble it. It's being used moreand more extensively for all sorts of things," saidDrew, head of the National Criminal IntelligenceService paedophile intelligence section, quoted byPA.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET FINANCIALS AND LAN SERVICES INTRODUCEDINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET FINANCIALS AND LANSERVICES INTRODUCEDCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDCharter Media Inc has introduced Briefing, said to bethe first intra-day financial market analysis serviceavailable through the Internet which has beendesigned for individual investors and money managers,providing real-time stock, bond and foreign exchangeanalysis at no charge. The offering is delivered overthe Internet's WWW and from April 1996 a US$10/monthcharge will be levied. Charter Media seems to have aphilanthropic vision. Richard Green, president andCEO of Charter Media, said: "The Internet allows usto provide the individual investor with professionalfinancial analysis that has traditionally costhundreds or thousands of dollars per month. Webelieve the low cost to access Briefing will helplevel the playing field between the individualinvestor and professional trader."   Access byhttp://www.briefing.com/. Additionally a new onlineservice has been launched which plans to provide arange of productivity boosting hints and tips tonetwork managers.  Lan Software Direct is offeringpractical advice on Windows NT, NetWare and Internetnetworks and addressing current network managementissues such as network security, Internet access andNetWare migration.   A number of free and trialnetwork applications can be downloaded off the sitefor subsequent use.  Dan Metcalfe, managing directorof LAN Software Direct claims that network and ITadministrators have been calling for such a servicefor a long time even though most of the informationcan already be found on the Internet and onlineservices such as CompuServe. "Network administratorshave been demanding a service like LAN SoftwareDirect for some time.  Networks are growing in sizeand complexity but management resources remainstatic.  Administrators need products which willautomatically manage certain elements of the networkand at the same time boost LAN  productivity. Mostmanagers do not have the time to research and testthe hundreds of software management products on themarket," said Metcalfe.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-ALPHANET EXPECTS LEADERSHIP IN INTERNET FAX SERVICEOFFERINGSINFORMATION TECHNOLOGY CONTRACTS-ALPHANET EXPECTSLEADERSHIP IN INTERNET FAX SERVICE OFFERINGSCOPYRIGHT 1995 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDAlphaNet Telecom Inc of Canada is buoyant about itsexpectations of becoming the world's leading providerof voice and fax Internet services by the end of 1996through the launch of its Unipost and EconoFaxservices.  Much of the confidence comes in the shapeof patents for the technology held in the USA, Canadaand several other key countries. Michael Reichmann,president of the firm, believes that the Internettransmission technology patents will make the companyhold a powerful position.  Unipost and EconoFax willallow users to access and send all their voice, faxand electronic-mail messages over the Internet forthe cost of a local telephone call, providingdramatic savings for the users notes the company. Anumber of partners will be announced in the nearfuture in different strategic areas around the worldalthough further details are presently not known.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-COLLEGES REPORT INTERNET PUBLISHING TIME SAVEDINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-COLLEGES REPORT INTERNETPUBLISHING TIME SAVEDCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDThe use of online services has given a much-neededbreather lifeline to researchers, reports theChronicle of Higher Education in its 17 Novemberissue, as work which is published online before itcomes out in print can trim valuable weeks off theone-year limitation they have if they wish to file apatent on their findings. The Internet's WWW is alsoused in order to promote the findings and keep thepatent clock at bay. While, according to the article,the US Patent and Trademark office hasn't issued aruling on electronic disclosure, a spokesman sayspatent lawyers should assume that anything that'savailable online should be considered published.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET DA SYSTEM TO BE INTRODUCEDINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET DA SYSTEM TO BE INTRODUCEDCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDComputer Concepts Corp has unveiled plans tointroduce an Internet Directory Assistance Servicecalled IDA which will allows users to obtain all theonline service addresses, by subject matter and/orname, for an individual or business. The firm's dbExpress database will be used in a data-miningapplication to provide graphical Internet WWW access.Registrations for this service will be taken during1Q'96 and there will be no charge for the service.Computer Concepts, who develops and markets softwaretools that aid organizations develop and operatebusiness-critical applications, plans to takeadvertising on the site and use it to demonstrate theadvantages of its software.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-LOW COST NET SERVICES TO LAUNCH IN NEW ZEALANDINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-LOW COST NET SERVICES TOLAUNCH IN NEW ZEALANDCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDPSINet and Clear Communications have signed anon-binding letter of intent to develop a jointventure to provide Internet access services in NewZealand. PSINet, a major US Internet serviceprovider, should have a 45% stake in the new venturecalled Clear PSINet Ltd. Service is tentativelyscheduled for launch during 1Q'96 although completionof the transaction was subject to the negotiation andexecution of definitive agreements. The joint venturewould connect the New Zealand network to the globalPSINet infrastructure to support unlimited outboundand inbound Internet traffic to the rest of the worldfor New Zealand organisations and privateindividuals.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-STUDENT CHARGED WITH INTERNET TERRORISMINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-STUDENT CHARGED WITH INTERNETTERRORISMCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDA New York state college student has been chargedwith terrorizing an Indianapolis family over theInternet by threatening in e-mail messages to huntthem down, rape a 12-year-old girl and kill them. The19-year-old alleged perpetrator has been arrested atSt John's University and charged with aggravatedharassment -- a misdemeanour offence.  It appearsthat the activity was viewed as a prank by theaccused.  Court papers reveal that a user under thealias  Mr Bungle' broke into a conversation that the12-year-old was having on 21 October on  the Internetwith a 13-year-boy from Toronto and after a fewinnocuous questions about age, the accused allegedlywrote that he wanted to sodomize her. The father ofthe young girl intervened online and ordered theaccused to desist, only to receive e-mail litteredwith sexually offensive messages which escalated intothreats including claims that he had HIV and wouldinfect the girl. A hearing has yet to be made.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET BITS:BANNED BOOKS MAKE DEBUT ON THE INTERNETINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET BITS:BANNED BOOKS MAKEDEBUT ON THE INTERNETCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDA new source of books banned by governmentsthroughout the world has gone live on the Internet.BANNED BOOKS, located at http://www.banned-books.com/readis guaranteed to cause unease to manyadministrations and organisations. Books can beordered online and discreetly delivered to allcorners of the world.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET BITS:JEWELLERY TRADING SITE INTRODUCEDTWW-6 January 1996-NET BITS:JEWELLERY TRADING SITEINTRODUCEDTELECOMWORLDWIRE--(C) 1994-6 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDAn Internet jewellery and precious stones tradingsite has been set up by DALLAS GOLD & SILVER EXCHANGEINC in the USA.  The company believes that thisventure is the first of its kind in the world,providing a means where buyers and sellers cannegotiate prices in a realtime auction market that issimilar to an exchange marketplace in securities. Details of jewellery and precious stones can bedownloaded from http://www.iminet.com/jewelry/ aswell as information on pricing and industry issues.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET BITS:FWD INTRODUCES FREE NET PHONE SERVICENETWORKINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET BITS:FWD INTRODUCES FREENET PHONE SERVICE NETWORKCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDFREE-WORLD-DIALUP has launched a new service whichallows Internet users to make free telephone calls.This service is slightly different, however, as itallows the net user to interface to the local publictelephone network.  The host computer acknowledgesthe incoming Internet phone call and dials apre-requested local number on a separate line. Forthe trial there are host computers in Jakarta, Tokyo,New York and London and anyone prepared to pay forlocal calls can easily set up a host computer.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET BITS:INDONESIA CONCERNED OVER INTERNETINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET BITS:INDONESIA CONCERNEDOVER INTERNETCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDThe INDONESIAN GOVERNMENT is concerned about thepolitical debates taking place on the Internet andapparently unfazed about sex and pornography. Seniorgovernment figures have expressed concern about agrowing conduit of uncensored news on home andinternational affairs. Military chiefs are alsoattempting to introduce mechanisms to restrictnational access to certain Internet resourcesalthough most observers believe that this task willprove in reality to be pointless -- pointing to theexperiences of the Chinese government.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET BITS:MICROSOFT NETWORK HITS 525K MILESTONEINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET BITS:MICROSOFT NETWORKHITS 525K MILESTONECOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDMICROSOFT CORP has revealed that its MicrosoftNetwork online service has attracted over 525,000customers in the first three months of service. Access software for the service is bundled withinMicrosoft Windows 95, a new operating system launchedat the time of purchase.  Microsoft revealed that itwould not be temporarily suspending new memberenrollment as previously announced because of thesystem's performance and operation to date. Microsoftis to expand its North American network of TCP/IPaccess from 80 points of presence to over 150 by theend of the year, all supporting 28.8kbit/s modem andmost supporting ISDN at no extra charge. No detailswere given on a European service introduction date.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET BITS:INTUIT CHIEF UNSURE OVER INTERNET BANKINGPERCEPTIONINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET BITS:INTUIT CHIEF UNSUREOVER INTERNET BANKING PERCEPTIONCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDScott Cook, chairman of INTUIT INC, believes thatwhile the technology exists to conduct secure bankingover the Internet, the public are still not trustingof the technology. Quoted by DJNS, Cook said thatuntil customers feel more secure with the Internet,Intuit will focus its online banking efforts on itsprivate network and on commercial networks withconsumers using its own financial software package tokeep track of their assets, investments and financialinstructions. Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET BITS:POL POT CRIME WEB SITE INTRODUCEDINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET BITS:POL POT CRIME WEBSITE INTRODUCEDCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDA new Internet WWW site is set to graphically displaythe horrors and crimes of Pol Pot's KHMER ROUGE inCambodia. The site will be created by a US-fundedteam and made available to the public with materialincluding photographs of the victims of a torturecentre and their final confessions, maps of massgraves and prisons, biographies of Khmer Rougeleaders along with ancillary information. Details ofthe WWW site's URL are not expected to be revealeduntil early 1996.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET BITS:NETCOM, PRODIGY IN SPAT OVER MARKETINGINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET BITS:NETCOM, PRODIGY INSPAT OVER MARKETINGCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDNETCOM ON-LINE COMMUNICATION SERVICES INC has beenadvised by Prodigy Services Co that it is allegedlyengaging in deceptive advertising in some of itspackaging and marketing materials for its US Internetservice. Netcom claims that the materials relate tocertain price comparisons between Prodigy's onlineservice and Netcom's Internet access service, whichare marked by Netcom to show pricing information asof 24 February 1995. Prodigy says that it reduced itspricing on April 1995 and that Netcom was aware ofthe price cuts although its continued use of thematerial constitutes deceptive advertising.   Netcomsays that it is investing the claims although it doesnot believe that it will be adversely affected by anyaction.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET BITS:NEW PRESTEL TO PROVIDE FREE INTERNET ACCESSINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET BITS:NEW PRESTEL TOPROVIDE FREE INTERNET ACCESSCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDNEW PRESTEL, a specialist UK online service, hasannounced that it is to provide a small amount offree access to the Internet as part of the service'sbasic subscription. The service provides a range ofpremium realtime financial information to dial-upinvestor customers. In return for a GBP29.50 one-timefee users receive 150 minutes of free Internetservice each month and pay GBP1.75 per hour of usethereafter.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET BITS:SUPERSCAPE MAKES FREE VR WEB BROWSERINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET BITS:SUPERSCAPE MAKES FREEVR WEB BROWSERCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDSUPERSCAPE VR has made a copy of Visualiser, its VRplatform, available for downloading free of chargeoff an Internet WWW site (http://www.superscape.com)which will let users see real time 3D interactivevisualisation of virtual worlds. Users can alsodownload so-called worlds with current offeringsincluding a record store, shopping mall, swimmingpool and leisure complex.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET BITS:TENAGRA MAKES INTERNET AWARDSINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET BITS:TENAGRA MAKESINTERNET AWARDSCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDRecently the second annual TENAGRA AWARDS forInternet Marketing Excellence were awarded to FederalExpress, Ragu, Yahoo!, NetPOST, Software.Net, andVirtual Vineyards in recognition of significantInternet marketing successes over the past year. Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET BITS:UUNET MAKES MOVES FOR EUNET GERMANYINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET BITS:UUNET MAKES MOVES FOREUNET GERMANYCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDUUNET TECHNOLOGIES INC has now made a move to acquirea 40% stake in Eunet Germany through a stockexchange. Details have yet to be concluded as theyare dependent on the degree of management controlproffered but it will be in the range of US$1.6-5.4m.Subject to regulatory and stockholder approvals thetransaction of Germany's top Internet serviceprovider should be completed by 31 December 1995.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-TITTLETATTLE...INTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-TITTLETATTLE...COPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDYAHOO! CORP and Ziff-Davis Publishing Co have formeda strategic relationship for a Web-driven publishingmodel which will deliver content through print,online and CD-ROM means... In just one month over11,000 WWW surfers participated in MERRYDOWN CIDER'S"The Dark Side of the Country" Internet game whilemany others have visited the site...  WEST PUBLISHINGin the USA is introducing a new range of products forlaw firms which use the Internet including West'sLegal News updated on the Internet and the WestNetwork, a graphical desktop environment for thelegal professional carried through e-mail... CANADATRUST customers are now able to check the status oftheir savings and cheque accounts over the Internetwith full security following the introduction of arandom code known only to the customer so that whilefinancial information is available on the net, onlythose who know the real identity behind the fake codecan understand the figures in true context... RichardBranson's VIRGIN ATLANTIC AIRWAYS has been finedUS$14,500 by the US Transportation Department afterit posted an advert on the Internet which has beenruled to be misleading -- The crime was an erroneousfare for a flight between Newark and London, UK whichin reality was not available... ACCENT SOFTWAREINTERNATIONAL LTD has joined Netscape CommunicationsCorp's Development Partners Program and integrate itsmultilingual Internet technology with NetscapeNavigator 2.0 for greater international support...NETSCAPE COMMUNICATIONS CORP says that its NetscapeNavigator Personal Edition Internet WWW browserproduct has reached number one position on the USIngram Micro Devices communications software best-seller list justfour months after debuting in theretail channel... UNIPALM-PIPEX in the UK is offeringall of its Pipex Dial subscribers 500k of freeInternet WWW space under its DialSpace offering...QUALCOMM INC has expanded its presence in the retailInternet software market with its Eudora Pro Internete-mail software for Macintosh and Windows computersand distribution deals have been signed with manymajor US retail chains: Qualcomm has also signed anexclusive agreement with Kuni Research Internationalof Japan for localisation of the product anddistribution... WOLLONGONG has formed a partnershipwith Internet America, the largest Internet serviceprovider in Texas, USA whereby it will bundle theEmissary 1.1 Internet offering as part of theintroductory starter kit...  A public bar in York, UKhas gone  live' on the Internet following a dealsigned between BRUBAKERS and an Internet provider toprovide cyber-bar service to customers in the themepub... The TOKYO GRAIN EXCHANGE, Japan's largestagricultural futures market, is to launch an InternetWWW service in February displaying prices andbackground information about TGE contracts such assoybean, corn, red bean and raw sugar futures inEnglish and Japanese... The Australian government hasseen parliamentary pressure exerted upon it to gettough on sexual abuse of children by signing treatieswith countries where child sex is prevalent and byopening a so-called hotline on the Internet so thatusers can report child pornography spread bycomputer...   AT&T CORP has apparently considered theuse of Internet-only telephone calling rates in orderto reduce the threat of revenue loss from Internettelephone services although it presently seesInternet calling as an opportunity, not a threat...BERTELSMANN AG and the WwissenschaftlicheSpringer-Verlag company have predicted that their newonline medical information service will have annualsales of DM20m by the year 2000 -- the servicelaunches next year, priced at DM100/month andprovides access to medical information databases andonline consulting for doctors with medicalspecialists... A survey by INTRUSION DETECTION INC of172 computer sites in the USA revealed that 85% ofusers are not required to change passwordsfrequently, that 23% had easy-to-guess passwords, 21%had no passwords at all and 14% of user accounts wereinactive... AMERICA ONLINE has issued a warning toits users about a destructive file attached to ane-mail message that has been circulating through itsservice and also over the Internet which could crasha PC is executed... LEGAL & GENERAL, the first majorUK insurance company to take a position on theInternet, has changed service providers away fromCityscape (owned by Demon Internet) to Unipalm-Pipexin order for more advanced services... CarlPascarella, president and CEO of VISA USA, saidrecently that he expects a  detente' in the battlewith MasterCard International over standards forsoftware which provides secure transactions on theInternet following a series of meetings between thefirms... SONY CORP OF AMERICA has announced plans tocreate an  ambitious' entertainment service at itsSony Station Internet site, giving customers theability to view Sony programmes, products andservices and purchase items by credit card... Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET PRODUCTS:ACCENT INTRODUCES MULTILINGUAL INTERNETBROWSERINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET PRODUCTS:ACCENT INTRODUCESMULTILINGUAL INTERNET BROWSERCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDACCENT SOFTWARE INTERNATIONAL LTD has launched a newmultilingual Internet browser with full support forJapanese language WWW pages under any version ofMicrosoft Windows, unlike previous products whichrequired a native Japanese MS product.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET PRODUCTS:DYNAMO INTRODUCES DYNAMIC PAGE DEV TOOLINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET PRODUCTS:DYNAMO INTRODUCESDYNAMIC PAGE DEV TOOLCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDART TECHNOLOGY GROUP has introduced Dynamo, apowerful dynamic Internet WWW page generation toolwhich lets apps developers prototype, build, andmanage next-generation dynamic applications andcontent for enterprise networks and the Internet. Thepackage is compatible with most HTTP servers and runsunder various versions of Unix. The company claimsthat Dynamo can also help the non-programmer builddynamic Web pages without requiring a deepunderstanding of CGI and Unix.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET PRODUCTS:DIVE INTRODUCES WORLDS SERVERINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET PRODUCTS:DIVE INTRODUCESWORLDS SERVERCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDDIVE LABS has launched its Internet Worlds Server debuted its low cost virtual worlds server whichenables multi-user virtual environments to operateover the Internet and initially a Microsoft WindowsNT version of the Amber server will be shipped.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET PRODUCTS:MATSUSHITA ELECTRIC DEVELOPS NEWCOMMUNICATIONS TERMINAL, TELEPHONEINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET PRODUCTS:MATSUSHITAELECTRIC DEVELOPS NEW COMMUNICATIONS TERMINAL,TELEPHONECOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDMATSUSHITA ELECTRIC INDUSTRIAL CO LTD of Japanreports that it has developed a new communicationdevice which allows a fax-equipped telephone to workas a Internet-connectable terminal.  Users can accessInternet resources by using DTMF controls with pageinformation then appearing on the fax machine.Amazingly, Matsushita claims that this system isfaster than using a personal computer to access theWWW.  One of the key applications for the service issaid to be governmental use, covering the provisionof public service information.  No pricing has beenrevealed.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET PRODUCTS:MECA INTRODUCE PORN BLOCKERINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET PRODUCTS:MECA INTRODUCEPORN BLOCKERCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDYET another Internet blocking package is beinglaunched which claims to be able to save yourchildren from the ravishes and perils of theInternet: MECA SOFTWARE LLC has introduced NetBlocker Plus, a package originally developed byMicroSystems Software, with the claims that thepackage can provide a quick and simple guide torestrict access to  undesirable' Internet resources.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET PRODUCTS:ORA INTRODUCE NEW WINDOWS 95 BOOKINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET PRODUCTS:ORA INTRODUCE NEWWINDOWS 95 BOOKCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDO'REILLY AND ASSOCIATES has introduced a revisedversion of Ed Krol's The Whole Internet for theMicrosoft Windows 95 operating system, taking fulladvantage of its in-built GPT Internet connectivitytools.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET PRODUCTS: PRISMA TO DEBUT INTERNET COLLABORATIVESCHEDULER SYSTEMINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET PRODUCTS: PRISMA TO DEBUTINTERNET COLLABORATIVE SCHEDULER SYSTEMCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDPRIMA OFFICE LTD, the UK distributors for the OnTimeGroup Scheduling software package has unveileddetails of a new offering from Campbell Services Incwhich will utilise the Internet for true net-widescheduling and collaborative working.  Campbell isset to launch the OnTime Web Server which will allowInternet users to store and maintain schedules. Users of a regular Internet WWW browser will be ableto access schedules from persons using the OnTime Webbrowser and a new generation of applet will evenallow meetings to be scheduled and confirmed in thefuture. The OnTime Web Server software is a CGIapplet compatible with Windows-class WWW servers.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET PRODUCTS: QUARTERDECK UPDATES INTERNETSUITEINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET PRODUCTS: QUARTERDECKUPDATES INTERNETSUITECOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDQUARTERDECK CORP has made a significant upgrade toits InternetSuite product. V2.0 now includes a newversion of the Quarterdeck Mosaic browser withsupport for Weblink from Adobe Systems Inc whichallows WWW page publishers to build hypertext linksinto an Adobe Portable Document Format (PDF) file aswell as Netscape Navigator-specific formatting andpage layout codes and features. Quarterdeck's supportof the so-called Adobe Amber technology is notuniversal at present. Initially it will support theability for PDF files to contain hypertext links toother WWW resources although future versions willseamlessly allow a user to view documents in PDF. Changes have been made to the Message Centre news andmail reader including MIME, searching for textstrings through Usenet newsgroups and a  smut' filterfor parents to filter out obscene materials.  Withthe new version, Quarterdeck has ceased sellingQuarterdeck Mosaic as a standalone product althoughthe InternetSuite package will be sold for the sameGBP44.95 UK pricepoint (and equivalent local prices).Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET PRODUCTS:QUARTERDECK INTRODUCE NEW WEBAUTHORING, WEB COMMS TOOLSINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET PRODUCTS:QUARTERDECKINTRODUCE NEW WEB AUTHORING, WEB COMMS TOOLSCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDQUARTERDECK CORP has also introduced a new range ofInternet authoring tools and access enhancementproblems.  WebAuthor 2.0 provides support for HTML 3commands and Netscape formatting extensions toprovide an easy-to-use authoring package inassociation with Microsoft Word 6. Some of the newfeatures in the release include document conversionfrom native Word 6 products, table support, textaround images, image maps, templates and macros. Quarterdeck has also introduced WebTalk -- formerlyknown as WebFone -- which allows full duplex,realtime voice conversations to be made over theInternet.   Full duplex communication is possible ona system as low as a 486/33MHz-based computer, a14.4Kbit/s modem and a sound card that supports fullduplex communication while half duplex communicationis possible for lower specified systems.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET PRODUCTS:SCOPUS TO INTRODUCE CUSTOMER SUPPORTACCESSINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET PRODUCTS:SCOPUS TOINTRODUCE CUSTOMER SUPPORT ACCESSCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDSCOPUS TECHNOLOGY INC, a US company which producessoftware systems aiding companies to manage customerinformation, has revealed plans to introduce InternetWWW versions of the software which works behind thescenes to provide selective access by a company'ssuppliers, customers and employee to its centralcomputer system -- taking Internet commerce to a newdimension in the process.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET PRODUCTS:US ORDER TO EXPAND SMART TELEPHONERANGEINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET PRODUCTS:US ORDER TOEXPAND SMART TELEPHONE RANGECOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDUS ORDER is expanding the functionality of itsPhonePlus smart telephone, providing the ability forthe first time for users to send e-mail messages overthe Internet, type and send full text messagesdirectly to pagers and receive nationwide directoryassistance information visually on the phone'sdisplay screen. The phone unit will retail for lessthan US$200 and a US$5/month fee will be charged forthe data/home shopping service before usage charges.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-NET PRODUCTS:WYND MOVES ONTO MAC PLATFORMINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS-NET PRODUCTS:WYND MOVES ONTOMAC PLATFORMCOPYRIGHT 1994-96 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDWYND COMMUNICATIONS CORP says that its WyndMAILpersonal communications service is now available forApple Macintosh systems, providing subscribers with ameans to communicate online, with pagers and faxes.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET BUSINESS NEWS via NewsNetJANUARY 1996-ON THE NETTWW-7 January 1996-ON THE NETTELECOMWORLDWIRE--(C) 1994-6 M2 COMMUNICATIONS LTDDave Stewart, formerly of the Eurythmics, has openedup his private photo collection, making it availableon the Internet WWW following a deal being struckwith BT Payphones --  Candid and colourful shots ofsuperstars Mick Jagger, Bjork, Lou Reed, IsabellaRossalini, and Daryl Hall, taken by Dave Stewart, aregiven a new spin by Dave on state et the artcomputers' says BT, noting that access can be gainedon http://www.secret.freud.co.uk/.CAMPBELL SOUP COMPANY in the USA has taken itself onthe Internet's WWW to provide a range of mealplanning tips, recipes and competitions -- access byhttp://www.campbellsoups.com/.The COMPETITIVE LONG DISTANCE COALITION, a US-based association that represents the interests of morethan 500 long distance companies, has established apresence on the Internet's WWW to inform the publicabout its concerns with telecommunicationslegislation currently before Congress: access byhttp://www.cldc.com/.The CHRISTIAN SCIENCE MONITOR has launched a specialInternet WWW site which features stories by DavidRohde, the Monitor's Eastern Europe correspondent whowas captured on 29 October by the Bosnian Serbs anddetained in a jail cell for eleven days: access byhttp://freerange.com/csmonitor.COREL CORP has hit the WWW at http://www.corelwtatour.com to provide support to the Corel WTA(tennis) Tour via the Internet.A new Internet WWW site dedicated to MADONNA has beenlaunched by Warner Brothers at http://www.wbr.com/Madonna and features pictures, audio tracks on demandand exclusive material on the performer.SCOTTISH ENTERPRISE's Energy Group has taken anInternet presence to promote the country's oil andgas capabilities around the world -- listing over 20categories of oil and gas related services such asaccommodation modules, drilling equipment, loggingand evaluation, transportation and subseaengineering: access http://www.globalweb.co.uk/.SMITH BARNEY, the US stockbroker, has taken its placeon the Internet's WWW and announced that it is thefirst brokerage firm to offer clients online accountaccess and electronic bill-paying through bothIntuit's Quicken and Microsoft money personal financesoftware packages: access byhttp://nestegg.iddis.com/smithbarney/.Two New York City companies have teamed up to createSURF'S UP, said to be the first instant winnersweepstakes on the Internet where 50 prizes with atotal value of US$24,500 are being offered in thefirst game: access by http://www.surfs-up.com/.SYSTEMS SYNTHESIS has launched Regionlink, a WWW sitedesigned to increase worldwide business for small andmedium sized companies throughout Europe by providinga virtual showcase to companies based in Europe --the site was developed following two year pilotproject supported by the European Commission: accessby http://ssynth.co.uk/.THE WEATHER CHANNEL in the US has launched a newInternet WWW site which provides details on currentconditions and five-day forecasts for more than 1,200domestic cities at http://www.weather.com along withover 200 ski resorts worldwide. VICTORIA WINE, a UK off-licence chain, says that itthe first UK venture to offer 24-hour shopping on theInternet, available through BarclaySquare, a shoppingmall accessible through http://www.itl.net/BarclaySquare/.ZENITH MEDIA has taken a spot on the Internet's WWWto act as a showcase for its internationaladvertising clients: access by http://www.zenithmedia.com/.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-28IA086-000622-B037-291http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te136.html 205.156.212.5 19970122050304 text/html 38251HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:01:00 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:28 GMTContent-length: 38064Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te136.html Sample Issue Copyright INTERNET WEEK via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES REALITY MAY CATCH UP TO HYPE THIS YEAR Opportunities Abound, But So Does Competition and Consolidation (2081 words) SECURITY MARKET TO BOOM TO '96: AUTHENTICATION, ENCRYPTION, ELECTRONIC PAYMENTS WILL BE WIDELY DEPLOYED THIS YEAR (640 words) ACCESS: PHONE COMPANIES BEGIN DIVING INTO THE INTERNET Several Major Players Poised to Roll Out Service in Early 1996 (1815 words) CONTENT: DIRECTORY SERVICE CHANGES STRATEGY TO COMPETE 555-1212.com Targets Niche, Locks in Area Codes as Domain Names (725 words) HOTNEWS BUSINESS BRIEFS (322 words) CopyrightINTERNET WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996REALITY MAY CATCH UP TO HYPE THIS YEAROpportunities Abound, But So Does Competition and Consolidation      Overall, growth in the Internet marketplace will not slow in1996.       Net software firms will barrel into the new year fueled byproduct introductions that will dominate the first half of the year.Internet service providers will continue to expand their networks at abreakneck pace, and new content providers will enter the marketplacewith ever richer multimedia content featuring 3-D, audio, and video.      But despite the opportunities that such growth represents, theInternet industry also will show signs of growing up this year. Thenumber of firms racing onto the Net will slow somewhat from 1995levels as companies struggle to justify the expense of their sites.       Despite this slight slowdown, last year's hype about the Netwill continue to draw more competitors into the access and softwarebusinesses, sharply increasing the amount of competition and leadingto an industry shakeout. Increased competition also will spark theoften-predicted access wars as Internet service providers vie withtelcos and cable firms to capture market share. Competition also willinspire firms to consider introducing proprietary applications thatwork with the Net's open systems to capture customers.Will Open Standards Survive?      Although the Net has always been based on open systems, the raceto get a competitive edge has encouraged firms to introduce andimplement new specifications long before standards bodies or otherindustry members can evaluate them. Firms with sufficient marketingmuscle and innovative ideas have set de facto standards. To keep up,others have begun incorporating the standards -- sometimes before thespecifications are even available to the public.      "No one is waiting for final specifications to beginincorporating new capabilities into their products," said StrattonSclavos, president of VeriSign. "We can adapt to final specifications;we can't wait around for them to emerge."      Since many firms -- most notably Netscape Communications Corp.-- have benefitted from this practice, many plan to copy the strategyin 1996 -- something that could lead to a confusing jumble of possiblestandards introduced in 1996, warn industry experts. Inevitably, somefirms will back the wrong standards.      But an even bigger threat to open systems are the increasingnumber of application programming interfaces (APIs) that are poppingup. Offering an API encourages firms to adapt to a particulartechnology that may or may not be open, said Gary Eichhorn, CEO ofOpen Market.      Many suspect that Microsoft Corp. will use that strategy tocapture a large portion of the Internet market, even though the firmhas pledged to use open standards. "I don't really see Microsoftparticipating in the open systems, cross-platform environment," saidJohn Patrick, vice president of Internet technology for IBM.       Despite the fears, many major firms have renewed theircommitment to open standards, which should ensure that the openness ofthe Net will survive at least another year.Partner, Partner Everywhere      The quickest way to get ahead in the Internet business is topartner with -- or acquire -- a company with a promising technology.As a result, partnerships will continue to drive much of the Internetmarket in 1996, and mergers and acquisitions will be on the rise asfirms try to buy into the Internet market.      "We expect to see a lot of mergers and acquisitions activity inthe market, and, of course, partnerships will continue to drive themarket," said Mary Pat McCarthy, partner and national director forsoftware and services practice at KPMG Peat Marwick. "There will besome alliances you would never expect."      IBM will actively seek partners for everything from simplemarketing agreements to possible technology acquisitions. "We want toshow how well we can work with others," said IBM's Patrick. Most othermajor firms plan to pursue a similar strategy.Consolidation Continues      However, partnerships won't be enough to save some firms. Everysoftware firm in the country is expected to jump into the Internetmarket with some product in 1996. Yet few have clear plans for how tocompete in the market or even in what products to develop. "Softwarefirms don't have a clear strategy and no one knows what it should bedoing on the Net," said KPMG's McCarthy. "Companies are vying forpositions and everyone is trying to cover their bets without knowingwhat the successful strategy will be."       As a result, many firms could get burned. "I think there will becontinued consolidation in the software industry, and it will beharder for small companies to survive unless they have a strong nicheor staying power," said McCarthy. "Large firms will continue to gobbleup small ones, and there will be a lot of jockeying in the Internetand web arena."      One of the main Internet software areas to take a hit will bethe browser market, predicted Laura Hanny, an analyst with FirstAlbany-META Technology Research. Hanny asserted that Netscape willlose its market dominance in 1996 as other firm's browsers become morewidely available. The integration of browsers into software packagesas the ubiquitous client could further shake Netscape's leadershipposition, she said.       However, that may not matter, since few firms will ever profitfrom the sale of browsers. "Everyone agrees that browsers will becomecommodities," explained Gaston Bastiaens, CEO of Quarterdeck.      But the software market isn't the only one to face consolidationin 1996, according to the Yankee Group. Internet service providers(ISPs) also will feel the pinch as long distance firms, local telcos,and cable firms begin to offer access (see related story on page 3).The Yankee Group predicts that the number of ISPs will drop fromaround 1,400 to 600 in 1996. In 1997, the firm predicts the number ofproviders will plummet to less than 300.      Content providers and service firms also will feel the pinch,added Yankee Group analysts.      In fact, the only firms that seem immune to consolidation arethe hardware and chip manufacturers. These businesses can expect tosee sales increase as demand rises for existing products and newproducts -- such as so-called dumb terminals or browser boxes -- areintroduced.      Quarterdeck's Bastiaens believes that the home computing marketwill take off, boosting penetration from 37 percent of homes today to65 percent by 1999. However, although growth will come from homeusers, he asserted that the money will still come from corporatemarkets.IPO Mania      But even a predicted industry consolidation won't be able todampen the financial market's enthusiasm for Internet stocks -- atleast not in the short term, said Hanny. Expect to see a rush ofInternet firms going public this year.      "The market is a frenzied environment and it is very chaotic.Many clients are talking about going public," said KPMG's McCarthy.       "Firms want to ride the craziness while it lasts and while theycan raise money," said Hanny. "We expect to see a lot of IPOs nextyear."Legal Troubles Brewing      Experts also expect to see a lot of lawsuits next year. Severalcases, including Statton Oakmont vs. Prodigy and the Church ofScientology vs. NETCOM (see Internet Week's May 29 and December 4issues and a related brief on page 4), have set some precedents, andattorneys expect that more lawsuits will be filed this year.      In particular, copyright and trademark infringement suits arelikely to become more commonplace as firms struggle to protectintellectual property on the Net, says Doug Wood, executive partner ofHall Dickler Kent Friedman & Wood, a New York law firm. The number oflibel and slander cases also is expected to increase.      Besides legal actions, 1996 will probably see some laws enactedas well. Congress is unlikely to leave the Internet alone, and itscontinued attempts to legislate privacy and pornography could causeproblems for many Internet firms. Also, the Federal Trade Commission(FTC), which has already begun monitoring the Internet for deceptiveadvertising claims, is expected to beef up its efforts in 1996 andmake Internet advertising a major priority, say FTC sources. Othergovernment agencies also will monitor web sites for infringement inareas of their jurisdiction.Uncovering Opportunity      Despite potential legal tangles and industry consolidation, morefirms are expected to jump on the Net. New products, delivered in thefirst half of 1996, will help these firms expand their web sitesbeyond simple advertisements into real tools to expand sales and cutcosts while improving customer service. In short, experts believe thatthe Internet industry will deliver solutions rather than just hype in1996. These solutions will spell opportunity for many.      "There remains a significant opportunity to help firms establisha presence on the web -- especially in other countries around theworld," said IBM's Patrick. "Firms will realize that just having apage or an ad on the Net is just the tip of the iceberg. Businessapplications will be added, and more firms will bring Net technologyinside the network."      As this takes place, companies will need to improve the way theymanage information -- opening the door for consultants and integratorsas well as software firms, added Patrick.      Meanwhile, the often-hyped but little-shopped electronicshopping malls also will become more popular in 1996, especially whenfirms update their approaches and security solutions become morewidespread. "They are using models of the past, and it's not working.Retailers need to rethink their approaches rather than just putting apaper catalog online," said Hanny. The widespread introduction andacceptance of electronic payment methods will further boost sales (seerelated story on page 2). When tied into exchange systems, worldwidecommerce will begin to take off, with many sales going to Japan.      With sales going global, many firms will rethink the way theyserve overseas markets, while others will rush to expand into Europe,Asia, and Latin America. Already, ISPs have pushed into Europe,followed by the online services and other content providers. Netscapeestablished several overseas offices in 1995, as did Quarterdeck. Thattrend will continue as more firms expand overseas.      While some firms expand geographically, others will concentrateon increasing their market presence in the U.S. Experts believe thatan Internet industry marketing blitz is coming, goaded by increasedcompetition. Already Digital Equipment Corp. has begun runningInternet-related TV ads, while Net ad space in the Wall Street Journalcontinues to fill several pages.      Competition also will drive firms to differentiate theirproducts and services and hone their marketing messages. IBM plans toemphasize its ability to deliver complete solutions, while Open Marketwill tout the security options and other features of  its serversoftware. Targeting niches will continue to be popular.      Other firms will seek new products to help differentiatethemselves. Quarterdeck has heavily invested in collaborativecomputing solutions. Although the webification of Lotus Notes couldstunt some of the market potential, collaborative computing isexpected to be hot in 1996 and beyond.      "Imagine being able to cut travel time and expenses by havingtelephone conferences that cost next to nothing since you are usingthe Internet," said Bastiaens. Quarterdeck plans to introduce itsvoice conferencing and document sharing software in 1996.      Also expected to debut in 1996 are the so-called browser boxesor dumb terminals. Although the market is hot on the idea, VeriSign'sSclavos cautions that encryption and other security solutions must beincorporated for the technology to really become useful. Sclavosexpects encryption chips to emerge in the next 12-18 months that willhelp add security to such "dumb" terminals, which could help drivetheir popularity.       "I think browser boxes are a wonderful concept. In the next sixmonths, we expect to see demos showing how they will work, but I thinkthey may have problems meeting the price point without running intopower management and security issues," he said. "They will have tohave security for people to use them.      "It will be noteworthy to see if $500 is a good cutoff point,"said KPMG's McCarthy. "Is that too expensive with some people? I seeprices coming down. I also think the baseline computer price will godown over time, offering competition for the boxes."      Meanwhile, 1996 will see Java going beyond the simple,animation-type applications that it is currently being used for topower real business applications. Java applets will power moreinteractive applications on the web and will enable firms to offervaluable information and services. By the end of the year, mostbrowsers will support Java, and Java applications will becomecommonplace, predicts IBM's Patrick. IBM licensed Java from Sun inDecember.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996SECURITY MARKET TO BOOM TO '96:  AUTHENTICATION, ENCRYPTION,ELECTRONIC PAYMENTS WILL BE WIDELY DEPLOYED THIS YEAR      Security breaches made headlines in 1995. In 1996, securitysolutions will make inroads into everyday workings of business andlives of consumers as encryption, digital signatures, andauthentication systems become ubiquitous in server and client softwarepackages, say industry executives and analysts.      "1995 was a great year for security. [Security] went from beingtalked about by cryptographers at security conferences to becoming acommon topic in financial and Internet conferences and talked about bybusinesses," said Stratton Sclavos, president of VeriSign. "In 1996,you will see security solutions moving from the realm of specificationdebates and political jockeying about protocols to being actuallyrolled out."      Such widespread deployment of security solutions will acceleratethe acceptance of electronic commerce and make doing business onlinemore commonplace, predicted John Patrick, vice president of Internetapplications for IBM [IBM]. "In 1996, we will see the beginning of anew level of trust and understanding about authentication andencryption. This will bring the next major round of growth, fuelingmajor growth in electronic commerce," he said.       To help consumers become more comfortable with onlinetransactions, banks and credit card companies plan to launch aneducation campaign in the spring. The campaign will encourageconsumers to shop and bank online and will assure them that securitystandards (especially those proposed by Visa and MasterCard [4823Z])will protect credit card numbers and other information.      Meanwhile, software firms are expected to incorporate electronicpayment modules into both client and server software packages bymidyear. Initially, most will focus on credit card payment methods,with cash and check systems catching up late in 1996 or early in 1997,say analysts. This could allow other solutions to enter the race,although those with existing products will continue to be regarded asmarket leaders, they say.      But although secure payment methods will continue to receive themost attention, consulting and intranet solutions are expected togenerate the most revenues.      Many security experts believe that consulting will provide oneof the biggest opportunities for the security market in 1996. Besideshelping clients implement security solutions, consultants also willhelp them develop security policies and procedures -- something manyfirms don't have. "Having a set of policies and procedures in place toauthenticate users is critical for setting up a network securitysystem," said Sclavos. VeriSign plans to introduce a formal consultingbranch this year (the firm already provides consulting to clients).Meanwhile, firms such as IBM and others with existing consultingbusinesses will reap the benefits of their service.      Deploying firewalls and user authentication systems withincompany networks also will be lucrative in 1996 as firms begin usingweb technology internally for a wider variety of tasks. At the sametime, public/private keys will begin replacing passwords for networkaccess, predicted Sclavos.      Meanwhile, security vendors also will introduce longerencryption keys. Sclavos predicts that 128-bit encryption keys will bereplaced by 256-bit keys in the next two years. Authentication keyswill grow from 1,024 bits to 2,048 bits.      The security market's opportunities will continue to drawcompetitors. Sclavos expects competition to heat up this year when theU.S. Post Office, IBM, MasterCard, and Visa join VeriSign in thepublic key certificate management business. But VeriSign welcomesthese firms into the market. "When public keys are enabled in allbrowsers and servers, tracking the keys will be a big job," he said."We think there is room for competition." E-data Takes Action, Offers Licenses      E-data Corp. is negotiating licenses with eight companies andhas notified 32 others that they are violating its patent. E-dataholds the Freeny patent, an electronic distribution technology foraudio, video, software, and other digital data. The company hastargeted more than 100 firms for infringement. IBM [IBM] received alicense in September; other firms are negotiating terms. For moreinformation, contact  E-data at (201) 866-8456.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996ACCESS:  PHONE COMPANIES BEGIN DIVING INTO THE INTERNETSeveral Major Players Poised to Roll Out Service in Early 1996      By the end of 1996, there will be at least one telephone companycompeting for a share of the Internet access business in every majorU.S. market. Long distance companies won't be the only ones taking onInternet service providers (ISPs) in the access business; most localtelcos plan to push into the market place this year.       The newest telco to enter the access market is GTE IntelligentNetwork Services (GTEINS), a GTE Corp. subsidiary. Last week, GTEINSintroduced a dial-up and dedicated line Internet access service calledGTE.net. Dial-up rates are $8.95 for five hours of access (additionalhours cost $1.95 each) or $24.95 for unlimited access.       The firm will provide its customers with Netscape CommunicationsCorp.'s [NSCP] Netscape Navigator browser (thanks to a licensingagreement between the firms) as part of the package, and it is betatesting Microsoft Corp.'s Internet Information Server (code-namedGibraltar) and Internet Studio Visual Publishing System authoring tool(code-named Blackbird). GTEINS already offers the service in theDallas-Fort Worth area and plans to expand service nationwide by theend of the year. GTEINS is part of GTE's long distance branch.      Meanwhile, local carriers also are starting to move into thefield. Bell Atlantic plans to begin offering access in theWashington-Baltimore area in February, and other local carriers arenot far behind. Planning to Take Over      Speaking as if they already owned the access business, seniortelco executives discussed plans for the Net at, "Building the OptimumBusiness Model: Telcos Providing Internet Access and Services," heldDec. 13-14 by International Communications for Management (ICM) inWashington D.C.       Local telcos are already gunning for the ISPs. Douglas Bulleit,chief strategist at BellSouth, referred to ISPs as "interlopers,laying on the public network, getting fast packet on one side, slowerdial-up on the other, and doing remarketing."       Bell Atlantic Media Ventures President Robert Beran predictedthat ISPs will have to get used to the fact that local and longdistance carriers will provide the bulk of access in the future. "Thebig gorillas are getting into the game," said Beran.      Telco executives see themselves as obvious providers of accessservices because they consider Net access to be essentially the samething as voice telephony and believe customers feel the same way. JeffCragan, director of new business development at Pacific Bell InternetServices, cited a company survey which found that 87 percent ofresidential customers would be interested in obtaining Internet accessthrough their local telephone company.       Telco executives also believe they have an infrastructureadvantage since their networks are designed to aggregate traffic attheir own switching points instead of at a server placed on thenetwork by one of their customers. This view could mean that therecent struggle between Bell Canada and its ISP customers (seeInternet Week's Dec. 4 issue) over traffic levels may repeat itself inthe U.S.Taking on Telcos      This trend worries some in the ISP industry, since the accessproviders will soon have to compete with the supplier of its product.However, not all ISPs fear the entry of telcos into the market. "It'sa question of how well they can do it. They have the basic networkinfrastructure to provide service, but how good is the service goingto be?" asked Brian Muys, a PSINet spokesman. Muys pointed out thatexisting offerings from Sprint and MCI have not "taken the market bystorm," and he maintained that there are differences between providingvoice service and Internet access.      "The way [the telcos] are approaching it is kind of 'we'realready in the phone business, and Internet is a no-brainer for us,'but it's not that easy to be a good Internet provider," said Muys."They may provide adequate service, but when it comes down toproviding the tech support, keeping the network up, and keeping thecustomers happy, I think there's going to be a longer learning curvefor the telephone companies than they would anticipate."      GTEINS disagrees. Bob Zinnel, director of network operations forGTEINS, said that although the businesses are not identical, the corecompetencies in telephony will help the firm provide Internet access."The infrastructure we're putting in place is sized and planned forthe same kind of quality assurance we planned into the telephonenetworks," said Zinnel. "Reliability is high on our list -- nocustomer busy signals, no customer outages, no degradation in speed --all those things had to be taken into consideration in our offering."      Zinnel also points out that the people staffing the GTE.netproject came from GTE's internal data network group that ties thecompany's dispersed operations together -- something that includessignificant experience in IP networking.      In addition, Zinnel says, "We have an advantage in the billingand backend operations, since that infrastructure is already in place.Our telephone operation issues millions of phone bills per month.That's one of the things that's killed off some of the smaller ISPs.Once the user base gets to a certain level, they just can't keep upwith the billing."      If the Internet is such a natural place for phone companies tobe, why haven't they been involved all along, and why have they chosenthis particular time to move into the field? One reason: Telcos arenotoriously conservative, and making money on the Internet has been aspeculative proposition until recently.Profits Provide Motivation      That is changing, however, and telcos have come to see theInternet as a potential profit center. "Internet services will providethe RBOCs [Regional Bell Operating Companies] a new high-growth sourceof revenue in a business with attractive margins," said Pete Renner,vice president, business information and advanced communications atNYNEX Entertainment and Information Services.      However, Renner and others pointed to another driving forcesending telcos into the Internet arena: the rapid approach of localloop competition, which will pit local carriers, long distancecarriers, and the cable industry against each other in a multibilliondollar, life-or-death struggle. In this kind of environment, evensomething as big as the Internet is ultimately important as adefensive weapon. "This will keep people on the NYNEX network," saidRenner.       Bell Atlantic's Robert Beran agreed that telcos have to be onthe Net if they want to remain industry leaders. Their customers aredemanding access, and they must be able to compete with other carrierswho will offer it if they don't. "We have to do this to retain ourcustomer base," said Beran.Grand Strategy      Each of the telcos' Internet strategies are similar and breakInternet opportunities into the general categories of access, contentprovision, and hosting customer sites.       GTE.net, like most of the local carriers, will offer access,along with a package of hosting and content development services forbusiness customers. "We do not plan to get into content developmentper se," said Fred Walters, GTEINS' director of business and productdevelopment. "But where there are applications where we see an unmetmarket need, then we will become a content developer to serve thatmarket." Walters cited several vertical market segments, such aseducation, where the firm may offer content.      Although Farouk Hussein, MCI's senior manager of internationalInternet marketing, described content as an "unstable" business at themoment, most telcos see content as an eventual opportunity sincecontent can help telcos differentiate their services in the market.Proprietary content will not be part of most initial service rollouts, however. Both Bell Atlantic's Robert Beran and NYNEX's PeteRenner said their companies will begin as simple access providers andwill develop their content strategies as they go. Beran said BellAtlantic likely will start by providing hotlinks to content, alongwith a search tool. NYNEX has begun moving existing content, such asits yellow pages, onto the Net. The firm debuted its Internet YellowPages last year.      Hosting web sites provides another opportunity, although it isstill not a big profit center for most firms, said AT&T's [T] DavidHughart. "It is probably breaking even and will eventually makemoney," he added.      That leaves access as the big money maker, and telcos plan tosqueeze it for profits while they can.Turning on the Meter      Telcos have demonstrated a strong preference for measuredaccess. Although Internet users prefer flat rates, providers havelearned that flat rates bring more difficulties than they solve. Usersoccasionally interpret "unlimited access" literally and leave aconnection up continuously. The result is strain on the network andimpaired service quality for other users who begin to encounter busysignals when dialing in.      Although MCI's Hussein claimed MCI had found that only a verysmall fraction of users will do this, other carriers maintain that itis impossible to offer flat rate access and provide quality service.Pacific Bell's Jeff Cragan said his company learned this lesson whenit tried to provide flat rate ISDN service earlier this year. Enoughusers left connections "nailed up" that Pacific Bell eliminated flatrate access.      GTEINS, which does offer flat rate access, has established apolicy to deal with those that abuse the unlimited service. "In ourend-user contract, dial-up access is exactly that. It was meant to bedialed up access," said Walters. "If we find that a customer is on 24hours a day, then we're going to ask them to move to one of ourdedicated access services."      Walters said that GTEINS does not have a predefined figure abovewhich usage would be considered excessive. Instead the company willhandle this on a case by case basis. Prodigy Appeal Denied      In a ruling last week, New York State Judge Stuart Ainreasserted his opinion that Prodigy Services Co. was a publisher,rather than a common carrier. The decision opens the door for futurelawsuits against firms that allow users to post messages onnewsgroups, bulletin boards, or other online forums. In his opinion,Judge Ain stated the need for a precedent as his reason for upholdingthe earlier ruling.      Judge Ain had made the original ruling in May when investmentbanking firm Stratton Oakmont filed a lawsuit against the onlineservice provider. Stratton Oakmont later dropped the suit when Prodigyagreed to apologize for an incident in which someone allegedly libeledthe firm on one of Prodigy's bulletin boards. The judge found thatsince Prodigy passed messages through a filter to screen out obscenityand derogatory terms, it exercised editorial control over the materialand therefore could be charged with libel.       Last week, Prodigy also acquired an interest in SonicNet, a website offering rock and music content owned by Sunshine InteractiveNetwork. Funding came from Prodigy's Wildflower Partners division,which supports Internet-based content providers. SonicNet will provideProdigy with original, exclusive content as part of the deal. Prodigywill provide support as well as funds for additional staff members.Contact: Prodigy, (914) 448-8700.Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996CONTENT:  DIRECTORY SERVICE CHANGES STRATEGY TO COMPETE555-1212.com Targets Niche, Locks in Area Codes as Domain Names      When Jeff Field began surfing the Net last February, he couldn'tfind an online directory that offered information about localbusinesses. So he decided to create one.      Launched in October, the directory, called 555-1212.com, wasdesigned to be a cross between a yellow pages directory and Yahoo!, apopular Internet directory. By listing companies under their telephonearea codes, as well as more than 8,000 categories, Field hoped toprovide additional online information about companies -- especiallyones like hotels, restaurants, movie theaters, and services -- thatweb surfers couldn't find anywhere else.      "There's one site (http://www.thelist.com) where you can go andfind a list of ISPs broken down by area codes. We think that's auseful service in itself, but we also want to do the same for hotels,movie theaters and such," Field said. By using the popular telephoneinformation number as the name for his service, he believes thedirectory's URL will be easy to remember and will draw visitors.      To lock in that advantage, Field registered every telephone areacode, plus 555-1212.com, as a domain name. This will allow web surfersto find businesses in their area quickly by typing in the familiartelephone information number -- something that could prove a majorcompetitive advantage as local phone companies put phone directoriesonline.      But despite that coup, competing with those services  has been achallenge, forcing Field to change his strategy.Change Is Inevitable      As it was originally conceived, 555-1212.com would have noadvertising and minimal graphics. To generate revenue, Field plannedto charge companies for listings on the site. He thought businesseswould pay $5 for a 2-line listing and $10 for a link to a home page orad page. Although the model is popular with yellow pages -- which thedirectory is modeled after -- it proved unsuccessful on the Internet.Field found that firms were reluctant to pay for a listing offered tothem free by competitors such as Lycos and Yahoo!. Now basic listingsare free.      Basic listings allow businesses to include their names in threesubject categories and two different area codes. Field charges anadditional fee for listings in extra categories or area codes.      555-1212.com allows the companies to select the categories theyare represented in. Field said he was disappointed with how othersearch services handle their listings. "It took me nearly three weeksto get listed on Yahoo! and when I did get listed, the tagline wasvery different from the one I supplied," he said. Yahoo! has sincechanged the way it handles listing requests.      But since it is not charging for listings, 555-1212.com had tobegin selling sponsorships to generate revenue. Although it uses thetraditional sponsorship style, sponsors' graphics are smaller than onother sites, since Field believes graphics slow performance.      Although this new business model more closely resembles that ofsearch tools such as Yahoo!, WebCrawler, and Lycos, Field emphasizedhe is not trying to compete with those services. Instead, he describeshis creation as between NYNEX's Yellow Pages and Yahoo!. "I didn'tstart out with the intention of making a telephone directory," saidField. "I just wanted to make it easy to find a local business usingthe Net."Building It Up      Since the site has only been online a few months, its directoryis still sparse. Field said this will not keep visitors from returningto the site because they will see the value of his simplified format.Nevertheless, "our number one priority is getting content," Fieldsaid. "I may not have the content at the moment, but I have ease ofuse and a familiar name."      To fill the directory, Field will initially concentrate onCalifornia's 408, 415, and 510 area codes. He said studies show that alarge percentage of Internet users are based in those regions andwould  likely use the service.      Although he is actively seeking content, Field is relying on thespeed and ease of use of the directory to draw users. So far he hasshunned the complex graphics and content features of otherdirectories, saying they slow users down. "I want to get people theirinformation and get them on their way," he said.      Once he has built up the number of listings, he thinks that555-1212.com will become "invaluable as the Internet's businessdirectory." Back to Headline List CopyrightINTERNET WEEK via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996HOTNEWS BUSINESS BRIEFSFrontier Introduces New Pricing: Frontier Technologies plans toprovide its SuperTCP Suite 96 on a CD ROM. Customers will be able topurchase just the applications they want, or they can purchase theentire 32-bit suite of tools. The entire package will cost $595.Components will cost: SuperTCP Internet, $125; SuperTCP, $295;SuperTCP/NFS, $395; SuperNFS, $195; SuperX, $295; and SuperTCP Kernel,$95. Contact: Frontier, (414) 241-4555.Terisa Receives Additional Financing: Olivetti Telemedia made astrategic investment in Terisa Systems Inc. The agreement will allowOlivetti Systems to deploy Terisa's security products in Europe.Olivetti Telemedia is an Italian telecom provider. Contact: TerisaSystems, (415) 919-1752.Vermeer Drafts API: Vermeer Technologies will release an applicationprogramming interface (APIs) for its FrontPage web publishing tool.The firm also will introduce extensions that allow users of threepublic domain web server software packages (NCSA, CERN, and Apache) touse the tool. Extensions for commercial web servers are in betatesting and will cost $200. Contact: Vermeer, http://www.vermeer.com.Fax Server Debuts: NetManage Inc. introduced the Chameleon Fax Server,which allows users to send and receive faxes via the Net. Faxes aredelivered into e-mail boxes. The software includes fax features and afax number directory function. The server costs $299 for a 30-userlicense. Contact: NetManage, (408) 973-7171.FTP To Acquire HyperDesk: FTP Software plans to acquire HyperDeskCorp. a workgroup and groupware software developer for $10 million incash this quarter. The firm also will establish a development andmarketing relationship with HyperDesk's principal shareholder, ASCIICorp. of Japan. Contact: FTP, (508) 685-4000.Quarterdeck Spins Out European Firm: Quarterdeck Corp. formed twooperating companies: Quarterdeck North America/Rest of the World (ROW)and Quarterdeck Europe, which will be headquartered in Ireland. Eachfirm will have its own president; Jim Moise will head the NorthAmerica/ROW firm. A president for the European firm has not yet beenappointed. Contact: Quarterdeck, (310) 309-4261.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-29IA086-000622-B037-311http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te90.html 205.156.212.5 19970122050317 text/html 7861HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:01:28 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:55 GMTContent-length: 7675Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te90.html Sample Issue Copyright ISDN NEWS via NewsNet January 17, 1990 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES FRONT PAGE NEWS THE 1990s: DECADE OF CONVERGENCE (628 words) BACK PAGE NEWS--NEW PRODUCTS HAYES RAISES ISDN IMAGE WITH PC ADAPTOR & SUPPORT PROGRAM (398 words) CopyrightISDN NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1990THE 1990s:  DECADE OF CONVERGENCE     As we move into the 1990s, companies are gearing up for theconvergence of various ISDN products along with the networks.ISDN users, stranded on "islands" for the time being, are peeringacross the vast spaces that separate the different switchingproducts and are beginning to build the pylons to connect theseislands.     These pylons are represented as international ISDN standardsthat have been adopted along with implementors' agreements beingcultivated by various companies.  These implementor agreements orconfidentiality agreements with developers and various companiesare often only hinted at in the various interviews we have had oflate.     Make no mistake about it:  Vendors, RBOCs, and resellers arejockeying for position and working on strategic alliances.Everyone seems to have an ISDN laboratory either in the planningstages or newly opened to test their equipment with that ofdevelopers.     Less then 2 years ago, the laboratory work was beingdelegated to Bellcore, BNR in Canada, and AT&T Labs inNaperville, Ill.  Then the RBOCs, first Southwestern Bell,decided they needed their own private testing laboratories.     Northern Telecom is also a player with major testingfacilities in North Carolina and Texas, not to mention itsaffiliation with BNR in Canada.     Even the consulting firms such as Andersen Consulting (ISDNNEWS, Dec. 6, 1989, p. 2) are offering laboratories for thetesting of ISDN services as well as for the development ofapplications.  Just recently, Hayes Microcomputers has added itslaboratory in Atlanta to the growing list of testing facilities.     The development of these laboratories across the UnitedStates and Canada illustrates the importance of applicationsdevelopment along with the integration of systems and switches.Standards organizations are cooperating     The Consultative Committee on International Telegraph andTelephone (CCITT), sponsored by the United Nations and located inGeneva, Switzerland, has been making advances for the last yeartoward other regional standards bodies.  These include the NIU-Forum and others stressing the need for working together and notduplicating efforts.     Speculation is that the CCITT is concerned about its futurerole in the standards implementation process because regionalstandards bodies are proliferating rapidly, meet more frequently,and can implement changes more quickly.     Other standards groups are also forming alliances.  TheCorporation for Open Systems (COS) and its European counterpart,the Standards Promotion and Applications Group (SPAG), have alsobegun to form alliances with each other as well as their Japanesecounterpart, the Promoting Conference for OSI (POSI).  Australia,of course, has a users' group supported by Telecom Australia, andCanada has just formed a users group.   These affiliations aroundthe globe are heralding the 1990s as "The Decade of Convergence."     Studies have indicated that these early days for ISDNinclude only 1/10 of one percent of the telephone lines in theUnited States.  The RBOC trials and commercial services updatedthis month in ISDN NEWS indicate extensive growth at BellAtlantic and U S West in the United States.     From the United Kingdom, Ovum Ltd. reports that 50,000 ISDNlines will be equipped for data by 1990, 280,000 in 1991, and800,000 in 1992.  These ISDN lines will have to be interoperableto meet their full potential.     Dennis Hayes, president and co-founder of HayesMicroproducts, told ISDN NEWS that the United States is on the"verge of 5 years of ISDN" and predicts significant growth inISDN in the next 5-7 years.  He expects it will take the sameamount of time for the ISDN market to mature as it did thevideotape player market.     If the standards, applications, and interoperability testingis being stressed in corporation laboratories, as well asstandards and users organizations around the world, it is highlylikely that ISDN will be interoperable on a normal basis, nottrial, by the middle of the decade.Back to Headline List CopyrightISDN NEWS via NewsNetJanuary 17, 1990HAYES RAISES ISDN IMAGE WITH PC ADAPTOR & SUPPORT PROGRAM     Hayes Microcomputer Products Inc. is promising access toISDN services for IBM PCs and compatible computers by mid-1990with an internal ISDN PC Adaptor.  The product is based onCCITT's basic rate interface (BRI), and supports both NorthernTelecom's and AT&T central office switches, X.25, and theAmerican National Standard's Institute (ANSI) high-speed datatransfer rates for circuit and packet-switched data.  Theestimated retail price is $1,599.  Dennis Hayes, president andco-founder of the corporation, told ISDN NEWS the product had 6revisions in 4 years and would be sold through telcos, largesystems integrators, and 2-4 technically qualified resellers.     Expecting to have to "educate the sellers" as well asactivate the market with its support program for softwaredevelopers, Hayes reminisced that his company would do the samething it did for modems over 10 years ago.  However, he concludedit had not been necessary to spend time with switch manufacturersand service providers to develop capabilities with the earlymodem market.     "We see the market as a high-end segment above the dial-upmodem market," and expects ISDN to "change the way a company doesbusiness with point-of sales, electronic banking, error control,data compression, and other advanced applications for speed andperformance driving."Broader market in possibly 18 months     Hayes said that "in the next 18 months or when it gets tothe point long-distance ISDN is in operation, service istariffed, and we know everyone knows how to order service, weexpect to broaden the reseller base to LAN networks."     Infrastructure is needed to support new products becauseresellers do not know how to write software for advancedfeatures.  Applications are of primary importance with developersand resellers working together; and Hayes has opened a laboratoryin Atlanta supported by engineers.     Dr. John Copeland, vice president for systems engineering atHayes, added, "Pressure is building up.  In the last 15 years,speed [requirements] have gone up a factor of 10 every 5 years;[we are] reaching the limit of the analog phone."  Hayes added,"We're paying the price of the break up of Bell System, [but by]working with switch manufacturers, we see things comingtogether."     In December, a beachhead in Europe and possibly Asia wassecured when GPT and Hayes formed an alliance to develop,manufacture and distribute products for ISDN networks.  (HayesMicrocomputer Products, Box 105203, Atlanta, GA 30348, 404/449-8791).Back to Headline List WT03-B12-30IA086-000622-B037-332http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te31.html 205.156.212.5 19970122050329 text/html 4709HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:01:40 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:38:03 GMTContent-length: 4523Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te31.html Sample Issue Copyright JAPAN TELECOMMUNICATIONS SCAN via NewsNet January 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES TELECOMMUNICATION NEWS Kyodo to change its English corporate name+ (109 words) MITI to develop sophisticated enciphering technology+ (105 words) Nintendo to enter Internet business next year+ (264 words) CopyrightJAPAN TELECOMMUNICATIONS SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Kyodo to change its English corporate name+TOKYO, Dec. 25 Kyodo     Kyodo News Service said Monday its English corporate name willbe changed to Kyodo News, effective from Jan. 1.     The news agency said the decision came to coincide with the 50thanniversary of its foundation in 1945.  The Japanese name KyodoTsushinsha will remain unchanged.     The group's business arm, K.K. Kyodo News Service, will alsochange its English name to K.K. Kyodo News.     Of the group's three U.S. subsidiaries, the change applies onlyto Kyodo News Service U.S.A. Inc., which will now be known as KyodoNews America Inc.  The two others, Kyodo News California Inc. andKyodo News International Inc. will remain intact.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN TELECOMMUNICATIONS SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996MITI to develop sophisticated enciphering technology+TOKYO, Dec. 26 Kyodo     The Ministry of International Trade and Industry said Tuesdayit will develop sophisticated enciphering technology to meet therequirements of an advanced information age.     Research and development institutions affiliated withuniversities and enterprises will be commissioned to undertake fivedifferent projects over a two-year period starting Jan. 1, ministryofficials said.     Cryptographic technologies exclusively for Japanese use arerequired to protect private data from plagiarism, they said.     They said sophisticated coding technology is necessary for thesettlement of transactions via electronic devices.     The five projects were selected from among 47 candidatesproposed to the ministry this summer, the officials said.Back to Headline List CopyrightJAPAN TELECOMMUNICATIONS SCAN via NewsNetJanuary 1, 1996Nintendo to enter Internet business next year+OSAKA, Dec. 26 Kyodo     Nintendo Co., a major maker of home video game machines, plansto enter Internet business as early as next summer, Nintendoofficials said Tuesday.     Nintendo is now developing a ''new type of magnetic disk drive''with 64 megabytes of memory capacity that will complement thecapabilities of its projected home video machine called ''Nintendo64,'' a company spokesman said.  Nintendo 64 will be marketedstarting next spring.     On the strength of the new drive, Nintendo President HiroshiYamauchi said the company plans to develop a machine that will enableusers to adjust the details of the prearranged story sequences ofvideo game software.     The new 64-megabyte random access memory device will allow therewriting of video games and the storing of the rewritten stories,unlike conventional machines that use read-only memory chips to storegame software, the officials said.     Yamauchi said the company plans to develop ''a machine that willallow users to rewrite the contents of a video game just as they wantits story to develop, while allowing users to store the rewrittenstories'' to complement the capabilities of the Nintendo 64 machine.     Under a linkup agreement between Nintendo and NetscapeCommunications Corp. of the United States, the pair are nowdeveloping communication software that would allow users to exchangesuch rewritten stories with each other through the Internet, theysaid.     Nintendo hopes to create an international club of fans ofNintendo video games who would exchange their rewritten video gamestories with each other through the interlinking of the Internet andthe new machines, they said.Back to Headline List WT03-B12-31IA086-000622-B038-14http://telnet.newsnet.com:80/libiss/te146.html 205.156.212.5 19970122050514 text/html 297180HTTP/1.0 200 OKServer: Netscape-Commerce/1.12Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:01:54 GMTLast-modified: Monday, 20-Jan-97 17:37:19 GMTContent-length: 296992Content-type: text/html /data/webdev/libiss/te146.html Sample Issue Copyright LAN MAGAZINE via NewsNet October 1, 1996 SAMPLE ISSUE HEADLINES NETWORKS: Netaccess Multiport Modem Card (497 words) NETWORKS: XIRCOM'S NETACCESS MULTIPORT MODEM CARD: The All-in-One Approach (2162 words) NETWORKS: DS Expert NetPro Computing (867 words) NETWORKS: NETPRO COMPUTING'S DS EXPERT: Tracing the Server Family Tree (2343 words) NETWORKS: Java Does it for Databases, Too (276 words) NETWORKS: Client-Server Moves to the 'Net (2676 words) NETWORKS: The Human Factor (676 words) NETWORKS: Electronic Troubleshooting (412 words) NETWORKS: Dialing for Help (2204 words) NETWORKS: Help Is On The Way (2840 words) NETWORKS: A Choice of Tech Support Tools (2375 words) NETWORKS: RUNNING YOUR OWN DNS (3151 words) NETWORKS: Performance Grading Gets Four Stars (377 words) NETWORKS: Reading the Cable Meter (3023 words) NETWORKS: Fault-Tolerance and Fault-Resilience (2951 words) NETWORKS: Beyond Static Web Pages (1997 words) NETWORKS: HOTTER THAN JAVA: LUCENT'S INFERNO PROMISES TO TURN UP THE HEAT (817 words) NETWORKS: CABLE TESTERS IN THE FIELD (2556 words) NETWORKS: THE COMMON GATEWAY INTERFACE IS THE KEY TO INTERACTIVE WEB SITES (1677 words) NETWORKS: Getting Basic Netware from Within Windows: A hidden menu Automatic disk maintenance Securing automatic logins (1784 words) NETWORKS: Who's Afraid of TCP/IP? (852 words) NETWORKS: Optimising a print server for NetWare (279 words) NETWORKS: Which Internet Server? (631 words) NETWORKS: ISDN to the Internet (919 words) NETWORKS: Tools of the Trade (610 words) NETWORKS: Build Support to Build User Loyalty (2098 words) NETWORKS: GETTING WEB EXPERTISE? (247 words) NETWORKS: PCL 6 Speeds It Up (329 words) NETWORKS: UB Networks Revamps Support (217 words) NETWORKS: Hughes Provides Satellite Link (164 words) NETWORKS: Olicom Raises Profile (244 words) NETWORKS: ManageWise Grabs NT and Java (300 words) NETWORKS: Novell Brings Out IntranetWare (312 words) NETWORKS: LAN SupportPack (134 words) NETWORKS: Singapore Data Warehousing Alliance (139 words) NETWORKS: Continuity Plan (168 words) NETWORKS: D-Link Rounds Out Customer Service (328 words) NETWORKS: Video Link Options (273 words) NETWORKS: ATM Banks in China (196 words) NETWORKS: Get Management Tools (282 words) NETWORKS: Switches Rule! (174 words) NETWORKS: MORE ROUTERS TO THE EDGE, BUILD ATM CORE (453 words) NETWORKS: LAN MAGAZINE: EDITORIAL: A New Frontier (646 words) NETWORKS: LAN MAGAZINE: EDITORAL (709 words) CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Netaccess Multiport Modem Cardfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996XircomTel: (805) 376-9300. In Asia: 65-323-1511. Fax: 65-224-3313Price: Four modems: US$2,299. Eight modems: US$3,999. (Prices mayvary in Asia)Requirements: Xircom's Netaccess Multiport Modem Card is a full-length ISA card, requiring a 386-DX or higher processor for serialport emulation, with more powerful CPUs needed to push Windows NTor NetWare Connect. DRAM needs vary widely based on systemapplication requirements: from 4 MB to 8 MB for a basic Windows3.1x station to 16 MB or more for an NT or OS/2 server. OS supportis robust, including compatibility with Windows 3.x, Windows NT,and Windows 95; OS/2 2.x or higher; and NetWare 3.1x or higher.Space in your bit box is a critical element, as there are lots ofLSI circuits producing copious amounts of heat. RAS users need tosupport either AIO (NetWare), NDIS (Windows NT), or standard COMports. Xircom Asia says that this version will ship into somecountries in Asia-Pacific by early 1997.N etaccess Multiport Modem Card is a full-length ISA board offeringfour or eight modem ports. It features V.42bis and MNP 5compression, onboard buffering, and speeds to 115.2 Kbps usingXMAPI mode.Installation:Installation path varies depending on the platform (Windows NT vs.NetWare). Basic steps are card setup (a rotary switch sets cardmode), loading the driver from a single disk, then configuringspecific RAS and adapter settings within the OS environment.Documentation:Manuals are well illustrated, with succinct descriptions ofinstallation and operation functions. Includes complete AT and S-register command reference, result codes, troubleshooting,diagnostic software and support options.Robustness/compatibility:Supports standard COM port drivers, AIO (NetWare) and NDIS WAN(Windows NT). Also tested with Lotus Notes.Applicability:Has the ability to support up to eight cards for a total of 64ports cranking at up to 115 Kbps.Ease of use:Works in support of the RAS software we tested. Once setup problemswere solved, MobileView network management software sniffed out ourNetWare server, providing information on port status, signalquality, interrupts, and connection status.Test environment:We tested the eight-port version in a 486-DX/66MHz HP LM serverwith 32 MB of DRAM and 2 GB of hard drive space, running NetWare4.1. We also tested it on a Compaq Deskpro 5100 100 MHz Pentiumwith 48 MB of DRAM and 2 GB of hard drive space, running Windows NT3.51.Remote control testing was done with a Compaq LTE Elite 4/75 CXLlaptop running Windows 95 and a compatible PC running Windows 3.11using Xircom's MobileView utility. A variety of PC-com patible486/100 MHz-DX4s with 16 MB of DRAM were used as client stations toestablish connections using Windows 3.11, Windows NT, and OS/2 WarpConnect 3.Warranties and support: Check with your VAR or Xircom's Asianoffice.  LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: XIRCOM'S NETACCESS MULTIPORT MODEM CARD: The All-in-OneApproachfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996If you're not afraid to put all your eggs in one basket, check outXircom's multiport modem card-a single-board solution to remoteaccess networking.ne of the problems with attaching remote access service to LANhardware has been the requisite multiport boards, the multiheaded"Medusa" cables, and the multiple stacks of modems that need to beconnected. For those of you who are discouraged by the mass ofhardware confusion required for remote access, Xircom's NetaccessMultiport Modem Cards (NMMCs) may offer you a solution.BEYOND METROPOLISAccording to Xircom, Netaccess is the first ISA-based system tofully integrate multimodem support into a single card, giving usersthe power of either four (with the MPM-4) or eight (the MPM-8) V.34modems in one slot.Xircom lists the MTBF at 163,850 hours for the MPM-4 and 86,903hours for the MPM-8. When viewed on a modem-to-modem basis,however, Xircom's claims of a radically longer MTBF fall short ofMicrocom's Deskport Fast modem, for example, which, in either arack or standalone external modem, lists a MTBF of 160,000 hours.But, as Xircom points out, if all the other components required foran operable component system are included in the calculations, theoverall MTBF for the other vendor's system may drop belowNetaccess' reliability level.It's a bird... it's a plane...Able to leap multiple platforms in a single bound, Netaccess iscompatible with NetWare 3.1x, NetWare 4.x, Windows NT 3.5x, andOS/2 2.x and 3.x. Faster than a speeding parity bit, the NMMCsupports remote access services (RAS) software that complies withAsynchronous I/O (AIO), NDIS, or standard COM port drivers. Morepowerful than a local node, Xircom supports up to eight cards persystem, so if you have the slots, you could be powering up to 64lines from a single PC. With powers and abilities far beyondordinary modems, the NMMC allows transmission speeds up to 115.2Kbps when using Xircom drivers, supporting V.42bis and MicrocomNetworking Protocol (MNP) 5 compression, as well as V.42 and MNP(level 2 through level 4) error detection, with full V.34 supportfor speeds between 2,400 bps and 28.8 Kbps.One of the slickest features of Netaccess is its ability toconfigure each port individually, allowing administrators todistribute line access privileges and setups on a port-by-portbasis via their RAS configuration settings.Netaccess cards contain two 4 KB onboard buffers-one transmit andone receive-and include flash upgradable firmware, with firmwarerevisions available via Xircom's BBS ([805] 376-9130) or Web site(http://www.xircom.com). At the time of this writing, the latestNetaccess release was 2.64b, although Xircom's BBS listing has atypo showing the file to be 2.46.Xircom has tested and approved NetWare Connect, Microsoft RAS, andLotus Notes for use with Netaccess, but any system that iscompatible with either AIO or NDIS standards will work. Xircom alsolists Citrix Systems' Win View for Networks and Symantec's pcAnywhere access server as compatible systems.Another of Netaccess' talents lies in its proprietary functionmode, XMAPI (Xircom Mobile Application Programming Interface).Netaccess can function in either of two modes: straight COM portemulation or XMAPI. Mode selection is accomplished by dialing therotary configuration switch to the setting for XMAPI or to othersettings that select one of several COM port emulation modes.The XMAPI architecture provides support for high-speed, block-modedata transfers using shared memory and onboard buffers, enablingNetaccess to crank along at 115.2 Kbps. When operating in XMAPImode, the Netaccess card bypasses the motherboard UART. This factorallows for higher transfer rates than is possible when data runsthrough a serial connection via either 8250 UART or 16550 UART.Achieving these high data transfer rates does not require aNetaccess card on both ends of the transfer-any modem supportingV.42bis is compatible.UP, UP, THEN AWAYInstallation and configuration of Netaccess is easy under WindowsNT, but considerably more difficult under NetWare Connect. Xircomhas eliminated DIP switch blocks, opting instead for a single-function, rotary-dial configuration switch that allowsconfiguration of the card's I/O port address, IRQ, and operationmode (COM port emulation or XMAPI). Once you have set the cardswitch and installed the card into an available ISA slot, you canload card drivers, which are located on a single disk. Once thedrivers are loaded, you must visit the network adapter and RASconfiguration screens specific to the OS in use to make theNetaccess card available as a port resource.Although installation instructions are included in the product'suser manual, you may want to call Xircom's toll-free FactsLine inthe US (a fax request system) at (800) 775-0400 and request faxdocument numbers 4608 (for Windows NT installation) or 4611 (forthe NetWare installation). The fax documents provide more detailedinstructions and troubleshooting information than does the productmanual.Installation on our NetWare server was problematic as a result ofincomplete and misleading documentation concerning the loading ofthe Xircom drivers. Our Xircom diskette was labeled 1.13, which, asinstructed by the documentation, led us to copy the file aioxrc.mdcinto the same directory con taining the aiomdms.mdc in an attemptto make Xircom's multiport modem driver available to NetWare.We discovered that merely copying this file to the serveraccomplished nothing more than the consumption of a few bytes ofdisk space, as nothing more is done with this file according toXircom's instructions.We found that the user must manually rename the existingaiomdms.mdc temporarily (for example, to aiomdms.old) and load theXircom file in its place. Instructions referring to Xircom driverrelease 1.10 called for loading the version of aiomdms that wasprovided on the disk, but our 1.13 variant contained no such filein any directory. As a result, we could nottrack the installationpath using the older loading procedure, either. Instructionsregarding NetWare Connect configurations contained numerous minor,yet annoying, errors. Those instructions tell you to selectConfiguring Ports, for example, but the actual prompt is simplynamed Ports. This type of mismatch was evident throughout theNetWare Connect configuration section, which was especiallybothersome because we were running NetWare Connect 2.0, the versionspecified in the included documentation. We detected adocumentation revision synchronisation syndrome.We encountered a minor glitch when attempting to execute a loadaioxrcm1 command using command syntax provided by Xircom. At firstglance, Xircom's command syntax seems to indicate that int= andirq= are equivalent command options, but deeper scrutiny led us todiscover that the int command accepted only a hex argument (int=b),whereas the irq command accepted only a decimal parameter (irq=11),hence the program's rejection of our attempted irq=11. Writtendocumentation did provide this information, but we would like tosee the command syntax designate these two parameters as distinctitems. This problem was further compounded by the total lack ofcommand examples within this section of the manual.This is not to say that the documentation provided with the productwas entirely inadequate. On the contrary, we generally foundXircom's Netaccess documentation to be among the best modem manualswe've seen. The text is well written (with the exception of thepreviously mentioned problems regarding NetWare installations),offering many informative illustrations and complete referencesections covering at commands, S-registers, and modem result codes.Xircom's FactsLine fax documentation adds another level of detailto an already worthy product manual.X-ray Vision IncludedNetWare network administrators will definitely want to check outXircom's MobileView network management software. MobileView allowsany Windows 3.x user connected to a Novell network to monitor anyNetaccess cards located in any NetWare server. MobileView installseasily from a single diskette and provides status reports either bycard display or by port display groupings.Card status displays include information concerning interrupts, I/Oaddress settings, and active drivers. Port status displays provideport speed, connection status, modem status, and signal qualityinformation.MobileView also contains an option to trap SNMP messages, which canhelp track down network or card problems. Although loading theMobileView software was a simple task, it took several discussionswith Xircom's technical support staff before we were able to getthe software to find our NetWare server.Clicking on the Discover button causes MobileView to seek out anyNetWare servers containing Netaccess multiport modems. MobileViewthen automatically adds those servers to a server database on theremote PC. You can also manually add servers to the list, avoidingthe need to rescan the network. MobileView displays the servers itdiscovers in a vertical column within the MobileView main screendisplay, requiring the user to simply double-click on the desiredserver's icon to select it, then to click either the Cards buttonor the Ports button to view the status displays. Xircom alsoprovides diagnostic software and hardware to test the Netaccesscard.Two DOS-level utilities (mpm4term and mpm8term) are included on theUtility Soft ware disk, along with a set of RJ-11 patch cords forloopback port testing. Once started, the diagnostic programdisplays individual port information in two columns of statusboxes, with a larger command window displayed at the bottom of theinterface.You can enter one of five commands (run, version, config, window,and exit) to control the test program, although we found that thesystem also responds to selected DOS commands, such as dir and cls.Xircom includes a set of 28 .scr script files which you can run toperform loopback tests using the run command. Entering run test38,for example, runs a test between port 3 and port 8, dialing andanswering from each side of the loopback connection.The config command scans the current rotary switch and cardsettings and updates the related information contained in thempm8.cfg configuration file, which is used by the diagnosticutility driver to perform the loopback tests. If you change thecard setup, you must rerun config. If you don't, the loopback testswill report errors.Pocketful of KryptoniteAs previously mentioned, we encountered problems getting MobileViewto find our NetWare server. Clicking the Discover button yielded a"Local server not found" error message. Attempts at connectionsfrom Windows 3.1 or Windows 95 workstations both failed to locatethe Netaccess card. After researching , we discovered that we hadtwo types of problems.First, we found that only connections based on Virtual LoadableModules (VLMs) are supported within MobileView's SNMP-based search.Because Windows NT systems do not use VLMs at all, any Windows NTstation running MobileView will fail to detect the Novell serverwith the modem card.A Windows 95 workstation could be configured to find the card, butonly if a DOS-based VLM is loaded during start-up. Without VLMsupport, the Windows 95 station also fails to discover the modem.The MobileView documentation card initially led us away from thisconclusion, as the systems requirement section stated that theproduct required Windows 3.1 or higher, when it should have statedthat only Windows 3.1 and 3.11 are fully supported.Second, we found that MobileView fails in mixed Novell environmentswhere both NetWare 4.10 and NetWare 3.12 servers are operating.When we logged in to the NetWare 4.10 server (using either binderyor directory services authentication) and also attached to a 3.12server (only bindery authentication is available on 3.12),MobileView failed to discover the Netaccess card located in the4.10 server. When we logged in only to the 3.12 server or to the4.10 server, the system discovered our modem without incident. Aswe had only one multiport card to evaluate, we were unable to testwhether cards placed in both 3.12 and 4.10 machines would bediscovered using our single login hypothesis.The readme.txt file contained on the MobileView disk contained alittle more information concerning setup and troubleshooting thanwas found in the folding card, but provided no specificrequirements or troubleshooting items for either SNMP or IPXissues. Help options simply restated the information contained onthe tent card, providing no additional information.ConclusionOverall, Xircom's Netaccess Multiport Modem Card is a greatproduct. Its pricing is comparable to its rack modem counterparts,and it includes improved reliability and system compactness in thebargain. Installation instructions for the NetWare portion of themodem setup need to be cleaned up, both in the accompanying usermanuals and in the FactsLine-based documentation, to eliminatesporadic inconsistencies. MobileView is a useful utility, butinadequate and misleading documentation concerning specific systemrequirements combined with a lack of troubleshooting informationmade installation more difficult than it ought to have been.  LANKirk Demaree is lab manager and Tom Henderson is director of US-based Beach Labs. Contact them via the Internet atkdemaree@unitel.org or thenderson@unitel.org, respectively.Copyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: DS Expert NetPro Computingfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 19967150 E. Camelback Rd., Ste. 100Scottsdale, AZ 85251(602) 941-3600http://www.netpro.com info@netpro.comPrice: A two-server starter pack lists for US$1,299, withadditional agents available for US$499. In quantity, prices foradditional agents drop to about US$350 each. Support costs arebased on the number of agents, starting at US$70 per agent andfalling to US$55 each for more than 100 agents.Requirements: DS Expert has three modules. The tree monitor runs ononly one server per tree. The agent runs on every server that has areplica. The last module is on administrator workstations, and thefirst two are NLMs that run on any server that meets Novell'sminimum requirements for NetWare. Nevertheless, NetPro recommendsthat the server with the tree monitor have at least 16 MB of RAM,and if there are more than 100 servers in the tree, the companyrecommends a Pentium 90 or better with at least 32 MB of RAM.Administrator's workstations must be running Windows 3.1 or Windows95, with at least 16 MB of RAM. They also need about 2 MB ofpermanent space for the client software and up to 20 MB oftemporary space for traces.S Expert is the first tool for NetWare 4.x administrators that isdesigned to help optimise NDS. It examines partitions and replicarings and reports on replicas that are either over utilised orunderutilised, thus optimising the network.Installation: The program comes on two diskettes. The installationprogram, setup.exe, runs under Windows 3.1 with Virtual LoadableModule support or under Windows 95 running the Novell 32-bit clientsoftware. It specifically does not run under Microsoft's 32-bitclient for NetWare. The installation program copies the treemonitor and the agent to the servers of your choice and applies thelicenses. It also provides a batch file, netpro.ncf, that you canrun to begin the monitoring process, and the installation programadds it to your autoexec.ncf.In order to complete the installation properly, you have to callNetPro with your serial number, the name of your tree, and yourcontact information. The company provides you with a password forthe tree manager.Documentation: There is a 125-page, spiral-bound manual that coversall parts of the software in minute detail. The manual starts withan excellent discussion of NDS, partitions, and replicas, beforemoving on to installation and use of the program. A nice touch isfound in Appendix B, which lists the NDS error codes and explainsthem.This list is kept up-to-date by Novell and can be found atftp://ftp.novell.com/pub/ updates/nwos/nw410.The program is relatively self-explanatory, which is good. The helpsystem is sparse, and many of the comments are self-laudatoryrather than informative.Technical support: NetPro maintains a wide array of methods foraccessing support. You can contact the company via a BBS at (602)941-3620, a CompuServe e-mail account at 70524,2670, a Web site athttp://www.netpro.com, an ftp site at ftp.netpro.com, and anInternet e-mail address at info@netpro.com.No matter how you contact the company, support is based on annualcontracts and is priced at US$70 per agent down to US$55 per agent,depending on quantity. There is a free initial 90-day supportperiod, which ought to be sufficient for small shops.Warranty: Thirty-day warranty from date of delivery.Ease of use: From the administrator's workstation, you need to runonly one program, which brings up several different comparativecharts and tables. When synchronisation problems occur, they arereported to the tree manager and reflected in the Windowsapplication. The shortcoming here is that the program does not snapinto more robust monitors such as LANDesk or GroupWise. Nor does ithave the ability to send mail or notify a pager. Simple MailTransport Protocol support is also lacking.Robustness/compatibility: The program runs under Windows 3.1 andWindows 95, but in the latter case it requires the Novell 32-bitclient for Windows. It does not run with the Microsoft client forNetWare. Once running, however, it works as advertised with minimalbandwidth and storage requirements. The requirement to call NetProfor the password that's tied to the tree name brings back all ofthe copy-protection problems that were common a decade ago.Applicability: DS Expert is used to manage partitions and replicasin a large NDS environment. It can identify replica placementthat's causing excessive bandwidth utilisation and delayedresponses. It can even suggest alternatives that would work better.The information it presents on a single, integrated screen wouldtake hours to manually collect and collate using Novell'sdsrepair.nlm. Given the importance of the NDS structure to theNetWare 4.1 environment, this is a tool that LAN administratorswon't want to be without.Test environment: Tests were performed using 2 NetWare 4.1 serversin a single tree. The workstations were connected via Ethernet 10-BaseT. Workstations were a Dell 486/33 MHz with 20 MB of RAMrunning Windows 3.1 and a 90 MHz Pentium-based PC with 32 MB of RAMrunning Windows 95. All machines used SMC Elite 16 Combo Ethernetadapters.  LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: NETPRO COMPUTING'S DS EXPERT: Tracing the Server Family Treefrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996DS Expert gives network administrators the tools they need tomanage the NDS database-tools that NetWare 4.x fails to provideefficiently.hen Novell introduced NetWare 4.0, it ushered in a shift in whichusers and administrators had to get used to the idea of treatingservers as just another network resource and the idea that one logsin to the network rather than the server. Similarly, the newversion represented a change for network designers, who had tofigure out how to store, update, synchronise, and protect thesenetwork resources.NetWare 4.0 was a monumental leap forward; nevertheless, I believeit fell short in many respects. For example, the default rules forpartition and replica creation had to be revised and re-revised asexperience with the product accumulated. The first version ofNetWare 4.0 made no replicas, leaving the task to theadministrator. This plan lacked any fault tolerance and made thefirst server a bottleneck. So, Novell made some adjustments, andthe next version made a replica for every server. Whensynchronisation traffic from this new replica rule choked thecables, it was up to the administrator to cut back on the number ofreplicas.The current version has a new default rule. It makes replicas ononly the first three servers created, which is a compromise thatworks in many, but clearly not all cases. Another problem was thatthe early versions automatically made new partitions by merelyinstalling a server in a container created by the installationprogram. This factor created problems of its own by eliminatingautomatic replication, which made the problems of 4.0 reemerge.The dsrepair.nlm.nlm has changed, too. The initial versions ofdsrepair.nlm.nlm looked at the partitions and replicas stored on aparticular server and checked them for integrity, but those servershad a very limited ability to communicate with other NetWare 4.0servers on the LAN. Thankfully, the current release is a remarkablyrobust troubleshooting and diagnostic tool.With all of this progress, there is still one need that NetWare 4.0fails to cover: a functional analysis of the current partition andreplica design. For example, network managers need to know if thedesign is efficient. Is the design causing bottlenecks? Is there anexposure due to too few replicas? Are the existing replicas usedevenly, or are there some that handle far more (or less) than theirproportionate share? Are there some replicas that takesignificantly longer to synchronise, and if so, why? The purpose ofDS Expert, a program from US-based NetPro Computing, is not only toanswer these questions, but to help guide the administrator towarda better NetWare Directory Services (NDS ) design.WHAT'S IN THE BOX?NetPro is licensed on a per-server basis. The initial packageincludes the tree management program and two server agents (whichconsist of the NLMs that monitor replica activity and report it tothe tree manager). Additional agents may be purchased as needed.Servers without replicas don't need an agent, and servers with morethan one replica need only one agent. If a replica is created andthere are no additional agents available, some information is stillavailable, such as the replica type (read/write, master, read/only,or subordinate reference), and is reported properly. However, noalerts will be generated for anomalous conditions that might existon that server.DS Expert comes on two diskettes. Before installing the program,you will have to call NetPro and give the company your serialnumber and tree name, after which you receive the password thatenables your program. Both the registration form and the manualmention this need for a telephone call-however, the packaging failsto point it out, and the box contains no special notice slip.I went into the lab at 9 a.m. on a Sunday to install the productand was unable to reach the company to obtain a password. Sincemost prudent administrators install and test system managementsoftware during evening and weekend hours, I suspect that limitedcompany availability will be a common problem. NetPro should eitherprint the requirement to obtain the password via telephone directlyon the box or include a notice with an appropriate messageindicating the company's hours of operation. Better yet, thecompany should trust its users' honesty and abandon this indirectcopy-protection scheme.Once I obtained the password, I found installation to be quick andrelatively painless. The program requires certain versions of CLIBand other support NLMs, and for those whose systems have not beenupdated, NetPro provides instruction on finding the latest versionsof these programs at Novell's ftp site or via NetWire, Novell'sforum on CompuServe.The installation program asks you to specify the server that is tohost the tree management program and suggests a higher-performancemachine for those users with large LANs (NetPro claims that itstree manager running on a 32 MB, 90 MHz Pentium easily supports 100servers). All the servers with replicas need a copy of the agentsoftware, which the installation program sends out. As a nicetouch, the tree manager is capable of distributing the agent at alater time should a replica be added to a server that never had onebefore (an unused agent license is available). This feature savesthe administrator the trouble of remembering to install the agentand the headache that comes from wondering why DS Expert isn'treporting the activities of the new replica and the replica'sserver.Finally, the installation program adds a Windows group and twoicons-one for the program and the other for the read me file-as itcopies the administrator's application to whatever location theinstaller specifies (the default is c:\dsexpert).HELPING YOU HELP YOURSELFSome LAN administrators are purely reactive. That is, they wait forproblems to arise, and then they fix them. Others are proactive,anticipating problems before they occur and taking steps to preventthem. The former approach is more common, but the latter is farless stressful for the network manager. While DS Expert will workfor both camps, it is designed to be a proactive tool.NDS is defined as a "loosely consistent" database. This definitionmeans that it does not have to be in complete synchronisation 100percent of the time. For example, if you change your password, thenlog out and log back in via some distant server, you might findthat, for a minute or two, the old password still works. Thereason? NDS uses the Service Advertising Protocol (SAP) packets tocommunicate, and it holds on to updates and sends them out assingle, larger packets in order to minimise bandwidth utilisation.It can take a few minutes for an SAP broadcast to work its way fromserver to server within the network. NDS is built to tolerate thesetime-dependent differences.For this reason, merely comparing the contents of two replicas andfinding some minor inconsistencies won't necessarily identify aproblem area.On the other hand, differences that don't resolve themselves in afairly short time period are problems that must be addressed beforethey cause erratic behaviour for users and programs.As a result, administrators have to examine the tree and search forproblem areas. DS Expert can issue four different kinds of alerts:Replica Sync, Time Sync, Load Average, and Low Memory/Disk Space.Because NDS is loosely consistent, you can program DS Expert toissue the alert only when the condition has been constant for anextended period of time. Those without DS Expert have to useNetWare's dsrepair.nlm NLM to keep an eye on their NDS databases.This presents two problems. One is that the database has to beclosed while the NLM is running. The other is that dsrepair.nlmforces an immediate synchronisation of the database. Closing thedatabase prevents it from handling authentication or being updated,possibly inconveniencing users. Forcing a synchronisation wastesbandwidth. Worst of all, because the NDS design allows for looselyconsistent replicas, any errors reported by dsrepair.nlm aresuspect.Listing 1 shows what you may get when you run dsrepair.nlm. Eventhough the display indicates an error condition, there is probablynothing wrong with your system. The error 625 means that the serveron which dsrepair.nlm is running isn't able to communicate withanother server.Most likely, it is a LAN or WAN communications problem, though itcan also occur if the NDS database on the other server is alsolocked (if, for example, another administrator is runningdsrepair.nlm at that server). Aside from dsrepair.nlm, there isanother way to get the information on your NDS database. NetWareprovides an NDS tracing tool that is enabled by issuing the Setcommand (set dstrace=on) at the console prompt.Enabling this tool causes NDS information to be displayed on theconsole in a rather cryptic form, and the information scrolls offtoo quickly to read in a busy network. To make reading theinformation easier, you can direct the information to a file usingthe four commands shown in Listing 2. The four steps simply tellNetWare to begin logging synchronisation information to the screen,then to send it to a file called sys:dstrace.log, to clear the fileof previous contents, if any, and to complete resynchronisation ofall replicas.dsrepair.nlm.nlm and the NDS tracing tool are the only twotechniques for checking the synchronisation and replica informationthat NetWare provides, yet they are unreliable. The tools look atone particular server and report on its health and well-beingwithout providing information about the other servers. The only wayto be sure there is a problem is to monitor the entire databaseover a period of time and note the recurring inconsistencies.This stage is where DS Expert shines. The tree monitor and itsagents are constantly looking at and keeping statistics on all NDSnetwork activities. A few minutes spent looking at the statusscreens of the DS Expert Windows client can give an accuratepicture of the status of the database.Figure 1 (page 86) shows the tree view. With this view, you can seeall of the partitions, servers, and replicas. The tree is shownstarting with the root, and if there are subordinate partitions, afolder is created with those partitions as entries. If a partitionhas an alert pending, its entry has a red circle next to it-thosethat are problem-free display a green circle.Expanding the tree near the errors displays a Current Alertssubfolder. If you open that folder, you see the text of the alertthat triggered the error indicator. As an administrator, you evenhave the ability to adjust the alert thresholds. For example, athreshold of three replicas is considered to be the minimum for apartition. If, however, you intentionally have only two, you canset the threshold lower to suppress the alert.If you set alert thresholds so that DS Expert indicates when ananomalous condition occurs, you simply check the client softwarefrom time to time and rest assured that the database is in goodhealth. When an occasional alert is raised, you are the first toknow, and it is possible that you will know even before the problembegins to negatively impact the network.The DS Statistics tab on that same screen displays the workloadbeing handled for a replica. Because the agents are constantlyrunning, they can track the number of times a particular partitionis used to resolve a name or to perform other tasks. Figure 2 showsthe statistics for several of the NDS commands, which are called"verbs." By comparing the utilisation levels of each of the serversin a replica ring, you can determine if access is balanced. If itisn't, you need to decide if the situation merits furtherinvestigation.There are several designs that won't be balanced-for example, areplica of a branch office partition kept in the home office willnever have the same number of accesses as the one in the branchoffice itself; and there are several designs that might-forexample, several servers on the backbone that carry the entiretree. As an administrator, you can see if the actual utilisationmeets your expectations, and you can monitor the statistics overtime to see if there are changes that you might want to address.As a final note, DS Expert isn't an NDS design tool. If each of thethree replicas of your partition are located in the home office andthe two branch offices, DS Expert won't issue any alerts tellingyou that you need a better plan or that you're wasting a lot of WANbandwidth for no good reason.On the other hand, if DS Expert hasn't heard from one of thebranches for a while, it lets you know that your tree is in danger.Also, DS Expert has no ties to tools that expedite delivery of thealerts. There is no pager or e-mail function, nor is the programSNMP-based. Administrators who don't remember to check the clientprogram might as well not install it.THE WRAP-UPDS Expert doesn't change anything on your NetWare 4.0 network. Itmerely reports the status of your partition and replica structureand suggests changes (such as adding replicas) that you shouldmake.Making modifications to an NDS tree is still an art more thana science, and similar to an art teacher, DS Expert can identifyareas that need improvement and suggest techniques that will workbetter. But, it is ultimately up to the student to execute thetask. Just as most students do better after following theirteacher's instructions, so, too, will most LAN administratorsimprove their networks after studying DS Expert's advice.  LANSteve Kalman specialises in migration planning.He can be reached via the Internet at 76702.3564@compuserve.comCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Java Does it for Databases, Toofrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Java is an object-oriented programming language closely modeled onC++. The main differences between the two are based on the needsfor platform independence, security, and application size. However,there is one major similarity: In business applications, client-server or otherwise, neither language has native support fordatabases-unlike Visual Basic and Delphi. Initial Java applets weremuch like a tic-tac-toe game, animation, and other visuallyinteresting contexts in that they lacked persistent data storage.In order to make Java useful for corporate development, theJavaSoft team has proposed the JavaSoft Database Connectivity(JDBC) API. Based on the X/Open Call Level Interface, JavaSoft'sgoal is "to define a generic SQL database access framework whichprovides a uniform interface on top of a variety of differentdatabase connectivity modules. This allows programmers to write toa single database interface, enables DBMS-independent Javaapplication development tools and products, and allows databaseconnectivity vendors to provide a variety of different connectivitysolutions."JDBC is organised like other Java subsystems (see diagram below)-such as the I/O and the language and graphics subsystems-as apackage of classes that encapsulate a well-defined set of services.Because of security issues and potential lack of local databaseaccess support (that is, a preinstalled ODBC driver), the JDBCproposal anticipates that the three-tier architecture will be verycommon. In using such a scheme, Java applications make calls to aservice layer on the network whose internals handle accessing thedatabase(s). From that position, the middle layers could functionmuch the same as any OLE or object request broker (ORB) server.LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Client-Server Moves to the 'Netfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996What's on the horizon for client-server computing? The next bastionto conquer is the host-based world of the global Internet.The more things change, the more they stay the same.As computing technology evolves, this timeless cliche can beapplied as much to the computer world as to history in general. Inthe beginning there were end user terminals that gave direction tolarge host systems that ran the applications; the hosts pumped theresults back to the terminals. Hosts changed sizes and became morespecialised.Then along came PCs, which revolutionised the business world,putting the power of the old hosts on each user's desktop. Butthere was a hitch: Each individual had his or her own set ofinformation, often duplicating his or her neighbour's machine.Sharing that information was very difficult. LANs arrived andseemed to resolve that problem. But every bright cloud has itsmuddy brown lining: Networks were very hard to maintain and theapplications they required were hard to write.A few years ago, some smart people recognised that the union ofrelational databases and front-end applications made a potentcombination. They named the new technology client-server. Still,there were concerns."How do I manage data scattered at offices all over the world?"grumbled managers. "How do I use this expensive technology tocreate closer relationships to my customers and find new modelsthat lower the cost of doing business?"Some answers are found by returning to the earliest forms ofcomputing-host systems that take direction from user terminals.Now, though, the connection is open to anyone. And anyone can besecure and use rapidly created applications that change dynamicallyin response to evolving conditions.The key to this change is, of course, the Internet and its youngercousin the intranet-here referred to jointly as the 'Net. And manyproducts are being developed to take advantage of the new paradigm.Just consider the 'Net as one global host system.SECURITYAnalysts, visionaries, and everyday Joes predict great things forthe 'Net. Stock market successes such as Netscape, Yahoo, and evenAmerica Online are evidence of that.Analysts estimate that within 10 years, electronic, or online,commerce may account for about one-fifth of the U.S. economy. Butto reach anything close to that share, the inherent insecurity of adecentralised, unorganised system such as the 'Net-where userscan't even know who owns the computers through which their trafficpasses-must be transformed.Last year, a group of visionary companies including VisaInternational, MasterCard, Microsoft, IBM, and Netscape bandedtogether to create Secure Electronic Technology (SET). SET is aprotocol that provides a way to automatically route paymentinformation between users, merchants, and their banks.The protocol specifies technology that encrypts credit cardtransactions, automates the processing and clearing of credit cardpayments, works with existing security protocols (such as SecureSockets Layer), and is supported by toolkits from Microsoft, RSAData Security, and Terisa Systems. In April, Terisa Systemsintroduced SecureWeb Toolkit 2.0. This standard is an early, opencommercial step toward winning the confidence of the general publicfor electronic commerce.JAVA AND JAVASCRIPTLike a nova bursting across the night sky, a new language calledJava has swept aside competition in the race to create a standardprogramming facility for the World Wide Web. Sun Microsystemsinitially created the project that resulted in Java in the hopes ofdeveloping a set-top cable television box. That market, into whichmany companies poured millions of dollars over the last sevenyears, is still somewhere out in the future. Java is probably theonly commercial product to come out of those years of research.Java exploded out of Sun's labs so quickly that even now, only afew months after it moved out of beta and into production, it isimpossible to count the books, magazines, conferences, and Websites devoted to it. One major computer book publisher, whichtypically ships 5,000 copies of new titles to bookstores, shipped20,000 copies of its first advanced Java programming book-and itsold out almost immediately.What is most amazing is that Java has achieved this unprecedentedlevel of acceptance while still being an incredibly hard to learnlanguage. It is C++ with minor differences in regard to memorymanagement and access to hardware. The latter delta is forpractical, rather than technical reasons: How many users would letsome unknown applet be downloaded and executed on their computersif there was no such limitation?JavaSoft, Sun's new subsidiary created to develop, manage, andmarket Java, has proposed a new API: Java Database Connectivity(JDBC). JDBC will allow Java applications to access any back-enddatabase in the same way as ODBC.In fact, the draft proposal for the JDBC API standard states thatODBC should be leveraged and that the two APIs, both being based onthe X/Open SQL Call-level interface, may even be able to use thesame drivers (with a small bridge driver connecting JDBC to ODBC).(For more on JDBC, see "Java Does it for Databases, Too.")OLD 'SOFT-YAs late as the end of last year, Bill Gates was discounting thesignificance of the Internet. Four months later, he totallyreorganised Microsoft, instructing his employees to find ways toadapt Microsoft's products to 'Net life. Often in computinghistory, new generations of technology have caused old giants tofall, but so far Gates has avoided the myopic vision that did inhis predecessors. Microsoft has responded to the Internet surge by: Releasing Internet Assistants for all office components thatconvert spreadsheets, databases, documents, and graphics to HTML; Purchasing Vermeer Technology for its FrontPage HTML editor; Releasing Internet Information Server at no cost; Announcing an end-to-end electronic commerce system calledMerchant (using the security technology discussed earlier); Updating the OCX standard to ActiveX to support 'Net componentsand releasing a set of basic ActiveX components (such as Winsock,ftp, HTML and Network News Transport Protocol [NNTP]); Adding support to Visual C++ via five new classes in the MicrosoftFoundation Classes; Announcing Peer Web Services to allow Windows 95 and Windows NTusers to expose folders on local hard drives as Web pages; Releasing VBScript, a freely available, multiplatform, lightweightversion of Visual Basic; and, Licensing Java, plus a Java development environment (Jakarta),and, plans to include the Java Virtual Machine in future releasesof the operating system products.A key theme running throughout Microsoft's efforts is leveragingthe installed skills base. Rather than requiring users to learncompletely new programming languages and tools, Microsoft now triesto add 'Net capabilities to existing products. "Microsoft has theresources to back all the horses in the race," said Dwight Davis,editor of Windows Watcher. "No one knows enough to make anypredictions, but Microsoft is determined to cover all the bets."THE REST OF THE PACKMicrosoft is not alone in providing 'Net-related tools to corporatedevelopers. The main competitors to Visual Basic in the low-to-middle end of the client-server application development market areSybase PowerBuilder and Borland Delphi. Both are responding to thechallenge of creating applications that can live on the 'Net.With the motto "Fast Applications Anywhere," the PowerSoft divisionof Sybase had planned to ship version 5.0 of PowerBuilder by theend of second quarter 1996. This release adds a compiler (somethingusers of interpreted development tools always clamour for) based onthe proven Watcom technology, and the ability to create three-tierapplications with server-based components.However, while Visual Basic 4.0's Remote OLE facility can be usedwith non-Visual Basic OLE servers, PowerSoft will take a closedapproach. In this first step into the distributed arena, MitchKramer, of the Patricia Seybold Group, labeled PowerBuilder'smiddleware as proprietary.ParcPlace-Digitalk provides a mid-level development tool called theVisualWave Development Environment. Based on its long-establishedVisualWorks Smalltalk environment, VisualWave takes the drudgeryout of creating ready-to-run 'Net applications with a cross-platform, multidatabase, object-oriented system.It automatically converts screens, forms, and tables into HTML, andgenerates the required Common Gateway Interface (CGI) scripts. Theincluded Personal Web Server allows applications to be testeddirectly on the development machine. On the downside, you must alsopurchase the VisualWave Internet Application Server as well asclimb the steep learning curve of the encyclopedic Smalltalk classlibrary.Oracle is also moving aggressively into the 'Net marketspace.Recently, it released Designer/2000 WebServer Generator, a freeupgrade to Developer/2000. Now developers can create applicationsthat query Oracle databases and publish reports via browsers."For internal clients, Developer/2000 2.0 [this upgrade is duebefore the end of 1996] would allow us to run a thin client thatruns a Java applet. So, if we need to upgrade the application, weupgrade the server, not the client," said a senior applicationsdeveloper with a large US retail company. "Implementing multi-tierarchitecture would keep client-side maintenance costs down."Attachmate made its reputation delivering host connectivity to PCs.But now it is moving into the 'Net as well. The Extra DeveloperSeries enables developers to create applications that access hostdata from Windows 95 and Windows NT platforms running overintranets or traditional networks. The host data can either becoming from databases, mainframe screens, or program-based businesslogic. QuickApp generates code for Visual Basic, C++, PowerBuilder,and Delphi that allows systems developed in those environments touse screen-based data.MOVING INTO THE HIGH ENDAmong the range of larger scale application development systems,Forte Software and Texas Instruments Software are taking fairlytypical approaches.Next Software and Haht Software are bringing out completely newtools.Version 2.0 of Forte's eponymous software, released late in 1995,allows enterprise developers to create dynamically partitionedapplications so that developers can tune deploy-ment needs amongclient machines and any number of appropriately powered and locatedservers. To add 'Net access via any browser, the company recentlyannounced the Forte Web Server software development kit.In April, TI released WebCenter. Web Center, combined with anexisting TI product, Composer, delivers enterprise-classapplications that can be delivered concurrently in any of fourconfigurations: host/terminal, traditional client-server, PCclients (such as spreadsheets), and 'Net clients against server-based applications (see Figure 1).Dan Ivanov, manager of information technology at Air Canada, says,"We are committed to delivering strong support to our customers andbelieve that WebCenter will allow us to significantly improve thequality and speed of our customer service in a very short time."WebCenter provides browser clients with a live 'Net page withdynamic content rather than a display of static documents. ThroughComposer's ability to connect to any database, relational orlegacy, WebCenter users can provide global data access to their owncustomer base.NEW FROM THE WEBNext Software was originally founded by Steve Jobs to develop andsell machines for the educational market. With the first commercialrelease in 1988, though, reality forced the company to expand itshorizons to include the business market.Over the next few years, Next struggled in a crowded Unix bazaarand finally gave up. Instead, they have been building on the simpleyet powerful application development system that was part of theNextStep operating system.Most recently, the firm released the Web Objects product line. Theentry-level version offers an easy entry point for building dynamic'Net applications that incorporate a set of prebuilt components andWebScript. This version can be downloaded for free fromhttp://www.next.com.WebObjects Pro adds the ability to incorporate C, C++, andObjective C code as well as OLE connectivity and database clientlibrary support. It also provides for distributed 'Net applicationservers facilitating scalability and management. The top-of-the-line version, Web Objects Enter prise, provides a complete dynamic'Net development solution. This variant is targeted to customersrequiring a solution that encapsulates existing data andapplications."We're very impressed with the functionality WebObjects brings tocorporations building dynamic, Web-based ap pli cations," said Jonathon Schwartz, president of Lighthouse Design. "In less than twomonths of working with WebObjects, Lighthouse has already deliveredWebVision, a server-based developer component designed to augmentNext's technology, delivering data-driven graphics to WebObjectsdevelopers."Haht Software, a year-old startup, is marketing its productHahtsite-as a tool for stretched-thin MIS staffers who are beingpulled into 'Net development projects. Founded by a group ofexecutives from Q+E Software, Hahtsite uses a compiled Unix versionof Visual Basic rather than CGI scripts to handle scalability andsecurity issues. Applications created with this tool are entirelyserver-based, with HTML pages created and accessed by browserclients. The developer product runs on Windows 95, Windows NT, andSolaris (see Figure 2).DECISION SUPPORTA basic need in most client-server systems is standard reporting.Actuate Software is set to ship Actuate Report Server 3.0, thefirst report server that can serve up reports as Universal ResourceLocators (URLs).Using Web Agent, which connects any Web server to the reportserver, corporations can make predefined report formats accessibleto any browser client. The Actuate Viewer Plug-in adds searchingand help capability, table of contents, and hyperlinks to otherreports. According to Larry Sikon, chief technologist withMontgomery Securities, "The Report Server is oriented to high-volume, client-server-level reporting. Overall, Actuate has done agood job of emulating the Visual Basic mode of development, whichis visual, and which reuses objects."IQ Software announced a new member of their IQ series of client-server decision support software, IQ/LiveWeb, which allows users topublish corporate data over the 'Net. It allows users to submitqueries to corporate databases, schedule them for execution, andpublish them on Web servers in HTML or Portable Document Format.When discussing decision support, Online Analytical Processing(OLAP) isn't far behind. Sure enough, MicroStrategy and ArborSoftware have announced server-based Web interfaces for their OLAPservers.Users with only a browser on their desktop can use MicroStrategy'sDSS Web to connect to DSS Server and perform the same sophisticateddata analysis as if they were connected locally. Arbor plans asimilar gateway for its Essbase OLAP server. And both plan tointegrate Java applets into their systems.READY FOR WHAT COMES NEXTThe history of technology has taught us once again that predictingthe future is a difficult task, at best. The Internet and intranetsare still in their nascency and changing so rapidly that it isimpossible to predict what will transpire over the next year, muchless an even longer time period. Every new medium is used first asa better way to do that which has been done before. The first carswere merely more expensive and, of course, horseless versions ofthe carriage; radio was used to send telegraphs without Morse code;television was used to transmit radio programs with visuals added;computers were used to automate counting and calculation.In each instance, an individual or small group figured out some newand different purpose for the new invention. Still, that processtook time. We see the same happening on the 'Net. It providesfaster, simpler connections to data.Companies can set up electronic commerce systems to sell tickets,flowers, or music without the need for direct human involvement ontheir end (setting up these systems still requires a great amountof human involvement, but that will change soon enough).Others have set up radio stations. Down the road are plans to sendmovies and television shows down the wires. But none of these arenew. The real uses of the 'Net are still out over the eventhorizon.  LANBill Lazar is a senior member of the services group at US-basedCenterView Software. He can be reached at blazar@centerview.comCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: The Human Factorfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996When analysing successful and unsuccessful helpdeskimplementations, I discovered seven key attributes that the besthelpdesk practices exhibit. Helpdesk implementations are driven by management. It must distribute and discuss metrics using reports. Call management is centralised. IS staff must embrace the helpdesk tool. Management must define and quantify its expectations of the ISstaff. Helpdesk staff must be accountable.Let's now discuss each factor briefly. For the first, it isapparent that the managment must realise the benefits of a helpdesksystem. If management does not take ownership, the staff won't bemotivated to use the tool. Management must stress the importance ofusing this system to create a knowledge base.Distribution and discussion of metrics. Unsuccessful helpdesksystems adhere to the paradigm "Garbage In, Nothing Out." This lackof reporting, or metrics, usually occurs because the folks settingup the system spent more time figuring out how to get the staff touse the system than they did determining its value.A manager requires staff to enter all trouble calls in thedatabase. However, once all the calls are logged, he doesn't knowhow to mine the data for useful information, which he can thenpresent to superiors. When staffers realise they are entering callsbut not receiving any feedback on their performance, they stoplogging calls. To be successful, a helpdesk system must presentmeaningful data to the staff and management.Centralised call management. The helpdesk can log calls only ifthey come into the helpdesk. While most helpdesk packages allownetwork administrators to enter tickets, these folks are lesslikely to enter records. This situation is compounded by the factthat users usually know who to call directly to get their questionsanswered. As a result, numerous calls go unreported. Thisinformation call routing can undermine the system and adverselyaffect projected staffing levels. To close this informal channel,some organisations tell their administrators to put their phones on"send." As a result, users reach a live person only if they callthe helpdesk.Get IS staff to embrace the helpdesk. Most helpdesk implementationsfail because of a What's-In-It-For-Me mentality. IS staffersusually see helpdesk tools as one more task to juggle during thework week. Management must show the staffers the value the softwareprovides. Often, a disparity exists between the manager's desire toget meaningful reports out and the staffers desire to spend timeentering that information so managers can extract it. IS staffersdon't see how this process affects them. Management must show themhow these tools will reduce their workload.Defining expectations. A manager must specify which tickets shouldbe closed within an hour and which ones could be closed within aday. Some tickets, by definition, take longer to close. Forexample, if IS has to order software before it can be installed ona user's machine, that ticket may stay open a week. However, takinga week to answer a spreadsheet question is unacceptable.Manages should define their expectations of IS staff in writing.One way is to draw up a contract between the helpdesk and end usersthat spells out the service level agreement between the twoparties. If managers do not define these parameters, how do theyknow whether the helpdesk is meeting or exceeding users'expectations?Accountability. Helpdesk implementations can fail because peoplestart to believe that using the tool is optional.So, how can management ensure that employees use the helpdesksystem? Money and status usually do the trick. Managers can use thehelpdesk as a tool to base performance reviews. Future raises andpromotions will be determined by how well each individual meets theservice levels managers have set. If staffers "forget" to closecalls, they will not be given an opportunity to "back date" theticket.  LANRon Evans is a consultant for US-based The Nettleship Group. He canbe reached at evansheath@earthlink.net.Copyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Electronic Troubleshootingfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Storage Dimension, a US$60-million provider of RAID and tapestorage systems for LANs, wanted to set up an automated help deskto provide quick response to users' inquiries. To do this, StorageDimensions turned to Apriori GT, a knowledge-based softwarefoundation program from Platinum Technology.Using Platinum's Apriori GT, Storage Dimensions designed its ownmethod of Internet access for customer self service, calledTechConnect.TechConnect is designed to help resellers, field service personnel,customers, and other networking vendors access documented solutionsfor commonly asked questions about Storage Dimensions' storageproducts.Customers can access the easy-to-use TechConnect help system 24hours a day via the Internet (techconnect@xstor.com) or via privateonline services. The knowledge base automatically provides userswith detailed, context-sensitive information on installation,compatibility, and support for any Storage Dimensions product, aswell as related products from a wide variety of vendors. To accessthis information, users simply send an e-mail message from withinhis or her existing mail application describing the problem."The TechConnect knowledge base has a dynamic feedback loop," saysBill Kirkwood, director of customer service and support at StorageDimensions. "It is constantly monitored by technical supportspecialists and engineers. All problems or issues are analysed, andresolutions are fed back into the knowledge base.As a result, solutions are consistent and readily available tosupport specialists and customers alike. The system automaticallyprioritises solution documents based on frequency of use, whichspeeds up resolution to the customer. In this way, trends arediscovered, and the customer becomes part of the productdevelopment process."Today, 25 per cent of Storage Dimensions' support inquiries comevia the Internet and up to 75 per cent of those calls are resolvedby the customers on their own (see figure).The helpdesk staff's workload has been reduced by about 20 percent. Storage Dimensions paid approximately US$160,000 for theApriori GT and a Sun Microsystems Sparc 670 MP server; the companyachieved return on investment in less than a year. StorageDimensions estimates it has saved more than US$200,000 annually inthe two years Tech Connect has been online, according to Kirkwood.TechConnect utilises the same documents that the StorageDimensions' technical support representatives rely on daily toresolve 99.4 per cent of customer support inquiries. Kirkwoodpoints out that users now have access to these same documents viathe Internet.  LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Dialing for Helpfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Sometimes it takes a little help to make a little help. Here's howto design an internal helpdesk that will keep your burgeoningnetworks under control.esigning a smoothly working, professional, yet cost-efficienthelpdesk support function is not an easy task. There are manypotential pitfalls to avoid.A successful helpdesk planning project must tackle some trickyissues, such as planning for future growth and changes intechnology and laying out provisions for the project's finalimplementation.Experts agree that the key to a helpdesk that will achieve first-rate operation is adequate planning during the initial designphase. This stage is when the project's team members must estimatethe current helpdesk needs and predict the near-term challenges thehelpdesk will face once it is in place. These initial plans includeimportant factors-such as expected growth in the number of computerusers, new applications that will need to be supported, and newtechnology issues-that will impact the helpdesk during its firstyears of operation.The first step during the planning stage is for management toascertain that a helpdesk function is actually needed. It may bethat increased user demand for assistance is due to unusualcircumstances, such as a heavy staff turnover, an influx of newtrainees, or installation of new hardware or software. In thesecases, the temporary need for increased end-user support can befulfilled by other, less-costly methods.Generally, you can easily assess your company's need for adedicated helpdesk when informal, ad hoc help provided by yourtechnical staff becomes a burden for them and disrupts their usualactivities. According to Stephen Davies, president of U.S. ComputerGroup, a US-based supplier of support services, the proliferationof departmental and companywide LANs within the corporateenterprise is driving the need to support multivendor nodes, opensystems software, and diverse applications. This proliferation has,in turn, led to a growth in end-user demand for assistance. Thistype of support requires complex problem analysis to resolveincreasingly sophisticated computing problems, making ad hoc end-user support a monumental task.If your staff is no longer able to satisfy users' requests forsupport on an informal basis, whether it's due to an overwhelmingnumber of support requests or a need for support that is beyond thesupport staff's capabilities, it's time to begin to plan for ahelpdesk.Matt Kochan, vice president of marketing and business developmentat Digital Equipment, suggests that you watch for these telltalesigns that an organised end-user support function is necessary:There is a large Data Processing staffturnover (which indicates possiblestaff-member burnout).MIS receives poor marks from endusers (registering unhappiness among the users).User productivity takes a dive (which could signal users'frustration with technical tools).If any of these symptoms are occurring, a helpdesk may be needed.IN COMMITTEEIf it is determined that a helpdesk is needed, management's nextstep is to proceed to the planning and design stage by forming ahelpdesk project committee. Delegates from company management, MISpersonnel, and end users should all be part of the helpdeskdevelopment plan. It is important that each affected group beinvolved in the helpdesk initiative for it to succeed.The committee concept allows management, users, and supportpersonnel to jointly iron out helpdesk functions and expectations,thus avoiding misunderstandings about what types of support will beavailable. The committee should determine exactly which functionsthe helpdesk will provide, define its functionality level, anddecide which applications, systems, and equipment will besupported. Staffing and training requirements, hours of operation,and budgets should also be addressed. With all parties inagreement, anticipation of what the final helpdesk implementationwill provide will be clear, and the committee can formulate thehelpdesk's charter.The next step is to investigate the benefits and drawbacks of aninternally operated facility vs. an external helpdesk. There arethree viable options for the implementation and management of ahelpdesk: the helpdesk function can be an in-house entity, it canbe completely outsourced, or it can be a hybrid operation that usesboth in-house staff and an outside service provider.In-house helpdesks give you complete control over operations,training, staffing, and costs. However, administration costs can behigh, and you will need extra time and staff to manage theoperation.Despite the drawbacks, many small organisations may still want tochoose an internal helpdesk, explains Harvey Walker, generalmanager of US-based integration firm Extranet Telecommunications.Walker says his firm often recommends its clients do exactly that."If you deal with a constantly evolving product and you have tocontinually train outside staff, the costs can be extremelyexpensive," says Walker. "Extranet's clients are mostly smallsoftware and Internet access companies with changing product lines.Because of this, we usually suggest they go with internalhelpdesks." It's quicker to train internal people on the differentproduct changes when they are already familiar with the products,he explains.In a totally outsourced helpdesk situation, the helpdesk vendormanages the entire problem resolution process. This resolution canbe done at the customer site or remotely from a designated helpdeskfacility. The vendor runs all phases of the helpdesk operation at apredetermined cost, which benefits the customer. Of course, thecustomer relinquishes all control over the operation. Training canbe challenging, as well; it is more difficult for outside people tokeep up with the constantly changing conditions of your LANs.In a typical hybrid helpdesk solution arrangement, the outsidevendor manages the helpdesk's operation, call response, and problemisolation process. The resolution of the problem is relegated tothe onsite staff or a designated service vendor. There areadministrative cost savings to be gained from this type ofarrangement, but you give up control over the helpdesk's managementand usually have the added disadvantage of a helpdesk facility thatis located far from your users.There are many reasons why your company may choose to use anoutside vendor to provide its helpdesk needs.It may be that there is a lack of technical expertise in yourcompany's ranks. Your company may be going through a period ofreduced growth, or management may have made a strategic decision todedicate resources to the company's core business. In such cases, atotal outsourcing agreement is appropriate. If the company's usersare spread out across a large geographic area or dispersed amongmany locations, a remote helpdesk may be more appropriate.TOO LITTLE, TOO LATEOnce you've decided whether your helpdesk function will beinternal, external, or both, the next step is to define in detailthe level of service the helpdesk will provide.Says US Computer Group's Davies: "It is extremely important toobtain companywide agreement on what the helpdesk will and won'tdo. Inflated user expectations and exaggerated claims of technicalresources will result in a disappointing end product, dooming thehelpdesk."Clearly define the level of service the helpdesk will provide andeither distribute it in a report or circulate the proposed helpdeskcharter. A basic helpdesk answers telephone calls from users,dispatches technical assistance, and tracks problem resolution. Amidlevel helpdesk tackles low-level problem-solving by asking thecaller basic questions about the problem and walking him or herthrough its resolution. Problems such as downloading files, usinge-mail, or finding a lost document are easily handled in thismanner. High-level helpdesks are staffed with skilled technicianswho are capable of using remote diagnostics and expert systempackages to examine a complex system problem and resolve it.The level of helpdesk that is best for your organisation dependsupon the capabilities of your in-house or outside vendor service,the organisation's size, the technical competency of the user base,and the amount of the allocated budget. Setting up high-levelsupport is expensive. Software costs alone can range from US$2,000to US$7,000 per user; consulting and train ing fees average anadditional US$1,500 per day. Add these costs to the amount you willspend on hardware, space, and labor, and you will see howstaggering the start-up cost can be.hidden costsThere are hidden costs involved, as well. Don't underestimate theamount of resources you will need to start and run a top-notchhelpdesk. Your start-up costs will include staffing, training,equipment, telephone services, software, and floor space. Expensesfor training, in particular, will be ongoing. (For moreinformation, see "Help Yourself." For a look at a successfulhelpdesk implementation, see "Electronic Troubleshooting" on page80.)The top priority of the planning team is to design a helpdesk thatis extremely easy for users to access-if it isn't, users willbypass it. Users should be able to access the helpdesk with asingle telephone call. After the usual logging data (name,location, computer type, and software used), the caller should beable to describe the problem and be walked through the solution.Davies advises that to ensure that the help is beneficial andremains attractive to users when they need assistance a user-feedback mechanism should be built in to the system. Successfulhelpdesks need a scheme for gauging user satisfaction andeffectiveness. With out user feedback, the only way to grade theoperation's usefulness is through the opinions of those who work onthe helpdesk itself, which would certainly result in a subjectiveevaluation. Users' satisfaction with the helpdesk can be reportedand measured in formal, companywide surveys, joint IS and user-basemeetings, or via e-mail to a designated ombudsman. Whatever meansyou employ to judge users' perceptions of the helpdesk operation,it should be performed at regular intervals on a continuing basis.Designate a high-level manager (or management team) to oversee thehelpdesk's operations. The manager must continuously review overallhelpdesk procedures and make necessary adjustments to meet new userdemands (for example, user load increases, technology enhancements,and operational time changes to support disparate, and worldwidesites). Planning for this important function should be done duringthe initial design stage.Management reports tracking the user's initial call, helpdeskaction taken, and final problem resolution should be easilyobtainable. These reports will ensure that the helpdesk can quicklyadapt to users' changing needs, which is critical to its success.Collect data that details the number of calls received (per hour,day, week, and month), the total time taken to arrive at asuccessful solution, and the number of calls that were successfullyresolved by the helpdesk vs. the number of calls that wereescalated to alternate support. These statistics should be tracked,tabulated, and reported regularly. The helpdesk manager needs thisdata to evaluate the overall effectiveness of the helpdeskfunction, and the information can be used to adjust staffing,training, and hours of operation, as necessary.There are a number of software packages available that can helpdocument these types of data (see related story "Help Is on theWay," page 67). Small companies can buy an off-the-shelf generalhelpdesk software product with the needed features built in forless than US$5,000. Larger companies, with more than 25workstations, can expect to pay about US$1,000 per user for apackage.DEATH BY OVERKILLAccording to the helpdesk Institute, companies frequently make themistake of not understaffing but actually overstaffing their newinternal helpdesks. Start small and increase staff and hours ofoperation as needed. Automation is playing an increasingly largepart in helpdesk services as LAN support becomes more complex. Newprograms are constantly being made available. These programsautomate the helpdesk call handling process, bringing it down toits simplest level: symptom, problem, and resolution.Relying too heavily on automation is a common pitfall of newhelpdesk func-tions. With so many helpdesk products available, thistrap is easy to get caught in. Automation is good up to a point: Itreduces costs, allows users to access the helpdesk around theclock, and, when used correctly, it provides efficient problemresolution. But don't forget that, in general, people prefer livecommunication with other people as opposed to computer automation.If users are too often asked to dial up and "talk" to a machine,they'll stop using the helpdesk no matter how efficient itsproblem-solving abilities.CAN'T GET ENOUGH HELPMany helpdesks are already providing services and support in areasother than problem-solving and trouble call management. Inventorymanagement, contract administration, user training, anddocumentation distribution are all examples of services now beinghandled by the typical company helpdesk.For many organisations that now depend on their LANs for daily,ongoing business activities, the proper staffing and operation of ahelpdesk has become as critical as the proper staffing andoperation of the marketing department. The technical tools are justas crucial. Whether your helpdesk operation is to be basic, medium-level, or high-level, it must be planned correctly to obtain theproper combination of people and technology.  LANRon Levine specialises in networking, storage device, and emergingtechnology issues. He can be reached at 70521.3417@compuserve.com.Copyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Help Is On The Wayfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Help desks are commonly viewed as expendable. But functionality andupcoming standards may show that supporting internal users makesgood business sense.The grim reality of corporate life in the 1990s means companies areresorting to layoffs, cutbacks, and even going out of business.This dilemma is being felt on a large scale in internal MISdepartments, which often have to make do with a fairly small staffno matter how many employees need to be supported. The crisis iscompounded at the helpdesk level, where often only a handful ofindividuals is charged with solving the everyday computing problemsof more employees than they can adequately manage.While many IS departments view the helpdesk as expendable and focuscost containment measures in this area, this decision can come backto haunt them in the form of reduced employee productivity.In other departments, the helpdesk may be sacrificed in favour of acompany's external customer support infrastructure, which may beviewed as a bigger contributor to the firm's bottom line.But with a relatively fragmented structure, no dominant player, anddozens of proprietary products, the helpdesk market seems to begoing in many directions at once with no clear destination.Partly to bring some cohesion to the market, several organizationsare working on standards that will provide a uniform means forpassing helpdesk data between various users and that will create away to import and export knowledge. This combined effort ofmultiple companies will give users better information regarding theimportance of helpdesk software to an internal IT infrastructure,as well as information as to how spending money on such resourceswill actually result in a return on investment.THE BOTTOM LINEWhen IT managers find out that the total cost of ownership (theinitial price plus cost of maintenance) of just one PC can bethousands of dollars over a few years, many start slashing fundsfor what they consider nonessential items. Sometimes this meanscutting financial support for the helpdesk. But sacrificing thisasset could be equivalent to throwing the oars off a sinking boatto make it lighter.With a restricted helpdesk infrastructure, employees are limited towaiting around for a member of the IT staff to show up in person totroubleshoot their problem. Alternatively, they may ask a coworkerfor help, which could cost more money in lost productivity than itdoes to maintain that workstation.A key way to do more with less is to literally enable end users tohelp themselves. Most helpdesk software vendors realise that thefewer relatively mundane calls a support analyst has to field, themore time and energy he can devote to more severe incidents.Instead of losing users in an endless loop of automated telephonevoice menus, it is more effective to give them control over whenand where they request information by using the World Wide Web andan ordinary Web browser (see figure, page 76). If a user has aquestion about importing an Excel chart into Word, for example,rather than attempting to locate the appropriate information in amanual, he may be able to surf over to the helpdesk through thecorporate intranet and type a few key words to find an answer.For more complex problems, an individual could create a troubleticket and dynamically interact with it before sending it via e-mail to the helpdesk system and waiting for an analyst to call (see"Answers Online," page 77). The trouble ticket might be customiseddepending on the department or business unit.Using the Web to resolve IT problems may not supplant the old-fashioned method of picking up the telephone, but giving usersoptions can only contribute to the efficiency of the helpdesk.BRANCHING OUTIn many organisations, the helpdesk is used to route calls and keeptrack of who called and with what type of problem. But because mostcompanies can't dedicate a staff to running the helpdesk, thisentity has started addressing IT-related functions, including assetmanagement, inventory management, and training administration."In the past, asset management might have been under the operationsdepartment and the helpdesk might have been an offshoot of customersupport, but now helpdesk, systems support, asset tracking, andinventory fall under the same umbrella, and are all under MIS,"says Bruce Law, executive vice-president of US-based Bultema.Bultema is an organisation that works with helpdesk and supportvendors to develop business, product, and marketing strategies.By integrating inventory tracking functionality into a helpdesksystem, IT staff can take calls from users and have immediateaccess to each user's desktop environment.Some helpdesk packages also integrate with change managementapplications, which aid in the administration and management ofmoves, adds, and changes that can occur after an office move or acompanywide software upgrade. This way, the helpdesk databasealways includes information regarding which employee has whichequipment and where they are located.This integration between the helpdesk and other applications can beseen in products from all the major helpdesk and support softwarevendors in the market. One example is SA-Expert Advisor fromSoftware Artistry, a problem and call management product that'spart of the company's SA-Expertise suite of automated supportsolutions.The suite contains a variety of modules that users can add as theirneeds warrant. These components include an asset managementapplication, a change management solution, and a component thatintegrates the product's support functions with network managementplatforms.Another combination of offerings includes helpdesk software with asoftware product that searches for answers to questions orproblems. Utopia Technology Partners' Utopia Resolve/CBR2 is a joint venture between Utopia, a helpdesk automationsoftware vendor, and Inference, a provider of software developed tosearch and retrieve information in a variety of applications.The product works with Utopia's HelpDesk to combine problemresolution and call tracking. Once a call has been logged usingUtopia's HelpDesk, a case-based reasoning session initiates to helpthe user solve his or her problem.Scopus also uses Inference's technology in its CasePoint Linkproduct, a case-based reasoning module that integrates Inference'sCasePoint search engine and Scopus' products. CasePoint Linkprompts users with a series of questions, the answers to which thenallow the product to search various databases to come up with asolution.Clarify's ClearSupport product goes a bit farther by integratinginventory management with software distribution-an asset for largeenterprise networks with thousands of computers to support andadminister. Clarify's system unites with Microsoft's SystemsManagement Server, resulting in a simplified method of distributingand updating Clarify's helpdesk application. Centralising andautomating software distribution helps lower the cost of running ahelpdesk.Clarify also features integration with Tivoli System's TivoliManagement Environment systems management suite. Earlier this year,Tivoli announced Tivoli/Plus for Clarify, a software module thatintegrates Clarify's support product with Tivoli ManagementEnvironment.DKSystems' DKHelpDesk for Windows includes a project managementfeature that tracks the movement of existing equipment and theinstallation of new equipment. It also integrates with OnTrack forTraining, the company's training administration and managementsoftware.In the long run, this integration between the traditional helpdeskapplication and various management components can help reduce thetotal cost of ownership, which can be important for IT departmentson a lean budget.Another helpdesk innovation that brings efficiency and possiblelower costs to IT departments is integrating telephony capabilitiesinto support software. This integration can provide informationabout a caller and solutions to prior incidents involving thatcaller.Professional Helpdesk (PHD) announced earlier this year a modulecalled PHD Automated Attendant, which is built into the company'sPHDEnterprise and PHDPremium helpdesk software products. Theproducts support Novell's Telephony Services API telephonystandard, which allows PBXs and servers to connect to each otherand pass information back and forth. Helpdesk analysts are able toinstantly obtain information that can help them resolve problemsfaster and more efficiently.Vantive uses a process called database routing, which the companypositions as different from traditional screen pops. "This conceptprovides value to the caller, because when someone calls in, thesystem asks them for their [telephone] extension, and then it goesto the database. Depending on the information, the system might putthe caller to the front of the queue, or it might route the call tothe appropriate person," says Bob Tate, vice-president of marketingat Vantive.SECOND BESTCorporations whose primary business is selling products tocustomers know the value of an external customer support system. Infact, many major internal helpdesk software vendors also provideproducts that are used primarily for external customer support andservice.The situation many companies experience is one in which more time,effort, and funding goes to this external support infrastructurethan to the company's own internal helpdesk. "Clearly there is acorrelation; if you support the external customers well, you gainrevenue benefits," says Scott Webber, president and CEO of SoftwareArtistry. However, he adds, although the gain in revenue fromoutside customers may be more direct, employees are also customers."With both internal and external customers, you have issues andproblems that need to be addressed. And if IS doesn't providequality support [to the internal customer], the customers have[other] choices," he says.Although an internal department may not be viewed as a customer, inmany cases the business unit, for example, does contributefinancially to the IT department. This transfer of funds may bemostly paper based, but it's a business deal nonetheless. If adepartment feels the helpdesk isn't adequately addressing itsneeds, it can choose to outsource its support needs, thereby takingaway business-and funds-from the helpdesk."With service, you are dealing with one customer at a time andmaking sure they are satisfied, whether they are internal orexternal," says Bultema's Law. "But the helpdesk is missioncritical in both cases."Many support software vendors don't see this link, but once theyrealise that their own people are crippled, that will change, saysBarbara Noti, senior analyst for application development strategiesat the Meta Group. "As vendors who are leaders in external customermanagement also sell to the helpdesk, you'll see people derive thebenefits," she says.Some in the industry go beyond a relationship between internal andexternal customers toward consolidation of the internal helpdeskwith the external customer support infrastructure. "In the past,you may have had a high-end, robust support solution for externalcustomers and a lackluster one for internal [customers], but now wesee they are coming together in a centralised approach," says Law.This merging might be in the form of a support center, under whichany type of support issues can be addressed. With suchconsolidation, the internal helpdesk can only benefit because theexternal applications usually receive more attention.STANDARD PROCEDUREWith close to 200 companies developing and shipping helpdesk andsupport software, the lack of cohesion in the marketplace is nosurprise. Most helpdesk products are based on proprietarytechnology with no established method of communicating with eachother.One exception may be the support many major vendors have showntoward manufacturers of knowledge bases. These are products thatload into helpdesk software and contain information about a rangeof issues and known problems associated with different hardware andsoftware products. One example is ServiceWare's Knowl edge-Paks,which come in versions that cover a variety of systems, includingMicrosoft Word, Lotus Notes, NetWare, OS/2, and the World Wide Web.Helpdesk vendors realise the value of such prepackaged knowledgebases, and more than a dozen of them have established relationshipswith Service Ware to OEM Knowledge-Paks with their own helpdesksoftware.The Molloy Group goes the extra mile and not only repackagesKnowledge-Paks under its own Knowledge Cube line of contentdatabases, but also modifies the products to work with thecompany's Cognitive Processor. The Cognitive Processor is atechnology that enables the company's Top of Mind helpdesk softwareto learn from each call that's logged. Upon integration, theKnowledge Cube databases can make Top of Mind "smarter" aboutcertain topics.Other than the support most helpdesk vendors have shown forServiceWare, the industry lacks meaningful standards that couldmake it easier for helpdesk analysts to share information acrossmultiple helpdesk platforms and improve the efficiency andeffectiveness of support products. To this end, the DesktopManagement Task Force (DMTF) has announced the Support ManagementWorking Committee (which is charged with developing a standard forexchanging electronic service tickets) and a standard that willoutline the content and structure of knowledge used by supportsystems.The Support Management Working Committee is chaired by PatrickBultema, president of Bultema and former chair of the US-basedHelpdesk Institute. Bultema found that many CEOs in the supportmarket were interested in hard-hitting advice about where theircompanies should go and how they should position their productlines. "We look at overall trends in the industry and focus oninnovation and transforming businesses in the area of high-techsupport," Law said.The current method of exchanging information in helpdesktroubletickets partly fueled the formation of the committee. When auser has a problem, he or she calls the internal helpdesk. There,an analyst generally opens a trouble ticket in which keyinformation about the call is logged. This ticket remains in theonsite database, so if the problem is too big for the analyst tohandle and the call is escalated to the systems integrator, theinformation can't be readily exchanged. Often, the integrator mustopen a new trouble ticket and enter the information all over again.If the problem is too big even for the integrator and the call isfurther escalated to the vendor, the process occurs again. "Eachstep you have a person on the telephone creating a service ticket,with no way of sharing the information and passing it along," Lawsaid. Many organisations do use e-mail to exchange trouble ticketinformation, but that information, unaccompanied by a formdocument, doesn't always make sense.The committee is looking at an Electronic Document Interchangestandard for passing along service ticket data and emphasises thatit is not trying to replace the way service tickets are used.Rather, it is attempting to define a standard way of moving thesetickets among systems.This effort will most likely involve creating a common platform forsending and receiving electronic trouble tickets, a data format forsending these tickets, and a transport mechanism. Mechanisms underconsideration include e-mail and Internet protocols."This standard will allow people to say that even though they havedifferent systems and different information in their troubletickets, at least there is a common way of exchanging thisinformation," Law said.Although knowledge bases are very useful when employed inconjunction with helpdesk software, they are, nonetheless,generally built on proprietary formats. Support organisations dohave access to vast amounts of knowledge, but exchanging thisknowledge can be cumbersome because there's no standard way to doit.The DMTF committee plans to create a standard for content,structure, and exchange of knowledge, which will make it easier toshare such information among a variety of systems. The standardscommittee, which includes vendors such as Astea, Digital, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Inference, Intel, and Vantive, plans an aggressivetimetable, with standards slated to be in place by early 1997.MARKET SHAKE-UPWith the progression of both the standards movement and the effortto educate customers on the importance of deploying and maintaininga helpdesk infrastructure, the next step might constitute a majorindustry shake-up. In an environment where so many vendors arevying for a piece of the pie, inevitably some will drop out of therace, and others will be taken over by larger companies.In the past year, Astea International acquired Bendata (anothermajor player in the market) and McAfee took over Vycor. More suchmergers could be in the works, thus reducing the number ofcompetitors in the support market.The support industry started out simply tracking calls, it thenmoved to identifying who was on the call, then integrating withproblem management and other applications, and finally the industrymoved to sophisti cated knowledge tools that empower end users. Butthe industry is still very proprietary, with almost 200 companiesand no market leader.As long as industry players make the effort to find common groundand let IT departments know their internal customers are asimportant as their external ones, most organisations will be in abetter position to do more with less and still meet their budgetrequirements.  LANAnita Karve can be reached via the Internet at akarve@mfi.com.Copyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: A Choice of Tech Support Toolsfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996What happens when your remote sites go down? What tools do you needto extract troubleshooting information? Show those techs a thing ortwo.he process of dealing with network troubles seems to unfold in sixstages. Stage one: You realise that something is wrong. Stage two:You call your VAR. Stage three: Your VAR sends a technician. Stagefour: You describe the problem to your VAR. Stage five: The techfixes it. And finally, stage six: Everyone is happy.The only hard part in this process is stage five. You expect theproverbial knight in shining armor to arrive on his white horse andslay the dragon. Instead, here comes the haggard tech-a littlehunched over-with a laptop and a briefcase full of tools, hoping atleast to find the dragon, never mind kill it.Even when this method is successful-and the so-called dragon isslain-it still leaves you with a handful of problems. Stages threethrough five are expensive. If you employ your VAR via amaintenance agreement, you're spending money. And the technicianmay have actually used your problem to learn something useful. Butthe next newbie who faces the same problem will have to start fromground zero. Anything you can do to minimise the time it takes forthat tech to complete the service call benefits both you.Several companies offer diagnostic tools that help you find thefault and perhaps kill the dragon. We'll take a look at some ofthem and discuss what you can do in your own office to lower costsand share knowledge.Touchstone Software's WINCheckIt helps you examine a PC anddiagnose its maladies. It first examines the hardware on themachine in question and produces a report. The report contains asummary of all the devices known to the system. Detailed reports onIRQ or DMA usage are available.This program solves two common problems for technicians:determining from the current environment what add-on hardware isappropriate and cleaning the drives.For example, let's say the technician needs to install anotheradapter card on the workstation. The "Hardware" icon on theWINCheckIt taskbar brings up a list of possible cards that might beadded to the machine. The tech chooses a Dialogic voice card;however, this card cannot be installed in this specific machine dueto IRQ conflicts.Sometimes, technicians are called in for a problem as simple asdisk space shortage. While WINCheckIt doesn't add capacity, it canidentify waste. The "Clean-up" button on the main screen tells theprogram to look for duplicate files throughout the hard disk. Manyof them must remain in place.For example, every machine has several SETUP.EXE and README.TXTfiles, which should be retained. However, files are frequentlycopied to create a "temporary" backup, then never deleted. Thecleanup function finds candidates for deletion, so you can clean upthe disk drives. Using this procedure, you can often recover 10 to15 per cent of a disk's capacity. Of course, making a good,verified backup before beginning spring cleaning is a smart idea.Archiving wizardAnother product that helps you recover disk capacity is Synmantec'sNorton Navigator, which has an archiving wizard. It searches thedisk for files older than an administrator-specified date and liststhem. You can then use built-in tools to copy the files elsewhere,or you can compress them into .ZIP files.Sometimes, your problem stems from a missing or outdated driver ormodule. Various options are available for supplying customers withsuch items, and the costs incurred vary with each. Your VAR'stechnicians should carry disks of common items, such as the latestNetWare client software.If you've standardised all your client configurations as much aspossible (for example, all clients receive SMC Ethernet NICs orAdaptec SCSI cards), each technician must have a disk or two withthe latest software for these cards. Doing so will solve many ofyour problems. Nevertheless, while the tech is at your site,they're bound to be in need of something they left at their office.There's a least one easy way to solve that problem.If your technicians carry modem-equipped laptops with them-always asound idea-they shouldn't be caught without Traveling Software'sLapLink. LapLink is available in versions for DOS, Windows 3.x, andWindows 95. The software connects over serial or parallelconnections as well as over LAN and Internet connections.They can use LapLink to access files from their office whilethey're on the road, but they must first set up a workstation atthe office to run it. The workstation must be logged in to theserver and dialed in to the local Internet access provider. Fromtheir laptop, they can access the Internet and run LapLink toconnect to the LapLink workstation in their office.To do successfully, they need their office workstation's IPaddress. (That address changes every time a new Internet connectionis made.) Make sure the connection doesn't time out if it's idlefor just a few minutes. You also must be able to use telnetservices; some Internet Service Providers (ISPs) require an extra-cost "shell" account for this purpose.Once they have the files they need on their laptop, they can attachthe computer to your LAN and use LapLink to make a peer-to-peerattachment to move the files. If a LAN isn't available, or if theconnections, topology, or protocol are different from what theyhave, they can use LapLink in its parallel or serial mode with thesupplied cables. (Parallel mode is about three times faster.) Theparallel cable has male terminators at each end, so it can connectto the parallel ports of two PCs. There is a handy converter thatchanges the Centronix plug found on all common parallel printercables to a male, 25-pin, D-Shell connector in most computerstores. With it, techs can use your printer cable to connect thePCs.For a VAR to support you from their site, ask them to try LapLinkHost. Helpdesk staffers can use LapLink Host to take control ofuser workstations, allowing them to diagnose and fix problemsremotely.CD-ROMS TO THE RESCUESeveral CD-ROM titles can help you minimise the time your techsspend on support calls. The three most popular titles are MicroHouse's Micro House Technical Library, Novell's NSEPro, andMicrosoft's TechNet.Novell's NSEPro has just about everything you'll need to supportNetWare and other Novell products. Think of the NSEPro as a seriesof index cards, with some fact, file, or other nugget ofinformation on each one. Because tens of thousands of cards exist,they're indexed and searchable electronically. The CD-ROM includesall the files available from Novell's ftp site (ftp://novell.com)and NetWire (Novell's CompuServe presence); the CD-ROM is publishedeight to 10 times a year.The Micro House Technical Library, updated quarterly, is a CD-ROMencyclopedia containing information on NICs, system boards, harddisk drives, and controllers. Its entries include graphics andtables. You'll find this tool extremely useful in researching howto set up hardware. If you have ever found yourself holding acontroller card, NIC, or motherboard without the accompanyingmanual, this tool is a welcome solution.The Technical Library is available in a network version (sold withlicenses that allow various numbers of concurrent users) and astandalone version. Running the latter requires that a hardwareswitch, called a dongle, to be attached to the parallel port of auser's workstation. This stipulation is an annoying inconvenience,but the value of the information outweighs it.Microsoft's TechNet is also a two-disk set. Each monthly updatecontains over 150,000 pages of current technical information, alongwith the latest drivers and patches. It covers topics such asclient-server and workgroup computing, system platforms, databaseproducts, and Windows and Macintosh applications. TechNet evenincludes the entire Microsoft Knowledge Base, with over 50,000questions and answers. The CD-ROM uses a Windows-based, full-textsearch engine. Information is displayed in a scrollable,prioritised list, and you can place electronic bookmarks in thetext, annotate topics of interest, and print directly from thescreen.While you're loading up the CD-ROM server, throw on a copy of theWindows 95 CD-ROM. After installing new hardware, you'll often beasked for a file or two from that CD-ROM. Ask if your tech has acopy, so that there is one permanently in his briefcase. WithLapLink, you can make all that information easily accessible. Withyour LAN, use NETSETUP from the CD-ROM to make a Win95 directory onthe server. Doing so lets your own staff without CD-ROM drivesaccess those files easily.STAY OUT OF TROUBLEThe last thing you want to happen is for an infection from anotherof your VAR's customers to pass from the tech's laptop to yourworkstations. You should run a server-based virus scanner such asNetShield from McAfee. In addition, you should have a variety ofup-to-date scanners and disinfectors to test and clean infectedstations. Check the National Computer Security Association's (NCSA)forum on CompuServe or the Computer Security Institute's (CSI) Website (http://www.gocsi.com) for a wide variety of products fromanti-virus program (AVP) vendors.You should also get into the habit of using write-protectedfloppies. If your VAR's techs are equipped with laptops, theyshould be running a shield program at all times-no exceptions.Remember, if they infect you, they have to spend a lot of non-billable hours cleaning your systems.HELP YOURSELF TO A HELPDESKMany VARs contract with their customers to provide technicalsupport. In a large organisation, this service is called thehelpdesk. Smaller companies focusing on their business rather thanthe technology that manages it often want to outsource theirhelpdesk needs.VARs are well positioned to support a dozen or a hundred clients,just as a corporate helpdesk can support anywhere from a few tonumerous users and departments.I believe that the ideal helpdesk hasn't been written, althoughseveral have potential. If your organisation is large enough, I doknow that with a combination of products, you can build a helpdeskthat comes close to perfection.Start with the core helpdesk software, One example is McAfee's DPUmbrella. (This product was developed by Vicor, which was laterbought by McAfee.) In addition to the traditional helpdeskfunctions such as tracking open items, escalation, and reporting,DP Umbrella has several built-in features and add-ons. The HelpDesk Monitor is one of them, and it provides technicians a place tolog new calls. It automatically prevents duplicate entries of thesame problem by one caller (for example, if the caller has alreadyreported it).If another user reports the same problem, the software adds thatcall to the count of pending calls; when a solution is found, itcan be distributed to all users who suffer from that particularproblem.Another built-in feature is called the White Board. Through it,operators post messages about situations that may affect severalend users. All calls relating to a posted White Board notice arelinked together; they can be worked on, updated, and resolvedsimultaneously. This collaborative computing tool lets technicianslearn from each other.More importantly, it prevents several of your own techs fromworking on the same problem at the same time in an uncoordinatedmanner.Among the DP Umbrella add-ons is Vicor Web. This tool lets thehelpdesk post common problems and solutions to an Internet orinternet Web site, so users can find their own solutions. Thisfeature can dramatically reduce the number of calls individualtechnicians must handle, which cuts the cost of staffing andmanaging the helpdesk. You can track helpdesk calls for reportingpurposes, and you can restrict access to various parts of the Website based on security clearances (or support levels). For example,if your office has no oher technician on staff, you can get minimalinformation, such as how to change printer ribbons, while youroffices with more savvy users can access updated drivers or otherfiles.Another add-on product to DP Umbrella is Vicor listener, whichmonitors network management consoles via its Simple Mail TransportProtocol (SMTP) Listener. The software receives SNMP messages fromany system capable of e-mailing them, letting the helpdesk staffact proactively to manage a problem before it becomes a crisis.If you need to standardise management information, AmericanMegatrends recently introduced PC Care. This product fully exploitsthe DMI technology supported by most BIOS vendors to offerstandardised system information.PC Care collects information stored in the BIOS and puts it into astandardised Management Information File (MIF) format. The programthen interprets DMI data into one of several formats, which an thenbe converted to SMTP messages and sent to Vicor Listener.In this process, problems brewing in one user's PC can be broughtto the attention of the helpdesk staff before the user even knows aproblem exists. These problems can be resolved in a planned,scheduled manner rather than in crisis mode.Few helpdesk products include inventory management and purchasing,but I believe the Vicor product and Open UPTIME from Metrix do-anddo so quite well.The Metrix product includes purchasing system and replenishmentcapabilities, and it maintains a complete history record on partsand products shipped (including serial-number tracking). It has anadd-on module called the Repair Center, which ties in a servicedepot function so authorised materials can be repaired whilerecording information for parts and labor billing.The basis for receiving technical support is being prepared whenyou do find a problem on your network. These tips and tools willhelp you and your VAR's techs resolve the problem at hand and avoidcrisis situations.  LANSteve Kalman is a partner in TigerTeam, a firm that helps companiesmigrate to new technologies. He can be reached via e-mail at76702,3564@compuserve.com. He is also sysop of the Network VARforum on Compuserve (GO NETVAR).Copyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: RUNNING YOUR OWN DNSfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996As your network grows, you may be considering the option of runningyour own Domain Name System (DNS) servers.We show you how to navigate the DNS structure.ll hosts on the Internet- or on any TCP/IP network for that matter-have an assigned 32-bit IP address. In addition, most hosts alsohave a name, because names are easier to remember than addresses.The Domain Name System (DNS) is the distributed database thatcontains the names and addresses of all reachable hosts on a TCP/IPsubnet, including the Internet.Most, but not all, Internet Service Providers (ISPs) will set upand maintain the DNS information for their customers. However, youmay prefer to operate your own DNS. Let's take a look at Internetdomain names and the DNS's structure and discuss how you can createand maintain the DNS information.INTERNET DOMAIN NAMES AND STRUCTUREInternet host names use a hierarchical address structure thatcomprises a top-level domain, a subdomain, and a host name. Top-level domain names and IP network addresses are assigned andmaintained by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA, USCInformation Sciences Institute), which is responsible for the DNS'soverall coordination and management. Domain administrators assignhost names and addresses within their domain. (For more informationon the IANA, contact its Web site at http://www/isi/edu/diz7/iana.)The Internet naming hierarchy is best understood by reading a hostname from right to left. All host names end with a top-level domainname (see Figure 1). Generic top-level domains (although generallylimited to the US) include the following: com (commercialorganisations), edu (educational institutions, primarily four-yearcolleagues and universities), gov (US government agencies), mil (USmilitary), org (nonprofit organisations), net (network providers),and int (international treaty organisations).The host name smcvax.smcvt.edu, for example, is assigned to a VAXcomputer (smcvax) within St. Michael's College's subdomain (smcvt),which is within the educational top-level domain (edu). The namegolem.bill.com refers to a host (golem) in the Hill Associates(Colchester, VT) subdomain (hill) within the commercial top-leveldomain (com).Other top-level domain names use international two-letter countrycodes, such as au (Australia), ca (Canada), de (Germany), es(Spain), fr (France), jp (Japan), mx (Mexico), and us (UnitedStates). Each country determines its own countrybased subdomainsand how the associated DNS database will be organised.The US domain, for example, is organised mostly on the basis ofgeography, usually using a name with the following format:organisation.city.state.us. The format may be slightly differentfor special names, such as those for state government or K-12 andtwo-year educational institutions. The address cnri.reston.va.us,for example, refers to the Corporation for National ResearchInitiatives located in the US.The ca subdomain within the us high-level domain does not cause aconflict with the ca high-level domain; the former refers toCalifornia and the latter to Canada. The host namemyo.inst.keio.ac.jp refers to a system at the Science andTechnology Department of Keio University in Yokohama, Japan; notethat the ac subdomain within jp refers to academic institutions.THE NAMING PROBLEMBecause host names are easier to remember than IP addresses, usingthem is a convenience for the humans who use the network. However,the network has to provide some sort of name-address translation inorder to operate.Prior to the definition of the DNS, the HOSTS.TXT file was used inthe ARPAnet. It contained the IP address, name, and alias(es) ofevery host on the ARPAnet. This scheme was suitable when thenetwork had only a few hundred systems and was not very dynamic.But, it is wholly unsuited for the Internet, which has almost 10million hosts (as of January 1996) and 10 percent growth per month.HOSTS.TXT files are still used, however. Their main function todayis to contain the names of local systems, so one machine on a LAN(or other local network) can find other local systems withoutperforming a DNS lookup.When TCP/IP software is configured on a host, the location of theHOSTS.TXT file must be provided if the file is used by a givensystem.Figure 2 illustrates a fictitious network: the foo.com domain.Listing 1 shows a sample HOSTS.TXT file for this domain. Each linecontains three fields: the IP address, host name, and (optionally)any aliases the system might use. For example, a system on the LANtrying to make an frp connection to the local ftp server mightattempt to open a connection to 192.168.210.3, ftp.foo.com, ftp,www, mail2, or dns2.THE DOMAIN NAME SYSTEMThe DNS is a distributed database containing the names and/oraddresses of every host accessible via the Internet. The DNS wasone of the key developments that allowed the Internet to grow as ithas. Unlike HOSTS.TXT files, which must be maintained individuallyat every host on the network and synchronised to ensure theircorrectness, DNS files are maintained by thousands of hosts on thenetwork. Each host is responsible for a portion of the name space,which is called a zone. The DNS provides a mechanism foridentifying backup databases in case the first one becomesunavailable. DNS databases are updated automatically, soinformation on one name server does not remain out-of-date forlong.When TCP/IP software is installed on a host, the address (not thenames) of one or more name servers (usually no more than three) areone of the configured parameters. When the host attempts toestablish a connection to another IP host, it first checks itslocal HOSTS.TXT file (if there is one) for the name of the remotehost. If the remote host is not the HOSTS.TXT file, the local hostsends a query to the primary DNS name server. The primary nameserver might not contain the information about the particulardestination host; in that case, the query is forwarded to anothername server higher up on the domain name hierarchy.Consider the following example. Suppose a user on a system at BazUniversity (domain: baz.edu) wishes to initiate a connection to theWeb server at Foo Corp. (www. foo.com). The following nameresolution steps would occur:1. The Baz host checks its HOSTS.TXT file. In this example, Foo's Web server is not found.2. The Baz host then checks its primary DNS name server. Becausethe Baz DNS server probably covers only the baz.edu zone, it doesnot contain Foo's Web server address; instead, it forwards thequery.3. The query is passed to a name server higher up in the DNShierarchy. A database exists for every top-level domain. Thedatabase contains the name of every sub-domain within that top-level domain and its assigned name server(s). When the higher-levelname server checks the com DNS file, it finds an entry for foo.comand the address of its DNS server(s). This information is returnedto the Baz DNS server.4. The query is then forwarded to one of the name servers forfoo.com, which, in turn, returns the IP address of the Web server(198.168.210.3).You can use several TCP/IP tools to examine the DNS. The mostcommon DNS lookup utilities are NSLOOKUP and Host. If you turn offthe "recursive" option, you can see these steps in more detail.The DNS database contains different types of information onresource records (RR). Following are descriptions of the mostcommon RRs.Start of Authority (SOA) records indicate the authoritative nameserver for a given domain and a few additional administrativeitems.Address (A) records supply the IP address for a given host name.Canonical Name (CNAME) records supply host alias names. You candefine multiple A records for a given address, providing alias, oralternate, host names. It is usually easier (and less prone tohuman error) to supply one A record for a given address and useCNAME records to define alias host names for that address.Pointer Records (PTR) associate a host name with a given IPaddress. These records are used for reverse name lookups.Mail Exchange (MX) records define the mail system(s) for a givendomain.Name Server (NS) records define the name server(s) for a givendomain.DNS SERVER SOFTWAREDNS server software has various names, depending on the operatingsystem. Windows NT refers simply to DNS, while Unix has named orBerkeley Internet Name Daemon (BIND) boot files. When the DNSprocess is launched, it will read a boot file that contains thenames of the database files containing the DNS information. Listing2 shows a sample boot file, called named.boot.The first record in the boot file contains directory informationand points to the directory where the DNS program files reside.Each remaining record contains three fields that describe a DNSdatabase file: the type of DNS information, the domain defined inthe file, and the file name. The six records listed refer to theDNS databases that this DNS server is primarily responsible for.The six domains defined here are:foo.com: The DNS entries for the foo.com zone, which containaddress, mail server, and name server RRs, are found in the filefoo.com.zone.210.168.192.in-addr.arpa: The foo.com domain is associated with the IP Class C address 192.168.210.0(a valid IP address for use in a private network per RFC 1918).Reverse lookups (obtaining the host name from an IP address) areaccomplished using a reverse database file. In this file, the nameof the domain is the reverse dotted decimal notation of thedomain's IP address followed by in-addr.arpa. (The latter is anindication of the use of IP addressed within the ARPA addressassignment domain. This nomenclature is an historic holdover from atime when more than one type of address could be found and morethan one addressing authority existed.) The file containing thisdata is called foo.com.rev.localhost: Localhost is a special IP name that always refers to thelocal host and, by convention, has the Ip address 127.0.0.1. Thisinformation is located in the file called localhost.zone.0.0.127.in-addr.arpa: IP reserves the Class A address 127.0.0.0 forlocal loopback. This address, therefore, is not maintained by anyglobal DNS registry. For completeness and security, we define thereverse lookup for this address in a file called localhost.rev.O.in-addr.arpa and 255.in-addr.arpa: IP reserves the all-zeros (0)and all-ones (255) addresses for special purposes. These domainsare defined in all the all-zero.zone and the all-one.zone files,respectively.The final record defines where to find the DNS cache informationfor the root domain (.). This is not a cache as in short-termmemory, but rather a set of fixed pointers to the higher-level DNSdatabases. In this example, the cache information is maintained inthe file named.cache.DNS RECORD FORMATS AND DATABASE FILESAll DNS resource records have a similar format. Although you canfind many shortcut notations and abbreviations in DNS files, I haveused examples with simple nomenclature to eliminate confusion andambiguity.The first field in any DNS record is always either an IP address ora host name. If this entry is missing, the name/address from theprevious record is implied. Note that all names and addresses endwith a trailing dot (.), which signifies that the name or addressis an absolute name/address rather than a relative one. Absoluteaddresses, also called fully qualified domain names, are relativeto the root, while relative addresses are relative to a defaultdomain (which may or may not be the root). This field may,optionally, be followed by a time-to-live (TTL) value, whichindicates the length of time the field's information field shouldbe considered valid.The second field indicates the address type. In today's DNSdatabases, the string "IN" most likely indicates an Internetaddress. This field is present for historical purposes and enablescompatibility with older systems. The third field is a string thatindicates the type of RR. This field is followed by optionalparameters specific to the RR.The foo.com.zone file, shown in Listing 3, contains informationabout the foo.com domain, including name lookup, mail exchange, andname server information. Specific RRs of note follow.Notable rrsThe SOA record includes the name of the DNS server system and thee-mail address of the person responsible for the name server. Notethat the e-mail address is not in the expected form; rather thanuser@domain, the format user.domain is used. This record alsocontains five other parameters.1. The serial number identified the version of the DNS database.Whenever the file's information is changed, the serial number mustbe incremented so secondary servers examining this database knowthe information has been altered. In this example, we use a serialnumber format containing the year (all four digits), month, and dayof the last update. This numbering scheme is usually sufficient ifyou don't change your DNS database more than once a day. Somesystems just start counting at 1 and increment it every time achange occurs.2. The refresh value tells the secondary name server(s) how oftento check for updated information (10,800 seconds is three hours).3. If the secondary name server is unable to contact the primaryname server, it continues its attempt to make a connection at thespecified retry intervals. In this example, it will try once every3,600 seconds, or every hours.4. If a secondary name server cannot contact the primary nameserver within the specified expire period, the secondary serverstops answering queries about this domain. The theory behind thisparameter is that at some point, the data is so old it might beharmful-no answer is better than a bad answer. In this case, thetime period 604,800 seconds is one week.5. The TTL value is returned with all responses to databasequeries. It tells the requester (or other servers) how long theinformation can safely be cached (86,400 seconds is one day). TheTTL value is the default value for all records in the file, it maybe overridden by a TTL value provided with a given RR.NS records contain the address of the name server(s) for thisdomain. In this example, two name servers have the foo.com DNSinformation.MX records contain the addresses of the mail exchange system(s) forthis domain. The number before the address is the preferred system.When a remote user sends mail to user@foo.com, the remote mailsystem looks up the MX record for the foo.com domain. the remotemailer then attempts to establish an SMTP connection to the foo.commail system with the lowest preference value (in this case,mail.foo.com). If that system is not available, the remote mailertries the next level mailer (in this case mail2.foo.com).The A records contain the IP address associated with the host namein the first field of the record.The CNAME records contain the alias host names associated with thehost named in the first field of the record. Although you canassign a single A record and many CNAME records to a single system,be careful when doing so. Some mailers, for example, dounpredictable things when asked to resolve an MX host name thatuses a CNAME record rather than an explicit A record. In thefollowing examples, the addresses of the backup DNS and mailservers are specified with separate A records, even though theypoint to the same machine.GOING IN REVERSEThe database file for the IP address domain handles the reverselookups.The records and their formats are essentially the same as those inthe previous examples, except that PTR records are used instead ofA records. PTR records contain a host name to associate with the IPaddress that is in the first field of the record. The foo.com.revfile that corresponds to the foo.com network is shown in Listing 4.Listings 5 and 6 show sample localhost.zone and localhost.revfiles, respectively, providing forward and reverse address lookupsfor the loopback address. Listings 7 and 8 show sample files forthe all-zeros and all-ones addresses. These files are provided onlyfor completeness and security.Finally, if the local name server cannot resolve a name, the queryis forwarded to a name server higher up on the domain name tree.The named.cache file contains the addresses of the top-level DNS servers. Youshould periodically download this file from the Internet NetworkInformation Center (InterNIC) atftp://rs.internic..net/domain/named.cache. (This fileis also called named.root and named.ca.) Listing 9 shows an abbreviated version of the currentnamed.cache file. The single dot (.) indicates the root domain; the"3600000" is the TTL value, indicating that these entries shouldexpire after about six weeks (3.6 million seconds).WHY MAINTAIN YOUR OWN DNS?If most ISPs are willing to maintain a DNS for their customers, whywould a company or organisation consider operating its own? Themost obvious and pressing reason is that not all ISPs will providethis service.However, even if the service is available, a site might want to runits own DNS for other reasons. One might be to have more controland to ensure the database's accuracy. If you constantly movesystems around, change host names, and/or changes IP addresses,your ISP may not keep the DNS as up-to-date as you would like-orneed it to be.Another issue is reverse name mapping; some ISPs keep reverse nameinformation only for servers-not the individual host systems. Inthis case, users may not be able to connect to ftp or otherinformation servers that attempt to reconcile the user's host namewith the IP address. Furthermore, as your site grows in size andcomplexity, your ISP may be unable to meet your needs.AND THAT'S NOT ALLRunning a DNS is not terribly hard, but you must be careful whencreating the databases. You must update the DNS files whenever asystem name or address change is made. The serial numbermust be appropriately updated whenever you make a change. The mostup-to-date named.cache file must be periodically downloaded fromthe InterNIC. You also have to manage zone transfers, which is theprocedure for moving DNS data between primary and secondary nameservers. These procedures require planning. The example used inthis article is a simple case of a small LAN attached totheInternet. If you understand the DNS, you can manage your servers;this way, you know the servers will be up-do-date.  LANGary Kessler can be reached at kumquat@hill.com.Copyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Performance Grading Gets Four Starsfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Microtest, in cooperation with industry leaders, introduced theconcept of performance grading-as opposed to simply identifyingpass or fail conditions-to provide a more accurate assessment ofthe quality of Category 5 links. In the past, it seemed acceptableto only know if a link passed or not. If you got a green light, youconsidered the link to be OK.A simple passing indicator was acceptable because different cablesappeared to have fairly equal performance factors. In fact, TSB-67had been written with this binary form of testing in mind. Today,however, the performance of Category 5 cables varies widely,especially if you buy cable from more than one vendor. For example,you may find that one vendor's cable barely passes TSB-67requirements, while another vendor's cable tests the signal-to-noise ratio 60 times better.Performance grading has several advantages. For one, users candifferentiate marginally compliant links from superior links. Thisability helps identify those links that offer longer life and lowertransmission error rates and that support higher-speedapplications. Also, you can measure the product's quality, assumingyou obtain the cable from the same supplier (that is, the cables'performance factors are approximately the same). Such data can helpyou evaluate whether your cable installation team will need moretraining before the next job.Performance grading rates the quality of Category 5 links that passin terms of near-end crosstalk (NEXT). The idea here, similar tostandard NEXT tests, is to measure the amount of NEXT at a varietyof frequencies within the cable's operating bandwidth. Thedifference is that the performance grade is based on a range ofacceptable NEXT values (in decibels) at each frequency.As shown in the figure, Microtest divides the range of acceptableNEXT values into seven quality bands, each 3 dB apart at the 100MHz end of the spectrum. This tester indicates whether the linkpasses, as well as the quality band within which it operates. Forexample, a cable exhibiting performance shown in the figure wouldpass at quality band three. If you're interested in upgrading yourexisting PentaScanner to include performance grading, Microtestoffers the PentaScanner 350 upgrade kit.  LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Reading the Cable Meterfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996A lot can go wrong beneath the casings of your network's coiledconnectors. Peek into your cabling infrastructure using these cabletesting techniques.Did you ever take your car in for major transmission or carburetorwork, only to have the mechanic point out the belts showing throughwhat's left of your tires' tread? When dealing with a complexsystem, it is sometimes the simplest component that we tend toneglect. But when those components fail, the effect on the systemas a whole can be as devastating as a major component failure.Network cabling provides a medium for the transport of data amongusers, servers, printers, switches, and routers within yournetwork. Any cable that isn't contributing to the flow of data willseriously degrade or even halt your network operations.Inadequate cabling is one of the most common causes of networkproblems, so don't take your cabling infrastructure for granted.Cabling requires the same kind of careful troubleshooting,monitoring, and maintenance routines that you implement for yournetwork's other systems. Not utilising preventive testing andeffective troubleshooting procedures on your cabling willeventually backfire on you. The results of such neglect willcertainly give you migraines and probably make you wish you hadchosen a different line of work.How do you ensure that your cables are installed properly and notthe cause of any network glitches? Whether you're checking a recentimplementation or trying to fix a problem on an operationalnetwork, a cable tester is the most ef fective tool for certifyingwhether the network's wiring is capable of transmitting datasuccessfully. The proper implementation of proactive testing usinga cable tester helps minimise network downtime and eliminates agreat deal of stress when cable problems do arise.WHERE IT HAPPENSCable testing takes place within the Physical layer of the OSIreference model. The Physical layer defines the transmission ofbits through a medium, and standards at this layer specify theelectrical characteristics of the signal, cable, and connector pin-outs. As you know, the most written-about cable types today isCategory 5 UTP wiring, which supports the 100 Mbps data trafficfound in networks running on protocols such as Ethernet, FastEthernet, Token Ring, and FDDI.Most cable testers, such as Fluke's DSP-100, run tests to certifywhether a Category 5 cable installation meets the requirements forpassing data. Testers are available that allow you to test othercabling media, such as multimode and single-mode optical fibre andthin and thick wire coaxial cable. However, if you need to test atlayers above the Physical layer, such as the Data-link layer orhigher, you'll need a protocol analyser.When should you perform cable testing? The obvious answer is whenusers begin to experience problems, but that type of reactiveproblem-solving is not desirable, especially for cable testing. Anycable testing procedure you attempt after problems have alreadyoccurred will certainly be pressured and stressful. And even so,users will often have to wait until you fix the problem before theycan return to work.Sometimes these situations are unavoidable, however. When you findyourself under the gun to restore the network's functionality dueto an emerging problem, such as slow or no response from networkresources, your first step should be to utilise your networkmanagement software or protocol analyser to determine the part ofthe network that is at fault. If the cabling and connectors areidentified as the culprits, a high-quality cable tester and knowinghow to use it will prove invaluable.By far, the best time to test your cables is immediately afterthey've been installed. This proactive testing philosophy will payoff by minimising problems that could plague your network in thefuture and by making the process a more pleasant experience foryou. Concentrate on testing before problems occur-not only once theinstallation is complete, but periodically, as well. Preventivemaintenance is your greatest ally against network problems of anykind. The result will be a more reliable network and much happierand productive users.COMMON CABLE FAULTSIt's worth repeating that cabling problems rank very high as thecause of networking troubles. Mechanical elements, such as cabling,connectors, and wall plates, tend to fail more often than activeelectronic devices such as network adapters and switches. It's alsomuch easier to make unnoticeable mistakes when installing wiringand connectors. Thus, if you're experiencing connection problems orexcessive delay, there's a good chance the cabling infrastructureis at fault.Of those problems that do stem from cabling and connectors,approximately 85 per cent are caused by a faulty installation, notfrom product defects. Cable installation errors come in all forms.For example, a technician working on the corporate telephone systemcould accidentally snip a network cable, or a cable installer couldimproperly attach a connector to the cable or exceed distancelimitations for a particular cable run. These errors may have alarge or small effect on the network, depending on which user orserver cable was cut or improperly installed.Intermittent problems are generally caused by improper splices,poor connector attachments, lack of termination, and corrosion. Acable will maximally transfer the energy of a data signal as longas the impedance within the cable remains constant. However, asignal encountering a sharp change in impedance will producereflections. Reflections occur when a signal is reflected in thedirection from which it came, causing a potential collision withitself or another signal.Reflection occurs most often when there is lack of termination onthe cable. Cable terminators are there to absorb the power anddissipate it as heat, making the cable seem infinitely long to thetraveling signal. If a terminator is missing, a signal will reachthe end of the cable and be met with a difference in impedance inthe air that surrounds the cable's exposed end, causing areflection. In addition to lack of termination, improper splicesand poor connector attachments may cause reflections.Cabling ailments can also cause excessive attenuation, decreasingthe amount of signal power that reaches the receiving device. Thissituation causes the signal-to-noise ratio to decrease, leading togreater transmission errors.In very few instances, the cable you buy may not meetspecifications. Even if you buy from a reputable vendor, there isthat chance that the cable you've purchased has severeimperfections. Therefore, you should make it a habit to test thecable before installation.CABLE TEST LINEUPBefore you purchase or utilise a cable tester, you shouldunderstand what they can do. First of all, cable testing isintrusive, meaning you can't support normal data traffic over thecable while running tests. Of course, if you're in the middle ofimplementing the cable plant, there won't yet be any users. But, ifyou're troubleshooting an active cable segment, you will have tobring down the cable on which you are working. Lastly, and moreimportantly, cable testers that comply with the Technical ServicesBulletin (TSB) -67 standard, which was approved in October 1995 bythe EIA/TIA 568A committee, perform a series of four tests toensure your cable installation is adequate.These tests are: Wire map, link length, attenuation, and near-endcrosstalk (NEXT). A new offshoot of cable testing, performancegrading, may be of help, as well (see "Performance Grading GetsFour Stars").The wire map test ensures that a link has proper connectivity bytesting for continuity and other installation errors. Continuitytests verify that the wire is not broken and that physicalconnectivity exists throughout the connectors and cabling. Thus,the wire map test will tell you if, as in our previous example,someone accidentally cut the cable. Sometimes during installationthe installer may inadvertently fail to connect the wires on oneconnector pin to the corresponding pin on the opposite end of thecable. This, of course, will not facilitate a connection-the wiremap test verifies proper pairing of wiring on opposite ends of thecable.The twisting of wires in UTP minimises induction of current flowfrom other devices that may be emanating electromagnetic waves,such as nearby wires. A Category 5 cable includes four individuallytwisted pairs of wires. If you don't wire your RJ-45 connectorsexactly according to a standard, such as EIA/TIA 568A, T568A orT568B wiring scheme, then you may produce split pairs. A split pairoccurs when you attach the connector in such a way that a wire pairconsists of one lead from one twisted pair and another lead from adifferent twisted pair, creating a pair of wires that areuntwisted. The split pair configuration provides a path for data toflow, but problems can occur. Of issue is the resulting untwistedwire pair, which will encounter an excessive amount of externalnoise interference and crosstalk, causing transmission errors.Cable testers do a good job of detecting the existence of splitpairs.Link length measurement tests tell you whether the cable meets thelength requirements specified by the T568B cabling standard. Cabletesters use a device called a Time Domain Reflectometer (TDR) todetermine the length of a cable. The TDR also indicates if thereare any improper cable splices or terminations.As shown in Figure 1 (page 54), The TDR tests cables based on theprinciple of reflections. The TDR connects to an end of a cable thetechnician wishes to test, then sends a signal throughout thecable. This signal reflects off changes in impedance, especially atthe end of the cable, and the amplitude of the reflected wavecorresponds to the degree of impedance mismatch.The TDR records the amount of time between the test signal'sdeparture and its return, which constitutes the signal delay. Itthen calculates the distance to the reflecting point based on thespeed of the signal and signal delay.Several products on the market today run TDR tests on metallic orfibre optic cable. For example, the Tektronix TS100 Option 01Metallic TDR tests LocalTalk; Type 1 and Type 3 cables; Category 3,4, and 5 cables; and thin and thick coax cables. This test setfinds shorts, ends, and breaks in the cable. The Tektronix TFP2AFibermaster Optical TDR (OTDR) tests single-mode and multimodefibre optic cables.A data signal loses power while traversing the length of a cable.This loss of power is called attenuation. For metallic and fibrecabling, attenuation increases linearly as a function of cablelength. However, radio signal attenuation increases exponentiallywith greater distances. If too much attenuation is present betweensource and destination, electrical noise becomes significant andtransmission errors will occur more frequently. Attenuation testshelp you identify problems such as manufacturing defects andcorrosion.Many LANs, including Ethernet and Token Ring, utilise digitalsignals to carry information among network devices. A digitalsignal contains a series of discrete voltage levels that representthe 1s and 0s of the data signal. In the time domain, which you canrender visually with an oscilloscope, a digital signal appears tocontain only DC (0 Hz) characteristics, such as positive 5 voltsfor a logic 1 and negative 5 volts for a logic 0. However, adigital signal's sharp changes of amplitude cause the signal tocontain very high frequency components. You can observe this effectby viewing the signal's frequency characteristics on a spectrumanalyser.In addition to cable length, the amount of attenuation is also afunction of frequency. Most cables will offer more attenuation tohigher frequency signals than to lower frequency signals. Thus,cabling acts as a low pass filter, smoothing out the sharp edges ofthe digital signal.Cable testers examine attenuation by measuring the effects ofsending a series of signals that step through the cable's operatingfrequency bandwidth. For Category 5 testing, most cable testerscover bandwidth ranging from 1 MHz to 100 MHz by taking readings in1 MHz increments. This process certifies whether the cable meetsspecifications in the part of the frequency spectrum where thesignal mostly resides. For Category 3 links, the frequency testrange is 1 MHz through 16 MHz.The cable tester will report a passing grade if all frequenciespass specifications. If a cable fails, the tester will tell you thefrequency at which it didn't meet requirements. Some testers alsoindicate the amount of attenuation per foot. Cable testers areavailable that work with metallic or fibre cable. For example,Microtest's PentaScanner measures attenuation (as well as manyother impairments) on Category 3, 4, and 5 cable, and AMP's AM9100tests single-mode, multimode, and plastic fibre cables forattenuation.NEXT is a specific case in which signals at one end of the linkinterfere with weaker signals that are coming back from therecipient. Current flow resulting from the difference of potentialimpressed by the data signal consists of electrons that movethrough a metallic wire. This stream of electrons creates anelectromagnetic field around the wire that may induce the flow ofelectrons in an adjacent wire. This crossing of the signal into adifferent wire is called crosstalk.You may have experienced voice signal crosstalk while talking onthe telephone, probably in the form of another audible conversation occurring during a telephone call. Sometimes crosstalkoccurs if you add a telephone line to your home and utilise bothtelephones at the same time. The close proximity of the wire pairsallows the signals to cross.Causes of crosstalk generally include improper wire placement andinadequate shielding. The twisting of wire, as is the case with UTPcable, offers some resistance to crosstalk and other interferingsignals. Shielded twisted pair and coaxial cable offer a furtherdegree of protection. But fibre optic cable is completely immune tocrosstalk because fibre uses light rather than current flow totransport the data. The flow of light through the fibre's core doesnot produce an electromagnetic field that couples to nearby fibres.In addition to crosstalk, networks may encounter the induction ofexternal electrical noise. This noise can become significant inrelation to the signal power, setting up the potential for errors.The noise that causes these problems within network cabling isusually Gaussian or impulse noise. Gaussian noise has nearlyuniform amplitude across the frequency spectrum and primarilyresults from thermal conditions in the atmosphere. Impulse noise,though, is typically the outcome of human-made devices such aslight switches, spark plugs, and heating coils. Impulse noisetypically occurs in short blasts, causing transmission errors tooccur in bursts. As with crosstalk, external noise produces anelectromagnetic field that causes unwanted currents to flow throughmetallic data cables.The amount of NEXT varies erratically as you sweep through theoperating bandwidth of a cable. For an accurate measurement, cabletesters record NEXT by stepping though the cable's operatingfrequency range at very small increments. For Category 5 cable,TSB-67 recommends a maximum step sise of 0.15 MHz for lowerfrequencies and 0.25 MHz for higher frequencies within the 1 MHzthrough 100 MHz frequency range. It requires a fast instrument totest the hundreds of samples.Fluke's DSP-100 handheld cable tester is a fast performer of NEXTtests. The DSP-100 utilises digital signal processing to increaseits speed and to allow samples to be taken at close 100 KHzintervals. The DSP-100 performs all tests required by TSB-67 for afour-pair cable in under 20 seconds. This tester not onlyidentifies the presence of crosstalk, it also locates its source.SKEWING THE DATAThe use of plenum cable continues to grow. However, there has beena shortage of the Teflon that manufacturers use as a protectivecable coating. As a result, cable manufacturers now use a non-Teflon coating on one or two of the four pairs in Category 5 cable.These cables are known as "3+1" or "2+2" cables. These cables fullymeet Category 5 crosstalk and attenuation requirements, but thedifference in coatings offer unacceptable skew. Skew is the maximumdifference in propagation delay between the pair in a cable.According to a white paper developed by Microtest, the use of 3+1and 2+2 cables makes it vitally important that your cable testermeasure skew to avoid inaccurate length measurements and othertroubles. Because cable testers base the length calculation ondelay, the skew will introduce a range of lengths. For example, atester may report lengths 97, 97, 99, and 108 metres for each ofthe four pairs of a 3+1 cable.The problem of skew is more significant than simply causing somebizarre length readings. Several high-speed LAN technologies, suchas 100Base-T4 and 100VG-AnyLAN, employ all four pairs of theCategory 5 cable. These schemes disassemble the signal into severalparts, send them down separate pairs, then reassemble the signal atthe far end. These standards expect each part of the signal toarrive at the distant end at about the same time. However, if onepart of the signal leads or lags the others by too much, thereceive buffer cannot keep up with information transfer.The 100Base-T4 skew requirement is a maximum of 50 nanoseconds;however, some experts suggest a skew of no more than 35nanoseconds. The TIA is expected to incorporate skew test standardswithin a year. Today, Microtest provides upgrades to users of theirtester, PentaScanner, free of charge to include the capability tomeasure skew.A cable tester is a requirement to effectively implement andmaintain your network.If you don't already have one, you should add a cable tester toyour toolbox. As with all network troubleshooting, the key is to beproactive in testing to avoid problems cropping up at inopportunetimes.  LANJim Geier is a US-based senior systems consultant. He can bereached via the Internet at jtgeier@tasc. com or via CompuServe at71165,2045.Copyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Fault-Tolerance and Fault-Resiliencefrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996How tolerant are your networks? How much downtime can you reallyafford? Don't live in a glass house: Here are several products andstrategies that improve network integrity.100 per cent fault-tolerant network is a goal that can beapproached but never achieved. According to a white paper fromVinca, a developer of fault-protection technology, "Downtime costsare significant. The typical PC LAN is unavailable to all users 1.6hours per week. In a 300-user network, this downtime costsUS$840,000 per year in productivity losses." Network Integrity,another manufacturer of fault-resilient server software, estimatesthe cost of a single server's downtime to be in the range ofUS$50,000 to US$170,000 per year.Today, networks are supporting a greater number of mission-criticalapplications such as international financial arbitragetransactions, where any downtime can cost millions of dollars.GIVE 'EM THE RASToday, a relatively new industry in high-availability networks isemerging. It focuses on eliminating single points of failure toprovide networks that are reliable, available, and scalable.High-availability or RAS networks run the gamut from those thatmust be available 99.99 per cent of the time to those that cantolerate minor downtime while redundant components initialise,providing 98 per cent availability. The spectrum runs from fault-tolerant, where any network fault can be tolerated without takingdown the resource, to fault-resilient, where downtime is measuredin seconds to minutes. The fault may momentarily interrupt networkresources, but the resiliency of the network allows the resource tobecome available with minimal downtime.Integrators can configure hubs, switches, bridges, and routers withpassive backplanes, redundant power supplies, and managementmodules so they do not become single points of failure. The networktopology can be configured to route traffic to mission-criticalresources via alternate paths. Some newer topologies, such as FDDI,implement redundant rings on the same network.I categorise server failures into five primary areas:Application/NLM failures causing the server to ABEND;Network operating system ABENDs;Failure of disk drives, controllers, and NICs;Power supply failures; andSystem electronic component failures (such as memory andmotherboards).In time, technology has made great strides in relation to theintegrity and availability of server data storage. RAID technologyallows data to be stored redundantly across several physical disk.With redundant power supplies, controllers and channels in the disksubsystems, and hot-swappable drives (drives that can be replacedwithout taking the disk subsystem off-line), data storage is nolonger a point of failure in the network.Uninterruptible power supplies (UPS), backup generators, isolatedcircuits and alternate electrical power points-of-presence in newerbuildings tend to eliminate raw electrical power as another singlepoint of failure in a network.SERVER SAVERSMost server hardware manufacturers offer redundant power supplies.Error correcting memory prevents memory error failures. Manynetwork operating systems offer the ability to configure multipleNICs on the same segment, preventing a NIC from becoming a singlepoint of failure. Multiple disk controller cards can be configuredto RAID systems to eliminate these circuit boards as a single pointof failure. The server's motherboard and processor remain thelargest single point of failure on the network.Servers are prone to several kinds of failures. Hardware failuresare the first that come to mind, and they are the easiest toaddress. Component redundancy is the first line of defense. Serverredundancy is the second. Many solutions exist for serverredundancy, from hot-spare servers to servers mirrored via high-speed links.Other types of server failures are harder to address. Today, themost common server failures come from the server NOS or applicationABENDs. Fault-tolerant solutions that mirror each servertransaction are prone to mirroring the errors that led to theABEND, leaving a hole in the fault-tolerant armor. In somesituations, fault-resilient solutions that provide hot spares orlive, hot servers (servers already booted and waiting to replacethe failed server) actually provide better fault-tolerance.Early attempts to make servers fault-resilient involved configuringthem with external redundant disk subsystems. Integrators couldconfigure the system so that hot spares (or redundant serversprovisioned with sufficient memory), NICs, and disk controllerscould be swapped with failed servers. The network administratorsimply needed to switch the disk subsystem and network cables tothe hot spare and reboot the server. However, this process had asignificant drawback: time. Identifying and swapping out a failedserver could take several minutes. Today, with many gigabytes oreven terabytes of storage in a disk subsystem, rebooting a hot-spare server might take up to 30 minutes.If you can tolerate that much downtime, this fault-resilientsolution is the most economical. And its significant advantage overother fault-resilient implementations is that a single, redundantserver can be a hot spare to many active servers.MIRROR, MIRRORMore advanced solutions provide server mirroring or clusteringbetween servers and multiported disk subsystems via high-speedlinks. A mirrored server can take over the operation of a primaryserver if it becomes unavailable. Mirrored solutions come in bothfault-tolerant and fault-resilient implementations. If the mirroredserver takes over and users are unaware of the change, the systemis fault-tolerant. In a fault-resilient solution, either the serverhas to reboot or users need to reinitialise their login,application, or transaction.Another advantage of the mirrored/clustered server approach isprotection against natural disasters. By placing mirrored serversin separate geographical locations, you can mitigate the effects ofsuch events.Many network software applications handle fault-resilienceautonomously. For example, database servers (Oracle, Sybase,Microsoft SQL, and so on) often have a transaction rollback option.Before a user updates, modifies, or deletes a record, a "snapshot"of that record is written to a transient area of the disk. If theupdate is successful, the snapshot is disregard.If a failure occurs during the update process, the database rollsback to the snapshot information. The snapshot is written back tothe appropriate records when the database again becomes available.This process ensures database integrity for almost any fault-tolerant/fault-resilient solution. Novell's NOS implementstransaction tracking-its version of transaction rollback-as ageneral file attribute.Novell was one of the first proponents of fault-tolerance andfault-resilience; in the early 1980s, it outlined a strategicdirection called System Fault Tolerance, or SFT. The companyquickly delivered SFT levels I and II; SFT III was delivered sevenyears later.SFT I, named Hot Fix, involves redirection of bad disk blocks. SFTII, known as Disk Mirroring or Disk Duplexing, provides hardwareredundancy for the disks. SFT II was the forerunner of RAID LevelI. SFT III implements server mirroring. Two servers connected viahigh-speed media provide redundancy for most NOS functions. If oneserver suffers a hardware failure, the mirrored server takes overoperation without interruption or data loss.SFT III is a reengineering of NetWare, dividing its functionalityinto two distinct parts. The NOS's hardware-specific functions,such as disk drivers, NIC drivers, or print servers, are includedin the Input/Output (I/O) engine on the server. The I/O engine isunique to each server in a mirrored pair. The remaining logicalfunctions of the NOS are included in the Mirror/Server (M/S)engine, which is common to both servers. The I/O engines are linkedto the M/S engines by a series of four queues. The servers arephysically linked by a high-speed medium called the Mirrored ServerLink (MSL).While this solution provides true fault-tolerance, it is limited tomostly hardware-oriented failures. According to Vinca, recentstudies show that 70 percent of server failures are due to softwaredisjunction. Runway NLMs or NOS errors will likely be duplicated inboth the primary and mirrored servers. Furthermore, I/O enginefunctions such as server-based print services, routing (such asTCP/IP), and Macintosh support will not be mirrored. If thesecomponents fail, manual intervention is needed to reconfigure andredeploy the system. Configuring alternative resources to theserver for network print serving or TCP/IP routing may make SFT IIIa tighter, fault-tolerant solution. NetWare 4.1 SFT III addressesthe TCP/IP and Apple protocol problems.SFT III is an elegant solution. It provides true hardware fault-tolerance in the NetWare environment. It is a well-established,secure environment for tested and stable server applications.However, one drawback of SFT III is cost. An SFT III solutioncannot be clustered in a one-to-many mirrored server configuration,but only as a one-to-one, primary-to-mirrored server solution (seeFigure 1).BEYOND SFT IIIWhile Novell led the pack in the small to medium uniprocessorserver environment, NCR developed a fault-resilient solution calledLifeKeeper. LifeKeeper is designed for the Unix operating systemand all NOSs that run on Unix, including Microsoft LAN MAN LMX andNetWare for Unix.LifeKeeper, an add-on to NCR's Unix, lets up to eight clusteredsymmetric multiprocessing (SMP) servers share an external disksubsystem. Each server can maintain its own space on the sub-systemor share space with the other processors. The servers maintainredundant links and monitor the heartbeat of the other servers viathe SCSI bus, EIA serial connections, and the network media (seeFigure 2).The servers may be configured in an active-active or active-passiveconfiguration. In the active-active scenario, each server acts asan autonomous server. If one of the active servers fails,LifeKeeper switches applications and communications interfaces toanother active server in the cluster. This server performs thefunctions of the failed server as well as its own. In the active-passive scenario, the passive server does no processing of its own;it waits to take over for a failed server. The system may beconfigured in an n+1 design, with one passive server for up toseven active ones. The servers need not be the same size as long asthey reside on the same segments and have sufficient memory.Because LifeKeeper servers are constantly running and monitoringthe heartbeats of other servers, they do not have to reboot as theaffected server.The LifeKeeper server takes over the failed server's disk andhandles TCP/IP readdressing, so users remain connected and loggedin to the "new" server. However, because the secondary server doesnot maintain the failed server's cache, users must resubmit currenttransactions or reattach to current server-based applications.Because a minor time delay occurs between the primary server goingdown and the secondary one taking over, and because users have toreinitialise their applications (not their server connections),LifeKeeper is a fault-resilient, not a fault-tolerant, solution.Vinca offers a fault-tolerant hardware/software suite that runs onmany manufacturers' servers. StandbyServer 32 is a server-mirroringsolution that connects a warm, on-line secondary server directly tothe main file server. Data is automatically mirrored to the standbymachine via a high-speed, dedicated link that does not add trafficto the network. When the main server fails, StandbyServer 32automatically switches operations to the secondary machine. Usersare back on-line in a matter of minutes. StandbyServer 32 runs onNetWare, Windows NT, and OS/2 Warp.Microsoft depends on server vendors and third parties to providefault-tolerant/fault-resilient solutions for Windows NT servers.NCR recently launched two add-ons for fault-resilient NT servers.The company migrated many of its Unix RAS features to NT and is inthe process of porting LifeKeeper to it. You can buy LifeKeeper forNT as an add-on to the operating system. A version of LifeKeeperLite is included free with NCR's OEM version of Windows NT.LifeKeeper Lite provides one-to-one server mirroring, but it doesnot accomplish TCP/IP readdressing. As such, users are required tolog in to the "new" server. Vinca's StandbyServer is also a server-mirroring solution for Windows NT.USING A STAND-INStand-in technology enables one server to stand in for a failedserver. When a server fails, the stand-in server immediatelyappears to be another, specific server on the network. Users cancontinue working in their current applications; however, access toother files is slow. A stand-in server must reboot to gain accessto files that were not in use during the crash. A secondary NetWareserver can appear to be a primary one if you reboot it under theprimary server's name. The caveat, though, is that this rebootingprocess can take up to 30 minutes.Network Integrity's LANtegrity product is a hybrid of stand-in andfault-tolerant technologies. With the product, one server can instantlyappear to be one of several protected servers. The stand-in servertechnology is layered on top of data vault technologies, whichcreate and maintain a secure, managed storage hierarchy of allcurrent and historical data.In addition to presenting itself as the downed server, a stand-inserver must make users' data instantly available. LANtegrity doesnot use data-mirroring or multiported data storage technologies;instead, it uses another software piece called Intelligent DataVault.To enable recovery from any kind of failure-even those that corruptdata-the data vault is "archival," which means the data vaultcontains the current version of data plus earlier versions, all ofwhich are accessible during stand-in.LANtegrity's stand-in server presents an identical security andfile system image to the downed server's users while continuing tobe the LANtegrity server to the other protected ones. TheLANtegrity server is never rebooted and can support multiple downedservers. It maintains an image of the server's memory.The stand-in image of the downed server is created by manipulatingthe incoming file access communications packets. Users can continueworking on their files, but the server may have to reconnect to getaccess to other files.Network Integrity's solution does not involve a significant amountof disk storage. The Intelligent Data Vault organises itself into aself-managed storage hierarchy. The most recently active dataresides in its disk, which acts as a cache at the top of thestorage hierarchy. All current protected data is available via ahigh-capacity tape autoloader. Earlier versions of files anddeleted files are migrated to a managed, off-line shelf storage ontape.Stand-in technology takes the top two components of this storagehierarchy and makes them appear and operate identically to thedowned server's file system. This process is significantly slowerwhen accessing files not in cache at the time of the serverfailure. Earlier versions of files can be "restored" from theLANtegrity server into its own stand-in image of the failed server.Even if the failed server's software corrupted a file while downingthe server, an earlier version of the file is available for use.The data vault layer poses significant technical challenges whencollecting and managing the data. To maintain a reasonably currentimage of all the protected data at a manageable rate, traditionalbackup methods are unacceptable; they depend on "full" backups,which create significant network traffic. LANtegrity's data vaultnever copies the same file over the network twice. Only changedfiles are copied. As a result, replication opens the door tocontinuous protection.LANtegrity is an example of a fault-resilient solution thatprovides full, immediate (within 15 seconds) server access (clientsmust reattach and log in) but not full server functionality. Thetransactions, applications, and files in use just prior to theserver failure are immediately available.HARDWARE FAULT-TOLERANCEFault-tolerance/fault-resilience is not limited to just the networkoperating system or its add-ons. Many hardware vendors includefault-tolerant features as part of their hardware designs.For example, NetFrame Systems introduced two fault-toleranttechnologies in its serves: MultiProcessing Parallel ServerArchitecture (MPSA) and Gemini. MPSA is built into everyClusterServer. A system of redundant components, combined withevery high data throughput, minimises downtime-scheduled andunscheduled.In Gemini mode, two Intel 100 MHz Pentium processor/ cache modulesoperate in tandem. The secondary module backs up the primary one,instantly taking over all operations in the event of a processor,cache, or bus interface fault.NetFrame's technologies also include Channelstart, which allows thesystem to recover from transient I/O errors or failures; theoperation is transparent to users. All I/O transactions are safelyrecorded while Channelstart clears the error condition, resets theappropriate hardware, initialises the drivers, and resumes normaloperations.Tricord Systems, a server manufacturer, markets a line of fault-tolerant servers called Power-Frame. PowerFrame's design includes apassive backplane to eliminate the motherboard as a single point offailure. All active electronic components are isolated toindependent, intelligent subsystems that are hot-pluggable into thepassive backplane.All subsystems can be redundantly configured or protected with hotspares, so no major subsystem failure impacts the server operation.Tricord was one of the first manufacturers to embrace Novell's SFTIII. The entire line of PowerFrame servers support fullimplementations of SFT III on mirrored configurations.CONCLUSIONFault-tolerance/fault-resilience lets mission-critical systemsoperate with minimal downtime, but it does not come cheap.Redundant components eliminate many of the single points offailure, but they almost double the hardware costs. Simplearithmetic can determine whether the "statistically" projecteddowntime costs justify the cost of a fault-tolerant or fault-resilient solution.Some many-to-one cluster "hot server" designs help lower the costsper server. In the end, however, the critical nature of theapplications and the availability of data to the users willdetermine whether you choose a fault-tolerant or a fault-resilientsolution.  LANRoger Addelson is in the Network Architecture Consulting Practiceof NCR, based in the US.He can be reached via the Internet atroger.addelson@chicagoil.ncr.com.Copyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Beyond Static Web Pagesfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Enhancing static web pages with dynamic media such as audio, video,animation and interactivity.When the World Wide Web (WWW) revolutionised the Internet with agraphically-rich environment in the early nineties, the worldforgot that interactive multimedia delivered on CD-ROM discs wasfar more dynamic and captivating. After all, the first web pageswas at best, static, with a few static and low-resolution graphicimages littered across text-centric content.On the other hand, CD-ROMs were already filled with 16-bit audio,multi-windowed QuickTime and MPEG video, as well as smooth 3Danimations and walkthroughs. Also, CD-ROMs often deliveredinteractivity through the use of graphical buttons that providednot only visual but audio feedback to the users. On the web, allyou could see then were hypertext links.When Marc Andressen stepped out of the Mosaic world and started theNetscape Navigator (or Mozilla) revolution, he created anextensible web browser model that allowed third-party developers toadd plug-ins to it. Plug-ins for Netscape Navigator are similar inconcept to Adobe Photoshop plug-ins and Macromedia Director Xtras,allowing enhanced features to programs without requiring completesoftware recompilations and upgrades. The plug-in concept alsofrees the main software vendors into focusing on delivering corefeatures without sacrificing execution speed. For example,Microsoft is mostly guilty of designing programs that grow infeatures but become cumbersome in size and speed.It was not until Netscape Navigator 2.x that plug-ins becameviable. With the aggressive stance Netscape took in capturing theweb market, Microsoft retaliated with its own architecture, butcould not overturn the colossal tide that Netscape created incapturing about 80 per cent of the web browser market. Today,Microsoft concedes that its own Internet Explorer will always befree for downloads and that version 3.0 will embrace Netscape'senhanced features such as frame, Javascript and of course, plug-ins.What are some of the plug-ins available for Netscape Navigatortoday?The main plug-ins that are widely adopted include Macromedia'sShockwave for Director 4 plug-in (several million downloads) andProgressive Networks Real Audio (RA) plug-in. Other up-and-comingplug-ins that we will discuss briefly include TotallyHip's Sizzlerplug-in, Geo's Emblaze, Acrobat PDF, and Macromedia's otherShockwave versions.Shockwave for Director 4.x is perhaps the most interesting for webusers, since it encases audio, animation, pseudo-video, and fullinteractivity within a secure environment. We are already familiarwith frustrated users across the web who discovered the many flawsof Java and Javascript, especially in the area of network security.And since Java is an open architecture, malicious hackers havealready written many Java applets to attack networks.Shockwave for Director 4.x is different. It uses a BASIC-likescripting language known as LINGO, which has been "adjusted" forthe web to disallow most file input and output operations, therebyreducing security risk to a minimum, far safer than Java andJavascript. And because it encases all media components into acompiled "applet", users will not be able to make changes to it,nor will they be able to copy media components easily, unlike Java-created animations, which are nothing more than a "flipbook" effectcreated by calling a series of still images.We should discuss Macromedia Director briefly so that youunderstand its relationship with Shockwave. Director is amultimedia development environment which uses the film productionparadigm, with a built-in scripting language LINGO.When you have completed your multimedia production, you save thefile to the hard disk as an uncompiled document (.DIR format).Under Director 4.x, you use the freely-distributed Afterburnerapplication to compress the document up to 60 per cent using theLZW (Lempel Ziv) lossless compression algorithm, and save thedocument as a Shockwave document (.DCR). Now the .DCR document canbe served on the web effectively through the Shockwave for Director4 plug-in.The next step for a webmaster is to ensure that his server allowssuch MIME extensions. You simply include a single line in the"mime.types" file in the "conf" sub-directory in your "httpd"directory (see figure 1).Notice that I have included several MIME types that we will talkabout here, including Real Audio (RA) and QuickTime Video (QT orMOV).After you have empowered your server to accept and deliver suchMIME types, you would allow your web pages to embed such data andto allow non-compatible browsers to know what's going on.First, note that it is a self-running Macromedia Shockwave forDirector 4.x web page featuring audio and animation (see figure 2).In your HTML (HyperText Markup Language) document, you simply add aline that EMBEDS the .DCR document and another line that allowsnon-compatible browsers or Netscape browsers without the Shockwaveplug-in to see a static image using the NOEMBED command (see figure3).Here's another 2 web pages featuring interactivity with the user(see figures 4 and 5 on this page).You will notice that the HTML codes to drive these interactive .DCRfiles are identical to the self-running version above (see figure6).Some of the constraints of the web means that when you author yourShockwave documents, you must watch out for a few things. First,bandwidth issues mean that you must try to optimise your graphicsdown to as low a bit depth as possible. And try to reduce the framerates of your self-running animation to perhaps, 5 fps. Also,Netscape does not reproduce all 256 colors in its internal colorpalette, so you may have to optimise your 8-bit colour graphiccomponents down to 6- or 7-bits in colour depth.Also, Shockwave does not recognise tempo settings in Director 4.x.So if you need delays in your applet, you need to write LINGOscripts with embedded DELAY settings. This can set back developmenttime somewhat since it can be quite tedious.Another constraint for Shockwave is that unlike Director documents,it does not support linked media. Therefore, you cannot linkQuickTime or AIFF (Audio Interchange File Format) files to the maindocument. And because QuickTime cannot be embedded like staticgraphics in Director, you cannot really have synchronised video.The workaround is to export QuickTime videos into 2 files, a PICSfile (a compiled series of static PICT images) and an audio file.Within Director, import the PICS file and it will be laid out inthe SCORE window using the "CAST TO TIME" command. Then import thesound file in Channel 1 and adjust the DELAY settings manually (seefigure 7).Another popular plug-in is Real Audio from Progressive Networks.Real Audio is a streaming technology which plays as it downloads.This is beneficial for users connecting to your web site from 14.4or even 28.8 Kbps modems, since line reliability may beinconsistent and the speed is slow. Shockwave for Directorcurrently does not support streaming, and users must download theentire applet before he knows its usefulness at all.Real Audio uses a proprietary compression algorithm to compressaudio much more than traditional AIFF or AIFF-C or AU (Sun's nativeas well as Internet's common Audio format). A typical AIFF file maybe more than 200 K while a RA file may be one-tenth of the size.The chart attached (figure 8, page 42) shows the mechanics of how aReal Audio server works.From experience, the disadvantage of Real Audio, compared toShockwave, is that you need a dedicated server to serve Real Audiocontent. If you do not own Real Audio Personal Server or Server 2.xsoftware, you cannot deliver content from your server. Theworkaround is to allow downloadable Real Audio content, and expectyour users to fetch Real Audio players from the Real Audio site.I have a web page on Jive Joint web site that features downloadableReal Audio content, the easiest to deliver, although it requiresReal Audio applications on the client's end (see figure 9 below).The embedded HTML commands look like that shown in figure 10 below.Other notable up-and-coming plug-ins include Sizzler, Emblaze,Acrobat PDF, QuickTime and Shockwave for other Macromediaapplications such as Freehand, Director 5 and Authorware.Sizzler from TotallyHip is a streaming animation plug-intechnology. You can have animations that download and playprogressively (expect some jerkiness and rough, interlaced imagesthough). The Sizzler image conversion tool on the Macintosh canconvert QuickTime and PICS images into a streaming animation sprite(.SPR). However, SPR files are much larger than Shockwave, up toseveral times, and therefore take up much more space on a server.The disadvantage of Sizzler is that it does not support embeddedsounds, and you must write a Java script to play sounds separately.That defeats the purpose of multimedia on the web.Emblaze from Geo is also a streaming animation tool which usesAllegiant SuperCard technology to create vector-based animations.Because it is vector-based, graphics and animations are smaller,play better, especially on 14.4 Kbps modems. But the EmblazeCreator (still in beta, and only available on the Macintosh) isslow and clunky because it was created with a high-level tool,SuperCard. And because Allegiant still has not delivered a cross-platform of the SuperCard authoring environment, you areconstrained to author on the Macintosh environment only. The goodnews is that Emblaze can play back from Windows (any version) andMacintosh, and the plug-in itself is a far smaller download thanShockwave for Director.Who doesn't talk about digital movies lately? The most common formof movies are QuickTime and MPEG. Because QuickTime is a far moreextensible technology and can have virtual reality (QuickTime VR)as well, we will briefly mention it here.There are several versions of Netscape QuickTime plug-ins availabletoday, including Apple's own QuickTime plug-in, KM's MultimediaPlug, and MovieStar.MovieStar is the most stable, and can work well with NetscapeNavigator 2.x, which most users have. Apple's own QuickTime plug-inmust work with Netscape Navigator 3.x or Gold versions, and sincethese versions have yet to become popular, its use is restrictedfor now. KM's Multimedia plug-in is only available for theMacintosh and therefore cannot become mainstream for now.Adobe has been competing fiercely with Macromedia on the multimediaand image processing front lately. Adobe took a different approachto delivering multimedia on the web, relying on its much-acclaimedAcrobat Portable Document File (PDF) technology. Acrobat documentstoday can have embedded movies and sounds, and allow simpleinteractivity.The downside is that Adobe's Acrobat 3.x technology, which allowsthe Acrobat PDF Viewer plug-in, is still in beta, and its own WebPresenter technology based on Adobe Persuasion is also in beta.Most users are still apprehensive in adopting beta technology. Withthe limited functionality of Web Presenter (a slideshow andoutlining tool), users are more comfortable with authoring onShockwave for Director now.Macromedia has also launched Shockwave for Freehand, Authorware andbetas of Director 5. Freehand is an illustration tool, andShockwave plug-in for Freehand allows resolution-indenpendentvector graphics to be viewed on the web. But its functionality isprobably restricted to graphic studios and advertising agencies fornow. Authorware is a computer-based training tool and the Shockwavefor Authorware plug-in, although capable of compressing Authorwarefiles, still cannot optimise it well for the web. Currently,Macromedia positions Shockwave for Authorware for intranetapplications only. Shockwave for Director 5 will be a greatproduct, but is currently available for Power Macintosh and Windows95 in betas only.In the November issue, we will discuss in greater detail how tooptimise multimedia content for Netscape Navigator.  LANSeamus Phan is the Singapore-based technology partner of McGallen &Bolden Associates. He can be reached at webmaster@ mcgallen.com.The multimedia files featured here can be found at McGallen's website, http://www.mcgallen.com/.Copyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: HOTTER THAN JAVA: LUCENT'S INFERNO PROMISES TO TURN UP THE HEATfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996This column's focus has always been on the Internet. This makessense, of course, because the Internet is networking's hothouse ofinnovation. But other major public networks are out there: there'scable television, the telephone infrastructure, and, for thatmatter, there's cellular. At the edges of all these non-Internetnetworks-at the point where you and I make our telephone calls andwatch our movies-the terminals are getting smarter.What do I mean by "smarter"? I'm talking about better CPUs and morememory. Still, even the upcoming generation of small gadgets won'thave enough horsepower to directly adopt Internet inno vations aswe know them. Java and the latest browsers, though they bring hugepossibilities to a broad range of traditional desktop computers,require the equivalent of at least a fast 486 chip and a good 4MBof available memory (that is, 4MB above and beyond the operatingsystem's own requirements) for high-quality functionality.THINK SMALLIf you're building a telephone or a set-top box, you can't load itup with a lot of silicon. You may want to put in a single SIMM'sworth of memory (which is about 1MB these days) and something alongthe lines of a 386 CPU. You want to sell your devices in theseveral-tens-of-dollars price range, not the several-hundred-dollars range. And your target volume should far exceed the numberof Compaq Presarios in the world. After all, there are a lot moresmall, consumer-oriented gizmos-such as Sharp, Casio, and ApplePDAs; Sega game computers; smart telephones; and singing microwaveovens-than there are desktop computers.The one and only network software player-at least for now-in thisbroad market of small, potentially networked gadgets is LucentTechnologies (Basking Ridge, NJ). When AT&T recently split threeways, it was Lucent that acquir-ed the bulk of Bell Laboratoriesand, therefore, its expert knowledge. Bell Laboratories inventedUnix and C, so it's safe to say that the folks at Lucent know alittle about computers and networking.Recently, the Bell folks announced a product they have been workingon for a couple of years-a software suite called Inferno. Infernocan serve as one of two functions: on small machines, Inferno is anoperating system, and on desktop machines, it's a suite ofapplications. This means that Inferno coexists with whateveroperating system a particular desktop machine uses.On the desktop, Inferno occupies much of the same market space thatSun Microsystems' Java does, although during the product's May 1996announcement everyone on the Lucent team tried to downplay thisfact. Inferno's programming language (called Limbo) lets you buildthe equivalent of Java applets.The differences that exist between Java and Inferno might also giveSun pause. First of all, Lucent claims that Inferno runscomfortably within 1MB of memory. In addition, Inferno implementsnetwork operating constructs that a language such as Java is not ina position to implement. With Inferno, you get features such asauthentication and native file management (including exporting yourfile system to other clients at will) right from the operatingsystem.SON OF PLAN 9Finally, Inferno draws on the research done at Bell Labs during thedevelopment of the Plan 9 operating system (see "Plan 9: Son ofUnix," Interoperability, Summer 1996 issue, page 41) to create anoperating system that distributes all over the network the variouskinds of work that an application performs. For example, Inferno'sbrowser splits its onscreen presentation away from all the datamanagement issues such as looking up domain names and figuring outwhere to draw images within a page of text. This way, slowerterminals can focus on what you see and can off-load the CPU-intensive work to CPU servers located back at the serviceprovider's shop.Distributing the various tasks that have to be performed in orderfor a client to make a presentation is an enormously powerfulconcept and one with which Bell Labs has grappled for severalyears. "We looked at what we had done with [the] Plan 9 [operatingsystem]," says Rob Pike, key Inferno developer, "and realized thatif we stripped it down to just the distribution capabilities, wewould have something very small and very powerful."A lot remains to be seen, but there's no question that Lucent is avendor that has the attention of the regional Bells and cableservice providers. The possibilities that surround Inferno'spotential to quickly penetrate a broad market are staggering.Inferno may be compelling at the corporate level, too: If you'rewriting thin-client Web applications for your corporate intranet,why not write to the same operating system that your telephones areusing and get extra capabilities for free?  LANRobert Richardson is Webmaster for LAN:WEB. You can reach him viathe Internet at robert@fiction.com.Copyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: CABLE TESTERS IN THE FIELDfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Field testing a cable plant serves to verify its transmissionperformance. This results in a more professional hand-off from yourcabling contractor. The guidelines presented in this series is ahigh level summary of the results of our evaluation and experienceusing the cable test instruments. These guidelines are not meant toduplicate the information in TIA/EIA TSB67, or the contents ofindividual field tester manuals, but to provide additionalinformation to address issues relevant to the testing of structuredcabling installations.These guidelines should be considered generic to all testers and asa general rule it is important to upgrade to the latest firmwareand maintain the current documentation (including readme files) ofthe testers to ensure up-to-date operational procedures.Calibration of Field Testers and Test ConfigurationsDifferent field test instruments have slightly differentcalibration procedures. It is important that these procedures arefollowed. Proper calibration of the field testers is required toensure accurate measurements.Calibration of Remote InjectorA short length of tester equipment cord (supplied with the fieldtester) is used to connect the main unit to the remote unit and thecalibration sequence activated from the main unit. This will resultin the main unit determining attenuation loss inherent in thetesters and calibrate this loss to be 0 dB (see Figure 1).Different manufacturers provide different calibration kits. Ifadapters are needed for the measurement of the installed cabling,it is a good idea to include these adapters in the calibration.This is because adapters are not part of the installed cable plantand should consequently be calibrated out of the attenuationmeasurement, resulting in better measurement accuracy forattenuation.Selection of Cable TypeSelecting the cable type closest to the cable being tested willyield better accuracy, especially for length and propagation delaymeasurements. Often, the field tester is pre-loaded with variouscable types, including 1061/2061 cables. The main result ofselecting a cable type is the selection of the nominal velocity ofpropagation (NVP). Values for NVP are obtained by tester vendorsfrom cable data sheets, or sometimes verbally from individualsrepresenting cable vendors. Consequently, these NVP values areoften incorrect or out of date. It is critical that the correctcable type be selected and the NVP determined using the fieldtester calibration procedure.Selection of Test ConfigurationTSB67 defines two test configurations, a basic link and a channel(see Figures 2 and 3). A channel assumes two connections at eachend while a basic link assumes one connection at each end.For example, if you are testing the cabling installed by acontractor from the wall outlet to the termination in thetelecommunications closet, you need to configure the field testerfor a basic link. If on the other hand, you are diagnosing an end-to end cabling circuit that will be attached to equipment at bothends, including cross-connections, patch cords, and equipmentcords, you need to configure the field tester to measure a channel.Sometimes, you may have a situation where there are two connectionsat one end and a single connection at the other end. For routineautotest measurements, it is acceptable to measure thisconfiguration as a channel in the interest of efficiency. However,for diagnostic or single parameter tests, this configuration willneed to be tested as a channel and a basic link. The end that hastwo connections must pass channel NEXT requirements, while the endwith one connection must pass basic link NEXT requirements. Thistype of dual configuration testing may be necessary only if you areworking in a detailed analysis or diagnostic mode.Calibration of NVPTSB67 outlines a simple calibration procedure for NVP using a knownlength of cable. Since various testers use different internalprocedures to find the pair with the shortest electrical delay(corresponds to maximum velocity of propagation), calibration isthe only sure way of initialising the field tester with the rightNVP for the particular cable type you are testing. This will resultin more accurate length measurements and less variability of lengthbetween different pairs within a 4-pair cable. Figure 4 illustratesthe NVP calibration setup.To calibrate, reel off 25 metres (82 feet) of cable and attachmodular jacks to both ends. Note the exact jacket foot marks anddetermine and length of cable that is cut from the reel. Attachthis connectorised cable to the main unit and the remote unit usingtester. Select NVP calibration from the menus and enter the lengthof the cable. Note that since the length is determined from thefoot marks on the jacket, it is necessary to make sure that thefield tester is set to the appropriate units (metric or USCustomary units) before running the calibration command from themain unit. The main unit will display the NVP determined for the1061/2061 cable that you are calibrating.Save this NP as a default for the appropriate cable type, so thatyou do not have to re-calibrate NVP again for the same type ofcable. If you move on to another installation, you may have adifferent cable, which requires that you calibrate NVP again.Field Measurement ProceduresIt is important to develop uniform test practices and provideadequate training. Although each installation may have differentrequirements, it is risky letting each job get tested differently.These units are much more complicated than continuity buzzers, andimproper settings or inadequate battery management could wastehours worth of testing. Suitable calibration procedures andintervals must be enforced. For example, calibration of the remoteunit every day of use is a good practice. Calibration of NVP foreach job will ensure that the NVP represents the value of the cablebeing installed at a site.Sanity ChecksAny tester should undergo regular checkups, or some form of sanitycheck. Users should develop some expertise to assess whether atester is providing useful results. One simple method is toconstruct a sample link to be used as a reference. Make sure thatis physically protected and not subject to movement. Expect somevariation with temperature, humidity, and time, but this is a validcheck for malfunctioning units. A link such as this is required forNominal Velocity of Propagation (NVP) calibration may be used as areference link and will serve as a simple test to verify theconsistency of a field tester. If this same link is used to checkperiodically for tester repeatability, one will get a usefulindication that the field tester is functioning properly (seeFigure 4).IS 11801 and TIA TSB67 Testing IssuesWith the release of TIA-568-A, TIA TSB67 and IS 11801, customersare faced with confusing choices in specifying testing requirementsand interpreting test results. Most of the confusion arises fromattempting to test against the performance limits of IS 11801. Itshould be noted that several of the performance limits listed in IS11801 are marked "ffs" ("for future study").Some of the reasons behind the "ffs" entries include lack ofagreement from cable vendors, inconsistent results from fieldtesting trials, and lack of accuracy determination methods forhand-held testing equipment in relation to such parameters. Inaddition, while specifying performance limits in IS 11801, theinternational standards community is still to release detailed testprocedures and test configurations.The horizontal link from which the IS 11801 performance includestwo connections in the floor Distributor (Horizontal Cross-connectin TIA-568-A), a 5 metre patch cord, 90 metres of cable and aconnection at the work area. This link specifically excludes theequipment cable and work area cable. It is not clear whether hand-held instruments, compliant to TIA TSB-67 are capable of accuratelytesting this link, as this would require the test set to "exclude"the equipment and work area cables.One of the parameters marked "ffs" in IS 11801 is Return Loss (RL).While the method for accurately measuring RL in the field is yet tobe specified, additional difficulties can be encountered when usingtest leads or patch cords incorrectly matched to the cablingsystem, or degraded by repeated use. At least one of the TSB67compliant test sets in the market includes two choices for IS 11801configurations (with and without RL), and the test set manufactureradvises the users to use the "IS 11801 without RL" option. Thedifficulties experienced by some users when testing RL withincorrectly matched test leads highlights the advantages of acabling system designed with matched components.In contrast with IS 11801, the TIA 568-A Standard and TSB-67include practical test configurations (Figures 2 & 3) and accuracyspecifications for hand-held instruments. While work is underway toharmonise the differences, and to reach practical agreement on theIS 11801 specifications marked "ffs", the practical choice is torefer to TIA TSB-67 for accurate field testing.Use of Interface AdaptersSometimes, an interface adapter is necessary to attach fieldtesters to the channel/link under test. These adapters are an extraelement in the link configuration and may affect the accuracy of ameasurement. In general, unknown adapters should be avoided. Tomeasure a basic link with a 110 interface, an adapter cord with 110on one end and the interface of the tester on the other end ispreferred. Test instrument vendors should provide this adaptercord. For channel measurements, testers provide an adapter from thetester interface connector to a modular jack. Again, it isimportant that only cords and adapters provided by the testers beused to attach field testers to the link under test. Note that TSB-67 requires that field tester cords do not exceed 2 metres.Durability of Connecting Hardware InterfacesAn important issue not yet handled by any of the testers is keepingtrack of the life cycle of test interfaces. Any jack or plug has areliable limit on connect/ disconnect cycles. Interfaces should beserialised (marked) and users should keep track of how many testsare performed so their reliable limit is not exceeded. Additionalinterfaces should be ordered and available for replacement atsuitable intervals. Field testers currently do not have a mechanismfor storing the number of times an instrument has been used. Henceit is a good practice to maintain approximate (to the nearest 100)cycles of usage so that plug/jack contacts can be inspected andreplaced as necessary. Different testers claim different number ofusage cycles for accurate measurements. As a first step thesevendor guidelines may be sufficient. If measurements are notrepeatable or if the failure rate of links increases, it may betime to replace the plug/jack interfaces.Backup ProceduresBackup protection is another important issue. A simple strategycould be to print tests every few hours. This might be suitable forsome small jobs, but may be too time consuming for most. A betterstrategy is to uplink to a PC every 4 hours and make duplicates onfloppy disks. Also, make sure an extra set of charged batteries areready.Structural Return Loss and Return Loss MeasurementsStructural Return Loss (SRL) characterising "impedance roughness"of a cable is a cable parameter and is measured in a laboratoryenvironment in accordance with ASTM D 4566 Method 3, or equivalent.SRL is not specified as a field measurement for links and chan-nelseither in TIA/EIA-568-A or in IS 11801 standards. Hence any claimsto measuring SRL in the field should be considered non-standard andquestionable.Return loss is a measure of reflected signal and is used tocharacterise either individual components or links. Whencharacterising links, return loss is an indication of impedancemismatches of different components within links and is notspecified in either TIA/EIA 568-A, or the associated TIA/EIA TSB-67field testing document. Further TIA/EIA TSB-67 clearly states thatreturn loss is under study. The IS 11801 document has a slightlydifferent approach when dealing with items under study. It showsthe possible target values for future revision of the IS 11801document and qualifies these values as "FFS" (For Future Study).The reason these are marked FFS is because no industry agreementhas been reached on the possible values, test methods, andmeasurement instruments.Despite the above background, certain field test manufacturers mayimplement proprietary test schemes for measuring return loss todifferentiate their instruments in the market. These proprietarytest schemes have not been reviewed and accepted by industry andmust therefore be viewed with caution.Differences in Length MeasurementsDifferent pairs within a 4-pair cable use different twist rates toimprove NEXT performance. This introduces a physical difference inlength between different pairs. Additionally, the velocity ofpropagation may vary between pairs because of material differences.Such differences are normal, and within the operating limits ofcabling and applications standards. Furthermore, these differencesare not significantly affected by installation of cabling, andshould therefore not be a major source of concern when checking thequality of the installation.Delay skew is the term commonly used to refer to the difference inpropagation delay over different pairs. The worst case delay skewallowed in application standards is 50 ns for a 100 differentpairs. The worst case delay skew allowed in application standardsis 50 ns for a 100 metre channel. Given that the speed of light inopen space is 1 ft/ns and assuming a relative velocity of 0.6 c forcopper cabling, the maximum difference in electrical length allowedis 30 feet (50 ns x 0.6) for a 100 metre channel. Differences of upto 20 feet in the length measurements of pairs for a typical cablerun are not uncommon and fall within the requirements ofapplication standards.Calibration of NVP for each different type of cable is critical toreduce errors in length measurements. Different cables require re-calibration. Note that the NVP calibration results must be saved toensure the new NVP values are effective. To test if the calibrationwas saved, power down the tester, power up and check if the new NVPvalues for the cable type being installed are current in memory.(Note: Because of accuracy issues, TIA standards do not endorsemeasurement of propagation delay and delay skew using fieldtesters).25-Pair CablingTIA considers 25-pair cabling to be backbone cabling and requiresNEXT to conform to "power-sum" requirements. These computationsinvolve hundreds of pair combinations and several thousand datapoints for conformance testing. Power sum NEXT testing is notpossible with currently available field testers. The alternative isto check individual 4 pair units within a 25-pair cable and verifyeach unit meets the 4-pair horizontal cabling requirements. Forexample, to test a zone cabling installation with a 25-pair cableserving six work areas, the six individual circuits can be verifiedas basic links or channels, depending on the current testconfiguration. Note: 25-pair cable is different cable from 4-paircable, and its velocity of calibration must be calibrated andstored in the field tester. Any 4-pair unit from the 25-pair cablemay be used for calibration.  LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: THE COMMON GATEWAY INTERFACE IS THE KEY TO INTERACTIVE WEB SITESfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996This series of tutorials, which has been running since July, hasexamined services commonly available on the Internet and hasexplored what you, as a network manager, need to do to make suchservices available within your company (via your corporateintranet) and to others (via the Internet).Last month, we focused on HTML and took a first look at hypertextlinks. This month, we'll continue to explore HTML, and we'll take alook at the common gateway interface (CGI).Using simple tags, you can make any word or phrase a hyperlink.Hyperlinks are not limited to text, however. They can also beimages. The following code fragment shows how to make an image intoa hyperlink: This sample code displays the graphic image frog.gif, and-if theuser clicks on that image-causes the Web browser to request the Webpage frog.htm from the Web server www.amphibian.com.THE COMMON GATEWAY INTERFACEHTML, along with HTTP, is the enabling technology of the World WideWeb. HTML's most compelling feature is hypertext linking. When youlook for information in a conventional book you might search theindex for a key word, then flip through the book to find thereferenced page, and hope to find the information you seek. Bycontrast, when searching for information on the Web, simplyclicking on a hyperlink and immediately jumping to the referencedpage is gratifyingly quick and easy. HTML is, however, essentiallya read-only format. It's not interactive except when using themouse to navigate. HTML pages are static documents that don'tchange until someone (the Webmaster, in many cases) accesses theWeb server and edits them.From the start, Web developers have been looking for ways to makeWeb servers interactive to allow users to input information as wellas retrieve information. The standard way of delivering informationin this manner is now known as the common gateway interface. UsingCGI, the Web server, in response to a user request for information,runs a program to search for that information and returns theresults to the user. In order to achieve these results, the Webserver typically generates an HTML page by inserting a few HTMLstatements into a pre-existing page. A Web server using CGI in thismanner could potentially run an infinite variety of programs.If you've used a Web search engine to find an item of interest,you've used CGI. But CGI itself isn't the search engine. Rather,it's a way to interface programs, such as search engines, with Webservers.HTTP (Web) servers are designed primarily to serve up HTMLdocuments. CGI files, however, aren't documents, they're programs.Therefore, to store CGI programs, most Web servers use a specialdirectory, commonly named cgi-bin. The Web server knows that filesstored in the cgi-bin directory are to be executed rather thansimply sent to the user's Web browser for display. CGI programs canbe written in a wide variety of languages, including DOS batchfiles, BASIC, C, and scripting languages such as Perl. It's the jobof the CGI to activate the CGI program at the proper time and passthe program to any necessary user- or operating environment-generated data. The CGI program then processes whatever data isgenerated. Once the program accomplishes this process (which shouldtake only seconds-the goal here is interactivity), it must returnsome output to the user via the user's Web browser. To make theoutput appropriate for browser display, the CGI program must formatits output in the form of an HTML document.A FORM FOR EVERYTHINGA CGI program has to somehow get from the user any data to beprocessed. That's where HTML forms come into play. HTML forms aresimilar to paper forms: They provide specific spaces in which toenter specific data items. A simple form is shown in Figure 1. Thissample form has one text input field: product name. The form alsohas some multiple-choice fields, in which, for example, the usercan check off the type of product, as well as what networkingprotocols the product supports. The form also has a button the usercan click on to submit the entry. (A CGI program will only act uponthe information in a form when the form data has been submitted tothe CGI program.) Clicking on the form's Clear Form button resetsthe form back to its default values. The HTML code for this form isshown in Listing 1 (page 33). Note that to aid in discussion,Listing 1 includes line numbers, which you wouldn't use in actualHTML code.The source code for a form is bound by the  and  tags (see line 1 and line 14 of Listing 1). The use ofaction specifies the action to be taken when the form is submitted.In other words, action determines which CGI program should be runin order to process the form, and you specify either a full orpartial URL for that program. Depending on the Web server, you maybe able to set a default directory for all CGI programs. As long asthe program you want to run is stored in that directory you needonly specify the program's file name. Otherwise, you will probablyhave to provide a complete URL for the file.Use method to move input data from the form into the CGI programthat's going to process that data. We'll explore the methods bywhich this is done in more detail next month, but for now, just beaware that there are two general methods you can use: "get" and"post". If you're going to use the "get" method to transfer datafrom the form to the CGI program specified in the action URL, besure that the CGI program is written to accept data in this manner.By the same token, if you use "post" to send data from your form,be sure the CGI program is expecting "post" data input.Line 2 and line 3 of Listing 1 prompt the user to enter data. Afterthe prompts comes the code that puts a text field into the form(line 4). Entering input type="text" tells the Web browser that itis a text field. Specifying name="name" tells the browser that thename of this field is name. (This example asks for the name of aproduct; if you want toask for the user's address, you might name this field address.)size="25" indicates that the text box will be large enough to see 25characters at a time. maxlength="30" means that the field can holdup to 30 characters of text.In this case, the length of the field exceeds the length of thebox, so a scroll bar will appear if the user types a long textstring.Next on the form are radio buttons, followed by check boxes. Theseare both multiple-choice, but they differ slightly in how they workin that, using check boxes, you can check more than one box at atime, but you can select only one radio button. Clicking on a radiobutton clears the radio button that was previously selected. Bycomparison, selecting one check box does not deselect another.Let's discuss radio buttons first. You determine the button styleby setting the type for the input equal to radio. There are threestatements for radio buttons (line 6 through line 8)-one for eachof the possible selections. Each statement containsname="prodtype." This creates a logical field named prodtype. Ifthe first button is checked, the field prodtype takes on the valuebridge. (You can determine the value by using the statement"value='bridge'"). Note also the keyword checked in line 6. Whenthe form first appears, the radio button for bridge will bechecked; in other words, we've made this setting the default. Theuser can override this default setting by clicking on the Router orSwitch button.Next comes a series of three check boxes that allow the user toindicate which network protocols the product supports (representedby lines 9 through 11of the sample code in Listing 1). When a userclicks in a box, "X" appears in that box to indicate that it ischecked. Clicking again on a checked check box removes the "X," orunchecks the box.You create a check box field with the statement input type= "checkbox ." You also need to specify the name of the input field. InListing 1, the name of the input field for the first check box isset to IP. The sample code uses the keyword checked, indicatingthat this box is selected by default, which the user can clear byclicking on the check box.When a check box is selected, by default the field with that namehas its value set to "on." Although it is not included in theexample, you can optionally use the value attribute to set thevalue, for example, to "green" when the box is selected. When thecheck box is not selected, the field has no value. In this example,the default setting for all three boxes is checked. Thus, unlessthe user clears the boxes, the form returns ip=on, ipx=on, andappletalk=on. If only the IP box is selected, the form returns onlyip=on. The IPX and AppleTalk boxes will be disregarded.I don't have quite enough space here to finish the discussion ofour sample form, so we'll have to conclude that next month. Also,so far, I've discussed gathering data to be passed to a CGIprogram, but I haven't said much about how that data is transferredor how the CGI program sends output back to the user. I'll coverthat (and more) in next month's Tutorial.  LAN  Alan Frank can be reached via the Internet at afrank@mfi.com.Copyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Getting Basic Netware from Within Windows: A hidden menuAutomatic disk maintenance Securing automatic loginsfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996A HIDDEN MENUThe following procedure will help you create a NetWare pop-up menuthat allows your users to perform some basic operations in aNetWare environment from within Windows 3.1.To enable the menu on a client, make sure the client's networkdriver or secondary network driver for Windows is the NetWaredevice driver (netware.drv). To do so, put either of the followinglines into the client'ssystem.ini file:network.drv=netware.drvsecondnet.drv=netware.drvThen, create a file in the root of the client's Windows directoryand name it netware.ini. In this file, type:[Options]netwarehotkey=1The next time a user starts Windows, he can just press the  keyand a small menu will pop up onscreen. The menu allows a user tolog in to and log out of a file server, map drives and printers,and change the hot key.Note: You must load the netx shell before you can use this feature.Jafar H. AlhashemiNetwork AdministratorInformation Technology DepartmentKuwait AirwaysNew YorkEditor's note: The netware.drv driver Alhashemi refers to is foundin the older, 2.0x version of the NetWare device driver. TheNetWare pop-up menu is a built-in feature of that generation ofdrivers only.In the newer, 3.0x version of netware.drv, Novell includes a hot-key feature that allows users to call up the NetWare User Toolsapplication from within Windows 3.1.Users access the NetWare Users Tools window to quickly performnetwork operations-such as map drives and printers, send messages,display server resources, and so on-similar to those features foundwith the afore-mentioned pop-up menu available with netware.drv2.0x.To enable the hot key for the NetWare Users Tools application, youneed to access the NetWare Settings window. You can do this byclicking on the Network icon in the Control Panel.The NetWare Settings window contains an option for enabling the hotkey, and an option to specify a hot key (the default is ).As with Alhashemi's instructions, you also need to specify theNetWare device driver as the network driver. Unlike the 2.0xdriver, you don't have to create the netware.ini file, it iscreated automatically when you enable the hot key feature using theNetWare Settings window.AUTOMATIC DISK MAINTENANCEAs a network administrator for a 160-workstation system, I used toreceive calls on a weekly basis from individuals having troublesaving files on their computers. I have eliminated the bulk ofthose calls by adding the following lines in the system loginscript of our NetWare 4.1 servers:if day_of_week = "wednesday" and os_version ="v6.22" then begin#c:\dos\scandisk c: /autofix /nosave /nosummaryendWhen a user boots his or her computer and the system date reads"Wednesday," the login script launches the DOS scandisk program.Editor's note: Scandisk, which is available in DOS 6.x, analysescomputer drives for errors relating to the file allocation table,file system structure, directory tree structure, and the physicalsurface of the disk.The /autofix switch automatically corrects any problems scandiskencounters, thereby avoiding any user input. The /nosave switchtells the program to delete any lost clusters it finds. The/nosummary switch tells the program not to display its summaryscreen after it finishes the scan.To really clean things up, I add:#c:\dos\defrag c: /f /s:nEditor's note: The Defrag command reorganises information stored ona disk to make the storage more efficient and to optimise theperformance of the disk. The /f switch tells the program todefragment the files on the drive indicated-in this case the c:drive. The /s:n switch organises files alphabetically, by name.The two DOS commands scandisk and defrag, with their parameters,run without user intervention. Users know that their computers willtake a little longer to boot on Wednesdays.Kurt Teare, CNE, MCPNetwork CoordinatorUniversity Athletic AssociationUniversity of Florida, Gainesvillekurt@gators.uaa.ufl.eduSecuring Automatic LoginsThe July 1996 Patches and Fixes column correctly points out thatconfiguring a workstation to log in automatically presents asecurity risk, especially if the password is contained in a textfile.I've set up a process based on NetWare's Station Restrictionfeature. My unattended stations that perform unique functions donot have passwords, but they are restricted to one login at aspecific node address.I've taken steps to prevent exiting to DOS by removing the comspecenvironment variable from the autoexec.bat. Also, I force themachines to log out of the network once they exit the application.For me, this approach works because 99 per cent of my users usetheir PC as a "terminal," and all applications are run off thenetwork.To prevent shelling to DOS from within a DOS application, I use thefollowing lines in a batch file:set oldcomspec=%comspec%set comspec=set comspec=%oldcomspec%If a user tries to shell to DOS from an app, he receives an errormessage, as the comspec variable is invalid. Some DOS applicationswon't run correctly without the comspec variable, but I've foundthat Lotus 1-2-3, DrawPerfect, Reflex, Symphony, and WordPerfectwork fine.Under Windows, I prevent users from accessing DOS by not providingthem with a DOS icon and by removing the Run command from the Filemenu (I use Saber Menu System).To force machines to automatically log out after exiting anapplication, I add the following lines to the end of the batch filethat runs the application. In fact, I use these lines at the end ofthe batch files that run our DOS and Windows menus so that usersknow what to do at the f:\login prompt. Here are the lines:rem Change default drive to login; clear screenz:cd cal1\sys:loginclsrem Blank out the DOS promptset prompt=rem Display the LOGOUT messagetype v:logout.txtrem Run OUT.BAT located in SYS:LOGINoutThe contents of logout.txt state that the logout is complete, andto please turn the system off or press any key to restart. Here'sout.bat:@echo offlogout > nul :pause > nul :warmbootwarmboot.com is a utility that restarts the machine. I forgot whereI got that particular utility, but there are several utilitiesavailable that perform the same function.With this setup, users see a confirming message to either reboot orturn off the system. If the user presses any key, except ,the PC will reboot. If the user gets smart and presses ,the batch file will terminate. But, because there is no DOS prompt,that user will probably just reboot anyway. (However, informedusers could type set prompt=$p$g and find themselves at z:\login.)Jon SheldonSystems EngineerJohn Alden Life Insurance CompanyWoodland Hills, CA74230.1135@compuserve.comYou can secure the remote device mentioned in "Following thePassword Piper" by restricting the login name to the node addressof that remote device. With NetWare 2.x or 3.x, this naming is donethrough Syscon. In NetWare 4.x, it is an NDS property.By using this restriction, a network login which uses the device'snode address as the login name has to be performed at the device towhich the address is tied. A password is not necessary, but couldbe used for additional security.Matthew MlodochSystems Engineering ConsultantCompuCom SystemsPortland, ORmmlodoch@compucom.comEditor's note: The preceding letters refer to "Following thePassword Piper," which ran in Patches and Fixes in the July 1996issue (page 28). The submission discusses one network manager'sdesire for a fix that enables a workstation to automatically log onto the network (composed, in this case, of NetWare servers) whenswitched on. This process would simplify the resetting of devices,such as e-mail servers, located at remote branch offices.In the event that such a machine were to hang due to a softwareproblem, a nontechnical user could restore that machine online bysimply turning the power off and then back on."Following the Password Piper" also discusses ways in which such anautomatic logon could be accomplished. These solutions involveputting the account and password in a file on the station's localdisk drive.We point out the security exposure this involves and recommend thatthe person who does the power switching also type in the password,as opposed to keeping the password on disk.NetWare does allow you to restrict a particular account's login toa specific node address. While that feature can be handy and willdeter some potential attackers, it isn't going to preventsophisticated attacks. On some networks, such as Arcnet, the nodeaddress is set by the installer and, therefore, can be set to anyaddress. On Ethernet networks, the manufacturer embeds the nodeaddress in firmware. Note that while Ethernet NICs default to usingthe address in firmware, many NICs have options that allow analternate address to be used, which makes it possible for one nodeto impersonate another node.Our concern about placing the password on a workstation's localdisk drive is that the network becomes vulnerable to any intruderwith physical access to that workstation. Restricting login to aspecific node address is equally vulnerable. An intruder can gainaccess to a file server by simply switching on that workstation.We included these suggestions because we feel they are good onesfor network managers to have in their bag of security tricks. Theycan be a good way to augment security, but we caution you againstrelying on them as foolproof solutions.Sheldon mentions another NetWare feature-the ability to restrictsimultaneous logins. By default, users can have multiple,simultaneous sessions. You can, however, limit an account to asingle login. This approach can be useful, particularly for e-mailservers or other such machines on the network. If such a node islogged in, no one else is able to log in with that account name.This approach, too, is vulnerable to someone who has physicalaccess to that machine. Also, if the workstation is not logged inat all times, there will be periods of vulnerability. LANLee Chae can be reached at Ichae@mfi.com or at71154.2131@compuserve.comCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Who's Afraid of TCP/IP?from LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Need to understand TCP/IP and how to buy a good stack? TCP/IP isnow enjoying its day in the sun with the explosion of the Internetand the emergence of the corporate Intranet.Computer systems in use now are diverse. From a mainframe runningan operating system like VM or MVS, down to a PC that could berunning Windows, DOS, NT or OS2. In between are minicomputers thatcould be running anything like Solaris, IBM AIX or HP-UX). You haveproprietary local area, generic operating system, mainframesrunning something, minis running something else, and when you wantto network all these, one of the best technologies to use isTCP/IP. After all, if TCP/IP is what you use on the outside, whyshouldn't you use it on the inside?Crucial Add-onsKey to TCP/IP technology are the add-ons such as security,collaboration, mobility, interoperability, and ease of use.Security involves encrypting data going between PCs and the companyfirewall, for example, developing interoperability with firewallsso you can create what is called a private network between your PCand the firewall. Companies are focusing on enabling security intothe technology itself (IPSEC, Cylink, RSA, etc.) and also oninteroperability of security-working on establishing the standards,and ensuring interoperability as a whole.Collaboration software using TCP/IP as the underlying transport cantake the form of e-mail, discussion databases, video-conferencing,etc. Companies are implementing collaboration protocols for thenext generation of audio, video and workgroup collaboration needsusing RSVP (reservation protocol), multicasting, IPv6, RTCP (Real-Time Protocol Control Transport), or RTP (Real-Time ProtocolTransport).With 50 per cent of all PCs sold today being laptops, the abilityfor users to go mobile and still be connected to the office networkis essential. Many companies are working with technologies likemobile IP, using one static IP address to communicate at all timeswith a corporate Intranet without having to change your IPaddresses when you change you location on the corporate network.What Features?If you are looking for a comprehensive TCP/IP package, check if itoffers the following features: The ability to detect a router on the network should you not haveaccess to the systems administrators when you need them. The 7a package that supports not only TCP/IP but co-exists wellwith related technologies like NetBIOS, IPX, Banyan, DEC, IBM etc. Address and name resolution which offers convenient features likeDHCP to manage your addresses in a simplified manner, WinSNMPsupport for interoperability with third party network managers likeHP OpenView and MIB11 compliance. And you should look for a packagethat supports VXD technology so you can optimise memory managementcapabilities of Win95. Simultaneous connection from the desktop so that if you run yoursoftware on a LAN and want to switch to a WAN, you can have bothresident in memory at the same time. Uses: serial send situations(bank and retail), LAN and Cable situations (interactive cable),redundancy (financial), LAN/serial connections. Mobile IP-so users can connect to a corporate Intranet withoutchanging their IP address; Multicast facility, which allows you to send to a group of hostsrather than to all hosts (broadcast). The ability to multicast iscrucial to videoconferencing when you wish to link with a selectgroup rather than with everyone on the net. Compatibility with ISDN technologies like WinISDN, CAPI; supportfor Sun's Yellow Pages NIS (network information service);compatibility with firewall standards like SOCKS; compatibilitywith new Novell technologies like Netware/IP, etc. Compliance with other related technologies like TDI (TransportDriver Interface)-a new standard Microsoft is promoting thatresides between the Kernel protocols and apps services.Who Provides?Choose a company that is looking at new technologies such as RSVP,RTCP, and RTP. RSVP reserves bandwidth for use with video andaudio, collaboration, workgroup applications, e-mail, Intranettraffic, etc. Transport protocols are for real-time applicationssuch as point-of-sale.Look for a company that follows all the issues being discussed onthe IETF (Internet Engineer Task Force) work group such assecurity, mobile IP and IPv6. One of the biggest problems facingthe Internet and IPv4 is the lack of address space. IPv6 will offerexpanded addressing from 32-bit to 128-bit with hierarchicalscalability.This will be essential for enterprise, Internet, intranet, PDAs,cellular, cable TV, and smart appliances.Your partner should have a well defined strategy for dealing withissues like next generation IP addressing-how will they make thetransition from current addressing to the new one?How will they deal with it? Gradual transition is possible, basedon a dual stack strategy, with hosts and routers upgradedindependently and no single 'doomsday,' which may be moreconvenient for a lot of companies.In my view, considering the developments, TCP/IP has become thestandard and is the foundation to the future of connectivity andcommunications.Ravi Prakash is the system engineering manager for FTP Software,Asia-Pacific. E-mail: ravi@ftp.comCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Optimising a print server for NetWarefrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996QHow does a network print server act in a Novell NetWare network?AS You can choose Print Server Mode or Remote Printer Mode. InPrint Server Mode the print server emulates a workstation or fileserver running the PSERVER software. This mode provides highperformance but requires one NetWare license for each print server.In Remote Printer Mode the print server emulates a workstationrunning the RPRINTER or NPRINTER software. Performance is lowerthan PSERVER but extra licenses are not needed.QHow does a print server act in a Unix environment?AA network print server can either act as an independent node or itcan be integrated in the network spool system. In both cases it hasits own IP address, which is set as usual with the ARP or BOOTPcommands. Print jobs can either be transferred directly to theprint server by using FTP or telnet, or sent to a print queue withthe lpr command.QDoes a network print server need a large cache memory to spoolprint jobs?ANo, a print server does not work as a spooling device. It passesthe data directly to the printer. If the printer is busy, thenetwork operating system takes care of the situation and the printjobs are spooled on different locations depending on which printmethod is being used. When printing via the file server, print jobsare always spooled in a print queue. When printing peer-to-peer,the print job is spooled locally on the PC's hard disk.Philip Siow, technical support manager, Axis Communications.E-mail: philsiow@axis.com.sgCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Which Internet Server?from LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996QI am sourcing for a suitable Intel-based Web server which would beused in our company's intranet. I your view, how does Microsoft'sInternet Information Server compare with the other web serverofferings in the market?AExcluding the various freeware and shareware web servers around,there are basically four products that currently dominate the webserver market. These are: Microsoft's IIS, Netscape CommunicationsServer (NT Version and BSDI Unix Version) and Novell's Netware WebServer. In terms of functionality, all the web servers support HTMLand standard CGIs (with the exception of Netware Web Server).Netware does, however, support a proprietary extension calledRemote CGI (R-CGI). This allows the execution of CGI applicationson a separate machine from the Web server. It is different frommost CGI implementations which execute CGI applications in aseparate process on the same machine as the Web server.In terms of API support, IIS and Netscape's Communications Server(NT Version) both support ISAPI, NSAPI and proprietary APIs.Netware does not support either ISAPI, NSAPI or a Novell definedset of API to extend their web server (other than R-CGI).According to tests conducted by Shiloh Consulting and Haynes &Company, the Microsoft Internet Information Server substantiallyoutperformed the other Web servers tested on straight HTML andproprietary APIs. This performance advantage increased consistentlyas the number of clients making requests increased. The second bestperformer in HTML tests was NetWare, followed by the Netscape BSDIserver and the Netscape NT server.When running CGI, the best performer was the Netscape BSDI server,followed by the Microsoft IIS. As should be expected, serverperformance for two servers running on Windows NT (IIS andNetscape) was virtually equal when 100 per cent of the requestswere for standard CGI. In this case, both servers spent a majorityof the time running identical CGI code, so very little time isactually spent in the HTTP server code. Microsoft's API (ISAPI) isroughly five times as fast as Microsoft's CGI. Netscape's API(NSAPI) is roughly about twice as fast as Netscape's CGI. In testsof the two servers with proprietary APIs, IIS was two or threetimes faster than Netscape.Even when the Internet Information Server was handling many moreHTML or API requests than the other servers, the average responsetime for IIS to handle each request was significantly less. It wasapproximately a quarter that of Netscape for straight HTML and onethird as great for 100 per cent API requests. When 100 per cent ofrequests were for CGI, the Netscape BSDI server was substantiallyfaster than the Windows NT-based servers.The superior performance of the Microsoft Internet InformationServer, which incidentally comes packaged with Microsoft NT Server4.0 (and downloadable from Microsoft for NT 3.51), means that Website managers running HTML or API's on Intel platforms will findMicrosoft's server the best alternative for minimising hardwarecosts, allowing a comfortable margin for peak loads, and providingthe maximum room for growth.All tests were conducted on a HP NetServer 5/133 Model LS with 32MB of RAM. The Netscape BSDI version tests were done on the samemachine but with 128 MB RAM. Novell tests were run with NetWare4.1. IIS and Netscape Communications Server (NT Version) were runon top of Windows NT Server 3.51, and the BSDI version was run onBSDI Unix Version 2.01. A 100 Mbps network was used for the tests.More information on the performance comparisons can be found on theInternet at http://www.microsoft.com/workshop/admin/iis/iisperf.htmThis entry was provided by Seah Yu Hsin, Response Centre EngineerHewlett-Packard Singapore (Sales). He can be contacted at Internete-mail: yu-hsin_seah@hp.comCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: ISDN to the Internetfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996QI administer 22 users on a NetWare 3.12 network. I would like toconnect to the Internet, and I want to use ISDN. How do I set upthe ISDN connections? What software and hardware do I need? Whatabout security? Can I run IPX NETX at the workstation, or do I needto run IPXODI and a VLM? Is there a better way to connect to theInternet besides ISDN?ATo provide Internet access, you should consider installing arouter-more specifically, an "access" router that supports ISDN-onyour network. Vendors preconfigure access routers to provide dial-up asynchronous/synchronous services for LAN and remote users.Cisco Systems, Bay Networks, and Ascend Communications all providerouter solutions. Make sure the router supports ISDN and that ithas enough ISDN ports to support your particular environment.When you receive your router, configure it for IPX according tovendor specifications. Without the IPX configuration, the serverand the router will not recognise each other.If users need only infrequent access to the Internet or if you wantto minimise performance degradation when the LAN accesses the WAN,you can implement a dial-on-demand ISDN architecture. With dial-on-demand, traffic within the LAN is identified as special orinteresting. In this case, "interesting" means the traffic withinthe network that causes the router to perform call setup functions.A standard configuration might allow IPX to start the call setup-aslong as the IPX packets are not carrying RIP/SAP updates. Youshould be able to configure all these parameters on the router. Forexample, you can configure a Cisco router to identify IPX trafficbut filter and block the propagation of RIP/SAP updates.Your servers and workstations on your current LAN require noadditional software. The connection between the router and serveris either direct or via a hub. The workstations' configurations,assuming each has an IPX protocol stack, remain the same. Onlyworkstations requiring Internet services need Internet software.Because you're running NetWare 3.12, workstation ODI and VLMsupport should already be present. The workstation configurationrequires you to add an IP protocol stack to support ftp, SimpleMail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), or telnet (Virtual Terminal)connections to the Internet. Remember that the Internet is a largeTCP/IP network and that its services are accessed using TCP/IP.Novell's LAN WorkPlace for DOS or LAN WorkGroup software provides asuitable IP stack for Internet access.Security is handled at the router via filters and at the server viaNetWare security. Unless your Internet Service Provider (ISP)suggests changes to your security configuration, you should be set.Additional security might involve adding a firewall machine toprotect your network from outside intruders. CheckPoint Software'sFirewall 1 is a popular protection solution.Hardware isn't all you need to access the Internet; you must alsochoose an ISP. Some ISPs provide Internet addressing and a completesuite of Internet connection options. Some might even suggest arouter solution for your environment.WHERE'S THE CACHE?QI've been told that the key to NetWare optimisation is to add morememory. But before adding more RAM, I need to know how to calculatethe ideal amount of cache to support basic server operations.AYou're right. Cache sizing is often the most beneficialoptimisation process you can perform on NetWare servers. The trickis determining the right amount of cache for a particular server.Unfortunately, the server memory calculations included in theNetWare 3 and 4 documentation are outdated and, in some cases,produce incorrect requirements. To avert this possible disaster,take a look at two procedures that Novell has published.The first procedure is a memory calculation worksheet thatestimates RAM requirements for new servers. The worksheetincorporates factors, such as the server's volume parameters, NOSfeatures, and number of users, to produce the total memoryrequirement for the server. If you're building a server with third-party NLMs and additional name spaces, an option lets you add moreRAM requirements for these services. When you're finished with theworksheet, you simply round the resulting estimate up to theserver's nearest memory configuration and install that much RAM inthe server. You can find the worksheet in "Calculating MemoryRequirements for NetWare 3 and 4," in the Novell Application Notes,January 1995. An automated version of the worksheet, calledSMEM.EXE, is available in the NOVUSER forum of NetWire onCompuserve.The second procedure is a cache-tuning procedure for existingNetWare 4 servers. Every server supports a different set of usersand applications; the workload they produce can significantlyaffect the server's cache. In some cases, the estimate you deriveusing the preceding worksheet can be several megabytes off. Thistuning procedure allows you to monitor the NetWare 4 least-recently-used (LRU) Sitting Time Statistic in MONITOR.NLM and tunethe server's cache for its specific production environment. Thisprocedure is documented in "Tuning Cache with the NetWare 4 LRUSitting Time Statistic," in the Novell Application Notes, March1995.These procedures can also be found on the Web (http://www.novell.com) and in Novell's Network Support Encyclopedia (NSE Pro)on CD-ROM. To subscribe to the Application Notes or NSE Pro CD,call your VAR.Charles Hall is an ECNE/CNI with experience designing, installing,and troubleshooting LANs and WANs. He teaches classes in the US ontopics including NetWare, TCP/IP, and internetworking. E-mail yourproblems to aptnet@singnet.com.sgCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Tools of the Tradefrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996To ensure its technical support employees are well-versed in bothproduct knowledge and customer relations, WRQ requires allpotential technicians to participate in a three- to six-monthprogram called the Hatchery. This informal training program allows"hatchlings" to learn about fielding support calls and the WRQcorporate culture, which promotes treating people as assets andgiving employees freedom to do their jobs unencumbered, all withouta set schedule of courses.LAN Mag: How many support technicians work for WRQ?Walker: A hundred in Seattle, and we also have technical supportpeople in our European headquarters in Holland and in ourSoutheast-Asia office in Singapore. In fact, because our sales arethrough distributors, the main reason for our international officesis for support.LAN Mag: Do you feel that other organisations don't put that samecareer-oriented spin on tech support?Walker: I don't know specifically about other organisations, butgenerally most people perceive technical support as being a burnoutjob. A person normally would not think of making a career out oftechnical support if they could avoid it. But that's not true here.While the company has very low turnover in general, I thinktechnical support is actually our lowest turnover department.LAN Mag: What types of resources and tools do your technicians haveat their disposal to help them look into some of the complex issuesthat arise with connectivity software?Walker: Well, a lot of people are not sure which parameters to aimfor when they're building in support because there are all thesedifferent situations. There are simple questions, and, at the otherextreme, there are very complex questions. What we try to do istake the attitude that first off, the customer support person issupposed to have ownership of the problem. In other words, we don'tuse really a multitier, escalation system. But if we have seniorprofessionals as tech support engineers, then once a problem isassigned to them, they are there to own the problem.In essence, they have the discretion to pursue the problem to theend of the earth, if need be. That might be a sort of extreme case,but in order to solve a problem that is very tough, you may have togo back to the programmers of the product.LAN Mag: Besides being highly trained, do the technicians havecopies of the products at their disposal or a simulated environmentset up at your offices?Walker: They have a very generous allotment of hardware, and theyhave access to every level of software up through the source. Butmore importantly, technical support is actually proportional to thedevelopmental organisation. And that's a little unusual.LAN Mag: So technical support is under research and development?Walker: Yes. The technicians have access to the people that developthe product. The frustrating thing that I have experienced as aconsumer is that in some organisations, there is no path betweenthe people who are doing support and the development of the productitself. But, if a problem extends into the base functionality of aproduct, there's nothing you can do.LAN Mag: In developing your model for fielding tech supportquestions, did you look at the competition?Walker: We certainly go to a lot of conferences and try to trackwhat other people are doing. We try to adopt any kind of ideas andsystems, but it is a homegrown system that's been developed by ourcompany in response to our customers' needs. LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Build Support to Build User Loyaltyfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Fifteen years ago, when the PC market was still in its infancy, agroup of individuals in Seattle shelled out US$500 and startedWalker, Richer & Quinn (WRQ). The company founders, includingcurrent president, Doug Walker, and vice-president of productdevelopment, Craig McKibben, saw the potential of the PC and itsinteraction with legacy systems.LAN Mag: Has the growing complexity of the networking world led tothe need for more technical support or a different approach towardit?Walker: When the PC started becoming commercially available in theearly 1980s, people were rebels; they were more self-supporting,which represented a revolt against the big glass room withmainframes and centralised IT.They were circumventing IT as an act of rebellion. IT wasn't partof the decision and also wasn't responsible for supporting any ofthe new products.In more recent years, because of the growing complexity ofnetworking and communications, people are ceding control back toIT. Buying decisions used to be driven by individuals, then bydepartments, and now it's by IT. Instead of a departmental decisionabout software, you're making a corporatewide and enterprisewidedecision about buying a piece of software. Often those buyers arevery concerned about support, and that's one of the first thingsthey want to talk about. They are very, very worried about thesupport, so when you do these contract negotiations to make one ofthese big sales, one of the first things out of their mouths is,'Let's talk about support.'LAN Mag: Does that apply more to host connectivity software, suchas your Reflection line of products, especially since customers arebuying thousands of licenses to connect PCs or workstations toenterprise systems?Walker: Yes. It's usually the first word out of their mouths,whereas back in the Wild West days it was more of an after thought.LAN Mag: Why has technical support traditionally been anafterthought?Walker: The early adopters of PC technology were more self-sufficient, and they took it upon themselves to deal with anyproblems that would arise.But I think the complexity has grown. When we started the companyup I was a programmer, and one of the really and truly fun thingsabout a PC was that you could understand everything in the wholemachine. Now it's just too complicated.LAN Mag: Are you trying to use your mainframe background as acompetitive advantage in promoting your technical support andservices to customers, and do you feel that technical support playsa big role when companies make a purchasing decision?Walker: It's definitely a key differentiator.LAN Mag: For the most part, is Guide Services the support thatyou've offered all along, only now it has a specific name?Walker: Yes, it's putting a name to the services that we have beenoffering, and it also marks an introduction of some new services.One of the reasons for putting this name on it, too, is to heightenour customers' awareness that these services exist.What we wanted to do under the Guide Services umbrella was includewhat we call our Help Desk Plan. We wanted to be able to provide aset of services that was particularly geared toward a help desk. Wewanted to create a flat-fee-based service plan that was based onthe installation size, set up a priority support team that couldmeet some of the customers' specific requirements, give aguaranteed technician response time, include product training, andprovide customers with technical information bulletins that givedepth of information greater than what other customers might need.LAN Mag: How do you differentiate the Help Desk Plan from theprimary support plans of traditional technical support services,which provide free, ongoing technical support?Walker: The Help Desk Plan doesn't replace the traditional plan.For most of our customers the traditional plan is quite sufficient.But there were additional services that especially the very largecustomers were asking us for, so we felt like we needed to design aplan to provide those.LAN Mag: With an internal help desk application, or even if yououtsource the help desk functions, a staff can solve a variety ofproblems, not just those related to one manufacturer or one type ofproduct. Does your help desk follow along the same lines, or is itexclusive to WRQ's Reflection line?Walker: Well, we don't have training on other products, but one ofthe things that's been a differentiator of our technical supportacross the board has been our desire to support customers in theirenvironment. In other words, we didn't want to pass the buck; ifthe customer called us up with a problem with another piece ofsoftware, we typically try to remain the point of contact, try tosolve the problem with them, or in some cases call the manufacturerof the troublesome software. Sometimes it's our software that'scausing the problem, but the customer doesn't always really know.And the boundaries between your software and someone else's are notalways very well defined. So one of the differentiators for us isthat we've always been willing to have an extended view of wherethat boundary is.LAN Mag: Are your help desk technicians using software at their endin order to keep track of the number of calls open and log them in?Walker: We use software from Scopus for tracking problems. We alsouse it for development as well. It's our bug-tracking tool; inother words, if test engineers were testing a product, they wouldrun it through Scopus. It's an integrated system involving everyoneacross our development organisation. Also, all of our internationaloffices are integrated on the same system. Then, we have aknowledge base set up of instances, problems, and solutions. We useVerity's engine to search that.LAN Mag: From a support standpoint, do you keep records of eachcustomer as they call in? For example, if a company called todayand then again in six months with a similar problem would yourtechnicians be able to call up that record?Walker: With Scopus' system, when someone calls in, it tracks thecase, and that record is an event of your problem. The record ofthe type of problem as an archetype goes into this knowledge basethat we track with the Verity search engine. We even keepindividual cases; just because it's solved, it's not dead. We counton the knowledge base to archive a case.LAN Mag: In general what has been some of the feedback that you'vereceived from customers who've heard about your new offerings?Walker: We've gotten a lot of comments back from customers. We alsodid a lot of beta with key customers beforehand, so for a lot ofour key customers, the announcement was anti-climactic because somany of them already knew about it. But, right now it looks likethe feedback is really good. I don't have figures on how manypeople have signed up for this, but we're very pleased with theresults so far.LAN Mag: How have you dealt with customers' normal frustrationswhen they call a technical support line?Walker: One of the things that's a bit confusing about support isthat consumers have different requirements, depending on whatthey're doing. For example, if you just bought a word processor,and you just typed up your story, and you wanted to print it, butyou couldn't figure out how, you might call the customer supportline. And you would probably like to know as soon as possible whichbutton to press to print the document. So the amount of time thatyou spend on hold would be a key source of dissatisfaction. If theysaid, "I'll let you know in a week," that might not do.Similarly, if you have a mainframe or some sort of central serveror computer, people need hardware support. And, basically, if thepower goes down or the disk drive just died, you need thesupporting manufacturer or support organisation to get it back up.It's more complicated if you're buying corporate connectivitysoftware. There are fewer of the "How do I print this document?"calls. The nice thing about those calls is that they're not verycomplicated, but the need for immediate response is high. It's moretypical in systemwide connectivity that the problem is verycomplex, so the time element is different. It might be a problemthat requires weeks to solve or even may require onsite analysis.LAN Mag: You discussed how tech support has changed over the last15 years. What is your general opinion on the tech supportavailable today?Walker: A lot of my own experiences are both prior to WRQ andduring the early years of WRQ, when I was doing consulting. Whenyou do consulting, you're putting together systems from differentvendors to create a workable system. And the biggest frustrationthat I had, especially with software, was system problems. I wouldget an intrinsic problem in some software and often the supportorganisation that I would call had no way of dealing with it. Itwas beyond the scope of their definition of support. It wasn'twhether their support was good or bad, it was not.If [a company's] support is not so good, you can complain more andjump up and down and raise more hell. But when it's not, it'sharder. And that's the toughest situation that I used to run into.I think a lot of people who have been consultants have run intothat problem. So that may have been one thing that has coloured ourattitude toward not setting limits on a systemwide penetration of asupport call.I think that problem is even more acute for people these days dueto the complexity of networking. Networking is such a huge issuetoday, and it wasn't so much a few years ago. Right now, thesoftware that's causing the IT professionals to lose sleep and pulltheir hair out is networking and the connectivity software.LAN Mag: Do you see tech support, whether it's good or bad, as akey factor in customers' company loyalty?Walker: It certainly seems to work for us. I try as often as I canto work on key sales situations. You'll run into situationssometimes where it's a real advantage to compete with a companythat already is installed in a site if their support is bad, asopposed to both companies arriving at the customer's site and bothclaiming to have a great product and great support.Let's say in this case the other company's product is alreadyinstalled and the customer discovered that the support was not sogood. Our support becomes a key way to make sales and close thedeal. It is definitely one of the key questions for customers.LAN Mag: Some studies suggest that half of the cost of softwareownership is taken up by support. Does that mean customers arepaying that much for technical support services?Walker: It's your own support infrastructure. In other words, whatdoes it cost to own a PC? A very elementary analysis would be,'What are PCs going for these days?' But the truth of the matteris, when you put all of the time of your support organisation outthere, it might be double that. Certainly we find that true in ourown organisation. The sticker price is only about half the story.Support means more than your IS person walking around, loadingsoftware, and upgrading software.LAN Mag: Do you feel your approach to support services is unique inthe industry?Walker: Our view of support is a differentiating point with us, andWRQ has, from the beginning, looked at itself as a long-termcompany trying to establish long-term relationships with ourcustomers. From the beginning, we've wanted to have this solutionorientation, and wanted to provide support to our customers tobuild that relationship because we were taking a long-term view.Our attitude toward tech support is that it's extremely congruentwith our overall business philosophy. If you're looking at the waywe do support, it makes it all very reasonable. LANComments? E-mail all letters to:aptnet@singnet.com.sgCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: GETTING WEB EXPERTISE?from LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996For those who are interested in getting a head start in Webpublishing but don't have the in-house expertise, Netframe Systemshas just introduced the ClusterServer 8560i, a fully-integratedIntranet server solution."Most companies are excited about deploying on Intranet, but manydo not currently have the in-house expertise required to getstarted, " said US-based Rob Van Naarden, VP of Sales, NetframeSystems."All that the company's webmaster needs to do, is simply answer aseries of short questions in a standard wizard."The new system comprises a high-capacity Netframe server, Intranettools, Web server software, Netframe's own Site Architect softwareand a comprehensive range of templates, wizards, tutorials andscripts. Using this suite of products, corporations can create thestructure for an Intranet and have their system on-line in lessthan sixty minutes, claims Van Naarden.The price of the server starts at less than US$25,000 for a fullyconfigured system, including software.Users design their Web site with Site Architect and then addcontent. Netframe even provides pre-formatted content for usefulWeb information such as delivery tracking, airline and hotelcontact information.Netframe's Intranet server is based on the company's ClusterServerplatform, Windows NT, the Microsoft Internet Information Server(IIS), Microsoft Access database, and the Excite search engine, andNetframe's Site Architect software.Netframe has offices in Singapore, China, Japan, Hong Kong andAustralia. LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: PCL 6 Speeds It Upfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996The watched printer never prints. Instead, it sits calmly, lightson, processing, taking its own sweet time-while you wait. For thosetired of the waiting game, Hewlett-Packard's (HP) new version ofPrinter Control Language (PCL 6) decreases the downtime between theprint command and tactile gratification.HP has been upgrading PCL since 1984, when the language was firstintroduced to improve communication between laser printers andworkstations.PCL 6 is designed for Windows and OS/2 environments that aresaturated with complex graphics. The Windows graphical directinterface (GDI) commands are translated by the printer driver intoPCL commands, which are sent by the host computer to the printervia the network or local parallel connection.PCL firmware in the printer, in conjunction with the printer'sprocessor and memory, translates the PCL commands into dots. Thenthe laser printer engine images the dots onto paper.Complex documents print faster because the printer's PCL 6 firm-ware and hardware process smaller, more compact object-orientedcommands for graphics rather than long strings of code sequences.For example, using PCL 5e, 1,130 bytes are needed to print arectangle with rounded corners. PCL 6 prints the rectangle using 19bytes, reducing the amount of traffic.PCL 6 also allows users to regain control of their PC andapplications sooner because the printer driver quickly translatesthe GDI commands to PCL 6.Improved print quality is another aspect of PCL 6. Users get trueWYSIWYG printing because the PCL commands that define a documentmap more closely to GDI commands, and the Windows printer driverautomatically downloads fonts within a document to the printer ifthey are not loaded on the printer.In addition, PCL 6 has complete backward compatibility. For thebenefit of users today, PCL 6 is currently included in HP's latestrange of LaserJet 5, 5N, and 5M laser printers. LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: UB Networks Revamps Supportfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996UB Networks may be in an iffy position with regards to its futureparent but it is toning up to remain in the business. Peter Ciceri,vice-president and general manager of Asia-Pacific operationsrecently let on that a comprehensive revamp of their customersupport programme was due.At press time the sprucing up had barely begun but Ciceri promisedthat UB faithfuls could look forward to a "channels-ready, end-userdriven support programme"."We will concentrate on professional services, customer care andpost-sales support," said Ciceri. "End users can look forward toeven obtaining level one service direct from UB should they chooseto. Certified channel partners can provide up to level two support."The end user will determine who [the VARs or UB] he wants to workwith," said Ciceri. He added that directors for services andcustomer care would soon be hired.UB has been trying to establish itself outside of the high endsegment. Said Ciceri, "We need to take price cuts [in the mid- tolow-end] to build the market." However, Ciceri felt that UB wasstrong enough at the high-end: "We have reset prices across theregion to meet competitor prices aggressively." LANby Ben ChongCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Hughes Provides Satellite Linkfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996If the current crop of wide area connectivity options doesn't giveyou the performance or speed you've been hoping for, NetWare-centric users can now harness the speed of satellite communicationfor applications such as broadcasting large files to a number oflocations and shared high-speed Internet access.DirecPC for NetWare, jointly developed by Hughes Network Systems,Helius, and Cisco Systems, builds on a standalone product releasedby HNS in 1994. The networked version includes hardware from HNS,ISA card for the NetWare server, Internet Junction IPX-to-TCP/IPsoftware from Cisco, and LAN-to-satellite integration software fromHelius.DirecPC provides two services: Turbo Internet and Digital PackageDelivery. Turbo Internet allows users to dial in to their ISPthrough a browser and send requests through a modem. The DigitalPackage Delivery service provides a way to deliver data files tomultiple locations through a single broadcast at speeds of 3 Mbps.LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Olicom Raises Profilefrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Denmark's Olicom is laying the groundwork for a drive into theworkgroup switching market with Token Ring, Fast Ethernet and 155Mbps ATM hardware due out in early '97. Olicom, with regionaloffices in Singapore and Hong Kong, has been established in Asiafor a couple of years, but has yet to be known outside of the TokenRing sphere.Michael Jonsson, vice-president of international sales, said thatthis impression was going to change. First on the to-do list wouldbe an upgrade of all support services for the region to pave theway."We need to build up the support programmes because we are notprepared yet. We have a low profile in Asia-Pacific," said Jonsson."One part of the rejuvenated support plan involves more pre-salesstaff in Asia. They will help the end-user do testing for productsuitability and directly work with them."For Level 2 technical support, Jonsson said that a central sitewould be set up in Sydney by the end of the year to provide 24hour, multi-language phone support. Customers would be given 1-800numbers and calls would be automatically routed to open supportoffices. "However, we believe that nine out of ten questions can besolved by Level 1 support," said Jonsson. Olicom's distributors andVARs would provide Level 1 support. Two of Olicom's VARs here areITS and Teledata. LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: ManageWise Grabs NT and Javafrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996The story of ManageWise has always been about the expanding reachof the management console, according to Prem Uppaluru, Novell'svice president and general manager of the company's management andadministration division.When Novell combined its NetWare Management System (NMS) withIntel's LANDesk Manager in early 1995, the server-centric andnetwork topology functions of NMS were added to the primarilydesktop-oriented functions of LANDesk. ManageWise 2.0 incorporateduser administration into the product and also added features thatsupport management by third-party service providers, such asintegrators and value-added resellers.Novell's management and administration division is currentlybeginning to pass along the results of last year's initiatives bydelivering cross-platform networking services, rather thanproprietary file and print transport services. ManageWise 2.1, setfor release in the third quarter of 1996, extends the productbeyond the NetWare space. The new version includes a managementagent for NT Server that allows the ManageWise console toconfigure, control, monitor, and troubleshoot the heretoforeforeign servers using the same interface and the same SNMP accessmechanism it uses for NetWare servers.New client support in ManageWise 2.1 includes OS/2 Warp and Windows95, and Windows NT Workstation support is due by the end of 1996.Novell has restructured its relationship with Intel to eliminateout-of-sync update problems, with Novell taking responsibility forupgrading the ManageWise components; Novell will provide thosecomponents to Intel for its separate line of LANDesk products.Upgrades to ManageWise in 1997 will include a Web browser console,which will provide cross-platform access to management andadministration data, and Java applets executing on NetWare serversand on the browser system will deliver such capabilities as real-time traffic monitoring and disk drive utilisation statistics. LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Novell Brings Out IntranetWarefrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Convert the majority of its NetWare 3.x users over to Netware 4.11,Novell has decided to launch IntranetWare in Asia. IntranetWare isa bundling sweetener that will include the latest NetWare 4.11(code-named Green River, NetWare Web Server, Netscape Navigator,Web-site authoring tools and a multiprotocol router for WAN andInternet connections."We are now making it very compelling for users to go on to NetWare4.11. Previously, they may not have seen any real benefit upgradingto NetWare 4, but today we are offering them ready components forIntranet. With IntranetWare, users are only adding value toexisting network," said Derek Foo, Novell's managing director forSingapore and S.E Asia region.IntranetWare enables IT managers to choose how and when they wantto transition their corporate networks to intranets, by allowingthem to selectively install those networking components.Novell is giving organisations a platform upon which they can addManageWise and GroupWise to create full-service intranets that willinclude directory, security, file, print, management and messaging.To access the intranet, users only need to launch the NetscapeNavigator browser from any desktop workstation and pass networktraffic to the server for IPX-to-IP translation.Traditionally, network administrators had to install and maintain aseparate IP stack on each desktop to provide NetWare clients withaccess to IP-based intranet or Internet services. Because IP isonly deployed on the IntranetWare server, administrators save timeand money by tracking and maintaining only one IP address per groupof users.When organisations are ready to move to IP, IntranetWare supportsTCP/IP with dynamic host configuration protocol (DHCP) and BootP toease IP address management. Future enhancements to IntranetWarewill feature full firewall and proxy cache capabilities. Theproduct will ship in October. LANby Cordelia LeeCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: LAN SupportPackfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Just launched across Asia, Hewlett- Packard's (HP) LAN SupportPackprogramme allows smaller companies to supplement the services oftheir VAR with what HP guarantees to be "reliable" phone supportfrom HP technical staff.To keep things simple, you just go to your VAR and actually buy"packs" off the shelf. These yellow boxes contain a password, alog-in diskette for your network details and specs and an"incident" card for you to keep track of the number of times youcall HP. The packs are sold in 5- and 10-incident versions.From their experience, HP says that 75 per cent of problems can beresolved remotely. For on-site work, however, you would stillrequire the services of your VAR. LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Singapore Data Warehousing Alliancefrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Toying with data warehousing? Call the newly set up Singapore DataWarehousing Alliance (SDWA) and you can visit their demonstrationcentre to get a taste of such a project. Led by Hitachi Data System(HDS), 13 vendors in the database hardware and software businesshave formed the SDWA to "assist" you in "understanding andimplementing" data warehousing solutions.The original line up consist of members who are notables in thefields of data modeling, extraction, management, data mining andend user query tools (see list). However at press time, Oracle wasnot in the bunch. Also, senior managers at HDS had not thought ofgaining the support of the Data Processing Manager's Association inSingapore either. For more details, please contact Clive Tilbrookeat 65-2246377. LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Continuity Planfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996The Singapore Computer Society has established a new sub-group (orchapter, as they call it) in late August.Called the Business Continuity Group (BCG), it aims to promoteBusiness Continuity as an essential component of business strategy.As explained by group president Goh Moh Heng, Business Continuitygoes beyond disaster recovery which is merely the IT part of thestrategy.Organisations with a Business Continuity plan can gain more timefor a total infrastructure revamp should disaster strike.In the long run, the BCG also intends to tie-up with organisationsin the US or the UK to run examinations in Asia to certify BCspecialists.Goh said that the affiliated organisation had not been decided yetalthough one possibility could be the Disaster Recovery Instituteof the US.At press time, a first conference was scheduled to run in Singaporeon Sep 30 as part of the BCG's activities. LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: D-Link Rounds Out Customer Servicefrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996D-link is putting the final touches to a sophisticated 24-hourcustomer service programme which it says will raise theirresponsiveness several fold for both their VARs and end-users. "Weare now three months into the programme and field problems havebeen drastically reduced by 50 per cent because of our problemtracking system," said Henry Ngai, D-Link's vice-president ofmarketing and customer support.The new programme uses Australia as a global support centre withSingapore as the regional support centre, and arms D-link supportstaff with a Lotus Notes-based intranet for access to asynchronised solution database and customer equipment purchaserecords and problem logs.Said Ngai: "If Australia logs off, customers can call the UK andthey would have the same records there. Databases are synchronised.Calls can be forwarded to the different customer service units aswell. The nature of support is really trial and error." In thepast, each country maintained its own database of customers.Said Ngai, "Problems have been promptly identified and supportstaff can fax or download from the web."The D-link support structure consists of 3 layers. Level 1 problemsare mostly to do with parameters and settings. These are non-systemproblems. Level 2 engineers handle problem tracking and isolation.Level 3 engineers fix the bugs and solve those problems whichcannot be solved in the field."We have relocated level 2 support into the testing labs. Thecompany has spent between US$5 to US$6 million on equipment and weare sure that we can replicate all problems encountered in ourlabs. In the past, some problems were not tracked," said Ngai.At the centre of the programme is a new independent customerservice division (CSD), which controls customer service units ineach country. "Now, no matter what the query, the CSD will handlethe matter," said Ngai. LANby Ben ChongCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Video Link Optionsfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Lucent's Multipoint Conferencing Unit (MCU), release 4.0 has beenintroduced into the Asian market as ISDN services get ever morepopular and economical.Features to be noted in this version are options for data sharingthrough a video link, the expansion of four access ports to 64, andto include four on-screen callers, with the ability to visuallylink 24 locations on a single MCU or 46 locations between twoconnected MCUs, which the sales support manager of Lucent'sbusiness communications systems division, Lawrence Lee claims isnot offered by any other system."Through the feature of continuous presence plus we can deliverthis kind of switching, whereas our competitors can only view fivefixed locations with additional participants being heard, notseen," he said.The system is capable of transmitting voice, video, and data atspeeds from 112 to 1920 Kbps, supporting ITU standards H.320 andT.120 for video and data conferencing respectively. Additionally,release 4.0 is compatible with algorithms used on videoconferencingsystems from Intel, PictureTel, and Compression Labs.According to Lee, the product is expected to be well accepted,especially in markets such as Hong Kong where PRI ISDN is to belaunched by the end of this year, and in China where privatenetworks can avail of facilities such as videoconferencing.Users may be interested to know there is an additional upgradeinvestment plan, which allows the client to set up an annual ormonthly payment schedule for future upgrades, with automaticupdates of hardware and software once they become available. LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: ATM Banks in Chinafrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996The LAN business unit of Datacraft China is about to constructShenzhen Development Bank's (SDB) entire branch networkinginfrastructure based on ATM technology.SDB has purchased Cisco's Lightstream 1010 switch, Catalyst 5000and 3000 Ethernet switches, Cisco 7507 and 2522 routers, as well asstackable hubs from Bay Networks. The system, which is to provideLAN connections with IP/IPX, is expected to offer connectivity to70 branches of the bank throughout Shenzhen in mainland China.Enhanced bandwidth for multimedia applications, will be availablevia the ATM technology using China's high-speed digital datanetwork (DDN) backbone.The contract is worth US$680,000, the largest of the total four nowmanaged by Datacraft in the Guangdong province of China, with threein Shenzhen and one in Zhuhei.But although the LAN market-base in China is huge, the profitmargin is small, with so many vendors now fighting for marketshare.Said Stanley Chan, Datacraft's South China account manager :"How doyou compete with other distributors who represent the same vendorsuch as Cisco. It is cut-throat competition." LANby Joyita HaldarCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Get Management Toolsfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996For those who are venturing out from the relatively safeenvironments of host-based computing and the centralised managementview, now might be a good time to try client-server as the numberof systems management products are starting to surface in Asia.Getting an application management product to integratewith yourexisting network management platform is a good place to start. Onecompany which dabbles in apps management is Compuware.Compuware has a line-up of mainframe management products but it istheir client-server range that catches the eye. Central to it allare its Econet and Ecotools products which allow managment of appson the LAN/WAN and servers, respectively.Ecotools work through polling agents residing in your distributedhardware and offers event management, performance monitoring andresource monitoring. Econet monitors apps traffic on the networkwith RMON probes and can be set to notify you should thresholds beexceeded. A modeling tool is included to allow you to test adds andchanges before any physical work is begun.Compuware's international sales manager for Ecosystems, Gary Angel,revealed that a new product, Ecoclient, would soon be available toallow fault-detection and diagnosis on hung apps. "It would takethe terminal information and see which module failed. It can thenpage you, trap information and show enough so that engineers canfix the code," he said."Start to evaluate management tools today. Don't add apps andservers first because it will get too messy," said Angel. "Considertools such as apps management first to get the apps up 100 per centof the time." LANby Ben ChongCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: Switches Rule!from LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Industry consultant Tom Noelle, president of US-based CMI, predictsthat routers will eventually be replaced by switches."Users arestill going to have some performance determinism loss even if youbuild a switched virtual core," says Noelle. "The funtion of arouter is inherently non-deterministic. A LAN switch is the onlysolution that allow users to allocate resources specifically to theapplication flow."As compaines move into enterprise TCP/IP, many will develop arequirement for central-policy management. "A user can't justrequest for any amount of bandwidth," said Noelle. "Some mechanismhas to inform the network how much bandwidth to allocate."By moving into policy-bandwidth management, the industry isdrifting away from the concept of routers. Routers were designedwith the idea that end-systems decided what they were going to sendand the network just carried it.Cisco realises that the router is doomed as a strategic device,which is why it is now moving into the switching arena. LANCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: MORE ROUTERS TO THE EDGE, BUILD ATM COREfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996If you want performance determinism, then you don't want routers.This is the view taken by Tom Noelle, president of US-based CIMI, anetwork consultancy firm.A router, according to Noelle, is simply nothing more than aconnectionless device. "Routers do not allow users to allocateresources to a particular information flow in a way that's reallyeffective," said Noelle"If I have an e-mail and video flow through a router, it doesn'tknow the difference between the two and can't give one of thempriority over the other."So does this spell the death of routers in networks? Apparently,not just yet.Router vendors are working hard to improve this. There's now aprotocol called RSVP or Resource Reservation Protocol that issupposed to provide the prioritisation of important traffic flows."The only problem with RSVP is that it's easy for routers to make areservation but it's hard to fill one. In terms of implementation,what do you do in a router to make this flow work better that thatflow," said Noelle.The solution is to have a check list to see which particular flowshould be given priority. However, this can be very time-consumingespecially if you have a very long list.Router vendors have also come out with the solution of sticking avirtual circuit processor on the router to make their routingprocess more efficient. "But even if you do this, you are stillrouting," Noelle cautioned.Cisco's architecture like NetFlow, for example, builds virtualcircuits with a packet processor that runs underneath the router toreduce the amount of information the router handles."The only way to make a router deterministic is to stop making it arouter. So why not go the rest of the way by not having it there tostart off with," said Noelle.Users should instead consider LAN switches. Routing could existonly at one place in the network and that is where a connectionlessLAN has to be connected into a virtual circuit infrastructure,according to Noelle."My advice is to build a virtual circuit core with Frame Relay orATM switching and push all the routers to the very edge of thenetwork. Once you've done that, begin to replace them with LANswitches on a phase by phase basis," said Noelle. "Use routers onlywhere you don't have any performance problems."The router, added Noelle, will eventually become a small low-costdevice that's subservient to the ATM network, instead of thebuilding block of the network itself, added Noelle. LANby Cordelia LeeCopyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: LAN MAGAZINE: EDITORIAL: A New Frontierfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996Having a bold vision alone is just not enough.What sets Malaysia apart from the rest of the pack, is itswillingness to take a risk on leading-edge technologies. With thenation's Multimedia Super Corridor (MSC) taking shape and with themerging of telecommunications and networking technologies, Malaysiaand the rest of Southeast-Asia can be assured of contributing andhaving a major impact on the world in the future of networking.Even non-IT business executives are trying to grasp the concept ofthe MSC, envisioned by the Prime Minister of Malaysia. But whatwill ensure its success, as Oracle's chief operating officer RayLane correctly points out, is the clarity and vision of thisconcept.A concept where attitude becomes a competitive advantage. AndMalaysia, he adds, is the first institution that has put forthattitude in these critical factors for competitive advantage. ThePM of Malaysia, himself, is personally taking an aggressive role inpushing IT into government institutions and universities.Critics say that the Multimedia Super Corridor serves merely toprolong the life of the country's booming economy. And they are notwrong. Besides cheaper labour and lower operating costs, Malaysiais also offering extremely attractive incentive schemes to lurecompanies to relocate their headquarters, R&D as well asmanufacturing facilities along the MSC.But more importantly, Malaysia aims to be the technology showcasefor the Asian region. Plans are in the pipeline to build individualstate networks and eventually link all thirteen stateselectronically.For a start, universities are now in the process of implementingthe latest high-speed networks such as ATM.Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia just purchased 68 Centillion 100Multi LAN/ATM switches from Bay Networks. The number of switchesinstalled across the campus is expected to make UKM one of thelargest ATM sites in the world. The network today connects about 40buildings, covering more than 8 square kilometers of the campus.But mind you, the UKM network is only part of a strategic nation-wide push by the Malaysian government to network within thecommunity and leapfrog into the age of digital economy.Riding the same route as the Internet, ATM networks will firstspring from universities and eventually, spread into the commercialarenas through joint projects and partnerships .Other early adopters of ATM are the technology parks, as they'll bethe first homes for new multimedia developers that will move intothe MSC. Hi-tech companies will want to run their sophisticatedsystems and development tools on high-speed networking technology.Ironically, the recent Kuala Lumpur City Centre project did cause astir among some ardent proponents of ATM. Imagine KLCC, Malaysia'spride and joy, was going to use FDDI for its backbone, theymuttered."Why would anybody want to use such an outdated technology," saidone puzzled senior executive from a US-based networking company."Not only can it not carry multimedia traffic, in real terms, FDDIis also very expensive. If anyone is looking for a backbonetechnology today that is proven and stable, ATM is the obvioussolution."However, conservative users contend that many of the major ATMspecs are still not out yet and that any "standard-compliant" ATMproducts available today are somewhat proprietary.Still, whoever wins the KL project (which is estimated to be in theregion of US$100 million) will be basking in the limelight. It's amassive undertaking that's never be done before in the world, sayindustry observers.Like it or not, all eyes will be focused on Malaysia for the nextcouple of years. Networking vendors are looking to Malaysia notonly for an ATM testbed but for other riskier technologies; andlater, hopefully, a shining example for the rest of the region toemulate.Copyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List CopyrightLAN MAGAZINE via NewsNetOctober 1, 1996NETWORKS: LAN MAGAZINE: EDITORALfrom LAN MAGAZINE, October 1996As trade journalists, if there is one thing that we abhore morethan having to get into the office before ten in the morning it isthe bundle of phrases that fall under the banner of technospeak.You must know them: the technical acroynms eg. SNMP, 100Base-T,segmentation, RMON, agents and LAN Emulation. Or the concept jargonwhere one word or phrase supposedly explains a sheaf of networktopologies eg. VLANs, SMP, Switched Workgroups, intranet. All akind of industry shorthand to be shared and bandied around amongthose in the know.To explain to users and network manager how the many new hardwareproducts fit in with existing networks, our writers most of thetime have to get to the very basics of a concept usually dunkedbefore them wholesale by the vendors, who also do their utmost toconvince us that their product does everything well. And even matchthe colour of the carpet.This is where the shorthand technospeak of the networking industrykicks in. But what we are worried about is a new range of phraseswhich are being shoehorned into the networking industry from the PCworld.If you have been to enough seminars, you will know that the phrase"total solution" is used far too liberally. The top hardwarevendors are guilty of this. Everyone claims to be a total solutionprovider, and yet they have only recently acquired new companies tofill out gaps in their product line up.Plug-n-Play is another phrase that is totally inappropriate for thenetworking world. And yet vendors just entering the smalloffice/remote office market are throwing this around to add glitzto their new range of hardware. We even encountered sales managersfrom the most well known router company who said, with a straightface, that their new routers for this market were PnP. We fail tosee how configuring router tables can be an easy process. Perhapsthe sales contract includes free foreign labour.In the land of the blind, the one eyed man is king. In the land ofnetworking, snowjobs are increasing. Nowhere more so than in Asiawhere certified NetWare professionals remain in shortsupply andwhere UTP cabling is left to pullers without installationcertification at all. Where some with NetWare and TCP/IP basics, acouple of years under his belt and a knack for Adobe Pagemill andMS Word 6 can profess to be an intranet consultant. (We kid younot)We dare say that most of the time the vendors don't help either.Maybe you caught the shifty dealings of the most well known NOSvendor last month when another trade journal exposed its selectivemanipulation of analyst data to place itself higher in the marketshare stakes. Apparently the Microsoft marketing hoopla method isbeing studied by competitors as well.And the BS shovelling is not confined to salesmen. Visiting seniorexecutives can fall under the spell as well. Our latest encounterwas with a networking NIC vendor whose CEO popped into town for avisit. On being asked about their business in Asia, he gave the oftheard dazzle about how Asia is their fastest growing market, how itwill be their largest soon, blah blah.What the executive did not realise was that the journalistinterviewing him before us was a close colleague of ours who hadgrilled him to admit that his Asian market share had actually beenfalling by more than a couple of percentage points since the yearpast and that there had been difficulties with the authorities inobtaining type approval.The bottom line really is not to look for how cheap the product isor how well the company name is lit in neon. The days of vendorsmerely moving boxes in volume is not that far behind us. The onlyreal benefit is that networking technology does work.So as you settle in with this latest offering from the MillerFreeman publishing group, keep us in mind. We welcome all news andletters, gripes and tips. Call or e-mail to aptnet@singnet. com.sgand help us eradicate the snowjobs.Copyright 1996 Lan MagazineBack to Headline List