WT03-B26-1IA029-000311-B014-101http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/deans/profile5.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162104 text/html 4824HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:19:20 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:04 GMTContent-length: 4650 EARTH OBSERVATION CENTRE Project Profile: Global Change Staffing Leader Dr Dean Graetz (email) d.graetz @ eoc.csiro.au (voice) (06) 216, 7199 (fax) (06) 216, 7222 Computational support - to be appointed (part-time) Recent publications Graetz, R.D., Fisher, R.P. and Wilson, M.A. (1992). 'Looking back: The Changingface of the Australian Continent', COSSA, Canberra, Australia, 176 pp. Graetz, R.D. (1993). 'The Cutting Edge of Global Change'. COSSA, Canberra,ISBN 0643047689, 28 pp. [5/1/5] Turner, B.L. Moss, R.H. & Skole, D.L. (1993). 'Relating Land Use andGlobal Land-Cover Change: A Proposal for an IGBP-HDP Core Project'. ReportNo. 24, IGBP, Stockholm, 65 pp. Wilson, M.A., Fisher, R.P. & Graetz, R.D., Campbell, S., & Wilson,S. (1993) 'Auswatch; Data Sets for the Study of Landcover Change'. (a CD-ROMof software and satellite image data companion to the Looking Back.). COSSA,Canberra, 540 Mb. Graetz, R.D. (1995). 'Futures of a wide brown land'. In Eckersley &Jeans (eds.) 'Challenge to Change: Australia in 2020', CSIRO, Melbourne,p 241-268. Graetz, R.D., Wilson, M.A. and Campbell, S.K. (1995). 'Landcover disturbanceover the Australian continent: A contemporary assessment.' BiodiversityUnit, Biodiversity Series, Paper No. 7, Department of the Environment, Sport& Territories, Canberra. Turner, B.L. et al (1995). 'Land-Use and Land-Cover Change: Science/ResearchPlan'. Report No. 35, IGBP, Stockholm, 132 pp. Graetz, R.D., Olsson, L. and Wilson, M.A. (1995). 'Interpreting a 9 yeartime-series of satellite observations for the Australian continent.' InGuyot, G. (ed.). Proceedings of the International Colloquium Photosynthesisand Remote Sensing, EARSel, Paris, pp 395-406. Graetz, R.D., Wilson, M.A. and Campbell, S.K. (1996). 'Looking Around: Acontemporary assessment of landcover disturbance for the Australian continent.'(Compact Disk format), CSIRO, Earth Observation Centre, Canberra, 370 Mb. Graetz, R.D., and Wilson, M.A. (In press). 'North-South: Where is the divide?'In Giambelluca & Henderson Sellers (eds.) Climate Change: DevelopingSouthern Hemisphere Perspectives, John Wiley & Sons, England. Graetz, R.D. (In press). Global Change and Terrestrial Biosphere: The Presentand Future Focus.' n Giambelluca & Henderson Sellers (eds.) ClimateChange: Developing Southern Hemisphere Perspectives, John Wiley & Sons,England. Graetz, R.D. (In press). Empirical and practical approaches to land surfacecharacterisation and change detection. In Hill, J.E. (ed.) 'Proceedingsof the Workshop on Remote Sensing for Land Degradation and DesertificationMonitoring in the Mediterranean Basin', 13-14 June, Valencia, Spain.European Commission, Directorate-General, Science, Research and Development,Brussels. Richards, J., Graetz, R.D., Gleick, P., Margalhaes, A., and Rosenberg, N.J.(In press). 'Landuse and landcover: The Cutting Edge of Global Change.'In Ashton, Cooper, Edmonds, Rayner & Rosenberg (eds.) Human Choice &Climate Change, Publisher TBA. National & international collaboration Foundation member (1989 - ) of the CSIRO Climate Change Research Program(CCRP, MDP #17). Co-investigator: A terrestrial source-sink carbon inventory etc.,of National Greenhouse Gas Inventory grant (1994 - 97, subproject D2). Co-investigator: GMS Pathfinder Project; jointly funded by NASA ,and CSIRO EOC. Co-investigator: Satellite measurements and terrestrial ecosystem modellingusing VEGETATION Instrument; CESBIO Laboratory, Toulouse, France, fundedby the EU VEGETATION Program, 1995 -97. Associate-investigator: POLDER on ADEOS Project; Consortium of Laboratories,France, funded by CNES-NASDA, 1995-1999. Dean Graetz, February 1996 WT03-B26-2IA029-000311-B014-163http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/dis1.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162151 text/html 15695HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:19:53 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:04 GMTContent-length: 15520 The EOC Concept The EOC Concept David L B Jupp The formation of the Earth Observation Centre (EOC) is a very welcome development.It is a concept that, in various forms, has been proposed and suggestedoften in CSIRO over the last 15 years but has always eventually fallen onbarren ground. The Simpson Report provided a catalyst for an EOC to finallycome into being. However, the EOC would not have progressed to its presentpoint if there were not an underlying and widely accepted desire to seesomething of this form develop. I believe that the desire existed beforethe Report was commissioned and involves much more than the data collection,storage and communication focus of MDP-19. Not withstanding this desire,the EOC can still be difficult to maintain. This will occur unless thereis a continuing level of strong commitment and support from the Organisationand from the individuals on whose skill and proud accomplishments its futuresuccess rests. Equally, with such support and commitment it cannot fail. Over those same 15 years there have developed strong centres of remote sensingexpertise in CSIRO. These have mostly had an applications focus and beenlocated in a range of different industry oriented Divisions. Decentralisationhas certainly lead to some of the difficulties listed in the Simpson Report.However, on the positive side, the period has seen remote sensing sciencein CSIRO develop soundly and productively in support of well defined applicationareas. These include atmospheric sciences, fisheries and oceans, water resources,mineral and geophysical exploration, soil survey, forestry and agriculturalapplications. The integration of the remote sensing scientists with appliedDivisions has been very fruitful in a way that their separation into a singledisciplinary Unit in the past may not have been. Australia has become verywell known for its application oriented combination of remote sensing scienceand real world applications. There has also developed strong support for a science focussed EOC fromthese groups. This has occurred in no small way because, in the words ofthe Simpson Report, "a given group's work attempts to cover instrumentationdevelopment, ground station operations, algorithm development, applicationsdevelopment, validation and product delivery. This task is too big for small,geographically isolated groups." The Simpson Report arose from a reviewof the Data Acquisition and Utilisation MDP-19. However, I believe the strongmove towards an EOC in CSIRO does not come from needs unique to the datagathering segments but from the wider truth of this statement. It appliesto the whole of the productive remote sensing and Earth Observing researchcommunity that has developed in CSIRO. The time has come when the value of focussing the skills of groups of scientistson issues common to the remote sensing science underpinning the applicationsacross many Divisions has become too great to deny. Modern remote sensingresearch has advanced from descriptive earth 'observation' through an eraof data gathering and exploratory image processing to a point where thevalue of remote sensing data as measurements is paramount. Remotely sensedmeasurements can be collected in a range of data dimensions and at timeand space scales which cannot be accessed in any other way. This has enabledgeographical applications to proceed in terms of scientific models and processunderstanding. The physical link between the data and the parameters ofinterest to users is providing the returns that previous image processingand 'correlation' based approaches could only suggest as being possible.'Making the transition' from close-range data that the end user can understandand needs to the recorded counts in a remotely sensed data stream is today'schallenge for remote sensing. This can be accomplished in a way that serves the needs of the establishedapplications areas in CSIRO and the wider Australian community. The meansis to thread together the internationally acclaimed skills of CSIRO researchersand provide them with the opportunity, support and facilities to jointlytackle common scientific themes and issues. The themes and issues tackledmust be those which underpin the applications being pursued in the individual,industry oriented Divisions and in the growing value added industry throughoutAustralia. This common base of interest includes issues relating to: sensor and instrument design and characteristics; base data processing; calibration and geometric/geographic modelling; integration with other data; atmospheric corrections; data management; the measurement models relating remotely sensed data and the targetsof applications; and the most effective computational algorithms; I believe an effective network of remote sensing scientists can be developed.It will consist of a well supported core group of scientists drawn fromcurrent CSIRO staff plus a few complementary and supporting additional staff.The core group will develop a network with remote sensing scientists inapplications areas and work in projects with them to provide their areasof applications with the means to make much greater progress. This willoccur as their efforts will not be dissipated in attempts to cover all thetasks and resolve all the problems arising between instrument deploymentand product delivery. Such activity was identified as a common problem amongthe AVHRR data collectors in the Simpson Report. The Simpson report also proposed a new focus for MDP-19 which was to develop'Level 1.5' products that could overcome the need for applications orientedgroups to solve the problems in the list above. However, I disagree withthe assumption made in the Report that "science focus areas (Level2) naturally will emerge if the Level 1.5 work is done well." The workof the Centre must be focussed on the measurement models that enable theapplications. The Level 1.5 products are the raw material on which boththe Centre and the applications research areas can work. The viewpoint of the core group and associated Divisional scientists - collectivelythe EOC - should also not be focussed on particular instruments nor theirspecialised data. Rather, the EOC should emphasise applications and themeasurement models that relate the targets to the appropriate range of availableraw data. For example, monitoring vegetation cover has applications at manyscales and finer scale data is usually needed to define cover/image relationships.If the working scale is 1:10,000 to 1:25,000 then airborne data and possiblySpot or TM data can meet the needs - but AVHRR cannot. On the other hand,at regional scale, the integration provided by AVHRR can match the scalingof the application's needs and the different platform and sensor becomesthe appropriate data. The central issue, however, is that underlying allthe choices are the radiative transfer in the coupled atmosphere and surfacelayer and its scaling behaviour. The primary activity therefore must include flexible considerations of sensorcharacteristics and scale of platforms together with the way they createmeasurements of water covered areas, complex land surfaces and the atmosphere.The specific issues (including scale and areas of application) relatingto particular instruments can be gathered productively within the measurementthemes. The priorities and emphases of the groupings must be determinedby the needs of the applications. The areas of application must reflectthe interests of the Divisions and other clients in the Australian EarthObservation industry rather than the interests of the individual scientists. Remote sensing and Earth Observation are not only about satellite data noronly about low resolution meteorological satellite data. The pressing needsfor environmental monitoring demand data with spatial scales from 1:5,000to 1:5,000,000 and time scales from daily to decadal. It would be a seriousomission to ignore the tactical monitoring and assessment issues createdby sudden or localised disturbances and natural disasters. They are as importantto respond to as the longer term environmental changes being monitored byspace observing systems. In addition, integrating the observations at anindividual site with satellite data without concern for the intermediatescales creates a disturbing gap in calibration methodology. This gap canonly be filled if there is a commitment to higher spatial, spectral andtemporal resolution earth observation in the centre. It is no accident thatthe advanced EOS instrument - MODIS - has high spectral resolution and multi-scaledata. I believe that the EOC must also from the beginning address the issues involvedwith airborne (1:5,000 to 1:10,000 scale) data and the higher spatial andspectral resolution sensors they carry. This must be done within the sameintegrated framework of measurement models and algorithms it develops todeal with satellite data and the various sensors they carry. The scalabilityof processing and the interpretation algorithms is both practical and fundamentalto creating successful operational and packaged links between sensor andtarget on any platform. Developments in instruments able to be deployedon aircraft at the present time is similar to the development of PCs inthe early 80's. Very soon the range of options will be enormous and theopportunities they create for rapid tactical earth observation must notbe neglected. The greatest opportunity lies in the potential for them tobe calibrated and have sensitive, narrow and flexibly placed spectral bands.Their needs in this case are exactly for the science and algorithms theEOC has the capacity to provide. As an example of how measurement modelscan integrate with the data processing stream, I have attached a documentdescribing some of the airborne work that has been done at CSIRO Divisionof water Resources. This work is currently being developed in a controlledcombination of commercialisation and collaborative international research. For the centre to be successful, there is a need to create strong threadsof collaboration and interaction among the excellent scientists currentlydispersed throughout CSIRO. Some should become fully part of the core EOCbut others should simply be encouraged and supported to make use of theEOC and participate in joint research. This would be ensured through makingsignificant (eg 3 or more month) visits to other laboratories and/or theEOC centres essential components of the collaboration. The EOC could consistof one primary core group in a single location plus more tempory 'satellite'groups which are developed in collaborating Divisions and centres for specificprojects and studies. Exchange and significant visits between the Australiangroups are alternatives to re-location. They may well provide the 'glue'the EOC needs in order to create open collaboration, trust and frequentcontact between the scientists that make up the strong base of skills infundamental remote sensing science. The budget of the EOC will need a veryvisible and solid allocation for this activity rather than either beingrestricted to the core group at the centre or dispersed in small allocations.The alternative provision of separate small 'grants' to geographically separatedgroups can only make the fragmentation and lack of critical mass at theseparate sites worse. The EOC should also encourage joint projects with industry. Its clientsmust potentially be inside and outside CSIRO. In the early 1980's, the CanadianCCRS pursued a policy of collaboration with industry in fundamental sciencethat involved secondment of staff from industry to CCRS for extended periodsas part of the R&D. This has created a strong science and research focusin the Canadian earth observation industry which has paid off considerably.Tasks that could be done by industry or that were desirable for industryto take on were always contracted out rather than done in-house - but withclose collaboration and staff exchange. You cannot assist industry by competingwith it. I believe this is the cooperative model the EOC should also adopt.In doing so, the Centre will also need to address the concerns of industryfor standards, economic evaluation of alternative data sources, informationthroughput and the cost-effectiveness of different levels of value adding.It is through industry contact that the Centre can contribute to these importantanalyses. It is no accident that centres such as the EOC have emerged in recent yearsin other countries and are developing a strong network between their scientists.The issues that must be tackled to realise the opportunities of an EOC areinternational by nature. They can only be successfully resolved by veryclose and collaborative contact between researchers at similar centres indifferent countries. In particular, links must be made with the US, Canada,Europe, China, Japan and the ASEAN members. Without such strong internationalcollaboration the EOC may achieve less than is being achieved now by thedispersed but internationally active groups. The EOC needs to put specialemphasis on promoting and enabling contact, collaboration and joint publicationbetween Australian and other scientists working on remote sensing sciencethroughout the world. Bringing scientists to Australia and sending Australiansoverseas are fundamental activities once the internal contacts have beenestablished. Participation in international projects and forums will pay-offsignificantly in this area and must be encouraged. It should be emphasised,however, that this cannot be achieved only through participation in internationalcommittees but by international collaboration. The EOC will succeed if it creates an environment in which the solutionto the 'Prisoner's Dilemma' is carefully encouraged to be cooperation ratherthan to take what is offered but give as little as possible. As a personwho has worked for many years to see remote sensing applied I believe theEOC can enhance the flow of applications if its focus is well directed.However, to succeed in the face of realities, I believe it will also needto have strong support from Executive level down and have a high degreeof independence, discretion and support. The Advisory Committee (for example)should not run the EOC but be like the Board of a Company with the ScienceProgram Leader as MD. The 'MD' also needs the capacity to make decisionsand make them stick. There may come times when the success or total failureof the EOC depends on the leverage that is provided to the EOC. Speakingsoftly but carrying a big stick was never more important. The next yearwill be an exciting one for all concerned with the venture but where itall ends will depend on the decisions made in the very near future. Attachment: Integrated Airborne Sensing atCSIRO Division of Water Resources WT03-B26-3IA029-000311-B014-201http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/rdgvis1.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162257 text/html 24751HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:20:51 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:07 GMTContent-length: 24576 rsdvo.doc VISION, MISSION AND STRATEGY; 1995-2000 R.D. Graetz, A.J. Prata, J.S. Wallace, and I.J. Barton PREAMBLE The compilation of this document was both a pleasure and a challenge. It was a pleasure because all the authors believe in the concept of theEarth Observation Centre and are committed to its implementation. It waschallenge to find and articulate the shared core of agreement. That wasnot easy: the debate has been spirited and detailed with independent inputsfrom many interested research staff. Even so, the four authors of this document share its vision and mission,and are committed to their implementation. However, the separate groupsof research staff represented by each author differed in their support ofthe three areas of research activity defined below. Research areas 1 &2, which will account for almost all activity (>95%) was supported everywhere,whereas area 3 was only supported by Melbourne, Hobart and Canberra. In this section of our report, we set out the argument that we developedsince being commissioned and which has shaped the research strategy proposedin the next section. Two propositions underpin all. The first is that CSIRO is a research organisation: its prime directiveis to undertake scientific research. Within CSIRO, components such as COSSAand CIRC, have different functions. Even though the concept of the EarthObservation Centre arose from a COSSA-initiated review, and COSSA has theresponsibility to create the Earth Observation Centre, the essential natureof the Earth Observation Centre will differ substantially from that of COSSA.The Earth Observation Centre will be part of main-stream CSIRO. Thereforethe prime directive and ethos of the Earth Observation Centre must be theconduct of scientific research. This is an important point that was raised in the Implementation Document(COSSASteering Committee) and we reiterate it here. The concerns that led to the concept of the Earth Observation Centre partlyarose from data issues; of these, some were related to research but mostwere not. A focus on data issues dominates the circulated vision and missiondiscussions in the 'Implementation Plan' and the draft 'Outline of StrategicPlan, etc.'. We do not accept this emphasis. We are convinced that an EarthObservation Centre within CSIRO must be based on relevant, high qualityresearch activities. Therefore, this document proposes a wider view that embraces all data issuesand integrates them within a comprehensive research strategy. This view is that in the current era of Earth observation activities,research and data are inextricably and synergistically linked. It is obvious to us that a strategy of emphasising data at the expense ofresearch has no future in the CSIRO of today or tomorrow. Conversely, astrategy of research that ignores data management will continue the emasculatedconditions of these last few years that led to the formation of MDP # 19,and its subsequent review. The second proposition is that the Earth Observation Centre should addressthe big issues: those characterised by broad spatial scales over long timeintervals to which Earth Observation data make a unique and underpinningcontribution. These are the issues that can really only be addressed withspace data. Moreover, we should address not only the current research questionsbut what is more important, consider those questions that are not presentlybeing asked. The Earth Observation Centre should become a leading and singular researchinstitution. Furthermore, we believe this can be achieved in a manner that is complementaryto activities within Divisions and without excluding any significant researchthemes. We illustrate this with a hypothetical research program in the Appendix. On the basis of on these two propositions, the central thrust of thisdocument is to propose a bold but operationally sustainable integrationof research and data management, the Research Strategy, to underpin theEarth Observation Centre over the next five years, 1995-2000. In addition, we also discuss several implementation issues that we believeare not usefully separated from the proposed Research Strategy. Like theStrategy, these implementation issues have been discussed amongst us andthe views of our colleagues that were canvassed and considered. To illustrate and support our proposals made in the next section, we herecollect some the many facets of shaping the Earth Observation Centre thatwere considered. The acceptability of the Earth Observation Centre within CSIRO managementand its attractiveness to research staff will be determined almost entirelyby the formulation and implementation of its Research Strategy. Therefore, once accepted, the Earth Observation Centre ResearchStrategy must be widely and speedily communicated within CSIRO, and implementedin the Earth Observation Centre development. Because COSSA and the Earth Observation Centre have very different rolesand responsibilities within CSIRO, the Earth Observation Centre must beindependent of COSSA in the pursuit of its role within the constraint ofits essential requirement to report to the Director of COSSA. Therefore, it is essential that the research and developmentdirections of the Earth Observation Centre be set by the Leader and staffwith input from Divisions and an Advisory Committee (see later). Now that the Earth Observation Centre is a reality, albeit still a fledgling,its identity and support needs to be indelibly confirmed. Therefore, we recommend that MDP #19 be terminated as soon asis possible and that its remaining funding be transferred to the Leaderof the Earth Observation Centre for disposition, and that this financialindependence be continued; in addition, we believe it to be critical that the Earth ObservationCentre creates and communicates its own identity, and manages its own informationaccess independently of COSSA. Two aspects of the creation of the Earth Observation Centre will enhanceremote sensing within CSIRO: by providing a disciplinary focus, and, moreinfluential, by the collocation of staff. However, if staff remain distributedacross Australia, then opportunities for productive interaction will remainlimited and thus the output of the Earth Observation Centre is unlikelyto be very different from the current output from the separate Divisions. Therefore, the collocation of staff is obviously the preferredoption wherever possible but it remains a practical problem that must befaced. The Earth Observation Centre research areas should not be traditional disciplineareas, for otherwise the overlap with Divisions will be too great and thenecessity of the Earth Observation Centre will be questioned. Therefore the Earth Observation Centre must include in its researchfocus, areas that do not rest comfortably within Divisions or cover areascommon to many Divisions. While it is important to set out the long term strategic goals of the researchand development, their creation will always risk the generation of unrealisticexpectations amongst some users. Therefore, the Earth Observation Centre should set both longterm strategic goals as well as short term objectives arising from interactionswith the user communities; the Earth Observation Centre objectives should be clear, open and achievablewith the resources available. RESEARCH STRATEGY The research strategy that we outline below is simple, general, and hasthree components; vision, mission and activities. No specific objectives are defined. We see the essential role of the Earth Observation Centre as being synergisticand facilitating for research scientists already actively engaged in theirown research and responsive their own interests, capabilities and funding.The focus of the Earth Observation Centre will enhance this research activity,and through coordinated data management, benefit a larger and more diverseclientele than before. The focus of the Earth Observation Centre is not to re-orient existing researchin the short term: rather, we want to do what we do far more effectively. Vision Statement. We begin with a succinct statement of the essential nature and directionof the Earth Observation Centre: 'To ensure that Australia gains maximum benefit from the applicationof Earth Observation data.' Mission Statement Translating the Vision statement into a broad action plan, we write: 'The Earth Observation Centre will conduct multidisciplinary researchand development based on remotely sensed and other data for the benefitof the Australian and global communities' We see this benefit being realised from the innovative and efficient extractionof relevant information from Earth Observation data. These three adjectiveslink research, development and application; they describe the three componentsrequired for an end-to-end approach. Research Activities The research objectives pursued within the Earth Observation Centre willbe diverse, reflecting the interests and collaboration of individual scientists.Therefore, as discussed above, it is difficult and counter-productive todefine and prioritise research objectives. It is far more useful to definethe three areas of research activity within which the spectrum of researcheffort could be managed. Continuing and potential cooperation and collaborationwith research staff from CSIRO Divisions and other organisations (DEST,DoPI&E, DSTO) is implicit throughout. While these activities are broadly defined below, they proscribe farm-leveldecision-support systems, that are increasingly being covered by other publicand private sector organisations. The three areas of research activities follow. These activities are exemplifiedin the Appendix that also illustrates the nature and extent of the potentialinteractions between the EOC and CSIRO Divisions. 1. Earth Observation Science and Data Analysis: To undertake theresearch necessary for the development of generic methods (measurement models)to relate satellite data recorded above the Earth's atmosphere to geophysicalvariables; these variables being required to address broader current andpotential research questions within the Earth Observation Centre, CSIROand the wider research community. Measurement models include scene, sensor, atmosphere and image processingsub-models that in combination, determine the accuracy and precision ofthe derived geophysical variables. Measurement models are required for the retrospective analysis of currentEarth Observation data archives, eg. AVHRR, as well as for the prospectivedatasets, eg. ADEOS, SPOT Vegetation Instrument, SeaWIFS and EOS. While it has and will continue to be applications research that createsthe need for highest quality Earth Observation datasets, it is the developmentand application of measurement models that remains the key to the productionof the value-added datasets required by the research community. As an illustration, an AVHRR Science Working Group has been established,originally within MDP #19 and now the EOC, to prescribe the processing ofa standard set of geophysical datasets to be generated by the EOC and madeavailable to CSIRO research staff: these datasets include sea surface temperature(SST), land surface temperature (LST), surface albedo (a VIS, a NIR, a SOLAR)and NDVI (a vegetation index). In addition, an analogous GMS PathfinderScience Working Group has been established in collaboration with the Universityof California, the Bureau of Meteorology, the Australian National University,and the University of Tasmania. 2. Calibration / Validation: To undertake the required field andlaboratory research to support the development of measurement models evaluatingeither the accuracy of sensor performance (calibration) or of derived geophysicalvariables (validation). Both measurement models, when translated to algorithms, and Calibration/ Validation activities as a source of ancillary data and process understanding,are fundamental to the generation and documentation of geophysical datasets for distribution by the CSIRO DAACs for subsequent application by thewider research community. Calibration / Validation research activities are critical to success inaddressing many contemporary scientific questions: it is not an unreasonableassertion that it is now the most critical issue in the application of spacedata. The importance of Calibration / Validation research is now widelyrecognised by organisations such as CEOS and EOS, and by individual spacecraftmissions that have sought, or are seeking CSIRO expertise in this researcharea; eg. the ATSR instrument on ERS-1/2, POLDER on ADEOS, and the VegetationInstrument on SPOT 4. Calibration / Validation research activities will ensure the highest qualitydatasets are available to the Australian and global research communities.It is anticipated that within this research activity, there will be considerablecollaboration with Divisional research staff; see Appendix. 3. Sensors and Systems: Australia has a growing aerospace industrythat has, in the past, found valuable research support for development programsfrom within CSIRO. These activities will continue to grow and CSIRO hasa vital role to play in supporting these programs. The research skills requiredfor the success of development programs in Earth Observation are currentlynot available from other Australian institutes. It is important that there is a national focus for this area of researchand, for CSIRO, the activity is far better suited to the EOC than to individualDivisions. The Earth Observation Centre can become this focus through secondment fromCSIRO or from industry, and by managing the research component only. These three research activities represent a significant change in emphasisand allocation of tasks from the Earth Observation Centre concept proposedby COSSA in the draft Implementation Plan. The emphasis has been placedon getting the research component right but not to the exclusion of datamanagement that is implicit in all that is stated above. Stated simply: Co-ordinated scientific research and development is the only sustainablelocomotive for generating useful Earth Observation value-added products; Strategic research and development first requires, and then generates EarthObservation datasets; The two key elements are co-ordinated Research and Development, and DataManagement. Both elements are critical and interactive, but for the Australian communityto benefit from Earth Observation Centre activities the nature and directionof Data Management activities must support and complement those of Researchand Development. We envisage an interactive interdependence of Research and Development andData Management within the Earth Observation Centre, and this relationshipis simplified in the following diagram. Data Management alone is a relatively simple problem to solve. It is farmore difficult to co-ordinate Research and Development with Data Managementso that end-to-end solutions are provided and the value-added datasets generatedand captured. Nonetheless, we see the solution to this problem as beingone of research-leadership rather that data-driven. Leader Because the scope of Earth Observation Centre research activities is sobroad, it is unlikely that any one person can be an effective research leader.The maintenance of research standards can be assured with the review processwithin and without the Earth Observation Centre. However, the maintenanceand co-ordination of research effort and the interaction with clients, bothactual and potential, are by far the most important tasks to keep the EarthObservation Centre on track and viable. Thus, we see the critical attributes of the Leader as being: a distinguished background in Earth Observation science; a capacity and willingness to manage the Earth Observation Centre research; a capacity to find and interact with the beneficiaries of Earth ObservationCentre activities both within and without CSIRO; a capacity and willingness to seek external funding. We also believe the next critical step in the development of the Earth ObservationCentre is the appointment of the Leader. We urge that this be urgently addressedwith the leader being appointed for an initial period of 5 years, locatedin Canberra. REFLECTION and GUIDANCE The Earth Observation Centre is a new concept within CSIRO and effectivelywithout peer within Australia; the organisations of ERIN (DEST), NRIC andAGSO, both (DoPI&E), being considered in this assessment. The role models,or at least analogues of the Earth Observation Centre are thus mostly international.Therefore, attention must be given to providing mechanisms that will providean international reflection of our direction, activities and performancein a way that will support the best possible management of the Earth ObservationCentre resources; people, funds, and time. Two mechanisms are suggested: the Earth Observation Centre Fellowships,and an Advisory Committee. Earth Observation Centre Fellowships The Earth Observation Centre Fellowships have already started with the firstand current award being to Jim Simpson. Jim Simpson has played a significantrole in the concept and establishment of the Earth Observation Centre andhe has continued to contribute to research during the brief period of hisFellowship. Following in this role, Earth Observation Centre Fellowships can providea mirror to our performance and direction. To do this, the award needs tobe to a distinguished but interesting and active scientist, for a briefperiod of time. Earth Observation Centre Fellowships are different from,and in addition to, visiting research scientists to the Centre. It is recommended that the award by invitation of Earth Observation CentreFellowships be continued at an annual rate, and that they continue to becarefully selected such that the benefit to the Earth Observation Centreis clear and widely distributed. Advisory Committee We believe that the direction and functioning of the Earth Observation Centrewould benefit from interaction with a small expert committee - an AdvisoryCommittee. Because of the vision and mission of the Earth Observation Centre, we suggestthis small committee be convened annually and comprise the following: Director, COSSA Leader, Earth Observation Centre Chief of Division (one only, most relevant, rotating) Bureau of Meteorology representative (most relevant) NASA representative (eg. Martha Maiden) ESA representative (eg. equivalent to NASA representative) Research institution analogue (rotating, eg. Yann Kerr, Director of LERTS). The intent and function of this Advisory Committee are clear from our suggestedmembership. The final choice should be made by the Leader of the Earth ObservationCentre. We believe it is critical to regularly take professional advice from a widerange of sources; particularly from outside CSIRO and Australia becausethe Earth Observation Centre will become a significant functional link inthe emerging international web of Earth Observation science and data analysis.To orient our activities by the Earth Observation Centre Vision - to ensurethat Australia gains maximum benefit from the innovative and efficient applicationof Earth Observation data - we must regularly assess our performance byinternational standards. APPENDIX Research Strategy exemplified To illustrate how the research strategy would be applied in the EOC, a fictitiousexample is described which also illustrates the perceived roles of the EOCand individual Divisions and the way these groups may interact on commonresearch topics. The example given is for an application of AVHRR data, but future EOC activitieswill also include data from other earth observation instruments and platforms(e.g. SAR, SeaWiFS, OCTS, MODIS etc.). THE APPLICATION OF AVHRR DATA IN THE MANAGEMENT AND RESEARCH OF LOCUST PLAGUEEVENTS Project Stages. 1. Reception (direct or indirect) of raw AVHRR data over the studyarea. 2. Routine processing of AVHRR data to provide at-satellite, navigatedbrightness temperatures in the infrared channels and radiances in the visible/nearinfrared channels. This activity requires conversion of the raw data using calibration coefficientsand navigation into earth coordinates using orbital elements, an orbitalmodel and ground control points. 3. Derivation of standard geophysical products from the brightnesstemperatures/radiances. These products include sea surface temperature, land surface temperature,surface albedo and NDVI (a vegetation index). The production of these parameters requires the detection of cloud contaminateddata, correction for atmospheric effects (absorption and scattering) andthe inclusion of surface and solar geometry. The four products mentioned above should be considered standard productsthat will be produced automatically by the EOC for use by CSIRO Divisionsin their research programs, and in applications developed by particulardivisions. 4. Standard statistical techniques for data analysis, compositingof data, production of time series, filling in missing (cloudy) values,etc. 5. Development of new parameters for highlighting locust active oraffected areas (new NDVIs?, thermal data may be useful here?). Comparisons with climatological data. Collection of ground data for validation of satellite-derived parameters. Development of task-specific analysis techniques. 6. Assessment of locust damage, forecast of locust paths, deploymentof ground based resources (aircraft spraying of insecticide etc.). Use of satellite data to forecast future areas of locust plague outbreaks. EOC activities: Actions 1, 2, 3 and 4 as described above are activitiesthat are common to any research project or application of satellite dataand these should be seen as the responsibility of the EOC. The first researchactivity described in the strategy thus includes investigations to providehigh quality standard geophysical data products from satellite data. Theseactivities will include data calibration, cloud detection and clearing,correction for atmospheric effects in the visible, infrared and microwavebands, navigation of satellite data and the development of common statisticaltechniques for data analysis. Divisional activities: Actions 5 and 6 clearly belong in individualDivisions of CSIRO as they pertain to specific research programs and applications.However, there are obviously areas here where some interaction is required.For example, the ground validation data collected by the Division shouldbe used by the EOC in the assessment of the quality of their derived standardproducts. Divisions may also WT03-B26-4IA029-000311-B014-232http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/wshop1.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162322 text/html 3898HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:21:34 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:07 GMTContent-length: 3724 Land AVHRR Data Users Group Workshop - Towards Product Standards David L B Jupp CSIRO Earth Observation Centre 1. ABOUT THE CSIRO EOC AVHRR has provided the world community with global data and a dense timeseries of earth observation now for at least 15 years. However, it is onlyrelatively recently that the data have moved out of the research area tobe evaluated in the 'workplace' of end user needs. This has come about inAustralia from the development of operational receiving stations and programsof archiving and processing the data received over the continent and EEZ. CSIRO Office of Space Science and Applications (COSSA) and Agencies suchas the Bureau of Meteorology have played a significant role in this developmentand today the availability of daily near real time and archival time seriesof data for the Australian region is unprecedented. Nevertheless, the developmentof this capability has not been without its problems. Many of these weredescribed in a review carried out on behalf of COSSA of its Data Acquisitionand Utilisation multi-Divisional Program MDP-19 . In this report (oftenreferred to as the Simpson Report from its principal author) many of theissues of fragmentation and dispersion of effort were outlined and remediessuggested. One of the outcomes of the Simpson Report has been the formation of theEarth Observation Centre (EOC) which is developing to provide a focus andidentity for CSIRO Earth Observation Research and Development as well asact to coordinate some of the activities that were identified in the SimpsonReport as limiting to the full value being obtained from CSIRO activities.In the area of Land AVHRR use there is considerable focus and activity amongCSIRO scientists who either as part of the formative EOC or from the Divisionswith which it is working closely will outline their work to you this morning.They are among scientists who have been and will in the future engage incross-Divisional projects in the fields of: Data Management [with data providers and distributors] Advanced Information Processing Calibration and Validation Advanced Measurement Models Based Products Applications Support [with Divisions and Industry] The knowledge base for the projects largely rests in the Divisions and thework will be aimed to support the Divisional needs in data and the Divisionalinterface with clients and users in the Sectors which the Divisions address.However, we see an underlying generic set of activities which are biggerin scope than can be handled by any one Division and which underpin theeventual acceptance and usefulness of the products to the real end users- people who want information about the world and the way it is changing. The EOC is an initiative that has been developing for some time and is nowfully and rapidly moving to address generic issues in the areas outlinedabove. It aims to maximise the benefit obtained from the activities of theexcellent earth observation scientists in CSIRO and see it impact effectivelyon the development of the industries that can put the information to work.In order to do this fully, however, I believe we must all (researchers,producers and users together) consider the issue of data and product standards. WT03-B26-5IA029-000311-B015-6http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/avout1.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162336 text/html 1989HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:21:53 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:02 GMTContent-length: 1815 Land AVHRR Workshop CANBERRA, Monday 25th March 1996 1. INTRODUCTION The primary aim of the LAND AVHRR Workshop was to promote ideas and to breakdown any real or perceived barriers between the data acquisition, modellingand application communities. AVHRR data were viewed in the workshop as being processed to three productlevels, these are base, standard and research products. There are severaloperational environment management systems in place that rely heavily onAVHRR data. In the workshop these applications were given the opportunityto voice their concerns and hopes for future AVHRR processing at the threelevels above. From the general discussions there arose a series of common questions: What generic changes can occur to the data acquisition, base and standardproduct development which will mean improvements to all applications? What mechanisms need to be in place by the data acquisition, base andstandard product development community to ensure that the users needs areadequately meet? Are the users needs and desires realistic and achievable? How can the application community make better decisions from the currentlyavailable data sets? To provide a framework for readers who did not attend the workshop, thelisting of presenters is given later. Some additional copies of the workshopproceedings are available from Tim McVicar on a first come first servedbasis. WT03-B26-6IA029-000311-B015-35http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/brdfmin.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162351 text/html 6737HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:22:11 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 27 May 1996 02:51:04 GMTContent-length: 6563 Minutes from BRDF Workshop Minutes from Informal Workshop on BRDF 28-3-96 List of participants Interest Areas of Participants Discussion Modelling Approaches The Factor of Scale in BRDF Outcomes List of participants: Gary Bastin, Vanessa Chewings, Nicholas Coops (CSIRO DWE) Graham Behn, Jeremy Wallace, Norm Campbell (CSIRO M&S) Alan Strahler (Boston University) Megan Lewis; B.Sparrow, S.Spackman (Adelaide) B.Lowe, David Lamb, Asoka Edirisinghe, John Louis (Charles Sturt Uni) Andrew Wilson (Forestry NZ) Vittal Shettigara (DSTO) Dr Frank Honey,Greg Kirkpatrick (Specterra); David Jupp (CSIRO EOC) Elizabeth McDonald (ERIN) Interest Areas of Participants BRDF correction from Aerial photography and videography - best methodsfor solving the problem Exploration of operational use of BRDF correction algorithms Correction of BRDF for mosaicing purposes Use of attitude and GPS from plane to assist in correction algorithms Correction of BRDF for monitoring purposes (both environmental and artificialobjects) - temporal changes in signatures due to BRDF Development of theoretical view angles. Reliability indicators of spectral information The use of empirical solutions using statistics Shapes of curves from different cover types Geometrical Optical models Advantages and disadvantages of different modelling approach i.e. empirical,semi empirical and physical The factor of scale in BRDF Discussion At small scan angles < 20 degrees atmospheric effects are much reducedas shown by the CASI. Scanning between range of +-20 degrees BRDF effect is fairly gentle. BRDFeffects are present but much reduced. At scan angles of +- 40 degrees BRDF is serious At scan angles of +- 60 degrees BRDF very serious The output from image scanning devices are better equiped to deal with BRDFeffects due to the line scan geometry. In photography or videograpy thecentral perspective of the viewer becomes a problem. Three aspects of BRDF: 1. 'hotspot' occlusion effects - hiding of objects 2. volume BRDF- radiative transfer, structural attributes of objects 3. Glint effects from water targets and specular effects over land Estimating the proportion of each can be difficult. For monitoring purposes, only interested in the nature of change of thelandcover - not the changes in BRDF or in extant atmospheric effects. State of the Art BRDF Correction for the MODIS satellite 1. Brightness 2. volume scattering - theory on leaves 3. shape from shadowing Models Alternatives to correct for different shapes MODIS uses four combination and finds the best fit Practical approach to predicting the mean function. Shapes are variable: tall and thin VS short and fat - where is it positionedin the landscape - a priori knowledge of shape helps Modelling Approaches 1. Empirical approach Use of image variance and extent Derivation of specific functions Fitting of data to particular functions using a statistical approach Can use empirical models based on variance and extent if you have theshape of the function and then can reduce to 1 or 2 parameters. If the functionalform of these effects is known then can start to use models. Extractionof functional form, complicated however by heterogeneity of ground cover. Implication of just changing the 'colour' of objects ie, physicallychanging the data to make it look better. 2. Semi-empirical approach Mixture modelling Combination of empirically derived functions and atmospheric correction Provision of opportunities for the inversion of surface reflectancemodels. 3. Physical Approach Atmospheric Correction to obtain reflectance of objects Need to have a very good understanding of the nature of BRDF Use of physically based models to obtain the absorption spectra of aleaf Derivation of composite functions to explain atmosphere and broad landcover effects. However, difficulties due to local mismatch - high frequencyeffects will remain. The Factor of Scale in BRDF BRDF is a broad scale averaging effect. Atmospheric effects for satellite data lead to a low level of smoothing. At high resolution (ie sub 1m pixel) fine scale images show broad trendsin BRDF Investigation of the patterns of light and shade Small pixels provide difficult issues Sunlit and shaded components at fine scale. In big pixels - statistical effect of how component proportions change.For a particular type of landcover how do shadow effects change as a functionof the BRDF. Outcomes Multidisciplinary approach to solving the problem. Funding needed for comprehensive study. Coordination of functions Use different datasets from different platforms, different scales, sun angles,spectral characteristics. Correction VS Normalisation for monitoring purposes. How do we correct BRDF, would this be a good thing? What does correction really mean? Comparison of methods. Surface property effects to look at monitoring issues. Looking for best approach as a function of imagery. Earth Observation Centre projects will be structured by recommended projects.Dr Norm Campbell recommended as CSIRO contact to identify a working groupfor interested parties in the CSIRO Investigation of the methods used for BRDF correction in the upcoming MODISlaunch. Pater outlining methods can be found at (FTP site address). WT03-B26-7IA029-000311-B015-68http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/brdf1.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162402 text/html 1672HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:22:23 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:08 GMTContent-length: 1498 Image Brightness & BRDF Workshop Issues David L B Jupp & Alan Strahler 1. ATMOSPHERIC & SCENE BRIGHTNESS VARIATIONS 2. APPLICATIONS DEMANDING ATTENTION 3. TYPOLOGY OF APPROACHES 3.1 Empirical Methods 3.2 Measurement Model Approach 3.2.1 Atmospheric Correction & ReflectanceNormalisation 3.2.2 Analytic BRDF Models 3.3 Semi-empirical Methods 3.3.1 Theoretical Description 3.3.2 Kernels 3.3.3 Kernel-Driven Models 3.3.4 The Modified Walthall Model 3.3.5 Advantages of Linear Models 4. THE ISSUE OF SCALE 5. SCOPE FOR AN EOC WORKING GROUP References WT03-B26-8IA029-000311-B015-106http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/meetings/china.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162429 text/html 38518HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:22:32 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 30 Sep 1996 07:35:57 GMTContent-length: 38343 International workshop on multiangular remote sensing: measurements, models & applications International workshop on multiangular remote sensing: measurements, models & applications September 13-18, 1996 Beijing, P.R. China WORKSHOP REPORT David L B Jupp CSIRO Earth Observation Centre 1. Changchun On Friday September 13 a variety of international BRDF people met at theYouyi Binguan (Friendship Hotel) in Beijing, registered and readied themselvesfor a two-part meeting - the first International Workshop On MultiangularRemote Sensing (Measurements, Models And Applications). The Meeting was organised by members of the Institute of Remote SensingApplications (IRSA) of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) and of theBeijing Normal University. There was international help as well, especiallyfrom Alan Strahler's group at Boston University. The first part of the Meetingwas held in Changchun, a city to the north of Beijing in Jilin. It is knownas the Detroit of China due to its vehicle production industry and historicallyit is remembered as the Capital of Manchu Guo, the puppet state set up byJapan in 1931 with the last emperor Pu Yi as head. But neither of thesebrought us there. Near Changchun is the Jingyuetan Remote Sensing Test Site. Operated by the CAS, the Test Site has a wide range of land covers and hasbeen the site of many field experiments and validation campaigns. Since1980, an extensive laboratory facility has been developed. In particular,we came to see the indoor Solar Simulation Laboratory. This is a large scalegoniometer with an artificial source to simulate the sun and moveable positionsfor sun/sensor effects measurement. The target measured is a square metreof anything you can fit in a square meter. A small table top instrumenthas also been developed to allow multi-angular measurements of reflectanceand transmittance at the scale of leaves. We saw the site in operation and the data processed in quick time as 3Dplots. There was considerable discussion of the various edge effects andconditions that make this type of facility similar or different to insitu measurements. We were all impressed by the facility. I wish wehad one even if only to calibrate our field panels! But not all is lost,since we are welcome to define and conduct experiments at Jingyuetan. Indeed,if field campaigns were made at the general site, example patches couldbe tested for complete BRDF at the same time. It beats using a SpectronSE590 out in the weather while the sun and sky change around you. Meanwhile,a graduate student can be measuring the leaves as well! Nearby is a solar observatory on a hill top with a dome roof that opensallowing a range of continuous sun photometer and irradiance device datato be collected. Quite an investment has been made and in principle a highlevel of characterisation could be had at Jingyuetan - to a level we haveno hope of matching in Australia at this time. After a good lunch on Sunday September 15 (which by itself was probablyenough to justify further collaboration and cooperative development) weflew back to (warmer) Beijing for the next phase of the Workshop. 2. Beijing On the morning of Monday September 16 the talking and discussion part ofthe Workshop began. We were welcomed by a group of very senior and distinguishedpeople from the CAS and the State Science and Technology Commission. JuhanRoss, the 'grand old man' of radiation in plant canopies and Alan Strahler(who is still quite young) gave Keynote Addresses which set the scene forthe Meeting. There followed two days (two half days and one full day) of very intensivelypacked presentations. The program as presented, with speaker (bolded) andtopic is attached for you to read. The papers will be available in the nearfuture for you to look more carefully at talks that are especially relevantto you. In this Report, I will limit my discussion to general impressionsplus a detailed set of notes on the outcomes Discussion that occurred onWednesday September 18 Of course, a primary outcome for such meetings is for people working ina field to meet, get to know each other if that has not happened before,exchange ideas both during sessions and at any other time that is availableand jointly develop their ideas of the directions that need to be pursuedinto the future. All of these happened. 3. General Notes & Impressions 3.1 Parametric BRDF It was very comforting to see how the recent simplifications to BRDF models(the 'kernel' and similar simple models) were performing well as tools inatmospheric correction and image brightness correction at airborne, TM andAVHRR data scales. Simplified models and linearity are obviously fashionablebut also provide very practical tools to describe and use BRDF for applicationssuch as those above and others such as panel characterisation. Obviously,the scope for such techniques is about to increase with the launch of ADEOScarrying POLDER and will further increase as MODIS and MISR data start tocome on line in a more distant time frame. These developments were outlined in Talks [1-8], [2-5], [3-3], [3-5], [3-6]and [4-2] 3.2 Hospot Specific Instrumentation Sig Gerstl [1-2] provided advance notice for an innovative mission to utilisethe hotspot region from space using an active laser and tethered receivers.It is 'Bi-static Lidar' I guess and the technology is feasible. All thatis needed is for the extra value of the information to be proven over notdoing it! His ideas are not alone in that. 3.3 Field and Laboratory Instrumentation There was a strong emphasis on field and laboratory measurement. In summarisinghis session, Juhan Ross said that the main advances have been in computertechnology and in constructing measurement instruments. Instrumentationand measurement protocols are very difficult but essential components ofthe research and also of the applications. The ideas included field datafor structural characterisation as well as radiometric measurements. Inaddition to the Changchun site, there is a goniometer in Italy at the EuropeanGoniometric Observatory (EGO) which is also producing many detailed studiesof BRDF at the one square metre plot scale. It was clear, however, thatthe leaf measurements being taken at Changchun were the envy of most andwe all hope to see outcomes being published and information made availablein the future. There is still a lot to be done relative to the 'scattering phase functions'of the objects that different user models and radiative models want andcan deal with. Leaf measurements need to be linked to high spectral resolutiondata and plant physiological information (such as chlorophyll and pigments)as well. However, the tools are emerging to do this which did not previouslyexist. At the 'module' or 'branch' scale, Juhan Ross described an instrumentfor measuring scattering that is being used in Estonia (the 'Shoot Goniometer')and for short crops and other covers, the large indoor Goniometers at Changchunand ISPRA are obviously filling a need. However, in order to relate models, measurements and the objectives of theusers there is still some work to be done in describing and recording structurein the non-homogeneous canopies we mostly work with. Juhan Ross and TiitNilson were especially adamant of the need to introduce such protocols offield description and measurement and emphasised that they need to relateto the end use. Given the limited relationships between (say) traditionalforestry data and radiation data this may mean the definition of a set ofnew phytometrical measurements. The Chinese work by Xiang Yueqin and WangJindi ([1-11], [1-12]) is very interesting in this regard. Other talks covering this area were: [1-1], [1-4], [1-5], [1-9], [1-10],[2-9] and [3-1] 3.4 Modelling & Inversion The recent main advances in modelling seem to have been computational ratherthan by changes in the physics and/or mathematics. There are now a welldefined set of models that can adequately describe the BRDF of structuredland covers. What is not so common are the parameters of the component propertiesof the models (such as leaf phase functions!) and there is still scope forcomputational simplifications and more robust techniques for inversion. Andres Kuusk and others described a number of uses of parameter inversionwith Landsat TM and AVHRR data. With Landsat TM data, Kuusk was invertingchlorophyll content using relationships obtained from field and laboratorymeasurements. Inversion is obviously the aim of this work and has stillto be made simpler and more robust. As a complete test base for models and measurements associated with theEGO, Michel Verstraete described the Monte-Carlo RayTran model which hasbeen running on a supercomputer at ISPRA. Able to be linked to an L-Systemmodel of the land surface it provides a good base for model testing anddata interpretation. He also described work in which the leaf structureis modelled by simple geometric forms (cylinders, spheres and sheets). Hewas keen to form an 'Observation Protocol' for the data that will be generatedin the future. Such work obviously sits at the interface between measurement and modelling.At this advancing stage of the development of the BRDF research the twoare clearly dependent and complementary. Related Talks were: [2-1], [2-2], [2-3], [2-6], [2-7], [2-8], [3-1], [3-2],[3-3], [3-4], [3-5], [3-6], [3-8], [3-9] and [4-1]. 3.5 Remotely Sensed Data There were many data types discussed. These ranged from the use of existingdata types, such as aerial photography, Landsat TM, AVHRR and airborne data(such as Daedalus data) to simulations of the emerging data types such asPOLDER, MISR and MODIS. Quite a variety of airborne instruments exist now which can obviously beused for research as well as for their prime objective as development toolsfor space borne instruments. These include ASAS, the POLDER simulator andMISR Airborne Simulator (MAS). These can be regarded separately as toolsfor mapping just as the final spaceborne tools will be. Their advantagesare those of airborne data - flexible deployment, control over calibrationand ancillary data. Papers discussion these include: [1-6], [1-7], [1-8], [3-2], [3-3], [3-4],[3-5], [3-8] and [3-9]. 3.6 Scale There were many ranges of scale presented at the workshop. Information wasobtained and models discussed for the sub-millimetre scale of ice crystals,through soil grain, leaf, branch, crown and canopy up to AVHRR scale. Itseemed to be unquestioned that BRDF and Hotspot effects translated easilythrough these scale changes. I believe the area of BRDF and Hotspot effects is perhaps almost uniquein the way its significant invariants do transfer across scales. Yet itis not all so easy. There are many issues of scale that are as yet neglected.Relationships between phase functions for the 'grains' listed above andthose of the components making them up have no complete theory and thisis a major challenge. Not wanting to push a barrow necessarily, I wouldmention that this scaling undoubtedly involves at least spatial varianceand correlations and that the 'mean' effects we call BRDF and the Hotspotare not themselves sufficient to describe the scaling. There were papers involving many scales but none on 'scale'. There was onewhich discussed variance [2-4]. 3.7 The Hunter and the Dog Juhan Ross pointed out that in Estonia in the forestry and ecology 'hunts'it has been traditional to regard the Forester or Ecologist as the Hunterand the physicist as the Dog. However, he noted that the traditional forestryand ecology cannot handle the information our science is able to providenor cope with the scales we can encompass. He claimed that in radiationecology it is time for the physicist to become the Hunter and the Dog. I agree. In other cases we have for years been asked by climate modellersand others to provide crude summarising parameters for models whose handlingof the radiation fields would make any remote sensing specialist weep. Ourscience is moving into data spaces unknown to our 'Hunter' buddies. It istime to hunt down what we can find out about the world that no oneelse can reach and then also drop it on their clean boots with wagging tails! 4. The Closing Discussion of September 18 The following discussion is an expansion of the set of notes provided andtaken by Alan Strahler as Chair and facilitator of this important discussion.He is thanked for the privilege he gave me to use his notes but is not toblame for the [embellishments]. 4.1 Initial Discussion Starter. 4.1.1 Why Study BRDF in Remote Sensing? (i) Improve understanding of physical scattering mechanisms of surface coversand interaction with soil and atmosphere; (ii) Retrieval of surface parameters by inversion. But which parameters?See below ... [Maybe not just inversion but also by interpretation and pattern recognition] (iii) Correction of angular effects in imagery allowing users to make theirown inferences. [Users often want to apply image processing to mosaics. Image processingimplies spatial stationarity which angular variations disrupt. We need themake the data at least 'quasi-stationary] Key Problem: " ... the main limiting factor remains - obtained by remotesensing, vegetation parameters quite poorly express the main biologicalprocesses - photosynthesis, respiration, transpiration, allocation etc ofgrowing vegetation." (Juhan Ross) That is, Radiation Parameters are not the same as Ecological Parameters. [However, Ross has the view that the fault is not with RS but there needsto be a re-appraisal of measurement models on both the ecological and remotesensing sides. That is, it is time the Dog became the Hunter and the Dog.This is not just the case in vegetation cover. Linking the user scene measurement/descriptivemodel with the radiative scene measurement/descriptive model is the Keyissue in most applications.] 4.1.2 What is Needed? Models: Not a problem Inversion strategies can use improvement [There was not complete agreement here. Bernard Pinty, the Modeller's Modeller(i.e. a Modeller who is such a Modeller that even Modellers call him a Modeller),felt that better models are still needed. Personally, I think the currentmodels are advanced enough and are not what is pushing the boundary. Itis a common statement in water radiation models and atmosphere radiationmodels that the current limitations are not in the models but in our knowledgeof the physical parameters and properties that are needed to run the models.Land models are not as well established but the statement is, I think, thesame. Better Inversion theory, of course, can provide many of theseproperties in addition to the scene parameters.] Data: "Point" measurements for model development and validation Lab: Leaf scattering measurements Goniometric measurements of targets Field: Goniometric measurements of real targets in the atmosphere "Area" measurements to extend information spatially Field campaigns, aircraft data Satellite data - AVHRR, POLDER, MODIS, MISR & Spot-Vegetation [Measurement and Validation issues are a major issue and provide the currentchallenge. At all stages and scales it is also important to introduce thecorrect environmental information so that the radiation scene models andthe user scene models can be related. For example, are leaf measurementsuseful without pigment and high spectral data measurements? Can fluorescencedata provide the link? In each case above there is an issue of standardisationand information cataloguing. What is the minimal data set and descriptorssuch that the data can be used by others? What standardisation is neededin measurement techniques as well as information recording? Is a field reflectanceuseful if (at least) the fraction of diffuse radiation is not recorded?Is a leaf scattering reading useful if leaf absorption spectrum and/or fluorescencespectrum is/are not recorded?] Mechanisms Sharing models? Sharing Data? [The above applies. There need to be common bases for model and data comparisonand validation. Perhaps there are standard targets which can be used totest instruments and standard scenes to test models. But how do you adequatelydefine and parametrise these? The suggestion is recorded later for someform of email discussion area. Maybe a listserver is a good start. However,perhaps a full Web Site is what is needed with pointers to data owners andsites, model owners and sites plus a compendium of proposed standards andmethods for model and field analysis. The EOC is starting such a beast.For people who are not on the internet, an HTML version could be suppliedregularly by diskette for off-line browsing!] 4.1.3 What's Next for This Workshop? Biennial Meetings? 1998 in ISPRA or Toulouse [I suggest also that the regular slot at IGARSS be maintained as a continuityplacer meeting. This plus the 'Web' site may be enough to keep the Beijingmomentum going forward.] 4.2 General Discussion The general discussion that followed was recorded in point form by AlanStrahler. I have repeated the points with some expansion but usually without[embellishment] as I remember them from the time. Where a change may changethe meaning I have recorded it in [brackets]. In addition, I have re-orderedthe points and collected them under a number of headings reflecting my viewpointand interests. [The classification arises from my way of describing what most of the modellersand measurers are going through. That is, they decide on a 'grain' for theirobjects, define a set of properties or functions attributable to the grainsand arrangement and geometric properties attributable to the collectionof grains. The complete system is the scene model. This "grain"model must be relatable to both the radiation model and the user model ofthe world if the activity is to be completely successful. When they go outto measure the world, the relationship between the measurements and thisscene model is the measurement model. If the data are to be useful theremust be a good base measurement model. For example, in plant canopies, you must decide if you are working at theleaf and stem level, the 'shoot' or 'module' level, or whether you can startat the crown level, or stand level or community level. Foresters tend tothink of forests as collections of tree trunks with aggregate basal areasand stem size distributions and make appropriately scaled measurements,but ecologists have a bit more flexibility. Crop modelling is usually bestdone at the leaf and stem level although recent data suggest the architectureof the way these group on plants is also of significance for modelling. In each case, if you are an ecologist, for example, you must ensure thedescription is rich enough in scene model grain and measurement model scaleto accommodate the outputs of interest such as CO2 flux, water flux or energybalance components. It must be powerful enough to accommodate dynamics (suchas succession) if this is the objective. For the remote sensor, it mustbe equally flexible and sufficient if these outputs are the objectives butit must particularly be sufficient to describe the radiation measurementmodel and link to the sensor measurement model. The relationship between the user scene model and the radiation scene modelinvolves measurement scale. The measurement scale may be finer or coarserthan the user scene model and this relationship is important for choiceof analytical approach. In the Strahler et al. terminology, the radiationmeasurement model may be (Low) L- or (High) H-resolution relative to thescene model. Using these ideas, the points people have made are collected under fourheadings: 1. Relationships Between User and Radiation Models 2. Tools for Measurement of Properties & Structure 3. Radiation Measurement Models & Inversion 4. Infrastructure Issues The collection 1. is of special significance and is the longest. It includeshow to describe the scene as well as the issues of Standards, User Viewpointsand User Attitudes. Typical management views in some of the programs mayreflect user views and question whether BRDF based methods really work,whether there are too many models and too few products and complain thatthere are too few standards and less quality control. What are the products? Bernard Pinty made the suggestion that it is too early for standards. Ifear that if it is too early then it is already too late. As a final category I have listed Infrastructure Issues. These are thingswe can do as a "BRDF Community" to take things forward.] 4.2.1 Relationships Between User and Radiation Models Sig Gerstl: Parameter match must be made. Ecologists see the [same] "sun"for their applications. We need to locate the same phenomena that give thebiological effect and the radiation effect. Canopy architecture is an overlaparea. We need structure-based vegetation classifications. Andres Kuusk: Chemical composition of leaves from spectral measurementsis [an] overlap area. [An optical classification exists based on pigments. Is it as discriminatingas the optical classification for algae in water quality modelling and measurement?] Tiit Nilson: The ground [model] has plant communities involving spatialdistributions and patterns which depend on scale. At small scales they maybe regular and at large scales clumped. Also, the mutual influences of plantsare important but rarely used in models. [Tiit suggested that these relationshipswould help the over-parameterised models.] DLBJ: In ecology there are a range of models for succession called 'GapModels' which are based on an effectively continuous canopy with 'holes'.These should be able to be modelled and used to interpret broad scale images.The individual trees are not actually considered. Xiang Yueqin: It is important to develop descriptions of structure of thedifferent types of crop such as wheat and corn. We need to work out howto scale structure. There is a problem in measurement at points due to differenttypes, times of planting etc. Need to characterise the variance for agriculturalapplications. Bernard Pinty: Connecting radiation with ecology. For example, with LAIit has been mostly done from spectral data. There is [apparently] no needfor angular data. But what is the error in LAI? We can get LAI by inversion[of BRDF] but in the end this will only reduce error which may not be veryinteresting to the end users. We need to develop more [unique outputs].Eg LAI+Structure+... For combined wavelength we have the same [structural]parameters, the same state variables so there is a lot more informationbut a more difficult inference. DLBJ: Sophisticated scene and measurement models for remote sensing haveoften had to deliver simple products for less sophisticated biophysicalmodels - eg SEB. But this is changing. The demands from modellers are becomingmore sophisticated and spatial variation in CO2, water and energy fluxesare being tackled by modellers. Demands for better products will come. Wemust anticipate these requests for structural data and have the answersready. Wolfgang Wanner: About the "gap". Remote sensing provides a hugeknowledge [base] about the Earth's vegetation and spatial structure. Somaybe RS can help extend ecologists thinking to scales they cannot reachwith plot data. For example, a new LC classification based on BRDF and theway large areas green up etc. Phillip Lewis: Remotely sensed information may often be at the wrong scale.Ecologists often need fine scale information. Don Deering: Scale is a problem. Now ecologists are interested in detailedinformation such as process studies, stomatal closure for CO2 etc. [Why is everyone forgetting airborne data? Multi-spectral, multi-angle datawith pixels < 1 metre is no problem!] Sig Gerstl: Why do we limit ourselves? We should be extending the ecologistspoint of view. This is the "Pretty Picture" syndrome. We shouldnow be extending the view using polarisation and detecting stress at a globalscale. First signs of stress are not spectral but wilting - structural changes. Alfred Chang: Microwave may be more sensitive to such stress. Physics unitesall our science. The same equations but different approximations. We needto study detection efficiency. Juhan Ross: Ecologists cannot help us. We need to educate ourselves as towhat is needed and how to get it. [We must be both Hunter and Dog]. Don Deering: Do we need any more models? DLBJ: Maybe we have enough models and what we really need are some standards? Sig Gerstl: We need a 'super-model' of the standard models structured byapplication. Bernard Pinty: Maybe we need more data. It is too early for standards. Don Deering: We are not focussed clearly on a product. LAI at a global scalehas a focus which BRDF does not have yet. Even then different models areneeded for different areas. 4.2.2 Tools for Measurement of Properties & Structure Don Deering: Need to make use of the forward scattered light to increasespectral information. [Maybe it is almost mandatory to measure reflectance and transmittance oftranslucent materials. It is certainly the case that only measuring leafreflectance of Australian trees misses more than half the information] Juhan Ross: Need to add other regions of the spectrum - microwave, thermaletc. In microwave the is information about [the same] leaves, stems etc.and no cloud problem. We need medium sized goniometric apparatus for Shootmeasurements and bridge the gap between leaf and canopy. This could usea laser beam. Maybe this would cost about $300K. Prof. Kawata: Polarised light is important now that scanning polarised sensorsare becoming available. Need ground and vegetation measurements to supportPOLDER. Shunlin Liang: Canopy polarisation is 2-3% but soils polarise to 10-15%so may be more important than vegetation as an opportunity for POLDER. 4.2.3 Radiation Measurement Models & Inversion Juhan Ross: For architecture, the use of fractals and L-Systems should beincreased. Shunlin Liang: Can BRDF help in remote sensing of water and soils? DLBJ: In remote sensing of water the angular distribution of the emergingradiation field is highly indicative of water properties - especially inmore turbid waters. Clumps of algae or other particles have a strong effectknown as the 'Packet' effect in water literature. Xu Xiru: Need to use thermal infrared data. The question is how to use it?Need Effective Emissivity (thermal BRDF) models [the models need to be effectiveas well!]. This is significant in CO2 flux. Juhan Ross: Need to connect TIR data to the heat balance and surface energybalance. 4.2.5 Infrastructure Issues Juhan Ross: Next meeting we should invite microwave specialist[s]. Alan Strahler: Lets invite water people to the next meeting. Don Deering: Being pragmatic - lets get people from the ecological communityhere to talk about structure - perhaps a "Tutorial". Don Deering: There is an email based "Plant Canopy Network". Dowe want to develop an internet network? May need special funding for someoneto manage it. Can start with a User Group on the internet. [The issues raised are clearly ones we must cooperate to resolve. We allneed to consider the end users and 'markets' as a common area to developand we must all display the quality we know our work can provide. When thedemand is there we can all compete as to who can meet it best or most efficientlyor for the lowest cost - but until it exists our competition is probablydestructive. The development of a network for the BRDF community is a veryimportant step and regular meetings are an equally important step. A lotof ground was covered in this Meeting and quite a lot was turned over aswell. I look forward to the next.] Agenda INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON MULTIANGULAR REMOTE SENSING: MEASUREMENTS,MODELS AND APPLICATIONS. September 16-18, 1996 Beijing, P.R. China OPENING SESSION Monday, September 16 Chairman: Guo Huadong, IRSA, CAS, Beijing, China. Welcome: Xu Guanhua, Alan H. Strahler, Chen Shupeng, Don W. Deering, Qin Dahe. Keynote Addresses: PRESENT STATUS AND PERSPECTIVES OF REMOTE SENSING OF VEGETATION. Juhan Ross, Tartu Observatory, Teravere, Estonia. OVERVIEW AND HIGHLIGHT OF KEY ISSUES. Alan H. Strahler, Boston University, Boston, USA. SESSION I: MEASUREMENT Monday, September 16 Chair: Xu Xiru, RS&GIS Institute, Peking University, China. [1-1] BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE CHARACTERIZATIONS FOR A VARIETY EARTH'SLAND SURFACE COVERS. Don. W. Deering, NASA/GSFC, Greenbelt, USA. [1-2] A MEASUREMENT CONCEPT FOR HOT SPOT BRDFs FROM SPACE. Siegfried A. W. Gerstl, Los Alamos National Lab., Los Alamos, USA. SESSION I (Continued): MEASUREMENT Monday, September 16 Chair: David L B Jupp, CSIRO Earth Observation Centre, Canberra ACT,Australia. [1-4] RADIATIVE TRANSFER IN CONIFEROUS TREES. Juhan Ross and M. Sulev, Tartu Observatory, EE2444 Teravere, Estonia. [1-5] MULTIANGLE OBSERVATIONS OF DIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE OF SNOW FIELD. Alfred T. C. Chang, NASA/GSFC, Greenbelt, USA. [1-6] THE BRDFs OF LAND SURFACES ESTIMATED BY THE AIRBORNE POLDER DATA. Yoshiyuki Kawata, K. Takemata and T. Yonekura, Kanazawa Instituteof Technology, Kanazawa, Japan. [1-7] DIAGNOSTIC ASSESSMENTS OF PLANT CONDITIONS USING MULTIANGULAR REMOTESENSING MEASUREMENTS AND BRDF MODELS. Qi Jiaguo, Paul Pinter Jr., T. Clarke, and Susan Moran, USDA- ARSWater Conservation Laboratory, Phoenix, Arizona, USA. [1-8] THE NON-LAMBERTIAN PROBLEM IN THE DYNAMIC MONITORING OF VEGETATIONBY NOAA-AVHRR. Xu Xiru, Li Bing, Liu Qinhuo, Peking University, Beijing, China. [1-9] THE EUROPEAN GONIOMETRIC OBSERVATORY. Michel M. Verstraete, EU Joint Research Centre, ISPRA, Italy. [1-10] THE REFLECTION AND TRANSMISSION CHARACTERISTICS OF HEALTHY GREENLEAVES IN VIVO. Zhang Hong, Zhu Qijiang, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China. [1-11] MEASUREMENTS OF RADIATION TRANSMITTANCE AND REFLECTANCE OF DISCONTINUOUSCANOPIES. Xiang Yueqin, Zhou Yunhua, Institute of Geography, CAS, Beijing ,China; Wang Jindi, Liu Yi, IRSA, CAS, Beijing China; Zhu Qijiang, BeijingNormal University, Beijing, China. [1-12] INDIRECT METHODS FOR MEASURING CANOPY STRUCTURE AND THEIR VALIDATION. Wang Jindi, Li Xiaowen, IRSA, CAS, Beijing , China; Xiang Yueqin,Institute of Geography, Beijing, China, Alan H. Strahler, BU, Boston, USA. SESSION II: MODELS, VALIDATION, INVERSION Tuesday, September 17 Chair: Juhan Ross, Tartu Observatory, EE2444 Teravere, Estonia. [2-1] ADVANCED MODELS FOR MULTIANGULAR REMOTE SENSING DATA INTERPRETATION. Bernard Pinty, Michel M. Verstraete, Ola Engelsen, Nadine Gobron,John V. Martonchik, Space Apps. Inst. ,EC-JRC, ISPRA, Italy. [2-2] A BRDF MODEL FOR FORESTS. Tiit Nilson, Tartu Observatory, EE2444 Teravere, Estonia. [2-3] TOPOGRAPHIC EFFECTS ON SURFACE BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE SCALING. Shunlin Liang, Ralph Dubayah and Dave Shirey, University of Maryland,USA; Phillip Lewis, Univ. College London, UK. [2-4] MODELLING DIRECTIONAL VARIANCE AND VARIOGRAMS USING GEO- OPTICAL MODELS. David L B Jupp, CSIRO Earth Observation Centre, Canberra ACT, Australia. [2-5] SHORTWAVE RADIATION TRANSFER OF CONIFER BOREAL FORESTS DURING BOREAS:RESULTS OF MEASUREMENT AND MODELING. Jean-Louis Roujean, Meteo France/CNRM, Toulouse, France. [2-6] A MODIFIED GEOMETRIC OPTICAL RADIATIVE TRANSFER APPROACH FOR BIDIRECTIONALREFLECTANCE OF DISCONTINUOUS PLANT CANOPY. Ni Weijin, Li Xiaowen, Curtis E. Woodcock and Alan H. Strahler, BostonUniversity, Boston, USA. [2-7] UNCERTAINTY AND SENSITIVITY MATRIX OF PARAMETERS IN INVERSION OF PHYSICALBRDF MODEL. Yan Guangjian, Li Xiaowen, Liu Yi, IRSA, CAS, Beijing, China. [2-8] THE CALCULATION OF THE REFLECTANCE OF THE FOUR COMPONENTS. Zhu Qijiang, Fan Shaohua, Zhang Hong, Zhao Liping, Beijing NormalUniversity, Beijing, China. [2-9] PROCESS SYSTEM OF MEASURED BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE IN CHANGCHUNLABORATORY. Gao Feng, Nanjing Inst. of Geography and Limnology, CAS, Nanjing,China; Zhu Qijiang, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, China. SESSION III: MODELS, VALIDATION, INVERSION, Continued Tuesday, September 17 Chair: Siegfried A. W. Gerstl, Los Alamos National Lab., Los Alamos,USA. [3-1] EVALUATION OF A 3-D RADIATIVE TRANSFER MODEL AGAINST GONIOMETER MEASUREMENTSON AN ARTIFICIAL TARGET. Michel M. Verstraete, Y.M. Govaerts, and Brian Hosgood, IRSA, ISPRA,Italy. [3-2] RETRIEVAL OF BIDIRECTIONAL REFLECTANCE FACTORS AND DIRECTIONAL-HEMISPHERICALREFLECTANCES USING SPACE-BASED AND AIRBORNE MULTI-ANGLE OBSERVATIONS. John V. Martonchik, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,USA. [3-3] GLOBAL BRDF AND ALBEDO FROM THE EOS MODIS AND MISR SENSORS. Wolfgang Wanner, Alan H. Strahler, Hu Baoxin, Phillip Lewis, Li Xiaowen,and J.-P. Muller, Boston University, Boston, USA. [3-4] ENHANCED DISCRIMINATION OF BOREAL FOREST COVERS USING DIRECTIONALSIGNATURES MEASURED BY THE AIRBORNE POLDER INSTRUMENT. Marc Le Roy, P. Bicheron and O. Hautecoeur, CESBIO, Toulouse, France. [3-5] AVHRR BRDF INVERSION FOR AFRICA. Phillip Lewis and E. Vives Ruiz de Lope, Univ. College London, London,UK. [3-6] RETRIEVAL OF LAND-SURFACE PARAMETERS FOR METEOROLOGICAL MODELS FROMMULTIANGULAR OPTICAL MEASUREMENTS. Jean-Louis Roujean, Meteo France/CNRM, Toulouse, France. [3-8] MONITORING OF LAI AND CHLOROPHYLL CONTENT BY THE INVERSION OF A CRANALYTICAL MODEL. Andres Kuusk, Tartu Observatory, EE2444 Teravere, Estonia; ZhangRenhua, Institute of Geography, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. [3-9] AN INVERTING APPROACH OF BRDF FOR WHEAT IN NORTH CHINA USING NOAA-AVHRRIMAGE. Zhang Renhua, Chen Gang, Institute of Geography, CAS, Beijing, China;Andres Kuusk, Tartu Observatory, EE2444 Teravere, Estonia; Alan H. Strahler,Boston University, Boston, USA; Li Xiaowen, IRSA, CAS, Beijing, China. SESSION IV: ATMOSPHERE-SURFACE BRDF INTERACTION Wednesday, September 18 Chair: Don W. Deering, NASA/GSFC, Greenbelt, USA. [4-1] USING BRDFs FOR ACCURATE ALBEDO CALCULATIONS AND ADJACENCY EFFECTCORRECTIONS. Christopher C. Borel and Siegfried A. W. Gerstl, Los Alamos NationalLab., Los Alamos, USA. [4-2] THE EFFECT OF SURFACE BRDF ON ATMOSPHERIC CORRECTION. Wolfgang Wanner, Hu Baoxin, Alan H. Strahler, Boston University,Boston, USA; Li Xiaowen, IRSA, CAS, Beijing, China. [4-3] PROCEDURES FOR REGISTERING POLDER AIRBORNE SIMULATED MULTIANGULARIMAGES. Zhu Chongguang, Guo Jun, Yu Fangfang, IRSA, CAS, Beijing, China. CLOSING SESSION Wednesday, September 18 Chair: Alan H. Strahler, Boston University, Boston, USA. Vice-Chair: Tian Guoliang, IRSA, CAS, Beijing, China. Subject: Key Issues in Future BRDF and Related Research. WT03-B26-9IA029-000311-B015-137http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/meetings/g1k96.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162450 text/html 9166HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:23:09 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 30 Sep 1996 07:35:58 GMTContent-length: 8992 6th Global Land AVHRR Data Set Meeting 6th Global Land AVHRR Data Set Meeting 13-14 June 1996 Annapolis, Maryland Agenda Thursday, 13 June 9.00 Registration 9.30 Welcome - NOAA 9.45 Project Review - NASA/ESA/NOAA/USGS 10.45 Coffee break 11.00 Project Status Reports - USGS 11.30 Data Acquisition - USGS 12.00 Lunch 13.00 Status of NOAA 14 - NOAA 13.30 HRPT station reports (15 minutes each) Baton Rouge - LSU Canada - CCRS Australian Network - CSIRO China Network - SMC Japan - Tokyo University South Africa - SAC 15.00 Coffee break 15.15 Buenos Aires - U of Miami Cachoeira Paulista - INPE Antarctica (McMurdo, Palmer) - NSIDC Russia/Yakutsk - NASA Mongolia - USGS/NASA Mexico - UNAM 16.30 ESA coordinated stations: Tromsoe - TSS Oberpfaffhenhofen - DLR Maspalomas - INTA Scanzano - TELESPAZIO Cairo - DRC Niamey - AGRHYMET Nairobi - KMD/NCSSMRS La Reunion - ORSTOM Manila - ESA Terranova Bay - ESA Kuala Lumpur - ESA 17.30 Adjourn meeting Friday, 14 June 9.00 Science Requirements - Martha Maiden, NASA 9.30 Data Processing - Jeff Eidenshink, USGS 10.00 Product Distribution - Jeff Eidenshink, USGS 10.30 Coffee break 10.45 NOAA K/L/M Changes - Dan Tarpley, NOAA 11.15 1.6 Channel Policy and Plans - Dan Tarpley, NOAA 12.00 Lunch 13.00 1-KM Data Set Projects, Applications, and Related Platforms 13.00 SPOT VEGETATION Update - Gilbert Saint, JRC 13.30 AVHRR Global Fire Product - Jackie Kendal, NASA 14.00 AVHRR Calibration - Eric Vermote, University of Maryland 14.30 NOAA Urban Heat Island Project - Kevin Gallo, NOAA 15.00 1-KM Polar Data Applications - Ted Scampos & Todd Hutchinson,NSIDC 15.30 Coffee break 15.45 Extension of Project - Martha Maiden, NASA 16.00 Date for Next Meeting - NASA, NOAA, ESA, USGS 16.15 Open Discussion/Summary - Jeff Eidenshink, USGS 17.00 Adjourn meeting Project Review Martha Maiden spoke about the commercialisation of NASA. Funding for the1km project has not been affected as NASA & IGBP are highly supportiveof the project. The pathfinder program provides stability. Alessandra Buongiorno, representing the ESA stations described their currentoperation. ESA is using LAS/ADAPS and providing stitched orbit data to theUSGS, and vice versa. Archiving on optical tape. Kevin Gallo - NOAA 's contribution is to ensure the recorders are scheduled.This data is free to the USGS now. Project Status Reports & Data Acquisition (USGS) Data comes from Tokyo university via ftp now, ~3 scenes per day. Possibilityof faster link from Australia to USA via Japan? Data from October 1993 to September 1994 will not be used for global compositesdue to the Southern hemisphere being in darkness. The passes are, however,stitched & archived. All of the 10 day composites for April 92 - September 93 should be finishedby the end of September this year. The data will be circulated, approximately200 tapes worth. Stitching of NOAA14 orbits will begin also in September,using data as of 1 February 1995. New atmospheric corrections have been published by John R Townshend, "A version 2 AVHRR multi-resolution land pathfinder data set ". NOAA 14 status: - correct calibration coefficients from NOASIS web site - thermal channels affected by seeing sunlight in the calibrating "space-look", gain calculations affected. HRPT Station Reports Baton Rouge, LSU, Dave Wilensky Canada - unrepresented. Australia, CSIRO, Murray Wilson. China Japan - unrepresented. South Africa, CSIR, SAC, Tim Boyle. NSIDC, Ted Scambos Mexico, Gabrielle Rodriguez-Gomez Russia, Yakutsk, Yevgeny Dumorov ESA co-ordinated stations: Agrhymet Centre, Niamey, Niger.. DLR, Oberpfaffenhoffen. Walter Edgar. Rest of ESA stations represented by Alessandra Buongiorno. Science Requirements & Extension of Project Martha Maiden stated that NASA envisioned the project continuing indefinitely,perhaps becoming more stabilised with time. The EROS Data Centre has strongsupport for the project as part of Mission to Planet Earth. All partiesagreed to continue until September 1998 ( by which time the 1996 data shouldbe processed ). Information on anyone using the global product, or any otherscience requirements should be fed back to NASA or EDC. Data Processing / Product Distribution EDC intends to get a global data set of control points due to errorsin the DCW. Interest in Australia's MSS mosaic. NOAA provides quality assessment of the Global product by comparing NDVIwith 8km NDVI. Information re the global composites is currently taking 4 to 7 months togo online (IMS limitations). NOAA Update (Dan Tarpley) Dan outlined the changes with the NOAA K, L, M series: additional / replacement sensors calibration changes in reflectance channels 1.6 & 3.7 micron channel (1km group should vote in the time-sharing) new launch policy (on failure of previous satellite) better launch rocket by NOAA L NPOESS to take over ~ 2008 1-KM Data Set Projects, Applications, and Related Platforms SPOT VEGETATION Update (Gilbert Saint, JRC) The products from the Vegetation instruments (Veg-1 & Veg-2) will bedistributed by SPOT at a minimal cost. Veg-1 should begin operation in 1997,Veg-2 in 2002. L-band reception may be free, with some charge for correctionparameters. National Snow & Ice Data Centre (Ted Scambos & Todd Hutchinson) NSIDC collects & composites data over the poles to create products suchas albedo, surface temperature, sea-ice movement. Discussed the problemsof rapid local time changes across the poles. AVHRR Calibration (Eric Vermote, University of Maryland) Near real-time calibration using ocean and cloud views. Ratio of ch1/ch2over the pacific ocean, where aerosol contribution is negligible, in thepresence of high altitude thick cloud (considered spectrally flat). Ozonecan be accurately measured (TOVS, SeaWIFs) thus effects due to Rayleighscattering can be isolated. The process currently has a 9 day turnaround. AVHRR Global Fire Product (Jackie Kendal, NASA) Fire Algorithm Working Group, NGSFC. See IGBP-DIS home page. The objective is to provide a standard global fire product. So far haveproduced a prototype data set from Global AVHRR 1km product (June 25 1992)and are validating it against DMSP & GOES data, high resolution satellitedata, and results from field experiments (SAFARI, SCAR(s), EXPRESSO, Firescan).Hope to publish the first product March 97, on cdrom. NOAA Urban Heat Island Project (Kevin Gallo, NOAA) Using NDVI and DMSP OLS. Results: a heat island bias is likely to be presentin the observed temperatures for stations with a lower NDVI than their surroundinglandscapes. Discussion All present reaffirmed continuation of the project. Another meetingis expected to be held before next (Northern) summer. Kevin Gallo advised of the next NOAA meeting, on satellite applications,March 4 - 6, North Carolina. Details at NOAA's website ( http://www.noaa.gov). Further details of this meeting will be available at: http://edcwww.cr.usgs.gov/landdaac/1KM/1kmhomepage.html Brochures / Papers collected. German Remote Sensing Data Centre (DFD): Main activities of the DFD Acquisition and processing of NOAA-TIROS AVHRR data at the DFD The Earth Scan Laboratory of the Coastal Studies Institute, LouisianaState University. Agrhymet catalogue of products & services Vegetation: The Vegetation Monitoring System. The Payload. WT03-B26-10IA029-000311-B015-166http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/meetings/poes.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162532 text/html 10913HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:23:19 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 30 Sep 1996 07:35:59 GMTContent-length: 10738 Poes User's Symposium Poes User's Symposium Fourth international satellite direct broadcast services symposium forNOAA Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental Satellites (POES). Annapolis, Md, USA June 10 - 12 1996 Symposium Themes To inform users of current and future plans of US and internationalpolar satellite systems To discuss the changes in NOAA's upcoming satellites (NOAA K, L &M), including changes in their direct broadcast systems. The U.S. Congress has reaffirmed "free access" to the data.There has been a significant increase in the number of amateur users ofthe data. Currently NOAA 14 is the primary afternoon satellite & NOAA 12 is theprimary morning satellite. The Search & Rescue Processor (SARP) on NOAA 14 has been inoperativesince launch. The backup computer failed. The next series of satellites, NOAA K to N will be the fifth generationof NOAA satellites. The changes include: the Microwave Sounding Unit (MSU) and Stratospheric Sounding Unit(SSU) will be discontinued the Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit, AMSU-A & AMSU-B will beadded the AVHRR/2 has been updated (to AVHRR/3) by adding a sixth channelat 1.6 microns. It will be known as channel 3A; channel 3B corresponds toch3 of the AVHRR/2 instrument. These two channels will be operated alternately,3A during the day & 3B at night, although there was much discussionof this during the meeting. Due to limited bandwidth A & B cannot beoperated simultaneously. The use of data compression is being examined. additional sunshield for calibration, more solar panels, extra instruments= increased weight of satellite HIRS/2 replaced by HIRS/3 - a change in the calibration sequence. increased data transmission rate (1200 to 2560 bits/sec). after NOAA K, command encryption will be used. With these changes the stored and real-time data formats have changed. Fordetails see http://psbsgi1.nesdis.noaa.gov:8080/noaasis.html NOAA K may be launched sometime in 1997, but could be much later. Launchdates will be dependent on failure of operating satellite for this series.Some discussion of what "failure" meant, as in the case of NOAA11 where the decayed orbit rendered much of the Earth observation data unusable. NOAA & Eumetsat plan a joint polar program beginning 2001. NOAA to provideafternoon spacecraft (NOAA N & N'), Eumetsat to provide morning spacecraft(METOP-1 & -2). The METOP satellites will carry the same instrumentsas the NOAA series, with additional European instruments. Eumetsat is developing a standard software package (EARP - Eumetsat ATOVSRetrieval System) for processing locally received ATOVS & AVHRR datafrom the HRPT stream of the NOAA K, L, M satellites, and the future METOPs.It is a combined effort between Meteo France, KNMI, UK Met Office, DWD,ECMWF and ARA/LMD. This software will be freely available. There is a planned convergence of the NOAA POES program and DMSP, to becomethe National Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS).It will be a co-operative effort between the Dept of Commerce, the Deptof Defence, and NASA. This has been prompted by US budget savings, and wasdirected by the President in 1994. The increased use of radio frequencies is creating interference betweenthe metsats & other users. The World Radio Administrative Conference(WRAC) in 1992 allocated two bands used by APT & HRPT to the MobileSatellite Service (MSS). NOAA is monitoring the situation. Applications of POES data were presented at the symposium, including biomassburning and aerosol detection, snow applications, coastal zone hazards andthe Global 1km project. Some educational programs in earth observation systems and satellite technologywere described. Web Sites: NOAA http://www.noaa.gov NESDIS http://psbsgi1.nesdis.noaa.gov New navigation page: http://psbsgi1.nesdis.noaa.gov/ISB/ISB.html NASDA: http://www.nasda.go.jp http://www.eorc.nasda.go.jp http://www.goin.nasda.go.jp/GOIN/TRIC http://tkl.iisu.u-tokyo.ac.jp Mission to planet Earth http://sdcd.gsfc.nasa.gov/ISTO Conference Proceedings A set of the conference proceedings are available at the COSSA ResourceCentre. Paul Tildesley, CSIRO Marine labs, Hobart will also be given a set.A list of the papers follows: POES Program Status Gregory A Mandt, Polar Program Manager, NOAA DMSP Program Status Lawrence H Weeks, Deputy System Program Director, DMSP NPOESS Program Status James T Mannen, Director, Integrated Program Office, NOAA EOS Program Status Robert Price, Director, Mission to Planet Earth, GSFC METOP Program Status Michel Langevin, Manager, Polar System Program, EUMETSAT Introduction to Chinese Polar-orbiting Meteorological Satellites Professor Fang Zongyi, Deputy Director, National Satellite MeteorologicalCentre NOAA POES Direct Readout Services/Documentation Dane Clark, Team Manager, Direct Services Division, Office of SatelliteData Processing and Distribution, NOAA Changes to NOAA K and Direct Readout Thomas M Wrublewski, Systems Acquisition Office, NOAA NOAA K, L, M Calibration Hagaraja Rao, Physics Branch, Satellite Research Laboratory, NOAA NOAA K, L, M Navigation Emily D Harrod, Ingest Systems Branch, Information Processing Division,NOAA METOP Direct Readout Services Robert Wolf, Ground Support Division, EUMETSAT Direct Readout Frequency Issues David F McGinnis, Acting Chief, Advanced Systems planning Division,NOAA Operational Use of NOAA/DMSP Polar Orbiting Data in NESDIS Marcia L Weaks, Satellite Service Division, NOAA NOAA/NWS HIPS Users Gary L Hufford, Regional Scientist, Alaska Region, NOAA Coastal Monitoring Farid Askari and Tim Donato, Naval Research Laboratory Access and Applications (EOSDIS Test Site) Bill Emery, University of Colorado Meteo-France HRPT Applications Andre Bellocq, Head, Centre de Meteorologie Spatiale, Service Central d'Exploitationde la Meteorologie The Global Land 1 Km AVHRR Data Set Jeff Eidenshink, US Geological Survey Weather Satellites and Mission to Planet Earth - A synergistic Partnershipfor Education Anne Anikis, Maryland Space Consortium, and Robert Popham, Satellite EducationSpecialist Innovative Programs at West Chester University Nancy McIntyre, Director, Educational Centre for Earth Observation Systems,West Chester University, PA EUMETSAT Regional Temperature/Moisture Soundings (ATOVS) Dieter Klaes, EUMETSAT Hungarian Meteorological Service's Application of NOAA/HRPT Data Ivan Csiszar, Hungarian Meteorological Service Potential AMSU Surface Applications Norman C Grody, Land Sciences Branch, Satellite Research Laboratory,NOAA Potential AMSU Precipitation Applications Ralph Ferraro, Land Sciences Branch, Satellite Research Laboratory,NOAA Snow Applications Thomas R Carroll, Chief, National Operational Hydrologic Remote SensingCentre, NOAA Uses of Polar-orbiting Satellite Date for Sea and Great Lakes Analyses Sharolyn R Young, Office of Satellite Data Processing NOAA Biomass Burning Christopher O Justice, Biospheric Sciences Branch, GSFC Coastal Zone Hazards and Emergency Management Oskar K Huh, Louisiana State University Satellite Data Fusion for Oceanography Kohei Cho, Research and Information Centre, Tokai University, Japan New 1.6 Channel Applications John Price, Remote Sensing Laboratory, US Department of Agriculture Developing a Strategy for LRPT James Silva, Advanced Systems Planning Division, NOAA An Inexpensive Portable APT Station Geoff Chester, Smithsonian Institution Low-cost Direct Reception of NOAA POES Data James Williams, Natural Resources Institute, UK NOAA Satellite Active Archive Peter J Topoly, Office of Satellite Data Processing and Distribution, NOAA North American Internet and Other Sources of Satellite Information Wayne G Winston, Interactive Processing Branch, Satellite Services Division,NOAA Additional Papers Operational Space Systems Russian Federal Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring. Remote estimation of the diffuse attenuation coefficient in a moderatelyturbid estuary. Richard P Stumpf and Jonathan R Pennock Remote sensing of water clarity and suspended sediments in coastal waters. R P Stumpf Retrospective and future studies of coastal water clarity and sedimentloads. Richard P Stumpf. Satellite ground receiving equipment in WMO Regions. Status report 1995.World Meteorological Organisation. WT03-B26-11IA029-000311-B015-214http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/meetings/barton.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162610 text/html 52127HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:24:27 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 06:03:01 GMTContent-length: 51952 REPORT ON OVERSEAS VISIT - I BARTON - REPORT ON OVERSEAS VISIT - I BARTON - NOVEMBER-DECEMBER 1996 ITINERARY 22 November Hobart- London 25-29 November RutherfordAppleton Laboratory 1 December London-Munich 2-3 December CEOS WGCV IVOS Sub-groupmeeting at DLR 4-6 December CEOSWGCV Meeting 6-8 December Munich- Hobart RUTHERFORD APPLETON LABORATORY (RAL) Meetings with scientists A series of meetings was held during the week to discuss joint scientificprograms based on the analysis and applications of ATSR data. More detailson these meetings are available on request. Albin Zavody - Discussed the new SST and cloud-clearing algorithmsfor the re-analysis of ATSR data. A paper was under preparation detailingthe new cloud-clearing scheme. Differences between ATSR and ATSR-2 dataproducts were discussed and methods for investigating these differencesevolved. New data files were obtained to extend the RAL atmospheric transmissionmodel to wider spectral bands in the near and thermal infrared. Chris Mutlow - Discussed future validation plans includingthe possible use of Australian waters for international campaigns. The collaborationwith Iwate University at Mutsu Bay in North Japan had suffered from persistentcloud cover and some logistic problems. Chris was also taking over fromI Barton as the Chairman of the CEOS IVOS sub-group (see below) and detailsof the hand-over were arranged. Phil Watts - Phil is planning to spend some time at DAR inthe near future and possible research programs were investigated. Thesemust fit in with his responsibilities and research activities at RAL aswell as with the programs at DAR. Fred Prata is the point of contact atDAR. Myles Allen - Discussions on the applications of altimeterdata in oceanography including techniques for combining ATSR and ALT data.We also talked about future techniques for the best analysis of ATSR data.It was agreed that the best techniques were probably those detailed in myrecent paper just submitted to JGR. Copies of this paper were left at RAL. Ryuzo Yokoyama - While I was at RAL Professor Yokoyama wasalso visiting so we talked about the Mutsu Bay campaigns as well as thepossibility of Yokoyama attending the series of meetings being set up forTownsville in April 1997. If he attended these meeting he would try andbring a high resolution infrared camera to obtain some coincident measurementswith the AIMS radiometer installed on the wave-piercing ferry. Tim Nightingale - Tim has built a new infrared radiometerfor SST validation and had used it at Mutsu Bay. The new radiometer wasinspected and provided some possible modifications to the CSIRO models. Data requests ATSR-2 data were requested for Fred Prata to cover two volcanic eruptionsas well as the data for the DC-8 campaign over the Hay and Amburla testsites. A request was lodged for full mission Australian continental coverage forATSR-1 data. This request would be forwarded to NERC and we are waitingfor a response. It is likely that this request will be filled when ESA andRAL start their full ATSR reprocessing program. RAL also agreed to forward some ABT files as soon as they were available.These files are required to enable continuation of the ATSR water vapourderivation studies. Other contacts David Llewellyn-Jones (Leicester Uni) - Phone discussions regardingplans for AATSR meetings in Townsville during April 1997. A draft noticewas formulated and has been circulated to likely attendees. The notice isincluded as Attachment 1. Cathy Johnson (UK DoE) - Cathy is replacing Peter Mallaburnas the DoE person in charge of the AATSR program. A courtesy phone callwas made to introduce myself and to discuss the status of the AATSR ScienceAgreement between CSIRO and DoE. Changes are required to the document sincethe demise of the ASO and these would be finalised at the Townsville meetingin April. CEOS MEETINGS - DLR, OBERPFAFFENHOFEN, GERMANY NOTE: CEOS = International Committee on Earth Observation Satellites WGCV = Working Group on Calibration and Validation IVOS = Infrared and Visible Optical Sensors Sub-group CEOS WGCV IVOS meeting The two day meeting was chaired by Ian Barton. The minutes of this meetingare included as attachment 2. Twelfth CEOS WGCV meeting This meeting was attended as the Australian representative on this WorkingGroup. The minutes of this meeting will be available in due course. Significant Items Two significant actions were discussed at the CEOS meetings involving theintercomparison of data from different satellite instruments using a particularground test site. These activities could extend to other test sites in thefuture. The Libyan Desert was selected as the land-based test site and Chris Mutlowat RAL was to coordinate the collection of data over this site for a selectedtime period. The results of this activity would be discussed at the nextIVOS meeting. Ian Barton suggested the Townsville wave-piercing ferry transect as an oceanbased test site. This has now (Jan. 1997) been agreed with William Skirvingat AIMS and Chris Mutlow at RAL. A fixed time period would be selected tocollect data over this site - probably in mid-1997 to provide cloud-freeconditions and time to ensure that the collection of good ground-truth datawas possible. ATTACHMENT 1 DRAFT PLAN FOR TOWNSVILLE MEETINGS - APRIL 1997 Dear All Herewith is a draft plan for meetings in Townsville next April. Can youplease let me know if you can make these meetings and whether there areothers who should be invited (David, Should you pass this on to all theAATSR SAG, - especially the ESA members?). William Skirving has agreed tolook after some of the local arrangements and we will advise of hotels andmeeting places when we have an idea of the number of participants. I hope you can all make it! Regards, Ian. Draft Plan for AATSR-Related Meetings in Townsville - April 1997 Below is a list of possible attendees at a series of meetings to be heldin Townsville during the week of 7 - 11 April 1997. Any comments on theproposed meetings, the list of attendees and the times allowed will be mostwelcome. The meeting schedule will allow for travel to Townsville on Monday afternoonto give a full day for meetings on the first 2 days. The best ATSR-2 passis on Thursday 10 April (Sunday 13 is better - but too late) so we willall participate in a validation exercise on that day. Please let me knowif you will be able to bring a radiometer on the Field Excursion to theBarrier Reef. Please let me know if you are likely to attend these meetings and whetherthere are others in your institute that may attend. Activities: AATSR Mini-SAG meeting. Half-day Day 1. Visit to AIMS Half-day Day 1 AATSR Science Agreement DIST/CSIRO/DoE/VEGA 2 hours Evening Day 1. Australian AATSR Science Team Meeting Half-day Day 2. Future Global SST and LST Validation Plans for AATSR Half-day Day 2. Visit to Barrier Reef validation site* Full day Day 3 * The outward trip to the Barrier Reef validation site will coincide withan ATSR-2 overpass. Collection of ground truth data by small portable infraredradiometers will be possible. AIMS and CSIRO will explore the possibilityof deploying larger radiometers during the trip to the Barrier Reef. Also,the return trip will coincide with an AVHRR overpass - so let's hope forclear skies! Possible Participants: Australia CSIRO B Embleton J Huntington D Jupp A.Prata I Grant A Pearce I Barton AIMS W.Skirving BoM JLeMarshall ANTCRC NYoung K Michael DIST ???? UK RAL C Mutlow (and/or ??) LeicsUni D Llewellyn-Jones NottsUni M Steven NERC SBriggs DoE CJohnson VEGA HKelliher H Tait Japan IwateUni R Yokoyama ATTACHMENT 2 Seventh CEOS WGCV IVOS Meeting Minutes DLR, Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany December 2-3, 1996 Agenda Monday 2 December 1000 Welcome, introductions and logisticsof meetings 1010 MeetingObjectives, Review of Agenda 1020 Minutesof Last Meeting and Discussion. Review of Action Items 1100 Reportfrom CEOS Plenary 1115 Agency/countryreports - Coffee 1245 Lunch 1400 Status of Calibration Test SitesDossier. Interaction with NASA Group 1430 Statusof On-board Calibration Techniques & Facilities Dossiers 1500 Discussion on status of StrategicPlan. Review of IVOS activities. 1530 Newinitiatives, Establishment of an IVOS data set. Suggestions for future specialsessions. 1600 Presentationfrom P. Teillet on a new paradigm for cal/val 1700 Recommendationsto WGCV 1715 Discussion onTuesday's agenda 1725 Nextmeeting Tuesday 3 December 0900 Presentations by DrsDavid Robinson and Nigel Fox 1000 Discussionon standards and traceability 1030 Coffee 1050 Special session on future validationplans. Introduction, aims, outputs. 1100 Presentationsto special session 1245 Lunch 1400 Presentations continue 1530 Discussion on special session activities 1630 Formulation of specialrecommendations to CEOS Working Group on Cal/Val (WGCV). 1715 Finalcomments, future meetings 1730 Close Welcome On behalf of DLR and DARA Wolfgang Noack welcomed the participants in theIVOS meeting and explained the logistics of the meeting and associated activities. Introductions went round the room and the Chairman passed on regrets andapologies from Karl Staenz, Allan Hollinger, Wayne Boncyk (who was representedby Dennis Helder), Masanobu Shimada and Zhimin Zhang. The Chairman noted that it was unfortunate that no one from NASA was attendingas the dossier is a key component in IVOS plans and activities. Objectives/Agenda The Chairman outlined the agenda items and suggested that an important componentof the day's activities was to ensure that the Dossier compilation and maintenancewas progressing well. The second day's sessions would include presentationsfrom the National Physics Lab. in the UK and a special session on the validationof future satellite instruments. The agenda was accepted without modification. The Chairman informed the meeting that he was standing down as Chair andthat Chris Mutlow had accepted the offer to become the new Chair. The Chairmanthanked all the IVOS participants for their contributions over the pastfive years and seven meetings and wished Chris all the best in his new role. Review of Minutes from Previous Meeting The Chairman reviewed the minutes of the previous meeting. He noted thatthe two recommendations presented to the plenary were accepted with modificationand some discussion. The recommendation that ``satellite operators providereliable on-board calibration'' was discussed and Plenary asked for therecommendation to be more specific with a definition of on-board calibration.For test sites the action is on WGCV members to go back to their agenciesand propose international test sites and to foster the use of the proposedtest sites. Much discussion about this topic centred on the fact that CEOS doesn't provideany funds for activities and thus, what kind of recommendations WGCV canmake? Alan Belward noted that if IVOS developed recommendations with greaterspecificity then the plenary and sponsoring agencies may be more likelyto accept and support the recommendations. Kumar asked what the criteriafor a CEOS-endorsed test site is? Garth Morgan suggested that the siteslisted in the dossier should be considered CEOS- endorsed, although fundingto maintain the sites (e.g. collection and archiving of ground data, etc)will have to come from each agency. Mike Rast suggested that the dossieris compiled for information purposes and that some effort needs to go intoselecting test sites and developing cross-calibration plans, etc. Review of Action Items IVOS-3-1. Still open - but will be replaced by ACTION IVOS-7-1with a reminder that all IVOS members should notify the WGCV Secretariatwith information on new campaigns and instruments. Alan Belward says thatwhen the information is available it should be emailed and hosted on orlinked to the CEOS-WGCV web page. IVOS-4-6. Outstanding. Will be replaced by ACTION IVOS-7-6. IVOS-6-1. Closed. The Chairman commented that he welcomed the attendanceof Guiseppe Zibordi and other Ocean Colour folks as this will help withthe co-ordination of their activities. He also suggested that it was unrealisticfor agencies to send more than one or two representatives to IVOS meetingsand it was thus the responsibility of those attending to represent theiragencies interests in a wider range of cal/val activities than their ownspecial areas of interest. IVOS-6-2. Outstanding. Will be replaced by ACTION IVOS-7-2. At presentthere is a limited number of test sites on the Dossier and a special effortwould be made to ensure that this component of the Dossier was expanded. IVOS-6-3. Outstanding. Replaced by ACTION IVOS-7-2. IVOS-6-4. Closed. IVOS-6-5. Closed. IVOS-6-6. Closed. Report from Plenary The new Chairman of WGCV (Alan Belward) briefly reviewed the results ofthe plenary meeting. A key item is that the affiliates now have a mandatefor greater participation in CEOS working groups. The plenary wants to knowwhat the consequences of the recommendations will be on the working groups.WGCV is encouraged to address cal/val recommendations emanating from theSept 96 In-situ Observations for Global Observing Systems, Geneva. Theserecommendations were directed towards the end user and geophysical (derived)data sets, and contained fundamental cal/val issues. Rao stated that weshould stay away from algorithm specifications and focus more on basic sensorcalibration and radiance. Phil Teillet however noted that the funding realityis that the focus needs to be on end-user product validation. Rao arguedthat only operational algorithms should be considered for validation - experimentalalgorithms being too unbounded. Agency/Country Reports Chris Mutlow - RAL, UK. ATSR-2 has been resurrected and has been operationalfor some time. ATSR-2 calibration has been confirmed and validated usingseveral methods including: on-board calibration vicarious calibration - desert sites vicarious calibration - deep convective clouds GOME comparisons sunglint All methods confirmed ATSR-2 pre-flight calibration except 1.6 micron channelwhich was off by a factor of 1.4 An error was discovered in the pre-flightcalibration calculations and the following correction results were verygood. Chris discussed the ATSR-2 instrument characterisation. They use anon-board visible calibration which views the sun each orbit for calibration.Using both White Sands and the Libyan desert sites has resulted in consistentresults and they have also done some cross-calibration with AVHRR measurementsover the Libyan desert sites with good results. In addition, comparisonswith aircraft underflights have been very good in the IR and good in thevis/near IR. Rao - NOAA, USA. The new AVHRR/3 instrument will have a new channel3a (1.58-1.64 micron) for aerosol products. This will change the basic dataformats which will impact operational processing and calibration. AVHRR/3will also have a sun shield to limit stray light contamination. Rao reviewedthe AVHRR Libyan desert calibration noting that the values are tied to U2aircraft underflights which minimise atmospheric contamination. All of thisinformation is available and kept current on the NOAA web site. Rao is alsolooking at test sites in Nevada USA and the Gobi desert. Ross Mitchell fromCSIRO will be looking at desert sites in Australia. In ensuing discussion it was noted that spatial homogeneity, temporal andseasonal consistency, consistent elevation, access to the site for ground-basedcollaborative measurements and no BRDF contamination are important for anyvicarious calibration test site. Phil Teillet - CCRS and IGBP. The Canadian report had been submittedin hardcopy. Phil did discuss one urgent topical issue. He noted that someBOREAS sites may be maintained for 3 years and will be available to cal/valactivities, however others are being closed. A final decision will be madein December and IVOS members should immediately notify Phil of any interestin these sites. Guiseppe Zibordi - EU. Guiseppe discussed the CoASTS project - CoastalAtmosphere and Sea Time Series project. This involved the collection ofmeasurements over the north Adriatic Sea to support SeaWiFS and OCTS. Thishas also involved evaluating bio-fouling of underwater radiometers as wellas intercomparison of atmospheric and marine radiometers. Oaku - NASDA, Japan. ADEOS cal/val briefing. Much work is being doneon detector normalisation and characterisation. For OCTS, the on-board calibrationis being used for trend analysis only at this time; users will need to usepre-launch information until vicarious and buoy data are available. Mike Rast - ESA. ERS; GOME cal/val is nominally complete though morework is being done now that algorithms are changing. ENVISAT; MERIS calibrationwork ongoing; they have had two additional diffuser plates developed andwill be shipped to GSFC for comparison. MERIS is also looking into optionsfor vicarious calibration test sites. Mike noted that a recent issue ofRemote Sensing of the Environment includes a paper of desert test sitesfor optical satellites and Mike circulated a good reference book (by Kramer).Ian noted that these should be added to the proposed CEOS WGCV bibliography. Action: Mike to circulate the study on cal/val strategies to theIVOS group pending review of the study. Lasse Pettersson - Norway. Lasse described ALOMAR; a lidar facilityat 69N which collects year round ground-based atmospheric parameters tostudy the arctic atmosphere including thermal and chemical parameters fortrend measurements. ALOMAR is collecting a long-term baseline data set aswell as campaign-specific measurements. An ALOMAR and GOME calibration exerciseis underway. They would like to use OCTS data in this work since SEAWIFSwill not be available for some time. Dennis Helder - SDSU / EROS Data Center. EROS are characterisingTM through the internal calibrator. They are looking within an orbit, ina 30 day outgassing cycle, and through the instrument life. They have alsolooked at several night scenes to identify and correct the ``memory effect''of the calibration pulse (memory effect being up to 2 DN). EROS is alsolooking at pulse decay effects. Lifetime degradation of the calibrationlamps is being investigated. Landsat 5 has lost forward scan calibrationpulses. LSAT 7 is similar to LSAT 4-5 and is scheduled for May 98 launch.The Enhanced (?) Thematic Mapper (ETM) has a 5 % absolute radiometric accuracywhich should be double earlier TM sensors. ETM will collect sun view dataonce per day and will have a full solar calibration once a month. LSAT7processing will correct for affects identified in the earlier satellites.A Landsat TM Radiometry page has been prototyped at http://iplab2out.sdstate.edu/tmcal Stephen Tjemkes - Eumetsat Operational calibration of Meteosat: Currentlyhere is no onboard calibration performed for Meteosat. Since the blackbodycannot be used. In future (Meteosat 7) the onboard blackbody calibrationcan be utilised, however it is inserted into the optical path with a mirrorsuch that not the whole optical path can be calibrated. For the calibrationof the VIS channel aircraft observations and model calculations are used.Since the spectral response function of the VIS channel is rather wide,the calibration is scene dependent. Therefore, clouds, sea, vegetation anddesert (Tunisia) targets are used for the vicarious calibration. The estimatederror in the aircraft observations are 5 %. The independent calculationsby the Matrix Operator Method also shows 5 % uncertainty. Analysis of the calibration coefficient of the two infrared channels depictsminor problems with the current adopted cloud detection method. The calibrationof the IR window channel relates digital counts over clear ocean areas toradiances calculated using a radiative transfer model with SST analysis,and ECMWF forecast data. The uncertainty in the calibration coefficientis estimated to be 1% with a possible 1K bias in the radiance. The WV channelcalibration relates the clear sky area digital counts to radiances calculatedusing a radiative transfer model adopting collocated radiosondes. Thereforein addition to the problems with the cloud detection method, the vicariouscalibration of this channel is also dependent on the quality of the radiosondeobservations. The precision of the current calibration coefficient is about3% with a possible 5% bias. Eumetsat is planning satellite intercalibration for all three channels.For the VIS channel this involves the Meteosat 5, Meteosat 6 and where possiblethe AVHRR. For the two infrared channels this involves the HIRS instrumentand AVHRR. Calibration Test Sites and Dossier Status Several members noted that information that had been supplied for inclusionon the WWW was not there. Alan Belward thus suggested that we make a specificrecommendation that specific information which we have submitted be madeavailable on the web. Ian suggested that 10 or so sites could be identifiedfor immediate inclusion on the web. These should be vicarious calibrationsites. Validation sites such as Hapex, Sahel and Boreas will be addressedlater. Phil Slater suggested that vicarious calibration sites such as thesebe considered level 1 sites, and product validation sites be consideredlevel 2. The following sites were identified along with those persons to be responsiblefor supplying the test site information to the NASA representative who maintainsthe WWW site. LAND SITES White Sands US (Slater,Biggar) Lunar Lake US (Slater,Biggar) Railroad Playa US (Slater,Biggar) Lake Tahoe US (Slater,Biggar) Ivanpah Playa US (Slater,Biggar) Dun Huang China (Z.Zhang] Qing Hai Lake China (Z.Zhang) Hay Amburla Australia (Prata, Mitchell, Barton) Strezlecki Australia (Prata, Mitchell, Barton) La Crau France [Adragna) Spanish Sites? Spain (Adragna) Libyan Desert Egypt (N.Rao) OCEAN COLOUR MOBY Hawaii (DennisClark) Venice Tower Italy (Zibordi) PlyMBODy UK (Zibordi) Japan Sea Japan (Oaku) IR/TEMP SITES Mutsu Bay Japan (Mutlow) Ocean Sites Australia (Barton) Sudofex UK (Mutlow) Action: For these sites, the identified folks will get a copy ofthe form off the web, send to J Butler, with a copy to Alan Belward andthe WGCV Secretariat by 1 March. These will be updated on CEOS web site(by 1 July) and the progress of the dossier site will be monitored. PhilSlater noted that it's important to advertise campaigns to better utiliseresources. There was some discussion about the applicability of some ofthe ocean sites. Discussion on Future Special Sessions and Activities An IVOS Data Set The Chairman proposed that IVOS could select 2 sites and a time period andcollect all the data available from all sensors. Kumar noted that if CEOS takes it up, all data should be provided free. The Chairman suggested that we could start collecting data now and Indiainvestigate the possibility of doing the work as part of taking the secretariatin a year's time. There was then some discussion about data availability.Alan suggests that we should identify the level of effort it would takefor compiling and analysing the data. All agreed that this should be undertaken. Specialist Sessions Rao suggested a special session on on-board calibration systems for thenext meeting. The Airborne RS conference in Copenhagen in July 97 has aspecial session/short course on imaging spectrometer calibration and correction.Phil Teillet suggested that hyperspectral calibration in general shouldbe considered for a future session. Phil Teillet's New Paradigm in Cal/Val Phil started his presentation by stating that users will only use data productsif the calibration was transparent to their application. He then discussedthe spectral and spatial resolution of various instruments. For instrumentcalibration there are only a few operational cases. Generally atmosphericcorrection is non-operational, but requires well calibrated data and timely,ready access to atmospheric parameters. In the past little attention hasbeen paid to spectral characterisation but this is required to generategeophysical parameters from different instruments. Phil also discussed geometriceffects, viewing directions, topography, scan angle, resampling, etc. Theseall have a big effect on information content. Users: Special users do their own preprocessing and require high accuracy.Operational users need good cal/val for further work, but don't want toknow abut cal/val. The majority of users need stability and quality butdon't really know about cal/val. Existing algorithms do not meet the needsof operational users. To get to the majority of users it is necessary tobe clear about what is being offered. For Remote Sensing, one needs reliabilityof supply, plug and play, and data quality (consistency, quantitative andcomparable). A future strategy should take account of research, reference sites, demonstration,QA focus, standardisation, accreditation and communication. Phil also suggestedthat we think laterally; e.g., recommend that all future instruments includespecific common channels. Ground truth areas of 10KM x 10KM area are neededto compensate for current problems in calibration. Data should be hyperspectral,measured from a low altitude aircraft. Phil also introduced the QuantitativeStability Reference (QUASAR) Concept in which hyperspectral data ($10-$15Kper flight) are collected. This would be followed by radiometric, spectraland geometric processing of the data. Phil hopes to begin some flights in97 and expand his activities in 98. He would then generate products (surfacereflectance and at-sensor radiance, and NDVI and biophysical) and distributesite statistics on a CCRS web site one week post-flight. The results wouldalso be available as wall-to-wall data sets on CD-ROM one month post-flight. For this activity the site considerations are; uniformity, flatness, andsize (10x10km). Primary sites would be in prairie grasslands in Canada andNevada. With this New Paradigm the immediate action should be on the communicationaspects. In particular web sites and the dossier should be improved andkept current. Important questions to be considered are: error budget, site selection,spatial resolution, imaging calibration, etc. Infrastructure questions are:availability of instrument, turn-around time, who participates. Phil thenshowed several images to illustrate potential sites and highlighted subtledifferences in and among sites. Discussion: Phil Slater endorsed this new idea as he believes the fundingfor on-board calibration will soon be drying up. Chris Mutlow noted that many instrument characteristics will not be identifiablewithout on-board calibration. Specifically, build up of condensation duringoutgassing cycles can't be observed by campaigns. Phil Slater then asked about a joint field campaign in Nevada and severalexpressed interest in participating including UK/RAL, CCRS, NASDA, and possiblyNOAA. A meeting to discuss this would be held in February next. 3rd December 1996 Country/Agency Reports (contd China. The Chairman read the highlights of the China countryreport which was submitted by Zhimin Zhang who was unable to attend dueto problems with getting a Visa. The full report would be placed on theWGCV site on the WWW. Presentations by NPL, UK David Robinson and Nigel Fox - UK National Standards Laboratory. David Robinson gave an introduction to NPL - it is the UK's NMI (NationalMeasurement Institute - any country's official measurements institute).NPL has about 600 scientists, more than 95 years in operation and maintainsall 7 SI units (Kg Mt Sec K Amp Candela Mole). NMIs establish internationalequivalence of standards as well as R &D contracting and technologytransfer. Scope of NPL's space measurement activities: Optical thermal instruments, RF/microwave/millimetre wave, time and frequency, problem solving and other measurement services. Importance of space standards; continuity, traceability, and terrestrialequivalence. Nigel Fox started his presentation by discussing Accuracy vs Precision;accuracy is how well a measurement is known compared to an internationallyagreed standard or scale while precision is how well a measurement can berepeated. Accuracy is less than precision but accuracy enables differentinstrument measurements to be compared, allows long term validity of datasets, and enables compatibility with other terrestrial data (e.g. ground-based radiometers equivalent to space-based, and finally reduces room forargument. E.g. fibre optic power showing that calibration efforts have resultedin much higher accuracy. Nigel explained the standards verification andtraceability process and how the measurements are filtered out to the usercommunity. Limitations to accuracy are that the NSL does not understand user-specificrequirements,, and space scientist don't understand options available fromNSL and of course time and budgets are always limited. The various assumptionsmade in the interpretation of optical measurements from space using pre-flightand in-flight calibration (TIR black body, VIS/NIR Lamp & Diffuser)were listed. Solar calibration and vicarious methods were then discussed.Steps to obtaining a calibration baseline from a National Standards Laband the sources of error in this calibration information from irradiancescales, BRDF, etc were then described. NPL have developed a new techniqueto reduce errors and improve dissemination of calibration to the community.This involved reducing uncertainty using a new radiance standard (usinga new cryogenic radiometer) and reducing the length of the calibration chain.Nigel provided details on current calibration methods in use. Direct radiance measurements using filter radiometers for both VIS/NIR andTIR have been shown to reduce measurement errors. These transfer radiometersare portable, robust, vacuum compatible, quick and cheap, and highly accurate.One drawback is that the number of channels available can be limited. Thiswas followed by a discussion of accuracy of field calibration and optionsfor field calibration. Discussion: Availability; the portable calibration standard for visibleis available now, depending on the specific channels requested. NRL canalso calibrate participant's own radiometers as needed. Action: Nigel and David to forward a list of relevant referencesand the Chairman encouraged them to publish details of their new techniquein a scientific journal. Phil Slater(EOS Calibration Scientist) is also planning to form an EOS CalibrationPanel sub-group to co-ordinate and oversee all EOS-related vicarious calibrationactivities. The Chairman thanked both David and Nigel for their presentations and wassure that the new technique would soon be adopted by those using transferstandards to assess the performance of space instruments. Special Session on Future Validation Plans Phil Slater - MODIS calibration Phil gave details of the plans in place for EOS instrument cal/val. In particularhe discussed the calibration of the short-wave channels of the MODIS instrument.Two techniques will be used - reflectance-based calibration and radiance-basedcalibration. He described the errors involved in the calibration proceduresand detailed the traceability of the measurements using transfer standards.A list of proposed intensive field campaigns was given along with plansfor pre-launch cal/val activities using ground-based test sites in the westernUS. Hard copies of the presentation "Validation of MODIS-derived top-of-atmospherespectral radiances by means of vicarious calibration" were made availableat the meeting. Mike Rast - MERIS Cal/Val Activities Mike reviewed the 15-band MERIS instrument characteristics, the System PerformanceParameters, and the operational characteristics. The MERIS Cal/Val RequirementsReport and plan is now complete. This includes calibration requirements,validation of atmospheric correction requirements and the validation ofwater constituents algorithms. Mike reviewed the following MERIS plans priorto launch. 1997 Identify and select vicarious calibration test sites, detailed planfor VC, prepare airborne campaign, prepare data sets from MOS/OCTS/ in-situ,and simulation studies for Case 1 and 2 waters. 1998 analysis of variability of optical properties and aircraft campaignfor case 2 waters, cloud, vegetation, and VC sites. 1999 evaluate campaign results and fine-tune calibration algorithms. Major questions for the IVOS groups to consider: 1. Where do we stand with respect to the design/definition ofa coordinated cal/val strategy for large scale optical sensors? 2. What is the most commonly atmospheric transfer procedure used and whatcould be the means of translating different correction procedures (betweendifferent sensor data sets and consequently make products from differentsensors compatible? 3. What Solar Irradiance profile shall we use? There are currently differentvalues being used in the community. Chris asked if the atmospheric correction issue can't be addressed by theInternational Radiation Commission? Rao says not, due in part to the proliferationof available RT programs. The key seems to be that investigators shouldclearly document what RT code was used and, and importantly, what inputparameters (spectra etc) are used. Mike also presented information from the Atmospheric Chemistry ValidationTeam (ACTV) (E. Attema). They have been working with GOME, MIPAS, GOMOSand Sciamachy. They currently have actions to compile an inventory of validationmethods, select a data centre and informatics infrastructure, and to identifylikely participants. Plans include: Feb 97 identification of ACTV members Summer 97 plenary ACTV meeting Summer 98 rehearsal campaign Autumn 99 Envisat commissioning Chris Mutlow noted that MERIS/ATSR-2 and AATSR should be included as significantparts of the cal/val plans. Giancarlo Maracci - Vegetation Programme Giancarlo presented an overview of the VEGETATION instrument characteristicsincluding a brief description of the on-board calibration for the vegetationmonitor. Additional general information is available at http://www-vegetation.cst.cnes.fr:8050/.A launch is scheduled for the second half of 1998. Chris Mutlow - AATSR validation AATSR will be tied to the same calibration sources as the earlier instruments(ATSR and ATSR-2). The AATSR would be going into the Thermal-Vacuum testchamber soon. Strategy for Cal/Val of Large Scale Optical Sensors The chairman suggested that one option to follow would be the method ofIOCCG as the inclusion of this activity in IVOS may be too big a task tohandle efficiently. Alan Belward stated that this should stay in IVOS becausethe people who are key to this coordination should be involved in IVOS.Chris Mutlow indicated that the list of attendees may be slightly different,but the work could take place in conjunction with IVOS. Several people agreedthat a good first step would be to work on an intercomparison and a coordinatedcalibration effort over a selected site and the Egyptian (Libyan) desertappeared to be a good candidate. Participants would be asked to bring datasamples and actually work through the intercomparison during the next IVOSmeeting; this may preempt work on an IVOS data set. It was also noted that two geostationary satellites cover the Libyan DesertTest Site. Chris will identify people who need to be contacted in orderto select a time period, and set up the task. The assumption is that thesite will be the Libyan Desert (21-23N and 28-29E) and TOA radiances willbe investigated. Guiseppe Zibordi offered to gather a coincident MOS, OCTS,and in-situ data for a coordinated validation effort. Mike Rast noted thatthis exercise (pilot project) should be viewed as a first step in developinga coordinated cal/val strategy. In addition, the information about RT proceduresshould be spelled out clearly and used in the intercalibration exercisein order to better identify the specific information which should be requestedin the future. Klaus-Dieter Rockwitz noted that an atmospheric instrumentgroup (in ESA) could be asked to develop a strategic plan for calibrationand validation and report provide this as input to IVOS. Strategic Plan IVOS plans: these should be updated before the next meeting. Alan notedthat some other mechanism may be used for the ``living document'' whichdescribes the WGCV activities. Recommendations to WGCV Recommendations will be held over until the next subgroup meeting as thiswill take place before the next plenary. Action Items ACTION IVOS-7-1 IVOS members to notify WGCV secretariat of futurecampaigns. ACTION IVOS-7-2 Identified members to give details of the followingtest sites to IVOS NASA representative (J Butler ?) with copies to go tothe WGCV secretariat. ACTION IVOS-7-2-1 P.Slater & S. Biggar. USA ground sites - WhiteSands, Lunar Lake, Railroad Playa, Ivanpah Playa, Lake Tahoe. ACTION IVOS-7-2-2 Zhimin Zhang. Dun Huang, Qing Hai Lake. ACTION IVOS-7-2-3 I. Barton. Hay, Amburla, Strezlecki Desert. ACTION IVOS-7-2-4 F Adragna. La Crau, Spanish sites. ACTION IVOS-7-2-5 N. Rao. Libyan Desert. ACTION IVOS-7-2-6 G. Zibordi. MOBY, Venice Tower, PlyMBODy. ACTION IVOS-7-2-7 H. Oaku. Japan Sea ocean colour site. ACTION IVOS-7-2-8 C. Mutlow. Mutsu Bay, Japan. ACTION IVOS-7-2-9 I. Barton. Australian SST sites. ACTION IVOS-7-2-10 C. Mutlow. Sudofex. ACTION IVOS-7-3 I Barton. To contact the NASA IVOS representative(J.Butler ??) with details on the IVOS activities and the importanceof test site information. ACTION IVOS-7-4 NASA representative. To place test site informationsupplied through ACTION IVOS-7-2 the WWW. Rao suggested that IVOS shouldconfirm that J Butler is the NASA representative on IVOS and that he shouldbe encouraged to attend the meetings. ACTION IVOS-7-5 C. Mutlow to pass on details of next meeting to IVOSsub-group. ACTION IVOS-7-6 B. Guenther. To compile reference list on on-boardcalibration. ACTION IVOS-7-7 M. Rast. To clarify the status of Solar Irradiancedata and activities. ACTION IVOS-7-8 C. Mutlow. To coordinate the Libyan (North African)Desert site validation exercise. ACTION IVOS-7-9 B. Guenther. To supply IVOS Chair and the WGCV Secretariata copy of CEOS/GCOS report from the 1995 Arlington meeting. (Action remainingfrom WGCV9). ACTION IVOS-7-10 M. Rast. To circulate cal/val plans and studieswhen available. ACTION IVOS-7-11 N. Fox. To communicate to IVOS Chair and WGCV Secretariata key reference list for NPL's new instrument calibration techniques. ACTION IVOS-7-12 I. Barton. To email IVOS address list to M. Rast. ACTION IVOS-7-13 I. Barton. To update the IVOS component of the WGCV3-year plan and forward to WGCV Chair. ACTION IVOS-7-14 I. Barton. To compile an IVOS bibliography and forwardto WGCV Secretariat. Next Meeting The Shanghai Institute of Technical Physics has offered to host the nextWGCV meeting in China. IVOS members unanimously expressed the wish to holdthe next IVOS meeting during the two days preceding this meeting. Therewere two time constraints that should be considered in setting these dates. 1. The IGARSS meeting - Aug 4-8 in Singapore. 2. NOAA-K will be launched in mid-August which may impact the NASA and NOAAfolks' ability to participate. The new IVOS Chair would circulate the dates and details of the next meetingas soon as they were available. Close The chairman thanked DLR and DARA for co-hosting the meeting and thoughtthat it had been a good meeting. He was hopeful that by the next meetingthere would be a substantial increase in the information on test sites thatwas available on the WWW and that the Libyan Desert exercise would be astart in developing closer collaboration between space agencies in cal/valactivities. The meeting closed at 5 pm. Appendix ATTENDEES Name Institute Facsimile Email Evert Attema ESA +317 1565 5675 eattema@estec.esa.nl IanBarton (Chair) CSIRO +61 3 6232 5123 ijb@ml.csiro.au Alan Belward JRC/SAI +393 3278 9536 alan.belward@jrc.it NigelFox NPL, UK +44 18 19436935 npf@newton.npl.co.uk Dennis Helder EROS DC, USGS +1605 688 5880 helderd@ng.sdstate.edu CharlieHersom ISTS Canada +1 416 665 1815 hersom@isl.ists.ca Mary James EOS Ltd +4412 5271 2552 maryj@eos.co.uk KiranKumar ISRO +91 7 9675 1752 kiran@sac.ernet.in Giancarlo Maracci JRC/SAI +393 3278 5461 giancarlo.maracci@jrc.it GarthMorgan ACTE +61 8 8302 5344 garth.morgan@unisa.edu.au Chris Mutlow RAL, UK +4412 3544 6525 c.t.mutlow@rl.ac.uk WolfgangNoack DLR +49 81 5328 1446 noack@dfd.dlr.de Hiromi Oaku NASDA +813 3224 7052 oaku@eorc.nasda.go.jp LassePettersson NERSC/NSL +47 5520 0050 lasse.pettersson@nrsc.no C R Nagaraja Rao NOAA +1 301 763 8136 nrao@nesdis.noaa.gov Michael Rast ESA +317 1565 5675 mrast@jw.estec.esa.nl DavidRobinson NPL, UK +44 18 1943 6755 dwr1@newton.npl.co.uk Klaus-Dieter Rockwitz DARA +49 2 2844 7700 PhilipSlater U. of Arizona +1 52 0621 8292 philip.slater@opt-sci.arizona.edu Phil Teillet CCRS +1613 947 1383 teillet@ccrs.nrcan.gc.ca StephenTjemkes EUMETSAT tjemkes@eumetsat.de Giuseppe Zibordi JRC/SAI +393 3278 5902 giuseppe.zibordi@jrc.it WT03-B26-12IA029-000311-B015-250http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/tasks/task2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162626 text/html 6673HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:24:46 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Aug 1996 23:45:26 GMTContent-length: 6499 CSIRO Earth Observation Centre Strategic Science Plan 2. PRIMARY THREAD: EARTH OBSERVATION DATA CONSISTENCY & STANDARDISATION The development and demonstration of 'best practice' base data streamsand value added products from Earth Observation data forms a primary issuefor both research scientists and end users. As defined in the Simpson Report(Simpson et al., 1995), the data streams available today vary considerablyin level of processing and usefulness from raw information from sensors(Level 0) through various degrees of reformatting and sensor correctionor formatting (Level 1 and 1.5) to scientifically and applicable data streams(Levels 2 and 3). The effective use of Earth Observation data for research or commerce tomap and monitor the Earth retrospectively or prospectively requires a baselevel of consistency & standardisation of both the geophysical data(Level 2) and Value Added Product (Level 3) type. By 'geophysical' data(Level 2) are generally meant time series of geolocated (and possibly mosaicked)images of derived physical parameters such as surface temperature, wavelengthdependent emissivity, wavelength dependent reflectance and possibly someintegrated and derived products such as albedo or BRDF. A useful distinction can also be made between 'primary' geophysical data(Level 2) and 'secondary' geophysical data (Level 2.5) according to whetherthe parameter is derived only from the remotely sensed data or uses ancillary(eg meteorological or GIS) data. By Value Added (or Level 3) Products are generally meant products that addressthe applications products that are driving the user end of the process.Products such landcover attributes, soil moisture or evaporation, oceanproductivity and phytoplankton distribution and dynamics, cropping stress,fertiliser levels and potential yield are such examples. Sometimes the productsare quantitative physical measures but as often they are indices or nominalcategories. The time series of consistent and standardised geophysical (Level2) data plus appropriate ancillary data are the material on which they depend. The methods that produce consistent and validated series of either baseLevel 2 or value added Level 3 products will be the nominated 'best practice'methods. They are a base for researchers and users alike to start from eventhough researchers and users often emphasise different aspects of the series.Realising consistent, standardised and accurate data streams involves acombination of operational calibration and validation activities as wellas the establishment of effective base algorithms and processing pathways. All methods and products involved in producing these series require definableand reachable standards as well as estimates of reliability if they areto serve the more sophisticated needs of the researchers and users in thegrowing Earth Observation area. But users often emphasise consistency whereresearchers emphasise accuracy (Jupp, 1996a). In the Thread being definedhere, we will demand that the consistency be applicable to the base of existingdata and the accuracy be sufficient for the information to be combined withmodels. The Thread consists of: 1. A base of well managed field and laboratory instrumentation 2. Instrumented and established calibration sites and field campaigns 3. Well established sensor, atmosphere & scene models 4. Well defined validation processes for the methods 5. A data base of satellite and ancillary data 6. Data management for the data volumes entailed 7. Effective algorithms and processing tools 8. A delivery mechanism for standardised, quality output products The need for such an end-to-end system has been often stated by end users.For example, see McVicar (1996). The reason can be illustrated by consideringthe following apparently simple 'requirements': 1. The same top of the atmosphere radiance should give the same'value' - that is the data should be consistently calibrated and Level 1.5calibrated data should therefore be consistent. 2. If the actual geophysical parameters associated with a scene target donot change the Level 2 data do not change - that is the processing shouldbe consistent It is a measure of the need for focused EOC activity that these very basicrequirements generally cannot be met using the available data streams. Tomeet the first requirement involves maintaining calibration of the particularspace borne instrument by 'vicarious' means for most satellite systems.The second involves the specification and validation of intermediate processingmethods. The process may involve empirical reference sites as briefly describedbelow or it may involve more complex atmospheric correction but whatevermethod is used, in order to be useful it needs to be consistent and to meeta standard against which the products can be assessed. The objective of the set of EOC Tasks outlined here is to demonstrate themeans to establish these and other requirements in a way that ensures qualityLevel 2 products in a selected set of cases and implies a generic approachto ensuring quality is available in future data streams. Initial EOC Threads in Jupp (1996c) which are being addressed through thisinitial integrated Thread are: EnvSat Standardisation Thread (except for Software Tools) Cal& Val Thread Surface/Atmosphere Measurement Models Thread GMS Pathfinder Thread Data Management [& Integration] Thread In the following, the component Task are outlined. To start this integratedset of Tasks, the 'blue touchpaper' is to decide the candidate geophyisicalparameters and value added products and to decide the actual data sets thatare the grist to the process. This topic will be high on the agenda at thesecond Task Definition Meeting in Hobart on August 29/30. WT03-B26-13IA029-000311-B015-297http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcata1.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162708 text/html 37246HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:25:14 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:36:50 GMTContent-length: 37071 Catalogue Library catalogue A: SPACE, ASTRONAUTICS (other than communications (C), remote sensing (R), & astronomical aspects(X) [see also Aeronautics, (F)]. Also used for Space in General, or combinationsof above. AC Space Stations, Colonies in Space, Space Platforms in general [SEE (RS)for Polar Platforms] AD Defence aspects ("Star Wars", SDIO, Weapons in Space) AE Space engineering & technology, Astronautical Engineering, SpaceResearch facilities as test labs., specifications for individual items.SEE also Engineering (E) & Aircraft Engineering (FE), Space Industry(AI) AG Microgravity, also Space laboratories [in Space]; microgravity technology;SEE also Space Commercial use AH Space Instrumentation & Equipment; Payloads; Payload Transport Systems& Carriers; Space Instrumentation in general: SEE (CH) for CommunicationsInstruments, (RI) for Remote Sensing, Environmental Research Instruments,(XH) for Astronomical Instruments AI Space Industry, Astronautical, Space Industry R&D etc. [SEE (FE)for Aircraft, Aerospace Industry; (AE) for Space Engineering & Technology;(IN) Industrial R&D in general.] AJ "Junk" in Space; Orbital Debris AK Launch Vehicles, Space Transport Systems, science & technology oflaunch systems, human-operated launches in space; Launch & SatelliteTrajectories [SEE (AR) for Rockets and Rocketry] AL Launch Sites & Facilities (Cape York, etc.); launch schedules AM Manned Spacecraft & Spaceflight. [SEE ALSO Space planes (FS) Unmanned SEE Satellites: (AN);(CS);(RS); Space probes, astronomical satellites (XF) general) special missions (XI, XL, XP, XS.) AN Satellites & Unmanned spacecraft and satellites in general, and multipurpose satellites. [SEE ALSO (CS), (RS) and (XF)] AP Space Science, Space Programs, Space Exploration in General, Space planning activities in general; [SEE also Remote sensing programmes (RZ); (PS), generalscience] [SEE also Astronomy (X) esp. (XA) (XI)(XI),(XL),(XP),(XS), ( XZ)] AR Rocketry & Rockets, esp. sub-orbital or principles of. SEE also AKspecifically for Launch Vehicles AS Space Resources, commercial use, Mining, Manufacture, Industralization AX Films, videos on space. [Exclude Astronomy, see (XX)] AZ General overviews of space, Principles & Practice (General &Collective) @\Space station background paper \ \ \ \ \National Research Council Canada \ \Space stations \ \ \Canada \ \ \1986 \9p. \AC1-11 \(paper) \#G P.812 Copy of Canadian Space Program booklet @\Salyut in orbit \ \ \ \ \Novosti Press Agency \ \Space stations \Space missions manned \Space technology \Russia \Space \ \1985 \ \Monograph \AC1-56 \#G 1993.56 Overview of Salyut (pre-MIR Soviet space station) and controlfacilities. mvk 20.6.93 @\Die Weltraumstation, beitrage der Bundesrepublik Deutschland [in German] \ \ \ \ \Germany. Federal Republic. BMFT \ \Space stations \Colombus \Space programs \Space \West Germany \ \1985 \32p. \AC2-01 \Monograph \#G P.811 Title:? Space station, project of the German Federal Republic. @\Moon base/Mars base transportation depot \LA-10552-MS \Keaton.P \ \ \Los Alamos National Laboratory \ \Space stations \Space missions manned \Space transportation systems \Space \United States \ \1985 \14p. \AC2-01 \Monograph \ #G P.817 On Publication: UC-34B issued : September 1985 @\Orbital station "MIR": complex of remote sensing of the earth"PRIRODA"scientific program \ \Armand.N \Kutuza.B \Petrov.Y \USSR.Academy of Science \ \Remote sensing instruments \Space stations \ \USSR (Russia) \Space \ \1991 \122p \AC2-01 \Monograph \#G 1992.116 @\Mobile servicing centre, Canada's contribution to space station \ \ \ \ \National Research Council Canada \ \Space stations \ \ \Canada \Space \ \1986 \4p. \AC2-11 \(paper) \ #G P.810 Photocopy of Canadian Space Program booklet @\Leasecraft, the world's first permanent space platform is at your service \ \ \ \ \Fairchild Space Operations Co. \ \Space platforms \Payload transport systems \Leasecraft \Space \United States \ \1985 \n/a \AC2-12 \Folder \ #G P.809 Folder dated 1983; enclosed booklet & letter etc 1985 @\ Space Station Spartan Study Final Report, May 1985 \NASA Technical Memorandum \ \ \ \NASA \ \Spartan \Payload transport systems \Space \United States \ \1985 \various \AC2-12 \Monograph \No. 86215 #G P.807 (Copy 1), P.808 (Copy 2), P.819 (Copy 3) @\ Proposal for evolution of an in-house Space Station Spartan, presentationto GSFC Executive Council, Feb. 8, 1985 \ \ \ \ \GFSC \ \Space stations \Spartan \ \United States \Space \ \1985 \21p. \AC2-12 \Monograph \Goddard Space Flight Centre paper. #G P.806 @\ Report on the Utilization of tne External Tanks of the Space TransportationSystem, a Workshop hosted by the California Space Institute, Scripps Institutionof Oceanography, sponsored by NASA (1982, 23-27 Aug.: University of California) \ \ \ \ \California Space Institute \NASA \Space transportation systems \External tanks \Space stations \Space \United States \ \1983 \various \AC2-12 \Monograph \#G P.805 @\ Process of space station development using external tanks, report bythe External Tank Working Group of the California Space Institute to Directorof the Space Station Review Project, office of Technology Assessment, UnitedStates Congress, 11 March 1983 \ \Arnold.J \ \ \California Space Institute \ \Space stations \External tanks \ \Space \United States \ \1983 \32p. \AC2-12 \Monograph \ #G P.804 @\ Space station Spartan executive summary, June 1985 \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space stations \Spartan \Platforms \United States \ \ \1985 \38p. \AC2-12 \Monograph \ #G P.141 Proposed generic platform for deployment by Shuttle and fromSpace Station. Never adopted for Space Station. jk 20.8.91 @\ Preliminary thoughts on the utility of the space station to operationalearth observations \ \McElroy.J \ \ \ \ \Space stations \Remote sensing \ \Space \International \ \1984 \6p. \AC3-05 \(paper) \#G P.816 @\ Presentations made to 1st IFEOS Meeting, Frascati, Italy, 12-13 Nov.1986, ANNEX [to report?] \ \ \ \ \IFEOS \ \Space stations \Space programs \IFEOS \International \Space \ \1986 \various \AC3-05 \(Conference pub.) \Includes Australian presentation by K.Mc Cracken. #C (IFEOS), P.820. CSIRO'smembership of IFEOS lead to it automatically becoming eligible to join CEOSwhen that organisation absorbed IFEOS in 1989. @\ Space research in the era of the space station \ \Frost.K \McDonald.F \ \NASA? \ \Space science \Astronomy \Space stations \United States \Space \ \1984 \14p. \AC3-12 \(paper) \ #G P.803 March 14, 1984 @\Astrophysics and the Space Station: Vol.1: Executive summary; Vol.2:SpaceStation as an observatory; Vol.3: Satellite servicing from the Space Station;Vol.4: Assembling astrophysics missions at the Space Station; Vol.5 Spaceplatforms for astrophysics \ \ \ \ \NASA \Astrophysics Workshop \Space science \Astronomy \Space stations \United States \ \ \1984 \varies \AC3-12 \(papers) \Drafts of books; Vol 1, 8.3.84 (P.802); Vol 2, 8.3.84 (P.801); Vol 3 8.10.84(P.800); Vol 4 8.10.84 (P.?) ; Vol 5 8.9.84 (P.799), all #G. (record redonejk 8.4.92) @\ Space station, science operations management concepts study, Aug. 1987 \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space stations \Scientific research \Management \Space \United States \ \1987 \varies \AC3-12 \Monograph \ #G P.798 @\Space station summer study report [of the] SEASAC Task Force on ScientificUses of Space Station [1984, 13-17 Aug.] \ \Banks.P \ \ \NASA \ \Space stations \Scientific research \ \United States \Space \ \1985 \117p. \AC3-12 \Monograph \Published March 21, 1985. #G P.797 . @\Columbus/Space station, United Kingdom utilisation study 1985-6 Report[ in 11 vols.] \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Space Stations \Space science \Columbus \Space \Great Britain \ \1986 \various \AC3-32 \Monograph in 11 vols. \Vol.1:Executive summary [not in collection]; Vol.2:Main text, P.977; Vol.3:Atmosphericsciences and applications, P.976; Vol.4: Oceanic science and ApplicationsP.975..;Vol.5: Land science and Applications P.974..; Vol.6:Polar scienceand Applications P.973..; Vol.7:Microgravity science and Applications P.971..;Vol.8:Astronomy, P.970; Vol.9:Solar terrestrial physics, P.969 ; Vol.10:Dataand operations, P.968; Vol.11: The Remote sensing value added industry,P.966. @\Columbus/Space Station United Kingdom utilisation study 1985-6: Report:Vol.7: Microgravity science and applications [photocopy] \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Space science \Microgravity \Columbus \Space \Great Britain \ \1986 \30p. \AC3-32 \Monograph \Photocopy of Vol.7 of Report. P.972. @\ Columbus/Space Station United Kingdom utilisation study 1985-6 Report:Vol.11: The remote sensing value added industry 31 Dec. 1986 [photocopy] \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Space stations \Space industry \Columbus \Space \Great Britain \ \1986 \58p. \AC3-32 \Monograph \Photocopy of vol.11 of Report, P.967. @\Interim report of the Columbus Utilization Land Applications Panel, 31Jan. 1986 \LAP(86)1 \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Remote sensing applications \Earth sciences \Columbus \Space \Great Britain \ \1986 \51p. \AC3-32 \Monograph \#G P.795 (Copy 1), P.796 (Copy 2) @\ Draft final report of the Columbus Utilisation Land Applications Panel \LAP(86)2 \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Remote sensing applications \Earth sciences \Columbus \Space \Great Britain \ \1986 \78p. \AC3-32 \Monograph \ #G P.964, P.965 (Copy 2). Received 30-9-86 @\ Interim report of the Polar Platform Panel on the Atmosphere, versiondated 3 March 1986 \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Polar platforms \Atmospheric research \Columbus \Space \Great Britain \ \1986 \18p. \AC3-32 \Monograph \Report of Columbus Space Station Panel, #G P.794 @\ Report of the Columbus Panel on the Atmosphere, September 1986 \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Polar platforms \Atmospheric research \Columbus \Great Britain \Space \ \1986 \79p. \AC3-32 \Monograph \ #G P.793 @\ U.K. Columbus Programme, Expert Panel on Polar Studies Interim Report,15 Feb. 1986 \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Polar regions \Environmental research \Columbus \Space \Great Britain \International \1986 \12p. \AC3-32 \Monograph \ #G P.792 @\ U.K. Columbus Utilisation Study Polar Regions Panel, final Report, Sep1986 [Draft] \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Polar regions \Environmental research \Columbus \Space \Great Britain \ \1986 \36p. \AC3-32 \Monograph \ #G P.963 @\ Solar-terrestrial Physics Panel of the UK Columbus Utilization WorkingGroup, 3 march 1986 [report] \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Space stations \Solar terrestrial physics \Columbus \Space \Great Britain \ \1986 \24p. \AC3-32 \Monograph \ #G P.791 @\ Solar-Terrestrial Physics Panel of the UK Columbus Utilisation WorkingGroup, Draft Final report, 30 Sept. 1986 \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Solar terrestrial physics \Space stations \Columbus \Space \Great Britain \ \1986 \33p. \AC3-32 \Monograph \ #G P.826 (Copy 1), P.827 (Copy 2) @\ Columbus Programme, Ocean Panel Interim report (Rev.1), March 1986 \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Oceanography \Space stations \Columbus \Space \Great Britain \International \1986 \34p. \AC3-32 \Monograph \ #G P.790 @\ Interim report of the Microgravity Panel [Columbus space station] \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Microgravity \Space stations \Columbus \Space \Great Britain \ \1986 \n/a \AC3-32 \Monograph \ #G P.789 (Copy 1), P.788 (Copy 2) @\Draft Final report of the Columbus Utilisation Remote Sensing Value IndustryPanel, 30th Sept. 1986 \RSVIP(86)2(issue 1 draft) \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Remote sensing applications \Space industry \Columbus \Space \Great Britain \ \1986 \28p. \AC3-32 \Monograph \ #G P.825 @\ Columbus Astrophysics Panel, Draft report \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Astronomy \Space stations \Columbus \Space \Great Britain \ \1986 \n/a \AC3-32 \Monograph \Received 9 Oct. 1986 #G P.823 (Copy 1), P.824 (Copy 2) @\Nissho Iwai presentation (space project) [relating to Japanese contributionto the Space Station] \ \ \ \ \Nissho Iwai \ \Space programs \Space stations \Space industry \Japan \ \ \ \n/a \AC5-63 \Monograph \ #G P.821 Nissho Iwai & space industry & space station projects;SPAT [Space Technology Research & Development Group of Japan]; DOMSATprogram. @\ Space Station: Leadership for the Future \ \ Martin.F \ Finn.T \ \ NASA \ \ space stations \ \ \ United States \ \ \ 1987 \ 8p \ AC7-12 \ Pamphlet \ #G P.80, P.81 US Government Prinitng Office 1987-190-171 @\Civilian space stations and the U.S. future in space \OTA-STI-241, Nov. 1984 \ \ \ \US. Office of Technology Assessment \ \Future planning \Space stations \ \United States \ \ \1984 \234p. \AC15-12 \Monograph \ #G P.818 @\Space Station Operations Task Force Final Report: executive summary October1987 \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space stations \SSOTF \ \United States \ \ \1988 \19p. \AC15-12 \Monograph \ #G P.815 Executive Summary of Summary Report @\Space station development plan, submitted to the Committee on ScienceSpace and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space stations \Future planning \ \United States \ \ \1987 \85p. \AC15-12 \Monograph \#G P.814 @\Spacestation, the next logical step \ \Froehlich.W \ \ \NASA \ \Space stations \Space programs \ \United States \Space \ \1985 (?) \51p. \AC15-12 \Monograph \ #G P.813 Pub. no.EP-213, after Aug.1984, before 1986. @\Space Biospheres \Orbit, a Foundation Series \Allen.John \Nelson.Mark \ \ \ \Exobiology \Environmental research \Space Life sciences \Space \ \ \1987 \89p \AC15-01 \Monograph \#G 1996.11 ISBN 0 89464 011 9 Speculative report on life sciences in space,plans for "Biosphere II" private research facility in USA to studycontrolled environments for isolated groups of humans, such as would beexperienced in long term space flight. Kreiger Publishing, Florida USA mvk20.2.96 @\ Weapons in space [series of 6 articles from New York Times, March 3-81985] \ \Gelb.L \Broad.W \Biddle.W New York Times \ \Star Wars Program \Space defence \ \United States \Space \ \1985 \ca 16p \AD1-12 \Reprints \ #G P.828 N.Y. Times reprint. Other authors C Mohr, P Boffey. Record reconstructedjk 9.4.92 @\ The Verification of Conventional Arms from space: an assessment of Europeancapability \ \ Anson.P \ \ \ Marconi Space Systems \ \ Surveillance \ Defence technology \ Space technology \ Europe \ International \ \ 1990 (?) \ 9p \ AD1-30 \ Paper \ #G 1990.88 , copy 2 1990.130. Paper by Rear Admiral Sir Peter Anson, Chairmanof Marconi Space Systems (Matra Marconi Space), presented at Armed ForcesCommunication and Electronics Association Conference (1990?). Covers SPOT,HELIOS, ERS-1 surveillance capabilities and proposes a European treaty verificationradar satellite under the control of the Western European Union (WEU). JK8/4/91 @\The Potential of Satellites for Wide Area Surveillance of Australia \ \Gale.W \ \ \RAAF \ \Surveillance \Space technology \Defence technology \Australia \ \ \1992 \ \AD1-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.275 Survey of satellites, capabilities, for defence surveillanceuse. Gale was at RAAF Air Power Studies Centre, Canberra, 1991-92. mvk 3.1.93 @\Into the Fourth Dimension: an ADF Guide to Space. \ \Forestier.A \ \ \RAAF \ \Surveillance \Space technology \Defence technology \Australia \ \ \1992 Jan \ \AD1-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.315 . ISBN 0 642 17080 0 ISSN 1037 7077. Survey of satellites,capabilities, for defence surveillance, navigation, and other uses. Forestierwas at RAAF Air Power Studies Centre, Canberra, 1991-92. mvk 26.1.93 @\ Scientific and technical aspects of the Verification of a comprehensiveTest Ban Treaty \ \Milner.B \Lewis.P \Jasani.B \VERTIC \ \Surveillance \Space technology \Space Law \Great Britain \International \ \1990 April \ \AD2-32 \Monograph \#G 1992.251 Study on the use of various technologies, including satellites,for Treaty Verification purposes. Other authors/study group members includesLeggett.J , Barnett.M , and Zimmerman . P . mvk 29.12.92 @\An International Satellite Monitoring Agency (ISMA) for Arms Control Verification,Conflict Resolution and Crisis Control \ \Swahn.J \ \ \Chalmers University of Technology \ \Surveillance \Space technology \Space law \Scandinavia \Sweden \ \1986 May \20p \AD2-39 \Monograph \#g P.1184 Report CTH/FKF-86-1, Technical Peace Research Unit of ChalmersUniversity. Background paper with proposed areas for further technical researchin field of arms treaty verification using space technologies. mvk 1.6.93 @\Antisatellite weapons \ \Garwin.R \Gottfried.K \Hafner.D \Scientific American \ \Space weapons \Satellites \Space defence \Space \ \ \1984 \11p. \AD8-05 \(papers) \ #G P.829 Copy of pp.27-37 of Scientific American, vol.250, no6, June 1984 @\ TITLE: Australia and Space ; Conference at the Strategic and DefenceStudies Centre, Research School of Pacific Studies, Australian NationalUniversity Canberra, 27-29 November 1991. \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 ANU \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Defence \ KEYWORD.2 Space defence \ KEYWORD.3 Defence technology \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 South east Asia \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1991 \ PAGINATION Various \ CLASSC'N AD8-80 \ FORMAT Conference papers \ OTHER.DATA #C "Australia and Space", 1992.53. Includes paperon Global change by G Harris, Satellite communications by William Hope (AUSSAT). @\ TITLE: Australia and Space \ SERIES.TITLE Canberra Papers on Strategy and Defence No. 94 \ AUTHOR.1 Ball.D \ AUTHOR.2 Wilson.H \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 ANU \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Defence \ KEYWORD.2 Space defence \ KEYWORD.3 Defence technology \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 South east Asia \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1992 \ PAGINATION 389p \ CLASSC'N AD8-80 \ FORMAT Conference papers \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.236. Revised and edited papers from Conference "Australiaand Space", held at ANU, late 1991. See also #C, 1992.53. Includespaper on Global change by G Harris, Satellite communications by WilliamHope (AUSSAT). ISBN 0 7315 1389 4 mvk 28.12.92 @\ David Florida Laboratory, Communications Research Centre, Departmentof Communications \ \ \ \ \Canada. CRC \ \Space science \Space research facilities \ \Canada \ \ \1981 \6p. \AE1-11 \Monograph \#G P.830 @\ Eurospace 86, Europe's commitment to space, Aerospace America specialreport: Europe aims for space independence \ \Langereux.P \ \ \Aeropspace America \ \Space technology \Space programs \ESA \Europe \ \ \1986 \9p. \AE1-30 \(paper) \ #G P.831 Extract from serial. @\Status of space science and technology- an Australian prespective [COSPARPaper 5.2.3.] \ \Carver.J \ \ \A.N.U. \ \Space science \Space technology \ \Australia \ \ \1982 \13p. \AE1-80 \(paper) \ #G P.832 @\ General environmental test specification for spacecraft and components(expendable launch vehicles), May 1977 [with amendments of Nov 15 &Dec.22, 1977, and 31 Oct. 1978] \GETS (ELV)-1 \ \ \ \NASA \ \Satellites \Launch vehicles \Specifications \United States \ \ \1977 \various \AE2-12 \Monograph \ #G P.836 @\National Space Engineering Symposium, [1st] Canberra 10-11 October, 1984,Pre-prints of papers \IEA National Conference Pub. \ \ \ \IEA \National Space Engineering Symposium \Space technology \Satellites \Remote sensing \Australia \ \ \1984 \various \AE2-80 \(conference pub.) \No.84-12. #C @\ National Space Engineering Symposium 1987 Preprints of papers (3rd:1987,30 June-2 July:Canberra) \IEA. National Conference Publication; no.87-8 \ \ \ \National Space Engineering Symposium \IEA \Space Technology \Satellites \Remote sensing \Australia \ \ \1987 \259p. \AE2-80 \Annual [Conference pub.] \COSSA a sponsor; includes papers by COSSA staff. IEA National Panel onSpace Engineering. #C @\National Space Engineering Symposium (2nd: 1986, 25-27 Mar.:Sydney) Pre-printsof papers Vol 1 & 2. \IEA National Conference Pub. no. 86-3 \ \ \ \National Space Engineering Symposium \IEA \Space technology \Satellites \Remote sensing \Australia \ \ \1986 \Varies \AE2-80 \(Conference pub.) \Annual. IEA National Panel on Space Engineering. AUSSAT Ltd. cosponsor.Vol. 1 contains papers by COSSA staff. #C P.833, P.834 (V2) @\ Fourth National Space Engineering Symposium Preprint of papers (4th:1988,12-14 July: Adelaide) \IEA National Conference Pub. \ \ \ \National Space Engineering Symposium \IEA \Space technology \Satellites \Remote sensing \Australia \ \ \1988 \181p. \AE2-80 \(Conf. pub.) \ #C Record reconstructed jk 9.4.92 @\ Fifth National Space Engineering Symposium, Proceedings. (5th:1989, 27November - 1 December: Canberra) \IEA National Conference Pub. \ \ \ \National Space Engineering Symposium \IEA \Space technology \Satellites \Remote sensing \Australia \ \ \1990 \297p +. \AE2-80 \(Conf. pub.) \#C ISBN 85825 490 5 1990.82, 1990.83. @\Proposal for study of Multifrequency radio beacon for AUSSAT II satellites \ \ \ \ \Auspace \ \Space industry \Space communications \AUSSAT \Australia \Space \ \1987 Apr \Various \AE2-80 \Monograph \#G P.864 (unsuccessful) proposal to the Australian Space Board. 21.6.92 @\ Abstracts of papers, 15th ISTS- Tokyo, 1986 \ \ \ \ \International Symposium of Space Technology and Science \ \Space technology \Space science \International Symposium of Space Technology and Science \International \Japan \ \1986 \417p. \AE3-05 \ #C P.835 Inc paper by COSSA. (conference pub.) \ @\Richard B. Kershner Space Integration and Test Facility [Kershner Building] \ \ \ \ \Johns Hopkins University \ \Space research facilities \Space technology \ \United States \ \ \n.d. \9p. \AE3-12 \Monograph \ #G P.837 Booklet on test facility @\ Space science & technology at RAL \ \ \ \ \SERC \ \Space science \Space technology \Rutherford Appleton Lab. \Great Britain \ \ \1986 \n/a \AE3-32 \Data sheets \ #G P.838 Data sheets in cover. @\ AUSSAT'86 New horizons, conference & exhibition, 5-6 Nov. 1986, Sydney,Conference papers \ \ \ \ \AUSSAT'86 \AUSSAT Ltd \Satellites \Space technology \AUSSAT \Australia \ \ \1986 \362p. \AE3-80 \Conference pub. \#C (AUSSAT) P.840 @\ Post-war aeronautical design and development in Australia; 28th Sir CharlesKingsford-Smith Memorial Lecture, 22 Oct. 1986 [of] Royal Aeronautical Society[Australia] \Kingsford-Smith Memorial Lectures \Schaetzel.S \ \ \RAeS \Hawker de Havilland \Aircraft technology \Space technology \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \46p. \AE3-80 \Monograph \ #G P.839 28th lecture. @\ Local and national impact of aerospace research and technology \NASA Technical Memorandum \McCarthy.J \ \ \NASA \ \Space technology \Economic impact \ \United States \ \ \1981 \7p. \AE4-12 \(paper) \No. 82775. Photocopy.#G P.851 @\ Space benefits: the secondary application of aerospace technology inother sectors of the economy, prepared for [NASA] by Program for TransferResearch and Impact Studies... Denver Research Institute. 81-1 [ed.] \ \ \ \ \Denver Research Institute \NASA \Technology transfer \Economic impact \Space technology \United States \ \ \1981 \various \AE4-12 \Monograph \#G P.843 Corrected jk 9.4.92 @\ Rethinking space business \ \Gwynne.P \ \ \High Technology \ \Space technology \Economic impact \Disasters \United States \International \ \1986 \8p. \AE5-12 \(paper) \ #G P.844 Copy of pp. 38-45 of High Technology, June 1986 @\ French-Australian Symposium on Advanced Technologies, 11-15 Nov. 1985[by] French Embassy Press & Information Service \ \ \ \ \France. Embassy (Canberra) \ \Space technology \Space industry \EUREKA \France \Europe \ \1985 \72p. \AE5-34 \Monograph \#G P.845 @\Commentary: Space technology and societal regulation \ \Levine.A \ \ \Science Technology & Human Values \ \Space technology \Social factors \Legal affairs \International \Space \United States \1986 \13p. \AE6-05 \(paper) \ #G P.846 Photocopy of pp.27-39 of Science Technology & Human Values,Winter 1986 @\Rocket ship, an incredible journey through science fiction and sciencefact \ \Malone. Robert \ \ \ \ \Spacecraft \Space technology \ \Space \International \ \1977 \125p \AE12-05 \Monograph \#G 1996.13 ISBN 0 06 012851 8 Illustrated history of spacecraft in fictionand engineerng, from twelfth century. mvk 16.3.96 @\ Proposal for India-Australia collaboration in space science and technology,28 November 1985 \ \McCracken.K \ \ \COSSA \ \Space science \Space technology \International cooperation \Australia \India \ \1985 \4p. \AE14-80 \(paper) \ #G P.847 Record reconstructed jk 9.4.92 @\Just over the horizon in space, [a report of the results of a New ConceptsSymposium of NASA, June 1979 at Woods Hole] \Springboard of the 80s \Bekey.I \Naugle.J \ \Astronautics & Aeronautics \NASA \Space science \Space technology \Future planning \United States \Space \ \1980 \13p. \AE15-12 \Reprint \ #G P.848 Reprint from Astronautics & Aeronautics, May 1980, pp64-76.Cover title: Springboard of the 80s @\ A Forecast of space technology 1980-2000, prepared by a Task Group \NASA SP-387 \James.J \McDonald.R \ \NASA \ \Space technology \Future planning \ \United States \ \ \1976 \various \AE15-12 \Monograph \ #G P.849 @\ Aerospace 2000, Second Annual Hinkler Memorial Lecture (2: 1984, 16 June:Bundaberg) \Hinkler Memorial Lectures \Page.F \ \ \Hinkler Commemoration Committee \ \Space technology \Aircraft engineering \ \Australia \ \ \1984 \31p. \AE15-80 \(paper) \ #G P.850 @\ Spacelab data book \ESA BR-14 \Longdon.N \ \ \ESA \ \Spacelab \Space laboratories \Space science \Space \Europe \United States \1983 \120p. \AG1-01 \Monograph \ #G P.854 @\Overview of First Material Processing Test (FMPT), July 1984 \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Microgravity \Materials technology \FMPT mission \Space \Japan \ \1984 \12p. \AG1-63 \Monograph \ #G P.855 @\ TR-IA-2 Launch Information for Press : test rocket "TR-IA"Flight No. 2 for Microgravity experiments, August 1992 \ NASDA Press Kit \ \ \ \ NASDA \ \ Microgravity \ Launch vehicles \ \ Japan \ International \ \ 1992 (Aug) \ 46p \ AG1-63 \ Monograph \ #G 1992.300 Explanation of mission (including description of experiments),launch sequence, launch personnel, site amenities and facilities, and NASDAplans and satellite program. mvk 24.1.93. @\ Material science laboratory for Spacelab \ \ \ \ \MBB \ \Microgravity \Materials technology \Spacelab \Space \West Germany \ \n.d. \10p. \AG3-01 \Monograph \ #G P.856 @\ Microgravity environment quality aboard a low earth orbit space station[paper presented] 36th Congress of the IAF, Stockholm, Sweden, Oct. 7-12,1985 \IAF-85-53 \Boudreault.R \ \ \Canadian Astronautics \IAF \Microgravity \Space stations \ \Space \Canada \ \1985 \15p. \AG3-01 \(conference paper) \Preprint. #C (IAF) P.859 @\ Microgravity program, detailed description, July 1986 \ \ \ \ \Canadian Astronautics \ \Microgravity \Space programs \ \Canada \Space \ \1986 \n/a \AG3-11 \(paper) \ #G P.858 Proprietary document @\Life Sciences Accomplishments \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space medicine \Microgravity \Exobiology \United States \Space \ \1986 Dec \60p \AG3-12 \Monograph \#G P.1168 Prepared by NASA Office of Space Science and Applications LifeSciences Division mvk 28.12.92 @\U.K. Columbus utilisation programme: report of the microgravity panelto the Core Team, October 1986 \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Space stations \Microgravity \Columbus \Space \Great Britain \ \1986 \29p \AG3-32 \[paper] \ #G P.857 + 1 surplus . Report to the Core Team of the Columbus/Space StationUnited Kingdom utilisation study. @\ Microgravity Science and Space Experiments: Selected proceedings of theFirst Chinese Symposium, Nov. 11-14, Beijing, China. \ \ Lanying.L (Ed) \ Junru.M \ \ SSTC \ CAS \ Microgravity \ Life sciences \ Materials technology \ China \ Space \ \ 1988 Mar \ 41p \ AG3-61 \ Conference papers \ #G P.119 Entered 20/3/91 @\Status of materials processing in space and its potential in Canada, Executivesummary, September 10, 1986 \ \ \ \ \Canadian Astronautics \ \Materials technology \Microgravity \ \Space \Canada \ \1986 \5p. \AG5-11 \(paper) \ @\Papers by Leopold Dintenfass \ \Dintenfass.Leopold \ \ \ \ \Microgravity \Space medicine \Life Sciences \Australia \Space \ \1983 to 1993 \ \AG10-80 \Folder \#G 1995.153 Collection of papers sent to COSSA by the late Dr Leopold Dintenfass,Australian physician who conducted several acclaimed space life scienceexperiments on the Space Shuttle in the 1980s without government supportapart from COSSA. These included Red Blood Cell coagulation experimentson STS 51-C. Collection includes IAF paper (UK, 1987), and biography. mvk30.12.95 @\ Eurostar \ \ \ \ \ British Aerospace \ Matra \ Satellite control \ Platforms \ Space commercial use \ Europe \ \ \ 1991 (?) \ 12p \ AH1-30 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.35 Describes platform sold by Matra/BAe for civil and militarycommunications payloads jk 30/5/91 @\ Spartan in the space station era, July 1984, prepared for NASA \ \ \ \ \OAO Corp. \ \Payload transport systems \Spartan \Space stations \Space \United States \ \1984 \8p. \AH2-12 \Monograph \Contract document. @\Spartan capability statement, Feb. 1984, Goddard Space Flight Center \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Payload transport systems \Astronomy \Spartan \Space \United States \ \1984 \44p. \AH2-12 \Monograph \#G, P.11 @\ Attached Shuttle payload carriers, versatile and affordable access tospace \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Payload transport systems \Attached Shuttle payload carriers \Space science \Space \United States \ \n.d. \19p. \AH2-12 \Monograph \Include GAS, Hitchhiker-G, & Spartan WT03-B26-14IA029-000311-B016-35http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatb.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162732 text/html 1054HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:25:50 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:36:54 GMTContent-length: 881 Catalogue Library catalogue B: BIOGRAPHY [personal] BA Surnames starting with "A" (BA1 = AA; BA26 = AZ; etc. BB Surnames starting with "B" (BB1 = BA; BB26 = BZ; etc. BC Surnames starting with "C" (BC1 = CA; BC26 = CZ; etc.) . . BZ Surnames starting with "Z" (BZ1 = ZA; BZ26 = ZZ; etc. (examples: Prytz is BP18; Clarke is BC12; Thorburn is BT8;etc.) WT03-B26-15IA029-000311-B016-75http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatc1.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162803 text/html 38254HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:26:09 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:36:55 GMTContent-length: 38079 Catalogue Library catalogue C: COMMUNICATIONS & INFORMATION & ASSOCIATED TECHNOLOGIES CB Radio communications, Broadcasting, Electronic media - radio &television, radio frequencies. See CZ for Radio science CC Computers & Computing; Databases(technical side) Computer hardware,chips etc., & software unless Remote sensing, SEE (RR). Includes technicalside of information networks such as CSIRONET, ESA IRS etc.[SEE ALSO Information science & systems CL] [See also Artificial Intelligence(ER), Remote sensing information processing (RR) CH Communications instrumentation & equipment [SEE ALSO (RI) remotesensing instruments] CI Communications Industry, Electronic & computer industry,Technology,R&D, Information technology; etc CJ Price lists (of Data, information) CL Library/Information, Science/Information systems, Data collection systems,Data management. For Remote sensing information facilities, specifically,USE (RR) CM Transport industry, road & rail communications etc. SEEALSO (E) & (F) CN Navigation, Tracking, Search & Rescue & Recovery; Ground receiver& transmission stations; Antennas, [but antennas for astronomy SEE X];Reception [radar & radio]; Distress systems (eg COSPAS); Interference.[SEE ALSO (CH) for Instruments themselves] [SEE ALSO (RD) Surveillance] CO Optical communications, Optoelectronics etc.; Optical fibres CP Publishing & Publishers; Media, public relations, advertising. CR Remote area communications, telecommunications & radio etc CS Communications Satellites (Aussat, Echo, Telstar, etc.) [SEE ALSO Satellites, (AN)] CT Telecommunications (Telephone, Telex, etc.)& telecommunications networks CZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective); Radio science;general overviews @\ Documents [of] CCIR Study Groups, Period 1986-1990: Interim WorkingParty 8-7 [and others]; Documents 8-9E-16E; /20E; /26E;/29E; /30-49E; andothers \CCIR Study Groups Documents \ \ \ \CCIR \ \Space technology \Communications technology \Radio communications \International \ \ \1987 \various \CB2-05 \(papers) \Collection of documents @\ Via satellite directly in your living-room, the German-French DirectBroadcast Satellite Programme, TV-SAT/TDF-1 \ \ \ \ \TV-SAT/TDF-1 \ \Satellite broadcasting \Communications programs \ \Europe \West Germany \France \n.d. \4p. \CB2-30 \Folder \Before 1985. @\ TDF1-TDF2, direct broadcasting satellite system \ \ \ \ \CNES \ \Radio communications \Satellite broadcasting \ \France \Europe \ \1985 \5p. \CB2-34 \Folder \ @\ International Union of Radio Science, XXII General Assembly, Tel Aviv,25 August to 2 September 1987. \Vol.XXI \ \ \ \International Union of Radio Science \ \Communications \Communication Technology \Telecommunications \Belgium \International \ \September 1987 \219p. \CB2-34 \Report \URSI (International Union of Radio Science) @\ Some notes on Direct Broadcasting by Satellites (DBS) as plannned overseasand its relevance to AUSSAT used by Western Australia. July 1983 \ \ \ \ \Brian J. O'Brien & Assoc. \ \Satellite broadcasting \Radio communications \AUSSAT \Great Britain \United States \Australia \1983 \12p. \CB3-80 \Monograph \Report to Office of the Northwest, WA. @\ ABC working with AUSSAT, [paper from] AUSSAT'86, New Horizons [Sydney1986] \ \Moriarty.G \ \ \ABC \ \Radio communications \ABC \AUSSAT \Australia \ \ \1986 \14p. \CB3-80 \(conference paper) \ @\ Satellites, a new distribution method [paper from AUSSAT'86 Conference,New Horizons, Sydney 1986] \ \Aspinall.D \ \ \Bond Corp. \ \Satellite broadcasting \Sky Channel[TV] \Television \Australia \ \ \1986 \12p. \CB5-80 \(conference paper) \ @\Radiocommunications Spectrum Management Reform \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Transport & Communications \ \Radiocommunications \Government policy \Telecommunications \Australia \ \ \1992 Sept \28p \CB15-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.99 Report led to establishment of high-level "Spectrum ManagementAgency" amid concerns from CSIRO and other institutions that airwavecommercialisation would be costly for scientific research and operationalbodies. COSSA placed a submission to the SMA in February 1994, arguing thatearth observation satellite groundstations and radioastronomy observatoriesshould not be categorised for licensing purposes, with commercial broadcastingfacilities. mvk 10.7.94 @\Multipoint distribution station: regional Australian transmitter licenceallocation co-ordination handbook. \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Transport & Communications \Spectrum Management Agency \Radiocommunications \Government policy \Telecommunications \Australia \ \ \1995 \various \CB15-80 \Monograph \#G 1996.10 ISBN 0 644 431628 See also 1996.9 Establishment of high-level"Spectrum Management Agency" occurred amid concerns from CSIROand other institutions that airwave commercialisation would be costly forscientific research and operational bodies. COSSA placed a submission tothe SMA in February 1994, arguing that earth observation satellite groundstationsand radioastronomy observatories should not be categorised for licensingpurposes, with commercial broadcasting facilities. mvk 16.3.64 @\Multipoint distribution station: regional Australian transmitter licenceallocation Information Memorandum \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Transport & Communications \Sprectrum Management Agency \Radiocommunications \Government policy \Telecommunications \Australia \ \ \1995 Apr \61p \CB15-80 \Monograph \#G 1996.9 ISBN 0 644 427248 Establishment of high-level "SpectrumManagement Agency" occurred amid concerns from CSIRO and other institutionsthat airwave commercialisation would be costly for scientific research andoperational bodies. COSSA placed a submission to the SMA in February 1994,arguing that earth observation satellite groundstations and radioastronomyobservatories should not be categorised for licensing purposes, with commercialbroadcasting facilities. See also 1996.10 mvk 16.3.96 @\ The C Programming Language 2nd Edition \Prentice-Hall Software \Kernighan.B \Ritchie.D \ \ \ \Computer software \ \ \ Not applicable \ \ \1988 \272pp \CC1-02 \Monograph \ISBN 0 13 110362 8 #G 1992.158 Long term loan from HQ Library (AS:HQ 005.133Ke) C is a general purpose programming language. Its generality makes itmore convenient and effective for many tasks than more "powerful"languages. This book is meant to help readers learn how to program in C.It is not an introductory programming manual - it assumes some familiaritywith basic programming concepts. mvk 14.7.92 @\The Whole Internet: User's Guide & Catalog \Nutshell Handbook \Krol.Ed \ \ \ \ \Information systems \Information networks \Data sets \International \United States \ \1992 \376 \CC1-05 \Monograph \#G 1994.64 ISBN 1 56592 025 2 Published by O'Reilly & Associates PtyLtd. Acquired by CSIRO Library Service through DA Information Services Mitcham.Includes Glossary, Index. Covers introduction to Internet, FTP (Data transfer),Network ethics, Telnet, electronic mail (e-mail), Gopher, Wide Area InformationServers (WAIS), Hypertext, World Wide Web (WWW). mvk 1.6.94 @\ Satellite ISDN seminar (1988, 4 May:Washington, D.C.) \ \ \ \ \INTELSAT \ \Computers & digital standards \ISDN \Satellites \International \ \ \1988 \n/a \CC2-05 \Monograph \ISDN is a digital standard. @\ High Simplicity Graphics Company [Genisco Computers Corp., GBase: Genisco'sGraphics Database Management Software] \ \ \ \ \Genisco Computers \ \Computer software \Computer graphics \ \United States \ \ \1985 \Various \CC2-12 \Folder \#G Folder with booklets on aspects of Genisco's graphics product. @\ Geometry Partners Directory \ Geometry Partners Directory \ \ \ \ Silicon Graphics Computer Systems \ \ Directories \ Information science \ Computer software \ United States \ \ \ HOLD Fall 1989 \ \ CC2-12 \ Serial \ #G P.63 Directory of IRIS Software @\ Quick guide to the Silicon Graphics Applications directory \ \ \ \ \ Silicon Graphics Computer Systems \ \ Directories \ Information science \ Computer software \ United States \ \ \ 1991 \56p \ CC2-12 \ \ #G 1992.64 . Marked QRG APPS-001 @\Visualizing our changing Planet \ \ \ \ \Silicon Graphics Computer Systems \ \Information science \Computer software \Remote sensing image processing \United States \International \ \1992 (?) \ \CC2-12 \Video \#G 1992.257 PAL format 1992.258 ? format . mvk 2.1.93 @\The PDS Toolbox Overview Toolbox Release 4 \Jet Propulsion Laboratory D-10263 \ \ \ \JPL \NASA \Information systems \Data management \ \United States \ \ \1992 Nov \36p \CC2-12 \Monograph \#G 1994.48 Hints and user notes on software tools for managing earth andplanetary data, including images, in libraries and archives. Developed forJPL's Planetary Data System, PDL. See also 1993.127 mvk 27.3.94 @\Fourth NASA Goddard Conference on Mass Storage Systems and Technologies \NASA Conference Publication 3295 \Kobler.Benjamin \Hariharan.P \Blasso.Len \NASA \NASA Scientific and Technical Information Branch \Information systems \Information networks \Data management \United States \International \ \1995 \397 \CC2-12 \Conference Proceedings \#G 1995.92 Conference at University of Maryland, 28-30 March 1995. mvk13.8.95 @\Starlink \ \ \ \ \SERC \ \Information networks \Astronomy \Starlink \Great Britain \ \ \n.d. \6p. \CC2-32 \Folder \ @\ Australia Telescope Correlator Chip \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Computer hardware \Astronomical instruments \Australia Telescope Correlator Chip \Australia \ \ \n.d. \7p. \CC2-80 \(paper) \ @\Dindima Group papers]: CSIDA Workstation [and] Arlunya "Gaiss Maus"[instrument,papers and brochures in folder] \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \Dindima \Computer hardware \Interference \Arlunya \Australia \ \ \n.d. \various \CC2-80 \Folder \Folder of miscellaneous papers on Dindima /CSIRO products @\ TITLE: Symposium on spatial database accuracy, 19-20 June 1991, Melbourne. \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 Hunter.G \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 University of Melbourne \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Information technology \ KEYWORD.2 Data management \ KEYWORD.3 Mapping \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 Victoria \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1991 \ PAGINATION 260p \ CLASSC'N CC2-80 \ FORMAT Conference proceedings \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.40 ISBN 0 7235 0280 2 Proceedings of Conference hostedby Department of Surveying and Land Information, University of Melbourne.Papers relate mainly to mapping, cadastral survey, and data transfer standard. @\The Networked Nation \ \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \Information systems \Information networks \Communications \Australia \ \ \1994, Sept \83p \CC2-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.153 ISBN 0644 35058 X , published by AGPS, Cat. No. 94 2385 5 .Reports on national needs for research data networks; their role in thewider community; and recommends action by Commonwealth government. CoversAARNet, National Library. mvk 19.11.94 @\ CSIRO Imaging Symposium, CSIRO National Measurement Laboratory, 25-26March 1991: Divisional Summaries. \ \ Berman.M \ \ \ CSIRO Division of Mathematics & Statistics \ \ Imagers & imaging \ Remote sensing \ Planning \ Australia \ \ \ 1991 March \ 50p (?) \ CC3-80 \ Monograph \ #C 1991.4 @\Access to discovery: Digital's External Research Program \ \ \ \ \ \ \Information technology \Information & computer industry \Research grants \Australia \ \ \1992 \32p \CC5-80 \Monograph \#G 1993.68 Form No. 6085, 11/92, description of Digital Equipment Corporation'sresearch sponsorship program. mvk 29.6.93 @\The global connection, future needs for research data networks in Australia.Draft findings. \ \Henderson-Sellars, A. \ \ \ASTEC \ \Information networks \Information systems \Communications \Australia \ \ \ \1994 \ \30p. \CC15-80 \ \#G1995.50 mvk 23.4.95 @\QPSX Communications Ltd \ \ \ \ \QPSX Communications Ltd \ \Information technology \Information dissemination \ \Australia \ \ \1989 \Various \CH1-80 \Folder \#G 1990.132 Overview, including newspaper reports. Obtained during visitin Feb 1990 to Perth office. jk 8.7.92 @\Meet Ericsson Radio \ \ \ \ \Ericsson \ \Radio communications \Communications industry \Radio communications equipment \Sweden \ \ \n.d. \35p. \CH2-39 \Monograph \Includes defence, space, radar & other applications @\ Catalog of ioospheric monitoring systems by KEL Aerospace \ \ \ \ \KEL Aerospace \ \Space industry \Communications instruments \Ionosphere \Australia \ \ \n.d. \5p. \CH2-80 \Folder \ @\ Computer White Paper, 1981 ed., a summary of highlights compiled fromthe Japanese original \ \ \ \ \Japan Information Processing Dvelopment Center \Japan. Government \Information & computer industry \ \ \Japan \ \ \1981 \70p. \CI1-63 \(paper) \Photocopy, missing pp.1-2, of original. @\Technological colonisation of Australia? \ \Caelli.W \ \ \Australian Electronics Engineering \ \Information & computer industry \ \ \Australia \ \ \1982 \6p. \CI1-80 \(paper) \Copy of pp.5-16 of Australian Electronics Engineering, July 1982 @\ Austek Microsystems: Company profile [and] VLSI design and manufacturingtechnical overview \ \ \ \ \Austek Microsystems \ \Information & computer industry \Computer hardware \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \n/a \CI2-80 \Folder \Folder containing 2 booklets @\Developing world communications \ \ \ \ \International Institute of Communications \Grovenor Press \Telecommunications \Information technology \Satellites \International \ \ \1987 \528p. \CI5-05 \Monograph \Papers + advertising:CSIRO ad. p.348-356. Complimentary. @\ Marketing of microwave communications technology: Australian capabilitiesand opportunities, May 1986 \Australian capabilities and opportunities \Siva.S \Cawthron.E \ \DITAC \ \Microwaves \Communications technology \Marketing \Australia \ \ \1986 \75p. \CI5-80 \Monograph \Technology Assessment Section paper. @\ Information industries- issues and directions, address to the AustralianInformation Industsry Association, Sydney, 24 October 1985 \ \Charles.D \ \ \DITAC \ \Information & computer industry \ \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \18p. \CI5-80 \(paper) \Given at Annual General Meeting of Association @\ Research priorities in communications and information technology, a reportbased on the Workshop, Leura 18-20 February 1988. Vol.1: Report; Vol.2:Keynote addresses and Background paper \ \Garrett-Jones.S \ \ \Industry Research and Development Board \DITAC \Industrial research & development \Communications technology \Information technology \Australia \ \ \1988 \27 + 52p. \CI5-80 \Monograph \In 2 vols. @\ Stategic alliances from an R & D point of view [paper] presentedby J. O'Callaghan [at the] AIIA Strategic Alliance Symposium, 10-11 October1988 \ \Frater.R \ \ \CSIRO. IICT \AIIA Stategic Alliance Symposium \Information & computer industry \Industrial research & development \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \11p \CI5-80 \(paper) \ #G Record reconstructed jk 10.4.92 @\ Telecommunications research and development in Australia: a report tothe Prime Minister \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \Telecommunications \Industrial research and development \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \47p. \CI5-80 \Monograph \ @\ TITLE: Sydney , telecommunications hub of the South Pacific ; a strategicplan for the communications technologies industry in New South Wales, Draft[report] \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 Gledhill \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 NSW Science and Technology Council \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Communications industry \ KEYWORD.2 Communications technology \ KEYWORD.3 Future planning \ REGION.1 NSW \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1987 \ PAGINATION 6p \ CLASSC'N CI5-82 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G Planning report . Record reconstructed jk 10.4.92 @\Telecommunications development strategy, NSW the premier state \ \ \ \ \NSW Science and Technology Council \ \Telecommunications \Communications technology \Future Planning \NSW \ \ \1987 \48p. \CI5-82 \Monograph \ @\ Industry policy and the electronics and information industry, Draft,Nov. 1985 \ \Rawlinson.P \Botsman.P \ \ \ \Information & computer industry \Government policy \High technology \Australia \ \ \1985 \26p. \CI7-80 \Monograph \Draft report not for quoting. @\ Technological change: impact of information technology 1985 \ \Goldsworthy.A \ \ \National Information Technology Council \ \Information technology \Technological change \Computers & digital standards \Australia \ \ \1985 \92p. \CI11-80 \Monograph \Contains contents lists of 1980-1984 eds. @\Information technology in Australia, capabilities and opportunities, areport to the Department [of Science and Technology]. Vol.1: Summary; Vol.2:Principle findings \ \ \ \ \W.D.Scott & Co \Arthur D. Little Inc \Information technology \Computers & digital standards \Information systems \Australia \ \ \1984 \Vol.1 40p., Vol.2 various \CI15-80 \Monograph in 2 vols \ @\ NOAA retrospective satellite data price list and ordering procedures,Jan. 1984 \ \ \ \ \NESDIS \ \Satellites \Data price lists \NOAA satellites \United States \ \ \1984 \7p. \CJ3-12 \Monograph \ @\ TITLE: Information systems on Space science and technology : a directory. \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 U.N. \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Data management \ KEYWORD.2 Space science \ KEYWORD.3 Directories \ REGION.1 International \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1988 \ PAGINATION 207p \ CLASSC'N CL1-05 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.46 UN Document A/AC.105/397/Rev.1 @\ Solar-terrestrial data access, distribution and archiving,[by] JointData Panel of the Committee on Solar and Space Physics, Space Science Boardand Committee on Solar-terrestrial Research, Board on Atmospheric Scienceand Climate \ \Shea.M \Williams.D \ \NRC \ \Solar terrestial physics \Data management \ \United States \ \ \1984 \31p. \CL1-12 \Monograph \ @\3.1 Taskmaster \ \ \ \ \C3 Incorporated \ \Computer software \Information systems \ \United States \ \ \1986 \ \CL1-12 \Manual \#G P.109 Software manual for NGEN mvk 30.4.94 . @\ CSIRO Library and Information Services Task Force Report \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Information systems \CSIRO \Libraries \Australia \ \ \1988 \varies \CL1-80 \Monograph in 2 vol. \Vol.1: ca. 50p., Vol.2: ca.150p. @\ Guidelines for CSIRO Libraries \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Information systems \CSIRO \Libraries \Australia \ \ \1994 Dec \8p \CL1-80 \Monograph \ #G 1995.79 Arises from review document and Board decision of 1991. mvk17.6.95 @\The VGA CD-ROM Sampler \ \ \ \ \Footscray Institute of Technology \ \Information systems \Information science \Data sets \Victoria \Australia \ \1989 \ \CL1-83 \CD-ROM \#CD-ROM No.11 1992.233 Produced by Technology Based Training Group of FIT,with contributions (photographs) from CSIRO Information Services. NS201.1mvk 26.12.92 @\Technical Characteristics for assessing standards for the transfer ofspatial data and brief international descriptions \ICA Technical Report \Moellering.H \Wortman.K \ \ICA Commission on Standards for the transfer of spatial data \ \Information systems \Data management \International cooperation \International \ \ \1994 June \98p \CL2-05 \Monograph \#G 1996.17 International Cartographic Association (?) Technical Reportgives concise generic characteristics of transfer standards for spatialdatabases, and gives overviews of national and international standards throughoutthe world (Including Australian Spatial Data Transfer Standard). mvk 16.3.96 @\A National Geographic Information Resource: the Spatial Foundation ofthe Information-Based Society \ \ \ \ \Federal Geographic Data Committee \ \Information systems \Data management \Geographic Information Systems \United States \ \ \HOLD 1991 \26p \CL2-12 \Series (annual) \#G 1996.62 Report to the Director, Office of Management & Budget. FGDC(Australian counterpart is CSDC) comprises Departments of Agriculture, Commerce,Defense, Energy, Housing & Urban Development, Interior, State, Transportation,EPA, Emergency Management Agency, Library of Congress, NASA, National Archives& Records, and TVA. mvk 8.4.96 @\SAR Data catalog system (V2.0) user's guide \JPL D-3233 \Pang.A \Curlander.J \Holmes.A \NASA \JPL \Information systems \Remote sensing applications \Data management \United States \International \ \1986 Apr \76p + \CL2-12 \Monograph \#G 1994.37 Guide/handbook for SDCS (SAR Data Catalog System) at JPL, usedfor managing access to SIR-B and Seasat data. Hierarchical management system.Includes pro forma for setting up data account. Fourth author Jai.B . mvk20.3.94 @\SAR Data catalog system (V2.1) release notes \Appendages to JPL D-3233 \Pang.A \Curlander.J \Holmes.A \NASA \JPL \Information systems \Remote sensing applications \Data management \United States \International \ \1986 Aug \ \CL2-12 \Monograph \#G 1994.49 Guide/handbook for SDCS (SAR Data Catalog System) at JPL, usedfor managing access to SIR-B and Seasat data. Hierarchical management system.Further information to using datalog: refer also 1994.37. Fourth authorJai.B . mvk 25.3.94 @\3rd National Workshop on Natural Resources Data Management: Data Standards& Directories 22-23 February 1994, Canberra. \ \ \ \ \NRIC \DOPIE \Earth resources \Data management \ \Australia \ \ \1994 \ \CL2-80 \Loose-leaf folder \#G 1994.89 Attended by Kingwell for COSSA. Examined requirements for metadataregistries in Australia. See also file notes by Kingwell under same titlein COSSA registry. mvk 8.7.94 @\Guidelines for data quality statements for Natural Resources data sets \ \ \ \ \NSW Government \ \Data management \Land data systems \Quality control \Australia \NSW \ \1995 \CL2-82 \Monograph \#G 1995.98 Prepared by Department of Conservation and Land Management,Office of Land Information Policy and Coordination. mvk 19.8.95 @\Urban and regional planning information systems for India /other ESCAPcountries: [proceedings and selected papers of the International Workshopon Urban and Regional Planning Systems (IWURIS) (1986: Dec.: New Delhi]) \ \Saini.N \ \ \Deemed University \ESCAP \Information systems \Remote sensing applications \IWURIS \India \International \ \1986 \423p. \CL3-05 \Monograph \Papers on use of Remote sensing techniques in town & regional planning& computerized information systems to oranize & disseminate thedata @\Conceptual design study of real time reporting system on oceanic conditions,by RTRSOC Concept Study Team \NAL: SP-2T \ \ \ \NAL \ \Oceanography \Remote sensing information processing \Data collection systems \Japan \ \ \1984 \84p. \CL3-63 \Monograph \Special Publication of National Aerospace Laboratory @\Information ONLINE 87, 2nd Australian Online Information Conference andExhibition, 27-29 January 1987, Hilton International Sydney, sponsored bythe Information Science Section of the Library Association of Australia[Preprints, programme guide, & exhibition program] \ \ \ \ \Australian Online Information Conference \LAA \Information science \Online system studies \Information technology \Australia \ \ \1987 \n/a \CL3-80 \Folder \ @\ NASA Tech Brief Program, a cost benefit evaluation, [prepared by] TransferResearch and Impact Studies Project, Industrial Economics Division, [forNASA] \ \Johnson.F \Gatseos.P \Miller.E \University of Denver Research Intitute \ \Economics \Information systems \ \United States \ \ \1977 \112p. \CL4-12 \Monograph \ @\ Image processing, consultancy [report] for CSIRO Office of Space Scienceand Applications (COSSA), September 1987 \ \Foster.A \ \ \Sirotech Ltd \ \Industrial Research & Development \Technology transfer \Economics \Australia \ \ \1987 \71p. \CL5-80 (reclassified from RR5-80, 20/3/91). \Monograph \#G P.120 @\ TITLE: EDSS Profile \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 CSIRO Division of Information Technology \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Handbooks \ KEYWORD.2 Information systems \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1992 \ PAGINATION 20p + \ CLASSC'N CL9-80 \ FORMAT Folder \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.70 Binder including coloured figures showing overviewof Environmental Decision Support System developed by CSIRO DIT for ERIN. @\A plan for a distributed data reception and archive network for Australia.Report of RSC Technical Committee Workshop No. 2, 21-22 January 1993. \ \ \ \ \ Australian Space Council \ Australian Space Office \Remote sensing \Data management \Information systems \Australia \ \ \1993 \ \CL15-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.84 (Copy 1), 1994.85 (Copy 2). Report of meeting at Jellore (McCracken'sfarm) which lead to 3 consultancy contracts in 1994 proposing an "AustralianEarth Observing Network" . mvk 7.7.94 @\ Geostar Corporation \ \ \ \ \Geostar Corp \ \Navigation \Tracking \Search and Rescue \International \Space \ \1989 \Varies \CN1-01 \Folder of Brochures \ @\Request for proposal specification for NOAA and GMS high resolution meteorologicalsatellite receiver system [for] Meteorological Department, Ministry of Communications[Thailand] \ \ \ \ \Thailand. Dept. of Communications \ \Tenders \Remote sensing satellites \Ground communications equipment \Thailand \ \ \n.d. (around 1987). \69p. \CN1-68 \Monograph \Document partly in Thai. @\ Canberra Deep Space Communications Complex, Tidbinbilla, ACT [informationbooklet] \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Science \ \Ground communications stations \Tracking \Tidbinbilla Space Tracking Station \Australia \A.C.T. \ \n.d. \6p. \CN1-81 \Monograph \1986. Superceded by Space Office's booklet Tidbinbilla Space Tracking Station[1988] @\ Tidbinbilla Space Tracking Station [information booklet] \ \ \ \ \ASO \ \Ground communications stations \Tracking \Tidbinbilla Space Tracking Station \Australia \ \ \n.d. \6p. \CN1-81 \Monograph. \1988? @\ Functional Description of Signal Processing in the Rogue GPS Receiver \ \Thomas.J \ \ \NASA \ \Tracking \GPS \Navigation \Space \USA \ \1988 \Varies \CN2-01 \Monograph \ @\Specification for COSPAS-SARSAT 406 MHz distress beacons, July 1985. Rev.ed. 16-7-85 [with other COSPAS-SARSAT papers and reports] \ \ \ \ \Canadian Astronautics \COSPAS-SARSAT \Distress systems \Satellites \COSPAS-SARSAT \International \ \ \1984-85 \various \CN2-05 \(papers) \Specification stapled with COSPAS-SARSAT Project Report Aug. 1984; CAL'sCOSPAS-SARSAT a search and rescue satellite system; and others. @\ COSPAS-SARSAT system summary \ \ \ \ \SARSAT \ \Search & resite Working Group, Magnavox, 1984 International \ \ \1981 \various \CN2-05 \Monograph \ @\SARSAT-COSPAS global satellite system for distress positioning [biennial?report on activities] \ \ \ \ \CNES \ \Search & rescue \Satellites \COSPAS-SARSAT \International \ \ \HOLD 1984 ed., 1985 ed. \5p. \CN2-05 \Folder \1984 ed covers 1983; 1985 ed. covers 1982- March 1985. @\ COSPAS-SARSAT project report, joint Canada, France, US, USSR demonstrationproject \ \ \ \ \COSPAS-SARSAT \ \Distress systems \Search & rescue \COSPAS-SARSAT \International \ \ \HOLD August 1984; Sept. 1985 \ca. 150p. \CN2-05 \Serial \ @\Simplified Software for Computation of Ground Nadir Track and other FactorsAffecting Ground Reception Planning for Sun-Synchronous Remote Sensing Satellites \ \Jeremy.R \ \ \Hawker de Havilland \COSSA \Remote Sensing Satellites \Sun-Synchronous Satellites \Ground Receiver equipment \ \July 1986 \11 pages \CN2-05 \Monograph \Commissioned Report (to COSSA) @\ SARSAT-COSPAS satellite ground station fully proven and tested...improvedsearch and rescue effectiveness \ \ \ \ \Canadian Astronautics \ \COSPAS-SARSAT \Search & rescue \Ground communications stations \Canada \International \ \n.d. \n/a \CN2-11 \Folder \Folded sheet. Date ca. 1983 @\ Teachers guide for building and operating weather satellite ground stationsfor high school science \ \Summers.R \Gotwald.T \ \NASA \ \Ground communications stations \Teachers guides \ \United States \ \ \1981 \83p. \CN2-12 \Monograph \ @\ The Transit navigation satellite system \ \Stansell.T \ \ \Magnavox \ \Navigation systems \Satellites \Transit \United States \International \ \1983 \83p. \CN2-12 \Monograph \ @\[Papers on Global Positioning Systems, supplied by NAVSTAR GPS ProjectLiason Officer, Hardcastle, in May 1987] \ \ \ \ \RAAF \USAF \Navigation systems \GPS \Satellites \United States \International \ \ca 1987 \various \CN2-12 \(papers) \Supplied re provision of GPS C/A code signal on AUSSAT. Shelf no. CN2-12,NA @\ Hughes satellite ground equipment \ \ \ \ \Hughes Aircraft Co \ \Satellites \Communications instruments \Ground communications equipment \United States \International \ \n.d. \24p. \CN2-12 \Monograph \1981? @\GPS Marine user equipment [a paper] presented at the Global Civil SatelliteNavigation Systems Conference, Royal Institute of Navigation, London 22May,1984 \ \Stansell.T \ \ \Magnavox \ \GPS receivers \Navigation systems \ \International \ \ \1984 \ca.9p. \CN2-12 \(paper) \ @\Considerations related to use of pseudolite for differential GPS, by JackMurphy, [and other papers from meetings etc of GPS Pseudolite Working Group,by T.Stansell, R. Maher and others] \ \Murphy.J \Stansell.T \Maher.R \GPS Pseudolite Working Group \Magnavox \Navigation systems \GPS \Pseudolite \United States \ \ \1984 \n/a \CN2-12 \(papers) \Noted on cover: Pseudolite Working Group, Magnavox 1984. Record reconstructedjk 10.4.92 @\Meteorological satellite tracking and processing station \ \ \ \ \Signaal \ \Remote sensing satellites \Ground communications stations \ \Netherlands \ \ \1981 \4p. \CN2-34 \Folder \ #G Record reconstructed jk 10.4.92 @\Earth station for weather satellites \ \Huele.H \ \ \Philips Telecommunications Review \Signaal \Ground communications stations \Remote sensing satellites \Meteorology \International \Netherlands \ \1981 \12p. \CN2-34 \Reprint \Reprint of pp.118-129 of Philips Teecommunications Review, Vol.39, no.3. @\ Receiving station for weather satellites \ \ \ \ \Signaal \ \Satellites \Ground communications stations \Meteorology \Netherlands \ \ \1983 \4p. \CN2-34 \Folder \ @\ Multipurpose tracking ground stations \ \ \ \ \MBB \ \Ground communications stations \ \ \West Germany \ \ \n.d. \4p. \CN2-38 \Folder \1984? @\ German ERS-1 Off-line ground segment, use of the Transportable GroundStation for ERS-1, TN38 preliminary report, July 30th, 1986 [ Restricteddocument] \DFVLR Technical Note 38 \Schroter.H \ \ \DFVLR \ \Ground communications stations \Remote sensing information processing \ERS-1 \West Germany \Europe \ \1986 \64p. \CN2-38 \(paper) \ WT03-B26-16IA029-000311-B016-116http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcate.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162832 text/html 20199HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:26:49 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:36:59 GMTContent-length: 20024 Catalogue Library catalogue E: ENGINEERING & APPLIED TECHNOLOGY (other than Space (AE)or Aeronautical (FE) ) [see also IN, Industry; Physical Sciences (P)] EA Architecture & Construction, building technology, town planning EB Biotechnology & Bioengineering [see also Biology (LB) & Medicine(LM)] EC Chemical & Materials Processing, Materials technology, materialstesting, (fracturing, structure of materials applying to engineering technology)[see also Chemistry (PC), Microgravity applications (AM)] ED Energy & energy technology & resources. [SEE ALSO (LE) ecology& environment, resources] EE Electrical Engineering, Electrical technology, and Electronics non- communications,-computer uses, non-High Technology. Prefer (CI) communications/computer; (EG) High/Advanced technology where appropriate. SEE also (R) remote sensing; (X) astronomy. EF Defence technology, science, facilities, of Defence forces [Prefer (AD)for space, defence aspects] EG High technology, advanced technology in general, industrial design &design technology EH Hydraulics, water & fluid engineering. [Prefer (M) oceanography etc;(TW) hydrology & flood mitigation EM Mining engineering aspects, mining technology [see also mining, geologicalaspects (TM); mining economic & resources aspects (TR) ] EN Nuclear Engineering [SEE ALSO Nuclear science (PN)] EQ Quality control, reliability engineering ER Robotics & Artificial Intelligence [see also Computers (CC)] ES Structural Engineering, Iron & steel technology, Metal trades [SEEALSO (EC) Materials technology; (EA) building,& Construction ET Technology in general, esp. research technology that is not Industrial,also Technology transfer; combinations of technologies.[SEE ALSO (subject) technology AE, CI, EC, ED, EE, EF, EG, EM, ES, EX, FE, IN, also RI, and other(subject) instrument] EX Photographic technology, chemistry, science, film material EZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective); Standard specifications @\MFP Adelaide: Community Consultation Panel \ \ \ \ \ \ \Industrial research & development \Industrial technology \Planning town \South Australia \Australia \International \1992 (?) \ \EA11-85 \Brochures \#G 1992.265 Set of brochures in folder. mvk 3.1.93 @\Multifunction Polis Feasibility Study \ \ \ \ \The Joint Steering Committee to the Australian and Japanese Governments \ \Planning town \Industrial research & development \ \South Australia \Australia \Japan \1990 \118p \EA11-85 \Monograph \#G 1992.269 Documents choice of Adelaide, summarises other proposals (Sydney,Melbourne, Gold Coast, North Queensland) ISBN 0 646 00376 3 mvk 3.1.93 @\ICAST, International Center for Aerospace Sciences and Technology [projectedindustrial town, Colorado, US.] \ \ \ \ \ICAST Inc \ \Space industry \Planning town \ICAST \United States \ \ \1984 \16p \EA15-12 \Monograph \Publicity booklet . Record reconstructed jk 10.4.92 @\ Biotechnology \CSIRO Research for Australia \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Biotechnology \ \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \86p. \EB3-80 \Monograph \No.8, #G @\ Biotechnology opportunities in New South Wales \Council report \ \ \ \NSW Science and Technology Council \ \Biotechnology \Industrial research & development \ \New South Wales \ \ \1986 \75p. \EB5-82 \Monograph \ @\ Draft annual report [of] New Materials Technology Advisory Committee1986-87 \ \ \ \ \IR&D Australia \NMTAC \Materials technology \Industrial research & development \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \17p. \EC1-80 \Serial \Draft. @\ General fracture control plan for payloads using the Space TransportSystem (STS) \ \ \ \ \GFSC \ \Payload transport systems \Fracturing \Materials technology \United States \ \ \1983 \various. \EC2-12 \(paper) \GSFC paper, 731-0005-83 @\ Advanced materials \CSIRO Research for Australia \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Materials technology \ \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \81p. \EC3-80 \Monograph \No.1, #G @\ Materials science in Australian defence \ \De Morton.M \ \ \ANZAAS \ \Materials technology \Defence technology \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \7p. \EC8-80 \(paper) \ @\ Power Generation technology. The international review of primary powerproduction 1990. \ \ Knox.R \ \ \ \ \ Energy \ Electrical power \ \ International \ \ \ 1990 \ 240p. \ ED2-05 \ Monograph \ #G P.160 ISSN 0951-1361. Published by Sterling Publications InternationalLimited.Aims to provide an international forum for engineers in electricutilities, in research, in engineering and in manufacturing industries.Covers all aspects of primary power production, including the basic motivepower, and the conversion of energy. It covers electricity and heat productionfrom all forms of fossil, hydroelectric, nuclear and renewable energy resources. @\ Power Generation technology. The international review of primary powerproduction 1992. \ \ Knox.R \ \ \ \ \ Energy \ Electrical power \ \ International \ \ \ 1992 \ 264p. \ ED2-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1992.35 0 ISSN 0951-1361. See also P.160 for 1990 report. Publishedby Sterling Publications International Limited. Aims to provide an internationalforum for engineers in electric utilities, in research, in engineering andin manufacturing industries. Covers all aspects of primary power production,including the basic motive power, and the conversion of energy. It coverselectricity and heat production from all forms of fossil, hydroelectric,nuclear and renewable energy resources. @\Rural Energy in the Asia-Pacific Region \RAPA Bulletin 199412 \ \ \ \U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization \ \Natural resources \Energy \ \International \Oceania \Asia \1994 Dec \64p \ED2-65 \Serial \#G 1996.31 ISSN 1011 6443 mvk 16.3.96 @\Power from space, technology transfer for human survival \ \Glaser.P \ \ \American Astronautical Society. Science and technology series \ \Electrical power stations \Solar power \Satellites \Space \ \ \1971 \9p. \EE15-01 \(paper) \Photocopy of pp.263-80 of American Astronautical Society. Science and technologyseries, vol.26, 1971, [article no] AAS70-088. Reconstructed jk 21.4.92 @\Review of Australia's defence facilities, report to the Minister for Defence \ \Cooksey.R \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Defence \ \Defence force facilities \ \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \351p. \EF1-80 \Monograph \Public version of the Report originally presented to Minister 18 Dec, 1987 @\ Defence of Australia 1987, a policy information paper, presented to Parliament,by the Minister for Defence...Kim. C. Beazley, March 1987 \ \Beazley.K \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Defence \ \Defence \Defence technology \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \112p. \EF1-80 \Monograph \ @\ Defence Science and Technology Organisation and national objectives,a report to the Prime Minister, October 1986 \ \Slatyer.R \ \ \ASTEC \ \Defence technology \Scientific research \DSTO \Australia \ \ \1986 \70p. \EF3-80 \Monograph \ \ TITLE: An Australian perspective on maritime CSBMs in the Asia PacificRegion \ SERIES.TITLE Working Papers on Strategy and Defence No. 234 \ AUTHOR.1 Ball.D \ AUTHOR.2 Bateman.S \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 ANU \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Defence equipment \ KEYWORD.2 Defence technology \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 South east Asia \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1991 \ PAGINATION 30p \ CLASSC'N EF8-80 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992. ISSN 0158 3751 ISBN 07315 1238 3 @\ TITLE: New technology ; implications for regional and Australian security \ SERIES.TITLE Canberra Papers on Strategy and Defence No. 76 \ AUTHOR.1 Ball.D \ AUTHOR.2 Wilson.H \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 ANU \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Defence equipment \ KEYWORD.2 Defence technology \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 South east Asia \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1991 \ PAGINATION 247p \ CLASSC'N EF8-80 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.45 @\ Forecast of minor defence capital equipment procurement, August 1986[for period 1986-1991] \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Defence \ \Defence equipment \Future planning \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \n/a \EF15-80 \(paper) \Copy. @\ Invetech [and] Invetech Design \ \ \ \ \Invetech \ \Industrial research & development \Industrial design \High technology \Australia \ \ \nb.d. \n/a \EG1-80 \Folder \2 Folders filed together, received 1988. @\Papers presented at 2nd ASEAN Science & Technology Week, 30 January- 4 February 1989, Manila, Philippines \ \ \ \ \ASEAN Committee on Science and Technology (Asean Cost) \Department of Science and Technology (DOST) Philippines. \Technological Research \Industrial Technology \Scientific Research \Philippines \Asia \Multinational \1989 \Various \EG3-05 \Papers \Copies of speeches by various authors. #G (possibly #C, ASEAN). Recordreconstructed jk 21.4.92. See also EZ5-65, #C, 1990.17 and 1990.18. @\ Laboratory and analysis technology international. 1991 \ 2nd issue \ Gledhill,B \ \ \ \ \ High technology \ Scientific instruments and equipment \ \ International \ \ \ 1991 \ 120p. \ EG3-05 \ Monograph issued serially \ #G 1992.5 ISBN 0 946300 68 2.Includes articles on laboratory automation,biotechnical and clinical chemistry, instrumentation technology and laboratoryequipment. Indexes products, services and suppliers. Reconstructed jk 21.4.92 @\Optical Photon Counting using Superconducting Tunnel Junctions \ \Perryman.M \Foden.C \Peacock.A \ESA \ \High Technology \Optical sensors \ \Europe \ \ \1992 \11p \EG3-30 \Preprint \#G 1992.288 Published in Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics ResearchA . mvk 24.1.93 @\Matching science and technology to future needs, an international perspective \ \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \Scientific research \Technological change \Future planning \Australia \International \1994 \68p. \EG15-05 \monograph \#G 1995.43 ISBN 0644354208 @\Matching science and technology to future needs - 2010, Background report. \ \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \Scientific research \Technological change \Future planning \Australia \ \ \1994 \27p. \EG15-80 \monograph \#G 1995.36 Includes address by Sen. the Hon. Peter Cook. mvk 22.4.95 @\Engineering in Australia \ \Fell, C. \ \ \ \Prime Minister's Science Council \Australia. Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet \Engineering \ \ \ \Australia \ \ \ \1991 \38p. \ET5-80 \monograph \#G 1995.30 ISBN 0644145145 mvk 22.4.95 @\Engineering effective innovation to Asia \Research Paper No. 23 1994/95 \James.M \ \ \Parliamentary Research Service \ \Technology transfer \Industrial research &development \Innovations \Australia \ \ \1995, March \50p \ET5-80 \Monograph \#G 1996.53 ISSN 1321 1579 Readings on technology transfer and trade toAsia, from Department of Parliamentary Library mvk 8.4.96 @\System-reliability effort at the Indian Space Research Organization \ \Aravamudan.R \Raja.J \ \IEEE Transactions on reliability \ \Quality control \ISRO \Reliability engineering \India \ \ \1981 \4p. \EQ3-53 \(paper) \Photocopy of pp.11-14 of IEEE Transactions on Reliability, Vol. R-30, no.1,April 1981 @\ Manipulator systems, special applications for industry and hostile environments \ \ \ \ \Spar \ \Industrial technology \Robotics \ \Canada \ \ \n.d. \5p. \ER2-11 \Folder \ @\Proceedings of the Engineering in Coral Reef Regions Conference, MagneticIsland Townsville Australia 5-7 November 1990 \ \ \ \ \University of Queensland \ \Industrial technology \Coastal zones \Marine technology \Australia \Queensland \International \1991 Jun \305p \ET1-80 \Conference papers \#G ISBN 0 86776 436 8 Conference sponsored by The Institution of Engineers,Australia; The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority; and the Departmentof Environment and Heritage, Queensland. mvk 2.6.93 @\ Technology transfer by Department of Communications: a study of eightinnovations \MOSST Background Paper \Bhaneja.B \Lyrette.J \Davies.T \Canada. MOSST \Canada. Dept. of Communications \Technology transfer \Industrial management \Industrial research & development \Canada \ \ \1980 \48p. \ET3-11 \Monograph \No. 12 @\ Naval Research Laboratory Review \ \ \ \ \Naval Research Lab. \ \Scientific research \Technology general \Defence industry \United States \ \ \HOLD 1984 \varies \ET3-12 \Serial \Title: 19-- Review @\ Modern developments in science and technology, Vol.3 \Modern developments in science and technology (SUPARCO) \Mehmud.S \ \ \SUPARCO \ \Space technology \Scientific research \Communications technology \Pakistan \ \ \1987 \226p. \ET3-52 \Monograph \Monograph in series. @\ Economic impact of stimulated technological activity, final report -summary, 7 April 1970- 15 Oct. 1971 for NASA \ \ \ \ \Midwest Research Institute \NASA \Economic impact \Industrial technology \Technological change \United States \ \ \1971 \46p. \ET4-12 \Monograph \#G Contract report. @\ TITLE: Public Sector Research Costing and Pricing \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 Australia Dept of Prime Minister and Cabinet \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Scientific Research \ KEYWORD.2 Government policy \ KEYWORD.3 Financial assistance \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1992 Jan \ PAGINATION 69p \ CLASSC'N ET4-80 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.89 ISBN 0 644 24075 X Pub AGPS, prepared for the CoordinationCommittee on Science and Technology. jk 27.4.92 @\Space technology transfer to community and industry, proceedings of theAAS 18th Annual Meeting and the 10th Goddard Memorial Symposium (1972, 13-14March: Washingtn D.C.) \American Astronautical Society. Science and technology series \Tripp.R \ \ \American Astronautical Society \ \Technology transfer \Space technology \Economic impact \United States \ \ \1972 \61p. \ET5-12 \(paper) \Vol.29. Photocopy of pp.1-61. Papers by: W. von Braun; J. Hamilton; W.Pickering; A. Eggers. Keyword change jk 21.4.92 @\Industry Vendor Pyramid Models: Aerospace Case Study \ \Sullivan.N \ \ \Aymeyer Consulting Services \CSIRO \Technology transfer \Scientific research & development \Planning \Australia \ \ \1991 \69p \ET5-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.168 Using Australian aerospace industry as a case study, this report(commissioned by Institute of Industrial Technologies) evaluates validityand effectiveness of the "Vendor Pyramid" model for characterisingindustry. mk 20.7.92 @\ Science and Technology for Australia. Statement by The Hon. R J L Hawke,AC, Prime Minister, and The Hon Barry O Jones, Minister for Science, Customsand Small Business and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister for Scienceand Technology. \ \Hawke.R \Jones.B \ \ \ \Policy \Government \Funding \Australia \ \ \1989 \32p. \ET7-80 \Monograph \#G P.36 Copy 1 P.647 Copy 2 ISBN 0 644 09720 5 @\ Science and Technology - selected speeches, press releases and articles \ \McGauran.P \ \ \ \Industrial research and development \Technology transfer \Government policy \Australia \ \ \1991 , Nov \180p \ET7-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.189 Peter McGauran MP is the Shadow Minister for Science and Technology.Contents include CSIRO Budget Forum & Address to AGM of the CSIRO Officer'sAsociation. mk 19.10.92 @\Science for technology for development: an expanded programme of scientiiccooperation in the Commonwealth, Report of the Expert Group, August 1984 \CSC(84)EG-1 \Kendrew.J \ \ \Commonwealth Science Council \ \Scientific research \Technology \Developing countries \International \Great Britain \ \1984 \96p. \ET14-05 \Monograph \ @Proceedings, 2nd Asean Science & Technology Week, 30 Jan-4 February1989, Manila, The Philippines \ \ \ \ \ASEAN Committee on Science and Technology (Asean Cost) \Department of Science and Technology (DOST) Philippines. \Technological Research \Industrial Technology \Scientific Research \Philippines \Asia \Multinational \1989 \Various \EZ5-65 \Conference publications \See also EG5-05. #C, Vol 1 1990.17 and Vol 4, 1990.18. @\ Building the technological edge: Defence Dept. establishments representedat the International Technology Exhibition (Canberra: 1987: 3-7 Mar.) \ \ \ \ \DSTO \ \Scientific research \Industrial technology \Defence industry \Australia \ \ \1987 \40p. \EZ8-80 \Monograph \ WT03-B26-17IA029-000311-B016-151http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatf.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162900 text/html 14245HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:27:09 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:01 GMTContent-length: 14070 Catalogue Library catalogue F: FLIGHT AND AIRCRAFT (Aeronautics, Aviation & Aircraft in General)[see also Space, Astronautics (A)] FB Balloons & Ballooning FC Commercial Aviation/Aircraft, for aircraft themselves, & non industryaspects. For Airline industry SEE (FI), aircraft etc. industry; SEE ALSO(FE) Aircraft Engineering & Technology FD Defence Aviation/Aircraft. [SEE ALSO Space Defence (AD), Rockets (AR),Defence technology (EF)] FE Aircraft & Aeronautical engineering, Aerospace that is chiefly aircraft[see also Space Engineering (AE) Engineering (E)] FH Instrumentation & equipment [SEE ALSO (CH)Communications; (AI) Space] FI Aircraft/Aeronautical Industry, Technology, R&D, Airline industryetc. [SEE ALSO Space Industry (AI)] [Airline industry SEE ALSO Commercialaviation & aircraft (FC)] FR Research Aircraft, aircraft used in research, kinds of research applicationsaircraft: eg F-27, ER-2 [SEE ALSO (RK) Remote sensing research carried outon aircraft FS "Space Planes" (HOTOL, etc.) self-landing craft & aeronautical/hypervelocityresearch into these.[SEE ALSO (AM) for Manned spacecraft] FT Experimental Aviation/Aircraft, i.e. other experimental aircraft not"Space planes FX Films & videos on aircraft/balloons etc FZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective), overviews @\ A 10B for the RAAF, Australia's own military trainer \ \ \ \ \Hawker de Havilland \ \Defence aircraft \A10B \ \Australia \ \ \n.d. \n/a \FD2-80 \Monograph \Contains loose inserts & letter dated 1985 @\ AMS index: aerospace material specifications index \ \ \ \ \SAE \ \Standards \Space technology \Aircraft \United States \International \ \HOLD 1987 \ \FE2-12 \Serial @\SAE aerospace index: aerospace standards...recommended practices...informationreports.19 - \ \ \ \ \SAE \ \Standards \Aircraft \ \United States \ \ \HOLD: 1987 \132p. \FE2-12 \Serial \Annual @\ Proposal by British Aerospace Australia Ltd. for the supersonic and hypersonicflight data system \ \ \ \ \British Aerospace Australia \ \Flight data systems \Space engineering \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \ca. 100p. \FE2-80 \ \Papers (?) \Enquiry no. 86-12-396 issue 1 Jan. 1987 @\ TITLE: British Aerospace Commercial Aircraft \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 British Aerospace Australia \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Aerospace \ KEYWORD.2 Aircraft \ KEYWORD.3 Aircraft industry \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 UK \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1991 \ PAGINATION Various \ CLASSC'N FI1-80 \ FORMAT Folder \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.57a Folder including booklet on BAeA, British Aerospace146 . Note that Acc No. 1992.57 was used for 1990 Reports to COSPAR. 7.4.92,rev. jk 27.4.92 @\ Quantas annual report 19- \ \ \ \ \Qantas \ \Aircraft industry \ \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1985-86 \various \FI1-80 \Serial \P.190 Former dbase no. 898 jk 27.4.92 @\Aerospace technology - technical data and information on foreign testfacilities \ \ \ \ \United States General Accounting Office \ \Aeronautical industry \Hypervelocity test facilities \ \International \ \ \1990 \587p \FI2-05 \Monograph \#G 1990.80 Fact Sheet for Chairman, Committee on Science, Space and Technology,US House of Representatives, prepared by National Security and InternationalAffairs Division of US GAO. Report numbered B-235387, also GAO/NSIAD-90-71FS.Record reconstructed jk 21.4.92 @\Aerospace plane technology : research and development efforts in Japanand Australia \ \Kingsbury.N \ \ \United States General Accounting Office \ \Aerospace \Hypervelocity \Space research facilities \International \ \ \1991 \152p \FI2-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.99 See also related report 1990.80 . This report (GAO/NSIAD-92-5)examines facilities in Japan and Australia, although main recommendationsrelate only to Japan's efforts in comparison to US's. 2.6.92 @\Government Aircraft Factories \ \ \ \ \GAF \ \Aircraft industry \GAF \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \n/a \FI2-80 \Monograph \#G RECLASSIFIED FROM OA2-80, P.204, jk 28.4.92 @\ Government Aircraft Factories and capacity for design and development,manufacture overhaul and repair of aircraft, target drones, and guided weapons,May 1979 \ \ \ \ \GAF \ \Aircraft industry \Industrial research & development \GAF \Australia \ \ \1979 \53p. \FI3-80 \Monograph \ @\Australian Light Aircraft Industry Study Group report [by] the AerospaceElectronic and Scientific Industry Council, October 1988 \ \Meier.R \ \ \Australian Manufacturing Council \Aerospace Industry Council \Aircraft industry \ \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \95p. \FI3-80 \Monograph \Study group were J.Corby; I.Dickson; M.Dunn; W.Gregson & C.Bott; L.Wood& presented in May 1988 @\ Aerospace industry: report of the tripartite working group on an exportdevelopment strategy \ \ \ \ \AUSTRADE \ \Space industry \Marketing \ \Australia \ \ \1986? \130p. \FI5-80 \Monograph \ @\ Aviation News Pacific Aviation Yearbook \ \ \ \ \Peter Issacson Pub. \ \Aircraft industry \ \ \Austalia \New Zealand \Papua New Guinea \HOLD CURRENT ISSUE \ca 400p. \FI5-80 \Serial \#G 1990.77 ISSN 0156 3726 @\ Aircraft & Aerospace Pacific Aviation Yearbook 10th Edition 1989 \ \Robertson.D OBE \ \ \Peter Isaacson Pub. \ \Aircraft industry \Government agencies \Aircraft technology \North Pacific \South Pacific \ \1989 \463p. \FI5-80 \Serial \2 copies (1 retained and 1 sent to R.A.F.) @\Workshop on International co-operation in research aircraft, aircraftspecifications and instrumentation, 204 November 1988, Denver. \ \ \ \ \ \ \Research aircraft \Handbooks \ \International \United States \ \1988 \Various \FR1-05 \Monograph \Bound folder plus loose leaves. Papers collected by B Ryan, DAR. Includesattendance list. P.870 21.6.92 @\Meteorological Research Flight \ \ \ \ \Meteorological Research Flight \Meteorological Office \ \United Kingdom \International \ \1992 \ \FR1-32 \Monograph \#G 1994.160 Summary of operation, instruments, programs of MRF. See also1994.159, 1994.161 mvk 20.11.94 @\ High altitude perspective \NASA SP-427 \ \ \ \NASA \ \U-2 aircraft applications \Remote sensing applications \High altitude flying \United States \ \ \1978 \30p. \FR2-12 \Monograph \NASA Ames Research Centre @\ Airborne Science and Applications Program: review of aircraft operationalprogram \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Research aircraft \Remote sensing applications \Space science \United States \ \ \1987 \unpaged \FR2-12 \Monograph \ @\ High altitude aircraft program \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \U-2 aircraft applications \Remote sensing applications \High altitude flying \United States \ \ \ \ \FR2-12 \Brochure \#G 1994.162 Covers U-2, ER-2 aircraft, operational support from Ames ResearchCenter, data access and archive. mvk 20.11.94 @\NASA DC-8 airborne laboratory aircraft program \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Research aircraft \Remote sensing applications \ \United States \ \ \1993 Jan \ \FR2-12 \Brochure \#G 1994.163 With data sheets, examples of AIRSAR data products (paper).Note DC-8 carried out mission around Australia, 1993 (November?). mvk 20.11.94 @\C-130 W Mk 2 Hercules: Summary of capability \ \ \ \ \Meteorological Research Flight \Meteorological Office \ \United Kingdom \International \ \1994 Feb \26p \FR2-32 \Monograph \#G 1994.161 Details of operation, instruments, programs of MRF. See also1994.159, 1994.160 mvk 20.11.94 @\Proposal for a data acquisition system to be installed in the COSSA FokkerF 27 aircraft \ \Parkin.D \ \ \COSSA \ \Research aircraft \Data collection systems \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \37p. \FR2-80 \Monograph \ @\ C130B aircraft experimenters handbook (supplemental), May 10, 1986 \ \ \ \ \NASA \Northrop Services \Research aircraft \Handbooks \Remote sensing \United States \ \ \1986 \varies \FR3-12 \Monograph \ @\ Use of aircraft to study the atmosphere, the Hercules of the UK MeteorologicalResearch Flight, June 1984 \MRF Internal Note no 23 \Readings.C \ \ \Meteorological Research Flight (RAE) \ \Remote sensing applications \Atmospheric research \Research aircraft \Great Britain \ \ \1984 \12p. \FR3-32 \(paper) \Unpublished manuscript. @\An evaluation of ultralight aircraft capability for remote sensing applicationsin West Africa \Int. J. Remote Sensing \Gregoire.J-M \Zeyen.R \CEC \JRC \Research aircraft \Remote sensing applications \ \Africa \ \ \1986 \7p \FR3-40 \Reprint \#G P.866 From Int. J. Remote Sensing 7, 1075-81. Aircraft carried MSS,SPOT simulators. Part of JOLIBA project of Ispra (JRC). 21.6.92 @\ The Australian Research Facility. A Submission to the Australian Scienceand Technology Council to establish a National Research Facility. \ \ \ \ COSSA \ Research aircraft \ Scientific research \ Environmental research \ Australia \ \ \ 1991 \ various \ FR3-80 \ monograph \ #G This submission is made by the CSIRO Office of Space Science and Applications( COSSA ) in response to a call by ASTEC for information on the need fornational research facilities in Australia. @\ CSIRO Research aircraft facility [overheads] \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Research aircraft \Scientific research \Remote sensing instruments \Australia \ \ \1987? \n/a \FR3-80 \Folder \Folder containing overheads etc. @\ CSIRO Research aircraft facility [papers] \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Research aircraft \Scientific research \Remote sensing applications \Australia \ \ \1985 \n/a \FR3-80 \Folder \Folder with papers dated 1984 & 1985 @\ C.S.I.R.O. Australia Research Aircraft Facility: financial appraisalof privatisation proposal, Contract ref. 301P, 21 Oct. 1985 \ \ \ \ \Trippett Allan and Associates \ \Research aircraft \Scientific research \Economics \Australia \ \ \1985 \12p. \FR4-80 \Monograph \Report to CSIRO. @\ Proposal for a National Research Aircraft Facility: submission to theASTEC review of public investment in research & development, June 1985 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ASTEC \Research aircraft \Scientific research \Remote sensing \Australia \ \ \1985 \varies \FR4-80 \Monograph \ @\Future of the CSIRO Research Aircraft Facility : proposal based on cost-sharingof F-27 with Navy & aquisition of smaller less costly CSIRO aircraftwith acquisition cost funded by Navy \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \Australia. Navy \Research aircraft \CSIRO Research Aircraft Facility \Space coordination \Australia \ \ \1984 \n/a \FR15-80 \Folder \ @\National aero-space plane, a technology development and demonstrationprogram to build the X-30, April 1988 \GAO/NSIAD-88-122 \ \ \ \US. GAO \ \Space planes \Space programs \Economics \United States \ \ \1988 \78p. \FS4-12 \Monograph (?) \ #G Record corrected jk 21.4.92 @\Report on the possible use of CSIRO F-27 aircraft VH-CAT for Laser AirborneDepth Sounder aircraft sub-system \ Research Aircraft Facility Engineering Report No. 11 \Llewellyn.D \ \ \CSIRO \ \Research aircraft \Remote sensing \Remote sensing instruments \Australia \ \ \1983 \Various \FR5-80 \Monograph \#G P.842 17.6.92 Issue no. one. WT03-B26-18IA029-000311-B016-194http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatg.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114162947 text/html 25274HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:27:51 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:02 GMTContent-length: 25099 Catalogue Library catalogue G: GEOGRAPHICAL REGIONS (include information about, data sets referringto particular areas) GA Africa GC Central & South America (inc. Caribbean) GE Europe & the Mediterranian GI Indian Subcontinent [see also Indian Ocean (MI) GM Middle East Region GN North East Asia (Korea, China, Japan, etc.) GO Oceania (Australia, NZ, PNG, Pacific Islands, include Hawaii as PacificIs. etc.) [see also Pacific Ocean (MP)] GP Polar Areas, Arctic and Antarctic [see also Polar Meteorology (WP); Polar Oceanography (MN) (MS)] GR Russia (USSR) GS South East Asia GU USA, Mexico & Canada (North America) GZ General & Collective, the Earth @\ Modernity and tradition ; the Saudi equation. \ \ Al-Farsy.F \ \ \ \ \ History \ Public relations \ \ Saudi Arabia \ Middle East \ \ 1990 \ 337p \ GM1-48 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.88 ISBN 0 7103 0395 5 . History, geography, economic and politicalstructure of Saudi Arabia. jk 1.11.91 @\Asia Initiatives Directory: a comprehensive guide to Australian Government,University & Private Sector Asia Programs and Initiatives \ \Harman.David \Ford.Jane \ \Scitech Pub. \ \Research grants \Directories \Development assistance \North east Asia \South east Asia \Indian subcontinent \HOLD 1994 (Pub. 1993 Dec.), \ \GN1-02 \Serial \#G ISSN 1321 2400 mvk 23.2.94 @\Striking a balance!: Australia's development & Conservation : Corematerial for Earth Studies \ \ \ \ \Australian Bureau of Statistics \ \Environmental protection \Economics \Data sets \Australia \ \ \1992 \285p \GO1-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.228 ISBN 0 642 16342 1 . Collection of useful basic data - population,economic production, social indicators - for environmental studies. FeatureMurray-Darling Basin and methods of statistical analysis and formulatingquestionnaires. $24.50 mvk 24.12.92 @\downUnder: interactive Australian geography \ \ \ \ \NSW Government \ \Data sets \Data products \Education \Australia \New South Wales \ \1993 \ \GO1-80 \CD-ROM Kit \# CD-ROM No. 38 , 1994.51 For colour Apple Macintosh with System 7, >4 Mbytes RAM and Quicktime only. Made by NSW Board of Studies with assistancefrom Heineman Education Australia (also ACRES and COSSA). Contains somedata from AusWatch CD-ROM (COSSA Publication 031). mvk 27.3.94 @\A catalogue of NOAA-AVHRR satellite imagery received in Perth, WesternAustralia, 1981-1987. \CSIRO Marine Laboratories Report 203 \Pearce.A \ \ \CSIRO \ \Data sets \Earth resources renewable \ \1989 \36p \GO1-86 \Monograph \#G ISSN 0725 4598 ISBN 0 643 04831 6 P.1182 Lists NOAA AVHRR satellitedata received and archived at the WAIT/CSIRO ("WASTAC") satellitefacility at Perth. Includes bibliography based on this data set. mvk 11.2.93 @\Guidelines for the collection and description of natural resource datafor geographical information systems \ \ \ \ \Murray-Darling Basin Commission \ \Geographic information systems \Information systems \Environmental protection \Australia \ \ \1993 \ \37p. \GO2-80 \monograph \#G1995.41 ISBN 1875209166 mvk 22.4.95 @\Looking Back: the changing face of the Australian Continent, 1972-1992. \COSSA Publication No. 029 \Graetz.D \Fisher.R \Wilson.M \CSIRO Division of Wildlife and Ecology \COSSA \International Space Year \Land Data Systems \Global Change \Australia \International \ \1992 \159p \GO9-80 \Monograph \#G 1993.25 (Copy 1), 1993.26 (Copy 2) ISBN 0 643 04764 6 ISSN 0818 4291. Comprises the Australian contribution to International Space Year GlobalLand Cover Change Project. Shows changes to vegetation and soils at representativeland uses and all capitals of Australia, plus some overseas examples (Cairo,Dallas, Lake Chad, Amazon) during the period 1972-1992, using mainly LandsatMSS data. Companion volume is CD-ROM Disk, COSSA Publication 031, see 1993.27,1993.28 . mvk 23.3.93 @\AusWatch : Data Sets for the Study of Landcover Change \COSSA Publication No. 031 \Wilson.M \Fisher.R \Graetz.D \CSIRO Division of Wildlife and Ecology \COSSA \International Space Year \Global Change \Data Sets \Australia \International \ \1992 \ \GO9-80 \CD-ROM \#CD-ROM No. 15 (Copy 1), 1993.27; CD-ROM No. 16 (Copy 2), 1993.28. ISBN0 643 04766 2 ISSN 0818 4291 . Comprises the Australian contribution toInternational Space Year Global Land Cover Change Project. Shows changesto vegetation and soils at representative land uses and all capitals ofAustralia, plus some overseas examples (Cairo, Dallas, Lake Chad, Amazon)during the period 1972-1992, using mainly Landsat MSS data (approx. 160images). Companion volume is the book "Looking Back", COSSA Publication029, see 1993.25, 1993.26. One of the first Australian data products inthis format, and the largest collection of readily available satellite digitaldata in Australia to date. mvk 23.3.93 @\ Biological Diversity: the variety of life \Biodiversity Occasional Paper Series \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of the Environment, Sport and Territories \ \Ecology \Earth resources \Environmental protection \Australia \ \ \1995 \ \GO9-80 \Brochure/folder \#G 1995.117 Background Papers from launch of Biodiversity Occasional Papers"Landcover Disturbance over the Australian Continent" and "Nativevegetation clearance, habitat loss and biodiversity decline", at ParliamentHouse, 21 June 1995. Includes speech notes from Senator the Hon. John Faulkner,Minister for the Environment. Dean Graetz of CSIRO EOC also spoke. mvk 25.10.95 @\ Biodiversity and its value \Biodiversity Occasional Paper Series, No. 1 \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of the Environment, Sport and Territories \DEST \Ecology \Earth resources \Environmental protection \Australia \ \ \1993, Reprinted 1994 \28p \GO9-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.118 Prepared by DEST Biodiversity Unit. ISBN 0 642 19904 . mvk25.10.95 @\ Australia's biodiversity: an overview of selected significant components \Biodiversity Occasional Paper Series, No. 2 \Mummery.Josephine \Neal.Hardy \ \Australia. Dept. of the Environment, Sport and Territories \DEST \Ecology \Earth resources \Environmental protection \Australia \ \ \1994 \87p \GO9-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.119 ISBN 0 642 22154 5 Inc. Glossary and index. mvk 25.10.95 @\ Country in flames: Proceedings of the 1994 Symposium on biodiversityand fire in North Australia \Biodiversity Occasional Paper Series, No. 3 \Rose.Deborah.Bird (Ed.) \ \ \Australia. Dept. of the Environment, Sport and Territories \ANU \Ecology \Fire \Environmental protection \Australia \Northern Territory \ \1995 \127p \GO9-80 \Proceedings \#G 1995.122 ISBN 07315 2133 1 Published by DEST Biodiversity Unit and ANUNorth Australia Research Unit, following symposium at Darwin, 27 August1994. Covers cultural (native land use), scientific and legal issues offire and biodiversity in north Australia. mvk 25.10.95 @\ Refugia for Biological Diversity in Arid and Semi-arid Australia \Biodiversity Occasional Paper Series, No. 4 \Morton.S \Short.J \Barker.R \Australia. Dept. of the Environment, Sport and Territories \DEST \Ecology \Earth resources \Environmental protection \Australia \ \ \1995 \171p \GO9-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.120 Maps and descriptions of arid land native wildlife refuges.Produced for DEST by CSIRO Wildlife & Ecology. ISBN 0 642 22731 4 mvk25.10.95 @\Native Vegetation clearance, habitat loss and biodiversity decline \Biodiversity Occasional Paper Series, No. 6 \Glanznig.Andreas \ \ \Australia. Dept. of the Environment, Sport and Territories \DEST \Ecology \Earth resources \Environmental protection \Australia \ \ \1995 \46p \GO9-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.123 ISBN 0 642 22698 9 Launched by Senator the Hon John Faulkner,at Parliament House, 21 June 1995. See related publication 1995.121 mvk25.10.95 @\ Landcover Disturbance over the Australian Continent: a contemporary assessment \Biodiversity Occasional Paper Series, No. 7 \Graetz.Dean \Wilson.Murray \Campbell.Susan \Australia. Dept. of the Environment, Sport and Territories \CSIRO \Ecology \Earth resources \Remote sensing applications \Australia \ \ \1995 \86p \GO9-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.121 ISBN 0 642 22905 8. Linked to COSSA/DEST CD-ROM "LookingAround". Book contains Landsat Mosaic data (eg GeoImage), ground truth,statisitical analysis of land clearance and cover change across Australia,primarilybased on satellite data. Launched at Parliament House, 21 June 1995, bySenator the Hon. John Faulkner, Minister for Environment. Dean Graetz ofCSIRO EOC also spoke. mvk 25.10.95 @\ The exploration of Australia \ \Cannon.M \ \ \Reader's Digest \ \Exploration (land) \History \ \Australia \ \ \ 1987 \ 304p \GO12-80 \Monograph \#G @\Antarctic Science - The way forward \ \ \ \ \Antarctic Science Advisory Committee \Australia. Department of theArts, Sport, the Environment and Territories \Antarctic Studies \ASAC \Scientific Research \Antarctica \Australia \ \1992 (?) \89p. \GP3-95 \Monograph \#G1992.296 ISBN 0 642 18064 4 [ includes map Antarctica and the SouthernOcean as an insert ] @\Looking South: the Australian Antarctic Program in a changing world. \ \Haywood. Elizabeth \ \ \ANARE \Australia. Department of theArts, Sport, the Environment and Territories \Antarctic Studies \ \Scientific Research \Antarctica \Australia \ \1995 \31p. \GP3-95 \Monograph \#G 1996.70 ISBN 0 642 235430 Describes Antarctic program and the role ofthe Antarctic Division. mvk 10.7.96 @\Guidelines for Antarctic Research Applications 19__-19__ \ \ \ \ \ \ANARE \Antarctic Div. \Scientific research \Antarctic studies \ \Antarctica \Australia \ \HOLD 1992 \ \GP3-95 \Serial \ #G1992.235 1993-1994. mvk 26.12.92 @\Australian Antarctic research program 1987-88 \ \ \ \ \ANARE \Antarctic Div. \Scientific research \Antarctic studies \ \Antarctica \Australia \ \ \180p. \GP3-96 \Serial \Includes research using remote sensing. Australia. Dept. of the Arts etc. @\Antarctic Science Advisory Committee First Forum 1986, Nov. 19-20: Canberra:Submissions Vol.1, October 1986; Vol. 2 , Oct. 1986; Vol.2 Addenda, Nov.1986; and Vol. 3, March 1987 \ \ \ \ \Antarctic Science Advisory Committee \Australia. Dept. of Science \Scientific Research \Antarctic studies \ \Antarctica \Australia \ \1987 \various \GP15-95 \Monograph \3 vols. in 4 Submissions include remote sensing etc. by COSSA. @\Land cover assessment and monitoring - Cambodia. Draft, Volume 3-A \ \ \ \ \United Nations Environmental Programme/UNEP \ \Environmental research \Land use \Mapping \South east Asia \Asia \ \1994 \ \GS1-65 \Monograph and attached papers \#G 1995.96 mvk 19.8.95 @\Work programme \ \ \ \ \Interim Committee for Coordination of Investigations of the Lower MekongBasin \ \Mekong Basin \Hydrology \Environmental research \South East Asia \Vietnam \Laos \ HOLD 1987, 1989 \Various \GS2-65 \Monograph \Remote sensing applications on p. 10 and p. 29 (1987 report). 1989 reportis P.174 @\ TITLE: Perspectives for Mekong Development ; Revised Indicative Plan(1987) for the development of land, water and related resources of the lowerMekong basin. \ SERIES.TITLE Committee Report \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 UNDP \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Earth resources \ KEYWORD.2 Development assistance \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 South east Asia \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1988 April \ PAGINATION 136p \ CLASSC'N GS14-65 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1990.108 A report by the Interim Committee for Coordinationof Investigations of the lower Mekong basin (IMC or Interim Mekong Committee)under the United Nations Development Program (UNDP). jk 27.4.92 @\The Lower Mekong Basin from a Bird's-Eye View: a programme proposal forthe use of modern remote sensing techniques integrated with a GeographicInformation System \ \Hauska.H \ \ \Interim Committee for Coordination of Investigations of the Lower MekongBasin \ \Mekong Basin \Hydrology \Environmental research \South East Asia \Vietnam \Laos \ 1988 Dec \Various \GS14-65 \Monograph \#G P.785 @\OTTER Oregon Transect Ecosystem Research Project Volume 1 Version 1 \ \Angelici.G \Skiles.J \Popovici.L \NASA \ \Data sets \Ecology \Daedalus \United States \ \ \1993 (?) \ \GU1-12 \CD-ROM \#CD-ROM No. 40 1994.180 From intensive field experiments in Oregon. Containsgeoreferenced data from satellites (NOAA-11), Research aircraft (NASA ER-2,DC-8, C-130), ultralight aircraft, and surface measurements. Data from airbornesunphotometers; ASAS; AVHRR; AVIRIS; canopy chemistry; Daedalus TMS; digitizedaerial photographs; field sunphotometers; NS001 TMS; TIMS; field sunphotometers;meteorology. Presented on Pilot Land Data Systems (PLDS). Labelled PLDS_OTS_0001.mvk 24.11.94 @\ TITLE: 1990 Conterminous US AVHRR Bi-weekly Composites June 22- August16 \ SERIES.TITLE Disk 3 \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 US. Geological Survey \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Data products \ KEYWORD.2 Data sets \ KEYWORD.3 NOAA Satellites \ REGION.1 United States \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1990 (?) \ PAGINATION \ CLASSC'N GU9-12 \ FORMAT CD-ROM Disk \ OTHER.DATA #CD-ROM No. 1 1992.54 Disk 3 of 5-disk set issued by EROS DataCenter, Sioux Falls. Ident No. CDRM-410700 1. Contains 5 NOAA-11 1 km channels,plus NDVI values for each pixel in each period. Ancillary data includescounty, land resource area, and climatic division. Complimentary copy fromUSGS for the NOAA 1 km Data Project. See also 1992.55 jk 20.3.92 @\ TITLE: 1990 Conterminous US AVHRR Bi-weekly Companion Disk \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 US. Geological Survey \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Data products \ KEYWORD.2 Data sets \ KEYWORD.3 NOAA Satellites \ REGION.1 United States \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1991 (?) \ PAGINATION \ CLASSC'N GU9-12 \ FORMAT CD-ROM Disk \ OTHER.DATA #CD-ROM No.2 1992.55 To be used with 1992.54 . Issued by EROSData Center, Sioux Falls. Ident No. CDRM-683000 6. Contains county and stateboundaries, water bodies & streams, climate, terrain, and ecologicaldata. Complimentary copy from USGS for the NOAA 1 km Data Project. See also1992.54 jk 20.3.92 @\Global Grass 1 \ \ \ \ \Rutgers \ \Mapping \ \ \International \ \ \1992 \ \GZ1-05 \CD-ROM \#CD-ROM No. 14 , 1992.276 mvk 3.1.93 @\Monthly mean global satellite data sets available in CCM history tapeformat \ \Hurrell,J. \Campbell,G.C. \ \National Center for Atmospheric Research Boulder, Colorado. \ \Data Sets \Global Change \NCAR \1992 \94p. \GZ1-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.289 NCAR/TN-371+STR NCAR Technical note mvk 11.1.93 @\Global Relief Data from the National Geophysical Data Center \ \ \ \ \NOAA \ \Data sets \Mapping \ \International \United States \ \1993 (?) \ \GZ1-05 \CD-ROM \#CD-ROM No. 32, 1993.124, from NOAA NGDC, $US 110 approx. Topography, bathymetry,gravity, coastline, image data plus software and gazetteers. mvk 31.8.93 @\JERS-1 \ \ \ \ \ \ \Data sets \Data products \Earth resources \International \Japan \ \1992 (?) \49p \GZ1-05 \Monograph \#G 1994.155 In Japanese. Maps, with images (OPS, SAR) from the NASDA/MITImission. Includes stereo glasses for viewing. mvk 19.11.94 @\Earth Observation data in HDF for MS-Windows \ \ \ \ \DLR \ \Data sets \Remote sensing instruments \ \International \Germany \ \1994 (?) \ \GZ1-05 \CD-ROM \#CD-ROM No. 39 1994.179 See also #C, CEOS, 1994.67 for another copy. mvk24.11.94 @\Sample Image Data Set CCRS Airborne C/X-SAR. Second Edition \ \ \ \ \CCRS \ \SAR \Data sets \ \International \Polar \Canada \1994 March \ \GZ1-05 \CD-ROM \#CD-ROM No. 41 1994.181 Terrestrial, sea ice and ocean surface images acquired1987-88 for the CCRS Radar Data Development Program mvk 24.11.94 @\ERS-1 SAR Reference Coverage \ \ \ \ \ESA \ \Data sets \Metadata \Guides \International \Europe \ \1993 \ \GZ1-05 \CD-ROM kit \#AV AV.45.1 CD-ROM developed by ESA, DLR, Eurimage and Intecs, coverageof ERS-1 SAR data over Europe, Antarctica. AV.45.2 is a 42p User Guide.mvk 26.11.94 @\Biological effects of climate change: an introduction to the field andsurvey of current research \ \Kristiansen.Gorill \ \ \IGBP \CICERO \IGBP \Global change \Climatic impacts \ \ \ \1993 (?) \190p \GZ3-02 \Monograph \#G 1993.165 ISBN 82 7734 000 1 Contribution to GCTE . CICERO was establishedin 1990 by the Norwegian Government to support international efforts instudying climate and energy matters. mvk 5.11.93 @\ TITLE: GEDEX : Greenhouse Effect Detection Experiment 1992 \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 Schiffer.R \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 NASA \ CORP.AUTHR.2 SAFISY \ KEYWORD.1 Global change \ KEYWORD.2 Greenhouse effect \ KEYWORD.3 Environmental research \ REGION.1 International \ REGION.2 United States \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1992 \ PAGINATION \ CLASSC'N GZ3-05 \ FORMAT CD-ROM Disk (kit) \ OTHER.DATA #CD-ROM No. 4 1992.59, also #CD-ROM No.10 , 1992.230. Two diskset of selected data (surface, mid-tropospheric, sea, land and upper airtemperature; solar irradiance; earth radiation budget; cloud data; atmosphericconstituents. Produced by NASA for the Space Agency Forum on InternationalSpace Year. Disks marked CDRM-832500 1 and CDRM-835500 1. Includes 14p booklet.E-MAIL PRINTOUT EXPLANATION, 6p, as 1992.59.1, dated 7 May 1992. Also 52pbooklet, 1992.59.2, inc. bibliography and list of participants at GEDEXWorkshop, 9-11 July 1991 jk 6.5.92 @\ TITLE: GEDEX : Greenhouse Effect Detection Experiment : 1992 update \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 Olsen.L \ AUTHOR.2 Warnock.A \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 NASA \ CORP.AUTHR.2 SAFISY \ KEYWORD.1 Global change \ KEYWORD.2 Greenhouse effect \ KEYWORD.3 Environmental research \ REGION.1 International \ REGION.2 United States \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1992 \ PAGINATION \ CLASSC'N GZ3-05 \ FORMAT CD-ROM Disk (kit) \ OTHER.DATA #CD-ROM No. 12, #CD-ROM No. 13 1992.238, 1992.239 (copy 2). Two disk set of selected data (surface, mid-tropospheric, sea, land andupper air temperature; solar irradiance; earth radiation budget; cloud data;atmospheric constituents. Produced by NASA for the Space Agency Forum onInternational Space Year. Disks marked CDRM-994800 (temperature, cloudsand radiation) and CDRM-994900 (atmospheric constituents). Includes 14pbooklet. mvk 28.12.92 @\An Atlas of Monthly Mean Distributions of SSMI Surface Wind Speed, ARGOSBuoy Drift, AVHRR/2 Sea Surface Temperature, and ECMWF Surface Wind ComponentsDuring 1991. \JPL Publication 93-10 \Halpern.D \Knauss.W \Brown.O \JPL \NASA \Data sets \Oceanography \Climatology \International \United States \ \1993 July \111p \GZ3-05 \Monograph \#G 1993.89 Other authors Wentz.F. Contains colour plates of DMSP, NOAA11, and data, with Bibliography. mvk 18.7.93 @\AVHRR CD-Browser Ionia \ \Melinotte.Jean-Manuel \Arino.Olivier \Mungo.Fabio \ESA \ \Data management \Data sets \Data products \International \Europe \ \1992 \ \GZ3-05 \CD-ROM \#CD-ROM No. 31 1993.31 (Copy 1); also #CD-ROM No. 42, 1994.182 (Copy 2)Includes 23p manual. CD contains 2000 Quick Looks (QL) from European CoordinatedTIROS Network (ECTN) of the European Space Agency's ESRIN facility in Frascati.The QLs on the disk (some from the Global Land 1 km AVHRR Data Set) givea visual impression of image quality, are accurate for any NOAA satelliteat any latitude or acquisition time, and highlight specific interestingfeatures (sunglint, fire, vegetation, ice etc). Manual contains references,background, installation instructions. Windows 3.1 compatible. mvk 22.7.93,26.11.94 \@ Looking at Earth \ \Strain.Priscilla \Engle.Frederick \ \National Air & Space Museum \ \Environmental research \Remote sensing satellites \ \International \ \ \1993 \304 \GZ3-05 \Monograph \#G 1995.135 ISBN 1 878685 16 3 Study of various remote sensing satelliteimages ad what they reveal about the Earth. mvk 10.12.95 @\ Man on Earth ; how civilization and technology changed the face of theworld - a survey from space \ \Sheffield. C \ \ \EarthSat \ \Civilization \Ecology \Technology \International \ \ \1983 \158p. \GZ9-02 \Monograph \#G P.176 ISBN 0 02 610100 9 Hardback, pub. Macmillan . $29.95. Shows appearanceof human artefacts from earth orbit. @\ISY Mission to Planet Earth Global & Asian Data Set \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Global change \Environmental research \Data sets \International \Japan \Asia \1992 \ \GZ9-05 \CD-ROM Disk \#CD-ROM No. 8 (Copy 1), 1992.222 and #CD-ROM No. 9 (Copy 2), 1992.223,also labelled ISY-0001. Produced by NASDA, with contributions from JMA,Tokai and Tokyo Universities, RESTEC, others. Produced for Asia-PacificISY Conference, November 1992. mvk 24.12.92 @\ Mission to Planet Earth \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Global change \Environmental research \Data sets \International \Japan \Asia \1992 \ \GZ9-05 \Video \#C ("ISY") , 1992.224 Produced by NASDA, with Tokai University& RESTEC.About 30 mins. VHS. Produced for Asia-Pacific ISY Conference,November 1992. mvk 24.12.92 @\ Earth Imagery by MOS-1, contribution to Earth Science and Earth EnvironmentMonitoring \ \ Maeda.K \ Ogawa.S \ Kodama.T \ NASDA \ \ Environmental research \ Earth sciences \ MOS-1 \ Japan \ International \ \ 1990 March \ 78p \ GZ9-63 \ Monograph \ #G, 2 copies, NASDA HE-90016, 1990.7, 1990.8 WT03-B26-19IA029-000311-B016-226http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcati.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163001 text/html 43931HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:28:17 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:05 GMTContent-length: 43756 Catalogue Library catalogue I: INDUSTRY [see also Organisations (O) & Engineering (E)] IC Technology consultants industry [see also (CI)] IE Industrial espionage IH High technology industry, development, its economics etc [see also (CI),(EG)] IN Industry in general, Industrial Technology in general, Commerce, Industrial research & development, etc.; (BUT SEE Space industry(AI); Communications industry (CI), Information & computer industry (CI); Aircraft industry(FI);[SEE ALSO (ET) general technology] ID Defence Industry [SEE ALSO (EF) Defence technology] IM Industrial management, business establishment, marketing skills for industry[SEE ALSO (SO) Management & administration general] IO Industry related overseas missions, trade missions, surveys of industries& technologies overseas (Govt. and private) @\ Export of technological services, papers from a seminar (1988, 9 June:Universityof Sydney) ... sponsored by the Australian Academy of Technological Sciencesand Engineering and Coopers & Lybrand \ \ \ \ \Australian Aacademy of Technological Sciences \Coopers & Lybrand \Technology \Technology consultants industry \Export trade \Australia \International \ \1988 \60p. \IC4-80 \Monograph \ @\ Defence science and technology- a national resource: proceedings of theTenth Invitation Symposium (Adelaide: 1986:30-31 Oct.) \Invitation Symposia \ \ \ \Australian Academy of Technological Sciences \Invitation Symposium \Defence \Scientific research \Industrial technology \Australia \ \ \1986 \226p. \ID1-80 \(conference pub.) \ @\ Review of Australia's defence exports and defence industry: report tothe Minister for Defence \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Defence \ \Industrial research and development \Defence industry \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \569p. \ID5-80 \Monograph \ @\ Australian Commercial Research and Development Limited: Unlocking Excellence \ \ Palmer.C \ \ \ Australian Commercial Research and Development Limited \ \ Industrial technology \ Scientific research \ \ Queensland \ Australia \ \ 1989 \ 67p \ ID5-88 \ Monograph \ #G P.76. Marked "Private and Confidential" @\ Australian Controls on the Export of Defence and related goods \ \ \ \ \DOD \Industrial espionage \Defence technology \ Technology transfer \ Australia \ \ \ 1989 July \ 20 (approx) \ ID8-80 \ Monograph \ #G First Edition P.96. Requirements of Customs Act 1901 and Customs (ProhibitedExports) Regulations, especially in relation to dual use technology (COCOM)goods. JK 8/4/91 @\ Soviet acquisition of militarily significant Western technology: an update,September 1985 \ \ \ \ \ \ \Defence technology \Industrial espionage \ \USSR \United States \International \1985 \34p. \IE8-55 \Monograph \US originating paper with no authorship given. @\Report on the Status of the Geomatics Industry in Canada 1991 \ \ \ \ \Industry, Science and Technology, Canada \ \Geographic Information Systems \Mapping \Land Data Systems \Canada \ \ \1991 \103p \IH1-11 \Monograph \#G 1992.277 Geomatics - term referring to professions using spatially referenceddata. mvk 3.1.93 @\The Canadian Geomatics Industry - a Sector Overview \ \ \ \ \External Affairs and International Trade, Canada \ \Geographic Information Systems \Mapping \Land Data Systems \Canada \ \ \1991 (?) \29p \IH1-11 \Monograph \#G 1992.280 Geomatics - term referring to professions using spatially referenceddata. mvk 3.1.93 @\Developing high technology enterprises for Australia, a report preparedby the [Academy's] High Technology Financing Committee, for the Ministerfor Science and Technology, April 1983 \ \Espie.F \ \ \Australian Academy of Technological Sciences \ \High technology \Manufacturing industry \Economics \Australia \ \ \1983 \132p. \IH4-80 \Monograph \Final report. Supercedes Interim report [Feb. 193] @\ High technology industries in Australia, January 1987 \EPAC Council papers \Camilleri.A \Bourke.R \Masterman.M \EPAC \ \High technology industry \Economics \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \40p. \IH4-80 \Monograph \No.25. Presented Dec. 1986 ISSN 0816 4991 P.1089 mk 21.10.92 6 @\ [Official Hansard report of meeting on 23 July 1986,] Reference: Newscience and technology; [presentation of COSSA's report on New Technologyand Employment, with ensuing discussion] \Hansard \McCracken.K \Astley-Boden.C \ \Senate Standing Committee on Science Technology and the Environment \COSSA \Technological change \Space technology \Space science \Australia \ \ \1986 \various \IH5-80 \Serial \Hansard issue of 23 July 1986 @\Proceedings of Workshop on Commercialisation of Image Processing and VisionTechnology \ \McDonnell.M \ \ \BHP \Australian Pattern Recognition Society \Innovations \Technology transfer \Industrial research & development \Australia \ \ \1990 \ \IH5-80 \Conference papers \#C Proceedings 1991.147.1 and Addendum 1991.147.2 . Conference held atMonash University, 7 December 1990, sponsored by BHP Research.mvk 31.12.92 @\ Establishing new enterprises in Australia , an address [delivered at]NSW Enterprise Workshop, April 11, 1985 \ \Kelly.T \ \ \KEL Aerospace \NSW Enterprise Workshop \Industrial management \ \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \n/a \IM1-80 \(paper) \ @\Manufacturing industry \CSIRO Research for Australia \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Manufacturing industry \ \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \130p. \IN1-80 \Monograph \No. 4, #G @\EUREKA: a European project for a European technological community \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Foreign Affairs \ \Industrial research & development \Industrial technology \EUREKA \Europe \ \ \1986 \14p. \IN2-30 \(paper) \ @\Notes on Overseas Visits, October-November 1988 to the 22nd ExecutiveCommittee Meeting and the 15th Biennial Meeting of the Commonwealth ScienceCouncil, held in Lagos, 6-11 November 1988. Visits also to FAO, WFP, UNEPand UNCHS Habitat. \ \Filshie.B \ \ \CSIRO CIRC \ \Natural resources \Food research and development \Environment \International \ \ \1988 \Varies \IN2-40 \Monograph \ @\ Offsets catalogue: opportunities for products services investment \ \ \ \ \AMOG \Chamber of Manufacturers of NSW \Industrial research & development \Offsets programs \Directories \Australia \ \ \Hold 1986 \varies \IN2-80 \Serial \Looseleaf; only Dec.1-1, 1986 @\ Innovation in Australian technology 19- \ \ \ \ \Australian Academy of Technological Sciences \ \Industrial research & development \Industrial technology \Innovations \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1977-78; 1978-79; 1984-85; \varies \IN2-80 \Serial \ @\ Directory of technological resources \ \ \ \ \Technology Park Adelaide Corp. \ \Industrial research & development \Scientific research \Directories \South Australia \ \ \1986 \106p. \IN2-85 \Monograph \Firms & organizations in advanced technology @\ Measures of science and innovation: Australian Science and TechnologyIndicators Report 1987 \ \Bryant.K \ \ \ \ \Industrial research & development \Measurement \Technological change \Australia \ \ \1987 \392p. \IN3-80 \Monograph \#G ISSN 1030 4673 P.1086 mk 21.10.92 Record reconstructed jk 21.4.92 @\ Australian S&T Data Brief \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Industrial research & development \Measurement \Technological change \Australia \ \ \1989 May \36p. \IN3-80 \Monograph \#G 1993.101 ISSN 1033 4955 Pub by AGPS. Covers Commonwealth funding ofscience and innovation; overall Australian R&D levels; internationalcomparisons. mvk 21.7.93 @\ Measures of science and innovation 3 ; Australian Science and innovationresources brief 1992 \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Industrial research & development \Measurement \Technological change \Australia \ \ \1992 \72p. \IN3-80 \Monograph \#G ISSN 1036 3173 1992.93 ISBN 0 644 144246 1992.92 Gives Australian spaceexpenditure 1988-89 as $31.7m, down from $45.6M in 1986-87. jk 1.6.92 @\Measures of science and innovation 4 ; Australian Science and innovationresources brief 1994 \ \ \ \ \DIST \ \Industrial research & development \Measurement \Technological change \Australia \ \ \1994 \74p. \IN3-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.84 (copy 2, see also 1995.76) ISSN 1036 3173 ISBN 0 644 350849Gives Australian remote sensing expenditure 1990-91 as $11.5m and satellitetechnology as $7.0m (p61; 163 and 90 people, respectively), and astronomicalsciences as $31.5m. mvk 09.7.95 @\ Measures of science and innovation 2 ; Australian Science and innovationimpact brief 1991 \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Industrial research & development \Measurement \Technological change \Australia \ \ \1991 \46p. \IN3-80 \Monograph \#G ISSN 1036 3173 1992.93 jk 1 6 92 @\ Measures of science and innovation 4 ; Australian Science and innovationimpact brief 1994 \ \ \ \ \DIST \ \Industrial research & development \Measurement \Technological change \Australia \ \ \1994 \74p. \IN3-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.76 ISSN 1036 3173 ; ISBN 0 644 350849 ; No measure of space expenditurebut astronomical sciences at around $31.5 m in 1990-91. mvk 11.6.95 @\ Entrepreneurship in the scientific industry: seminar, (1987:Parkville,Vic.) \ \ \ \ \Australian Scientific Industry Association \ \Industrial research & development \Scientific research \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \varies \IN3-80 \(papers) \Seminar papers by McLean, Frazer, Saul, Robertson. Record reconstructedjk 21.4.92 @\ Minerals industry \CSIRO Research for Australia \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Minerals & mining industries \ \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \84p. \IN3-80 \Monograph \No.6, #G @\Innovation directory \ \ \ \ \TECH-LINK Australia \ \Industrial research & development \High technology \Directories \Australia \ \ \n.d. \varies \IN3-80 \Serial \Supplement to TECH-Link Australia. HOLD 2 isues,[1985, 1986?] @\ Role of science and technology in the development of Australia, reportof the 43rd Meeting of the National Science and Industry Forum, Thredbo,6 February 1988 \National Science and Industry Forum report \Tegart.W \Wild.J \Kimpton.C \AAS \ \Industrial research & development \Technology \History \Australia \ \ \1988 \63p. \IN3-80 \Monograph \ @\ Sustainable economic growth & industrial development ; report ofthe 47th Meeting of the National Science and Industry Forum, Thredbo, February1990 \National Science and Industry Forum report \Day.M \Kimpton.C \ \AAS \ \Industrial research & development \Technology \History \Australia \ \ \1990 \86p. \IN3-80 \Monograph \#G P.190.131 ISBN 0 85847 158 2 26.6.92 @\ABC, assistance to business in Canada 1981-82, the federal governmentcatalolgue of business assistance programs, services and incentives, 2nd.ed. \ \ \ \ \Canada.Economic Development \ \Financial assistance \Industry \Directories \Canada \ \ \1981 \237p. \IN4-11 \Monograph \ @\ Public investment in research and development in Australia: a reportto the Prime Minister \ \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \Industrial research & development \Scientific research \Financial assistance \Australia \ \ \1985 \187p. \IN4-80 \Monograph \#G Record reconstructed jk 21.4.92 . P.1060, 16.10.92 @\ Industrial research and development: proposals for additional incentives:a report to the Prime Minister \ \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \Industrial research & development \Economics \ \Australia \ \ \1980 \75p. \IN4-80 \Monograph \ @\Optimizing research and development in Australia \ \Bennett.M \ \ \ \ \Industrial research & development \Economics \Scientific research \Australia \ \ \n.d. \67p. \IN4-80 \Monograph \Unbound. Latest reference within 1985; rec. May 1986. @\ The role of research and development in company strategy and performance:a commissioned report, October 1987 \ \ \ \ \P.A. Management Consultants \Basic Metals Industry Council \Industrial research & development \Economics \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \54p. \IN4-80 \Monograph \#G @\Australia's trade in manufactures: 1971-72 to 1983-84. No. 12, July 1985 \Internal Research Memorandum \Deady.S \Donoghue.K \ \Australia. Dept. of Trade \ \Manufacturing industry \Export trade \Economics \Australia \ \ \1985 \89p. \IN4-80 \Monograph \#G No. 12 of Economic Policy & Research Division's series. @\Efficiency of labour and capital in Australian manufacturing \ \Whiteman.J \ \ \ANZAAS Festival of Science \ \Manufacturing industry \Economics \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \29p. \IN4-80 \(paper) \Paper presented at ANZAAS Festival of Science, Monash University, Clayton,Vic., 28 Aug. 1985 @\Science and Technology Statement 1982-83 \ \Jones.B \ \ \Department of Science and Technology \ \Commonwealth Funding \Economics \Research and Development \Australia \ \ \1983 \185p. \IN4-80 \Monograph \ @\ Science and technology in Australia: a review of the 1986-87 budget \ \ \ \ \NSTAG \ \Scientific research \Research grants \Industrial research & development \Australia \ \ \1987 \61p.P \IN4-80 \Monograph \ Note: later reviews at OG4-80. @\ Industry technology and commerce: budget 1987-88 \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Industrial research & development \Budget \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \34p. \IN4-80 \Monograph \ @\ Science and technology statement 1984-85 [?] \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Science? \ \Government policy \Scientific research \Industrial technology \Australia \ \ \1985? \221p. \IN4-80 \Monograph \Photocopy, title page omitted, no author or title except handwritten: Science& technology statement 84-85 @\Science and technology statement 19 - \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Government policy \Industrial technology \Scientific research \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1987-88 \various \IN4-80 \Serial \1987-88 issued May 1988; @\ The Right Climate \ \ \ \ \ DITAC \ AUSTRADE \ Economics \ Marketing \ Commerce \ Australia \ \ \ 1987 (approx) \ 44p \ IN4-80 \ Monograph \ #G P.71 ISBN 0 642 14099 5 @\ How to become a successful consultant in your own field. 3rd Edition. \ \ Tonge.R \ \ \ \ \ Commerce \ Marketing \ Economics \ Australia \ \ \ 1991 \ 147p \ IN4-80 \ Monograph \ #G ISBN 1 875128 13 1 1991.58 Advice on charging, marketing, preparingproposals, setting fees etc. jk 4.9.91 @\ NSW Government R&D [a report] \Council Reports \ \ \ \NSW Science and Technology Council \ \Industrial research & development \ \ \NSW \ \ \1987 \93p \IN4-82 \Monograph \#G Record reconstructed jk 21.4.92 @\ Research and development report 1982-83 \ \ \ \ \U.K. Dept. of Trade \ \Industrial research & development \Scientific research \Space technology \Great Britain \ \ \1983 \44p. \IN5-32 \Serial \Annual report @\An Introduction to the Sunrise Fields of Technology in Indonesia \ \ \ \ \Minister of State for Research and Technology, Jakarta, Indonesia \ \Science and technology \Laser technology \Biotechnology \Indonesia \ \ \1988 \26p. \IN5-66 \Brochure \ @\The role of research in Australia's economic future: the end of naturalcomparative advantages \CSIRO Occasional papers no. 1 \Boardman.N \ \ \CSIRO \ \Scientific research \Future planning \Industrial research and development \Australia \ \ \1987 \12p. \IN5-80 \Monograph \No. 1 @\Research and Development: Issues Paper \ \ \ \ \Industry Commission \ \Industrial research & development \Policy \Economic impact \Australia \ \ \1993 Sept \25p \IN5-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.104 Introduction to government inquiry into R&D mvk 1.9.95 @Food processing \ \Egan, A. \ \ \ \Prime Minister's Science Council \Australia. Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet \Manufacturing industry \ \ \Australia \ \ \1991 \35p. \IN5-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.31 ISBN 0644145129 mvk 22.4.95 @\Australian manufacturing industry issues; Vol. 2 of CSIRO ManufacturingIndustry Research initial planning document \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Manufacturing industry \Industrial research & development \ \Australia \ \ \1982 \137p. \IN5-80 \Monograph \ @\National extension service for Australian manufacturing industry, a reportto the Australian Industry and Technology Council, April 1985 \ \ \ \ \Nicholas Clark and Assoc. \Australian Industry & Technology Council \Manufacturing industry \Industrial extension services \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \92p. \IN5-80 \Monograph \ @\ Commercialisation of Research Workshop, Sydney 6/7 August 1986 \ \ \ \ \ NIS Associates \ SIROTECH \ Industrial Research & development \ Industrial technology \ Technology transfer \ Australia \ NSW \ \ 1986 Aug \ \ IN5-80 \ Folder of Workshop notes \ #C , " Commercialisation", P.117 @\Intellectual property services and guidelines \ \ \ \Sirotech Ltd \ \Technology transfer \Industrial technology \Industrial research & development \Australia \ \ \1991 \36p \IN5-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.118, 1992.119 (Copy 2). For Sirotech Annual Reports see OC4-80.19.6.92 @\ Commercialising Public Sector Intellectual Property \ \ Taylor.J (ed) \ \ \ Adelaide Innovation Centre \ \ Industrial Research & development \ Industrial technology \ Technology transfer \ Australia \ \ \ 1989 \ 159p \ IN5-80 \ Conference papers \ #C "Commercialisation", P.97. Proceedings of Conference, Adelaide,20-21 March 1989. @\The Global Challenge: Australian Manufacturing in the 1990s \ \Carter.C \Pecault.D \Evans.R \Australian Manufacturing Council \Pappas Carter Evans & Koop \Management \Export trade \Industrial technology \Australia \International \ \1990 \204p \IN5-80 \Monograph \#G 1990.76 Argues for more proactive government role in supporting exportindustries. @\ CSIRO assistance to manufacturing industry \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Manufacturing industry \Technology transfer \Industrial research & development \Australia \ \ \1986 \n/a \IN5-80 \Monograph \#G Record reconstructed jk 21.4.92 @\Technology base for the Australian Space Programme, paper delivered at3rd National Space Engineering Symposium, Barton, A.C.T., 30 June-2 July1987 \ \McCracken.K \ \ \COSSA \ \Space programs \Industrial research & development \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \4p. \IN5-80 \(paper) \ @\Business expenditure on research and Development Scoreboard '95 \ \ \ \ \IR&D Board Australia \Australia. Dept. of Industry, Science & Technology \Industrial research \Technology transfer \Economics \Australia \ \ \1995 Oct \30p \IN5-80 \Monograph \#G 1996.42 ISBN 0 642 23334 9 Prepared by Coopers & Lybrand mvk 5.4.96 @\ Special Report, the Broken Hill Proprietary Company Ltd, Into the 1990s. \ Research Report \ McLeod.J \ \ \ J.B. Were & Son \ \ Industrial research & development \ Industrial management \ Industrial technology \ Australia \ \ \ 1989 June \ 288p \ IN5-80 \ Monograph \ #G, P.24 @\ Commercial opportunities from public sector research \ BIE Research Report \ Ryan.J \ \ \ Bureau of Industry Economics \ \ Industrial research & development \ Marketing \ Research grants \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 \ 132p \ IN5-80 \ Monograph \ Research Report 32. #G, 1990.23, ISBN 0 644 11039 2 @\ Technology strategies in Australian industry \ \ Johnston.R \ Scott-Kemmis.D \ Darling.T \ University of Wollongong. Centre for Technology and Social Change \ DITAC \ Technology consultants industry \ Industrial research & development \ Innovations \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 \ 89p \ IN5-80 \ Monograph \ #G 1990.49 AGPS 90/20794 Cat. No. 90 0933 X. Third in group of 4 reportsproduced for DITAC (others: Innovation for the 1990s, 1988; Strategic Alliancesin the Internationalisation of Australian industry, 1990; Technology andcompetitiveness in the processed food industry, 1990) @\Paths to success. Programs in support of Industry Research and Development \ \ \ \ \Industry Research and Development Board \DITAC \High technology \Research grants \Industrial research and development \Australia \ \ \1990 \na \IN5-80 \Folder includes 2 booklets \#G 1992.160 Gives details of government measures to assist business wishingto invest in research and development to increase competitiveness. Includesinformation on 150% tax concession, Discretionary Grants Scheme, NationalProcurement Development Scheme, and National Teaching Company Scheme. mk16.7.92 @\Developing Australian Ideas : a blueprint for the 1990s. \ \Free.R \ \ \DITAC \ \Government policy \Innovations \Technology transfer \Australia \ \ \1992 Aug \52p \IN5-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.248 ISBN 0 644 25523 4 Statement by Minister for Science and Technologyabout capturing the benefits of Australian research. mvk 29.12.92 @\ The changing role of manufacturing technology \ \ Robinson,P. \ Cambridge,J. \ Good,M. \ Prime Minister's Science Council \ Australia. Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet \ Industrial Research and Development \ Manufacturing Industry \Technology Transfer \ Australia \International \ \1992 \41p. \IN5-80 \Monograph \#G1992.291.ISBN 0 644 24629 4 A paper prepared by an independent workinggroup for consideration by the Prime Minister's Science Council at its sixthmeeting 18th May 1992 mvk 11.1.93 @\Tomorrow's World: the Australian initiative \ \ \ \ \ \ \Technology transfer \Industrial technology \Innovation \Australia \ \ \1993 \224p \IN5-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.63 First Edition, published by Associated Publishing Corporation,NSW. Index, and Forward by Paul Keating, Prime Minister of Australia. ISBN0 646 16294 2 . Contains CSIRO Volcanic Ash Detection System (p216). mvk30.4.94 @\ Tertiary education research and development in New South Wales \Council papers \ \ \ \NSW Science and Technology Council \ \Scientific research \Education \ \NSW \ \ \1987 \67p. \IN5-82 \Monograph \ @\ Business enterprise research and development in New South Wales \Council papers \ \ \ \NSW Science and Technology Council \ \Industrial research & development \ \ \NSW \ \ \1987 \50p. \IN5-82 \Monograph \ @\ Commonwealth Government research and development in New South Wales \Council papers \ \ \ \NSW Science and Technology Council \ \Industrial research & development \Economics \ \NSW \ \ \1986 \111p. \IN5-82 \Monograph \ @\ Research and development in New South Wales: overview report \ \Dix.A \ \ \NSW Science and Technology Council \ \Industrial Research & technology \ \ \NSW \ \ \1987 \18p. \IN5-82 \Monograph \ @\ Directory of business enterprise R & D in New South Wales \ \ \ \ \NSW Science and Technology Council \ \Industrial research & development \Directories \ \NSW \ \ \1987 \236p. \IN5-82 \Monograph \#G Record reconstructed jk 21.4.92 @\Directory of NSW Government, Commonwealth Government and Tertiary EducationR & D in New South Wales \ \ \ \ \NSW Science and Technology Council \ \Industrial research & development \Scientific research \ \NSW \ \ \1987 \87p. \IN5-82 \Monograph \ @\ France [report] \Studies in industrial development and innovation policy \Schmidt.G \Kulys.A \ \Bureau of Industry Economics \ \Industrial research & development \Government policy \Innovations \France \ \ \1988 \59p. \IN7-34 \Monograph \No.4 @\Federal Republic of Germany [report] \Studies in industrial development and innovation policy \Schmidt.G \Kulys.A \ \Bureau of Industry Economics \ \Industrial research & development \Government policy \Innovations \West Germany \ \ \1988 \43p. \IN7-38 \Monograph \No.5 @\ Building international competitiveness: the Government's approach toindustry policy \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Industrial research & development \Government policy \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \32p. \IN7-80 \Monograph \ @\ Industry and technology policy , an information paper \Information paper \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Government policy \Industrial technology \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \33p. \IN7-80 \Monograph \ @\ State industry policies, an information paper prepared for the EconomicPlanning Advisory Council by the Department of Industry Technology and Commerce,January 1988 \EPAC Discussion paper \ \ \ \DITAC \EPAC \Government policies \Industry \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \34p. \IN7-80 \Monograph \No. 88-04. @\ MTIA Defence industry directory \ \ \ \ \MTIA \ \Defence industry \Directories \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1985-86 \varies \IN8-80 \Serial \Metal trades industry. @\The environmental challenge: sustainable businesses in the 1990's \ \ \ \ \Australian Manufacturing Council \ \Environmental Protection \Government Policy \Manufacturing Industry \Australia \ \1991 \10p. \IN9-80 \Monograph \#G1992.292 The Australian Manufacturing Council has prepared this documentas a direct input into the nine working parties established by the Governmentto report on ecologically sustainable development. It is theCouncil's consideredview of what the major issues are and how they should be addressed.It isthe second of three reports on industry and the environment produced bythe Australian manufacturing Council over a 12 month period. [ see also#G1992.293 ] mvk. 11.1.93. @\ The environmental challenge: best practice environmental management. \ \ \ \ \Australian Manufacturing Council \ \Environmental Protection \Industrial Management \Manufacturing Industry \Australia \ \ \1992 \49p. \IN9-80 \Monograph \#G1992.293 This document is the third report on industry and the environmentproduced by the AMC over a 12 month period. [ see also #G1992.292 ].Thisdocument articulates how manufacturing firms can best move toward sustainabledevelopment while maintaining Australia's drive for international competitiveness. The term used to describe this process is called Best Practice EnvironmentalManagement [BPEM]. mvk 11.1.93 @\ Long-run impact of technological changes on the structure of Australianindustry to 1990-91 \Research report [BIE] \ \ \ \Bureau of Industry Economics \ \Technological change \Industry \Economics \Australia \ \ \1981 \380p. \IN11-80 \Monograph \No. 7. @\Research and Development: overview draft report \ \ \ \ \Industry Commission \ \Technological change \Industrial research & development \Government policy \Australia \ \ \1984 Dec \58p. \IN11-80 \Monograph \#G 1996.14 See also #G 1995.104 Considerable emphasis on government R&Dagencies including CSIRO. It concludes that CSIRO should be retained bygovernment to do primarily "public good" strategic research. mvk16.3.96 @\Australian technology: past present future \ \Ford.J \Costello.J \Knipe.M \Scientific American \ \Industrial technology \History \ \Australia \ \ \1984 \48p \IN12-80 \(paper) \#G Copy of ppA3-A51 of Scientific American, Vol 250, No. 1, Jan 1984. Recordreconstructed jk 21.4.92 @\Presentation to the Filipino Delegation on the Occasion of their visitto CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Wednesday, 16 November 1988 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research \ \Overseas visits \International cooperation \ \Australia \Philippines \ \Nov.1988 \Varies \IN14-72 \Presentation booklet \ @\ Selecting technologies for the future: a discussion paper \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Industrial research & development \Technological change \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \119p. \IN15-80 \Monograph \#G Record reconstructed jk 21.4.92 @\ TITLE: The Global Challenge : Australian manufacturing in the 1990s.Final Report of the study by Pappas Carter Evans & Koop / Telesis \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 Dix.W \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 Australian Manufacturing Council \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Manufacturing industry \ KEYWORD.2 Commerce \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1990 (June) \ PAGINATION 204p \ CLASSC'N IN15-80 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.36 Influential report which criticises "levelplaying field" ideology, proposes targetted government interventionto encourage stronger export performance. jk 10.3.92 @\Future directions for Australian manufacturing industry: a broad strategyframework \ \ \ \ \Australian Manufacturing Council \ \Industrial technology \Future planning \Manufacturing industry \Australia \ \ \1986 \54p. \IN15-80 \Monograph \ @\ Technology assessment in Australia \ \ \ \ \Senate Standing Committee on Science Technology and the Environment \ \Technological change \Industrial technology \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \111p. \IN15-80 \Monograph \ @\Technology statement, 1 July 1986 \Economic Strategy for Victoria \ \ \ \Victoria. Parliament \ \Technological change \Industrial research & development \ \Victoria \ \ \1986 \158p. \IN15-83 \Monograph \No. 8. On cover: Partnerships in technology for the 1990's @\Bilateral Science and Technology Programs, guidelines for Australian applicants,Feb. 1988 \Science and Technology Collaboration Program \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Guidelines \Financial assistance \Overseas visits \Australia \ \ \1988 \12p. \IO1-80 \Monograph in folder \Folder, entitled: "Guidelines and application forms" also containsapplication forms. @\Trip report: USA 11-25 March 1988 \ \Thorburn.L \ \ \COSSA \ \Remote sensing \Eos \Overseas visits \United States \ \ \1988 \n/a \IO2-12 \(paper) \ @\1986 overseas visit: report to the Australian Academy of Science- RoyalSociety Exchange Programme \ \Barton.I \ \ \ \ \Scientific research \ATSR \Overseas visits \Great Britain \ \ \1987 \varies \IO3-32 \(paper) \Contains his paper: Australian validation plans for ERS-1 and: Llewellyn-Jones(etal): Along-track scanning radiomenter for ERS-1 @\ Visit to Japan 12 Jan. 1987 wrt Remote Sensing \ \Jones.I \ \ \University of Sydney \ \Remote sensing \Marine science \Overseas visits \Japan \ \ \1987 \varies \IO3-63 \(paper) \ @\ Report of visit to Japan for discussion of space programs, 29 March-6April, 1984, by Deputy Secretary , Department of Science and Technology \ \Green.R \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Science \ \Space programs \Overseas visits \ \Japan \Australia \ \1984 \n/a \IO3-63 \(paper) \ @\ Report on discussions in the USA Canada and Sweden and a conference inSwitzerland during February 1988 [Space Commerce 88], March 1988 \ \Middleton.B \ \ \ASO \ \Overseas visits \Space industry \International cooperation \International \Australia \ \1988 \43p. \IO5-05 \(paper) \ @\ Australian Materials Research Overseas Collaboration Program: Opticaland Opto-electronic Materials, Japan, USA and Europe 7-27 April 1990 \ \ Rossiter.P \ \ \ DITAC \ \ Overseas visits \ Industrial research & development \ Materials technology \ Australia \ Japan \ United States \ 1990 \ 53p \ IO5-80 \ Monograph \ #G 1990.21 @\ Australian - USSR Space Research Co-operation. Report of the Australiandelegation's visit to the USSR, 25 May-4 June 1988. \ \ \ \ \ASO \ \Russia \Opportunities \Organisations \USSR \ \ \1988 \44p. \IO14-01 \Report \ @\ Report on visit to Malaysia, Thailand, Italy and France, April/May 1986 \ \Tegart.W \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Science \ \Overseas visits \Scientific research \International cooperation \South East Asia \France \Italy \1986 \101p. \IO14-05 \Monograph \Reports on 1st ASEAN Science and Technology Week @\ Visit to Hawaii, China, Japan, Canada and USA,. 19 Sept.-13 Oct. 1986 \ \Tegart.W \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Science \ \Overseas visits \Scientific research \Industrial research & development \China \United States \Canada \1986 \154p. \IO14-05 \Monograph \Includes cover of Anglo-Australian Telescope Board meeting in Hawaii. @\Record of discussions undertaken during the CSIRO/Industry space fact-findingmission 24 June-31 July 1984 \AUSPACE report 2-84 \Schaetzel.S \ \ \AUSPACE \CSIRO/Industry Fact-Finding Mission \Space industry \Space technology \Overseas visits \International \United States \Europe \1984 \126p. \IO14-05 \Monograph \Dr. K. McCracken and Ms C. Astley-Boden were other paticipants @\ Report on the Mission on Remote Sensing to the People's Republic of China \ \Perry.R \Trinder.J \O'Callaghan.J \Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering \ \Co-operation between Australia and China \Exchange of information \ \China \ \ \August-September 1987 \10p. \IO14-61 \Monograph \ #G Other author Little.R. Record corrected jk 21.4.92 @\ Scientific Industries Steering Committee Mission to Singapore, Malaysia,Thailand,Philippines, Indonesia, Nov./Dec. 1986: [Report] \ \McEwan.D \ \ \SISC \ \Industrial technology \Remote sensing \Overseas visits \South East Asia \Australia \ \1986 \76p. \IO14-65 \Monograph \ @\Scientific Industries Steering Committee Mission to Singapore, Malaysia,Thailand, Philippines, Indonesia, Nov./Dec. 1986: Remote sensing [excerptsfrom the Report with Addenda: Thailand's Eastern Seaboard-Regional EnvironmentalManagement Plan ESB/REMP] \ \McEwan.D \ \ \SISC \ \Remote sensing \Environmental research \Overseas visits \South East Asia \Thailand \ \ \1986 \Varies \IO14-65 \Monograph #G Report of mission discussions on remote sensing. ESP/REMP by ThailandOffice of National Environment Board and Setec International. Record reconstructedjk 21.4.92 @\Australia-Indonesia S&T linkages: case studies of remote sensing,telecommunications and biotechnology. \ASTEC Occasional Paper \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \Industrial technology \Overseas visits \ \Australia \Indonesia \South East Asia \1992 November \98p \IO14-65 \Monograph \#G 1994.08 Draft Occasional Paper . Report of party including Tegart (ASTEC),McEwan (DITAC), Johnston (Univ. of Sydney). Refers to SISC projects of formerDepartment of Science, critical of absence of consistent Austrlain governmentpolicy and "patient" Australian capital in relation to Asian investment,as well as to attitude of Asia as a passive market rather than a seriesof countries with their own development needs mvk 2.2.94. @\Australia-Indonesia S&T linkages: case studies of remote sensing,telecommunications and biotechnology. \ASTEC Occasional Paper No. 25 \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \Industrial technology \Overseas visits \ \Australia \Indonesia \South East Asia \1992 December \97p \IO14-65 \Monograph \#G 1994.210, Final. ISBN 0 644 27305 4, ISSN 1036 3319. See also 1994.08Draft Occasional Paper . Report of party including Tegart (ASTEC), McEwan(DITAC), Johnston (Univ. of Sydney). Refers to SISC projects of former Departmentof Science, critical of absence of consistent Austrlain government policyand "patient" Australian capital in relation to Asian investment,as well as to attitude of Asia as a passive market rather than a seriesof countries with their own development needs mvk 28.12.94. @\ Review of the export market development grants scheme. Program EvaluationReport 5 \Program Evaluation Report 5 \ \ \ \Bureau of Industry Economics \ \Industry \Export trade \Marketing \International \ \ \1988 \71p. \IO15-05 \Serial \ @\Report on a visit to Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines to assessthe feasibility of an AIRSAR/TOPSAR deployment in Sout East Asia in October1996 \ \Paylor.Earnest \Milne.Tony \Tapley.Ian \NASA \UNSW \Overseas visits \Research aircraft \ \South East Asia \Indonesia \Malaysia \1995 June \ \IO15-65 \Monograph \#G 1995.151 Planning document for NASA, COSSA, UNSW to decide on repeatvisit of NASA DC-8 to Australian region. mvk 20.12.95 WT03-B26-20IA029-000311-B016-250http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatl.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163013 text/html 29553HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:28:33 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:07 GMTContent-length: 29378 Catalogue Library catalogue L: LIFE SCIENCES [see also Biotechnology (EB); Marine Biology (MB);General Science (PS); Exobiology (XE)] LA Animal Sciences (Zoology) [see also Remote Sensing (RF)] LB Biology (in General); Origin of Life, Science side of Biotechnology if(EB) not appropriate LE Ecology & the Environment [SEE ALSO Remote Sensing (environmental)(RE); Energy (ED), Environmental Geology (TE); Marine environment (ME) LF Fossils (Paleontology) [see also Historical Geology (TH)] LG Agriculture, Primary Industry, Forestry; [see also (RA) Remote Sensingin Agriculture LI Entomology, insects etc, biological control etc LM Medicine (Human) LP Plant Sciences (Botany) [see also Remote Sensing (RA)] LX Films, videos on life science LZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective) @\ Our changing Environment \ \ \ \ \NERC \ \Scientific research \Information systems \Environmental research \Great Britain/United Kingdom \ \ \1990 \55p \LE1-32 \Brochure \#G 1994.45 ISBN 185531 0236 Chapters on global change; British landscape;tracking pollution; "the planet's frontiers" [oceans, deep landsurface, polar regions]; surveys & monitoring. Emphasis on earth observationas " one of the technological cornerstones of the new environmentalsciences". Describes Environmental Information Centre (EIC) and NationalGeosciences Data Centre, amongst other environmental & resource datamanagement systems, with a slant to commercialisation.Published to commemorate25th anniversay of NERC. mvk 23.3.94 @\Vegetation: from mapping to decision support. A Workshop to establisha set of core attributes for vegetation. \ \Bolton.M \ \ \ERIN \ \Mapping \Information systems \Vegetation index \Australia \ \ \1992 \ \LE2-80 \Workshop report \#G 1994.74 ISBN 0 642 18505 0 Report of Workshop, held 16-17 May 1991,in Canberra. "The primary aim of the workshop was to draft nationalstandards for vegetation survey, in the light of recent technological innovations,notably Spatial Information Systems and Global Positioning Systems"[from Executive Summary]. A result of the Workshop was a detailed revisionof the Core Attributes for Terrestrial Biological Survey Data in Australia.which is appended to this document. Contributed to development of spatialdata transfer standards and to awareness of needs for metadata standards.mvk 19.6.94 @\ International Symposium on Earth System Science (ISESS) \ \ \ \ \STA, NASDA, JAMSTEC \ \Earth observation \Resources \Ecology \International \Japan \ \1988 \169p. \LE3-63 \Monograph \Collection of papers from Symposium @\International Forum on Environmental Information for the Twenty-FirstCentury \ \ \ \ \ \ \Environmental protection \Information systems \ \International \Canada \ \1991 May \Various \LE3-05 \Conference papers \#C (Int. Forum on Envir. Info.) Papers from Forum held in Montreal, 21-24May 1991. 1992.249.1 Informational Requirements for Policy Decision Makers(Pearce.D and Freeman.S , Department of Economics , University College London);1992.249.2 Reporting Environmental Information (Holtz.S , Canada); 1992.249.3Institutional Arrangements ; 1992.249.4 FINDAR ; 1992.249.5 Monitoring &data management ( Croze.H , UNEP/GRID) ; 1992.249.6 Australia Position Paper,Bradbury.R , Richardson.B , and Oakley.G . ; 1992.249.7 Environmental InformationStatement mvk 29.12.92 @\Conservation and the environment \CSIRO Research for Australia \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Conservation \Environmental research \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \104p \LE3-80 \Monograph \#G v.15. Record reconstructed jk 21.4.92 @\Research Directory \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Darwin Tropical Ecosystems Research Centre \ \Tropical ecology \Agricultural research \ \Northern Territory \Queensland \Western Australia \H0LD 1987, 1989 \ \LE3-80 \Serial \#G Record reconstructed jk 21.4.92. 1989 report is P.1180 , compiled bySue Taylor, Darwin, mvk 10.2.932 @\Australian Fire Research in Progress, Register No. 1 \ \Hoare.J \ \ \CSIRO \Australian Forestry Council Standing Committee on Forestry \Fire \Forest research & development \ \Australia \ \ \1989 \67p \LE3-80 \Monograph \#G 1993.46 ISSN 1033 8004 mvk 9.6.93 @\Scientific aspects of major environmental research, Biodiversity \ \ \ \ \Prime Minister's Science Council \Australia. Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet \Scientific research \Global change \Environmental research \Australia \International \ \1992 \19p. \LE3-80 \monograph \#G 1995.32 ISBN 064425064X mvk 23.4.95 @\ Environmental research in Australia - a review \ \ Martin.R \ \ \ ASTEC \ \ Research grants \ Environmental research \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 June \ 186p \ LE5-80 \ Monograph \ #G 1990.20 ISBN 0 644 12416 4. First of two parts, "Environmentalresearch in Australia, the Issues" due end 1990.#G 1991.95 is copy2. SEE ALSO #G 1991.96 being the second part of this review which is a responseto the Prime Minister reference of 7 August 1989 @\CSIRO and the sustaining of Australia : CSIRO's contribution to ecologicallysustainable development \ \McAlpine.G \ \ \CSIRO \ \Environmental research \Research & development \ \Australia \ \ \1992 May \27p \LE5-80 \Monograph \#G ISBN 0 643 05382 4 Copy 1 1993.3, Copy 2 1993.4 . Summarises CSIRO researchand its relationship to the ESD (Ecologically Sustainable Development) strategy.mvk 11.2.93 @\Commercial opportunities in waste management \ \Priestley, J. \ \ \ \Prime Minister's Science Council \Australia. Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet \Ecology \Environmental protection \Economics \Australia \ \ \1991 \31p. \LE5-80 \monograph \#G1995.28 ISBN 0644145137 mvk 23.4.95 \@\ Ecologically sustainable development. A Commonwealth discussion paper.June 1990. \ \ \ \ \ Australia. Dept. of Prime Minister and Cabinet \ \ Environmental protection \ Government policy \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 \ 41p. \ LE7-80 \ Monograph \ #G1992.9 ISBN 0 644 12750 3 SEE ALSO Ecologically sustainable developmentworking groups final report. November 1991. ISBN 0 642 16932 2 (set) orISBN 0 642 16942 X @\Report of Programs Implemented and Policies Adopted since 1988 that Contributeto reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions in Australia \ \Wood.B \ \ \ANZECC \ \Government policy \Environmental protection \Greenhouse effect \Australia \New Zealand \Oceania \1991 Oct \52p \LE7-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.270 ANZECC (Australian and New Zealand Environment and ConservationCouncil Formerly ANZEC) mvk 3.1.93 @\ Australia's environment and its natural resources - an outlook \ \ Young.M \ Cocks.K \ Humphries.S \ CSIRO INRE \ \ Environmental protection \ Environmental research \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 \ 48p \ LE9-80 \ Monograph \ #G 1990.47 ISBN 0 643 05110 4 @\Living on the coast. The Comonwealth coastal policy. \ \Faulkner, J. \ \ \Aust. Dept. of Environment, Sport & Territories \ \Coastal zones \Government policy \Ecological sustainability \Australia \ \ \May 1995 \various \LE9-80 \folder containing 2 brochures \#G 1996.66 ISBN 0642 227721X, ISBN 0642 22773X This policy recommends co-operationbetween the community, industry & the 3 spheres of government for Australiato develop a coastal management system to ensure we achieve an ecologicallysustainable use of the coastal zone. mvk 10.6.96 @\An investigation of nutrient pollution in the Murray-Darling River system.Report summary \ \ \ \ \Murray-Darling Basin Commission \ \Environmental protection \Land use \Environmental research \New South Wales \Victoria \Australia \1992 \12p \LE9-82 \Monograph \#G 1992.166 ISBN 1 875209 12 3 Commissioned report by Gutteridge Haskins& Davey mk 16.7.92 @\ TITLE: Kakadu Conservation Zone . Background Paper \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 Resource Assessment Commission Australia \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Environmental protection \ KEYWORD.2 Land use \ KEYWORD.3 Conservation \ REGION.1 Northern Territory \ REGION.2 Australia \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1990 Jun \ PAGINATION 75p \ CLASSC'N LE9-87 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1990.114 ISBN 0 644 12738 4 jk 27.4.92 @\Kakadu Conservation Zone: Draft Report \ \Stewart.D \ \ \Resource Assessment Commission \ \Environmental protection \Minerals & mining \Conservation \Northern Territory \Australia \ \1991 Feb \251p (Vol 1), 302p (Vol2) \LE9-87 \Monograph \#G 1993.29 (Vol 1), 1993.30 (Vol 2), ISBN 0 644 13479 8, 0 644 13765 7.Published by AGPS, Canberra. 90/22313 Cat No 90 2229 8, 91 0073 7. mvk 30.3.93 @\World resources 1994-95. A guide to the global environment \ \Lash.J \ \ \UNEP \WRI \Environmental protection \Natural resources \ \International \ \ \1994 \400p \LE11-05 \Monograph \#G 1996.58 ISBN 0 19 521045 X ISSN 0887 0403 Looks at interaction of humanpopulation and natural resources, role of women in sustainable development.mvk 8.4.96 @\Environmental change in Australia since 1788 \ \Young, Ann, R.M. \ \ \ \ \Environmental research \Ecological sustainability \ \Australia \ \ \1996 \238 p. LE12-80 \monograph \#G1996.63 ISBN 019 5535839 Reviews the widespread changes within the Australianenvironment since European settlement. Provides students with a sound technicalunderstanding of the physical processes involved. Five chapters deal withmajor land uses. Special case studies are included in each chapter includingthe Greenhouse Effect. @\Australian Environment Expertise - resources for Development Assistance \ \Halliburton.M \Jones.P \Hundloe.T \AIDAB \ \Development assistance \Environmental protection \Environmental research \Australia \ \ \1989 \66p \LE14-80 \Monograph \#G 1990.135 ISBN 0 644 09432 X . Booklet summarises Australian environmentalservices and products which can be supplied to developing countries eitherthrough offical development assistance or through commercial arrangements.mk 20.7.92. @\Australian National Report to the United Nations Conference on Environmentand Development, Public Discussion Draft, 30 July 1991 \ \DiSano.J \ \ \Australia. Dept. of the Arts etc. \ \Environmental protection \International cooperation \Government policy \Australia \International \Brazil \1991 \190p \LE14-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.319 Prepared in advance of UNCED Conference, Rio de Janeiro, 1992.mvk 27.1.93 @\ Report by The Hon. R J Kelly, Minister for the Arts, Sport, the Environmentand Territories on the Earth Summit, the UN Conference on Environment &Development (UNCED), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil June 3-14 1992. \ \Kelly, R J \ \ \Australia. Dept. of the Arts etc. \ \Environmental protection \International cooperation \Government policy \Australia \International \Brazil \1992 \27p \LE14-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.03 See also 1992.319 . ISBN 0 644 25870 5 . Prepared in advanceof UNCED Conference, Rio de Janeiro, 1992. mvk 27.1.93 @\CSIRO land and water care program. Outcomes '93 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Institute of Plant Production & Processing \ \Environmental protection \Agricultural research \Water resources research \Australia \ \ \1994 \16p. \LE15-80 \Brochure \#G1995.40 mvk 23.4.95 \ @\Environmental Research in Australia ; The Issues \ \Martin.R \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \Environmental Research \Future Planning \Government Policy \Australia \ \ \1990 \87p. \LE15-80 \Monograph \#G1991.96 ISBN 0 644 12417 2 being the second part of a response to thePrime Minister reference of 7 August 1989 #G1990.20 Environmental Researchin Australia-a review. @\Our Country, Our Future \ \Hawke.R \ \ \ \ \Environmental protection \Government policy \Future planning \Australia \ \ \1989 Jul \629 \LE15-80 \Monograph \#G P.1056 Statement on the Environment by the Hon R J L Hawke AC, PrimeMinister of Australia. Gave rise to the so called "July 1989"environmental funds. ISBN 0644 10295 0 mk 19.10.92 @\Policy proposals for the future of Australia's rangelands \ \Foran.B \Friedel.M \MacLeod.N \CSIRO \CSIRO Division of Wildlife and Ecology \Environmental research \Agriculture \Land use \Australia \ \ \1989 Dec \27p \LE15-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.26 ISBN 0 643 05065 5 . Other authors Stafford-Smith.D, Wilson.A. mvk 26.2.95 @\Coastal Zone Inquiry Draft Report: Summary and Interim Conclusions \ \ \ \ \Resource Assessment Commission \ \Coastal Zones \Environmental protection \Land data systems \Australia \ \ \1992 Dec \ \LE15-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.100 See also 1994.101 Background Report. Led to acknowledgementof necessity for coastal data systems including remote sensing and GIS.ISBN 0 644 28643 1 mvk 10.7.94 @\Coastal Zone Inquiry Background Paper \ \ \ \ \Resource Assessment Commission \ \Coastal Zones \Environmental protection \Land data systems \Australia \ \ \1992 Apr \68p \LE15-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.101 See also 1994.100 Draft report. Led to acknowledgement of necessityfor coastal data systems including remote sensing and GIS. ISBN 0 644 244119 mvk 10.7.94 @\Coastal Zone Inquiry Final Report \ \ \ \ \Resource Assessment Commission \ \Coastal Zones \Environmental protection \Land data systems \Australia \ \ \1993 Nov \ \LE15-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.106 See also 1994.101, 1994.100. Led to acknowledgement of necessityfor coastal data systems including remote sensing and GIS (eg CAMRIS, MarineData Group of CSDC). ISBN 0 644 29495 7 mvk 1.9.94 @\State of the environment reporting: framework for Australia \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of the Environment, Sports and Territories \ \Government policy \Information dissemination \Land data systems \Australia \ \ \1994 \442p \LE15-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.8 ISBN 0 642 20205 2 mvk 2.1.95 @\Towards local sustainable development: a toolkit of strategies. An integratedenvironmental management manual \ \ \ \ \ANU Centre for Resources and Environmental Studies \Australia. Dept. of Housing and Regional Development \Environmental protection \ \ \Australia \ \ \1994 Sept \61p \LE15-80 \Monograph \#G 1996.24 ISBN 0 642 22085 9 mvk 16.3.96 @\ Annual report 19- \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Primary Industry \ \Agricultural research \Primary industry \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1985-86 \varies \LG1-80 \Serial \ @\Forests and their products \CSIRO Research for Australia 12 \Landsberg.J \ \ \CSIRO \ \Primary industry \Forest research & development \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \91p \LG1-80 \Monograph \#G P.1181 ISBN 0 643 03797 7 mvk 10.2.93 @\Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation Research Report1990-1993 : A compendium of completed research projects \RIRDC Research Compendium No. 1 \ \ \ \RIRDC \Australia. Dept. of Primary Industries and Energy \Agricultural research \Primary industry \Directories \Australia \ \ \1993 June \339p \LG1-80 \Monograph \#G ISBN 0 642 19565 X Edited by Judy Caughley . Summaries of completedreserach project funded by DOPIE. mvk 20.2.94 @\ Agriculture \CSIRO research for Australia \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Agricultural research \ \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \97p. \LG3-80 \Monograph \v.16, #G, ISBN 0 643 03801 9 @\Tropical agricultural and landcare research : Australia's future \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Soils \CSIRO Division of Tropical Crops & Pastures \Agricultural research \Environmental research \Land use \Australia \1990 ? \Various \LG3-80 \Brochure \#G 1992.101 Copy 1, 1992.102 (Copy 2). 2.6.92 @\ Weeds, pests and plant diseases \CSIRO Research for Australia \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Pest control \Agricultural research \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \100 p. \LG3-80 \Monograph \v.11, #G, ISBN 0 643 03796 9 @\ Wool textile research \CSIRO Research for Australia \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Wool Research and Development \Textiles \Industrial Technology \Australia \ \ \1986 \65p. \LG3-80 \Monograph \v.9 @\Food \CSIRO Research for Australia \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Food Research and Development \Industrial technology \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \86p. \LG3-80 \Monograph \v.10, #G, ISBN 0 643 03795 0 @\ Science in the management of forests and catchments \ National Science and Industry Forum reports \ Drielsma.H \ Fitzpatrick.N \ \ AAS \ \ Forestry research & development \ Hydrology \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1991 \ 32p \ LG3-80 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.34 ISBN 0 85847 168 X Papers from 48th National Science and IndustryForum. jk 29/5/91 @\ Wool Research and Development Fund Research Projects \ Research Projects \ \ \ \ Australian Wool Corporation \ \ Primary industry \ Industrial research & development \ Research grants \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1989, 1990, 1991 \ various \ LG3-80 \ Monograph \ #G P.25, 1990.73, 1991.16 ISSN 0818-948X jk @\ Australian Wheat Research \ \ \ \ \ Wheat Research Council \ \ Primary industry \ Agricultural research \ Research grants \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1988-89; 1989-90 \ Various \ LG3-80 \ Monograph \ #G ISSN 0819 579X Review of projects sponsored by Wheat Research Council1988-89 P.33; 1992.136 (1989-90) @\ TITLE: Division of Chemical and Wood Technology Research Review 1987 \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 CSIRO IIT (Institute of Industrial Technologies) \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Forest research and development \ KEYWORD.2 Water resources research \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1989 \ PAGINATION 115p \ CLASSC'N LG3-80 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G P.60 ISSN 0814 99923 Final research review of the Divisionbefore CSIRO restructuring transferred its constituent programs to otherDivisions. jk 27.4.92 @\ A brief account of China's forestry \ \ \ \ \Chinese Academy of Forestry \ \Forest research and development \ \ \China \ \ \198? \10p. \LG4-61 \Monograph \In Chinese and English. @\Australian agriculture: sunrise industry \CSIRO Occasional papers \Donald.A \ \ \CSIRO \ \Agriculture \Economics \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \11p. \LG4-80 \Monograph \No.2 @\ Potential for the Australian horticultural industry, report of the 42ndMeeting of the National Science and Industry Forum, Canberra, 26 September1987 \National Science and Industry Forum report \Pitman.M \ \ \AAS \ \Horticulture \Economics \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \72p \LG5-80 \Monograph \ @\Workshop on the organisation and funding of research for the rural industries \BRR Proceedings No. 4 \Williams.R \ \ \BRR \DOPIE \research grants \primary industry \agricultural research \Australia \ \ \1989 \115p \LG5-80 \Monograph \#G P.105 ISSN 1032-2469 ISBN 0 644 09893 7 @\ Rural Research and Development in Australia: roles of the Public andPrivate Sectors. \ Bureau of Rural Resources Working Paper No. 4/88 \ Avent.K \ \ \ Bureau of Rural Resources \ DOPIE \ Primary industry \ Agricultural research \ Technology transfer \ Australia \ \ \ 1988 Dec. \ 107p \ LG5-80 \ Monograph \ #G P.68 Study on commercialisation of rural R&D. JK 8/4/91 @\SCA Workshop on Research Priorities and Resource allocation for ruralR&D \BRR Proceedings No. 7 \ \ \ \BRR \DOPIE \research grants \primary industry \agricultural research \Australia \ \ \1990 \137p \LG5-80 \Monograph \#G 1990.72 ISSN 1032-2469 ISBN 0 644 12405 9. Record reconstructed jk 24.4.92 @\CSIRO's Research for the Rural Industries: a strategic perspective \ \Foley.K \Asimus.D \Gregson.T \CSIRO \ \Primary Industry \Agricultural research \Horticulture \Australia \ \ \1992 \46p \LG5-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.212 ; Copy 2 is 1992.213 . Critical review of CSIRO Rural R&D,presented to CSIRO Board June 1992. Other members of review panel were Miller.J,Millis.N (Professor), and Shears.D . ISBN 0 643 05439 1 . Concludes thatCSIRO in general is " over-reviewed and under-managed" . Notesproblem of co-ordination in R&D for "pervasive research' , includingremote sensing and climate change. mvk 22.12.92. @\Rural research - the pay-off. The returns from research undertaken bythe CSIRO Institute of Plant Production and Processing \CSIRO Occasional Paper No. 7 \Johnston.B \Healy.T \I'ons.J \CSIRO \Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics \Economic impact \Primary industry \Agricultural research \Australia \ \ \1992 May \54p \LG5-80 \Monograph \#G 1993.23 ISSN 1030 6676 Study by CSIRO IPPP & ABARE on cost-benefitsof research. mvk 9.3.93 @\Today's research - Australia's future. CSIRO Rural Sector Report 1989. \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Economic impact \Primary industry \Agricultural research \Australia \ \ \1989 \24p \LG5-80 \Monograph \#G P.57 Introduction by Dr Tony Gregson. Combined report of INRE, IAPP,IPPP. mvk 9.3.93 @\A qualitative market research project for Rural Research \ \O'Keeffe.M \Manifold.F \ \CSIRO \ \Marketing \Primary industry \ \Australia \ \ \1993 Mar \53p \LG5-80 \Monograph \#G 1993.67 Report for CSIRO by Australian Agribusiness Research Unit, MonashUniversity, on readership of CSIRO journal "Rural Research". mvk29.6.93 @\Research, Innovation & Competitiveness: policies for reshaping Australia'sPrimary Industries and Energy Portfolio Research and Development \ \Kerin.John \Cook.Peter \ \DOPIE \ \Government policy \Scientific research \Primary industry \Australia \ \ \1989 May \105p \LG7-80 \Monograph \#G 1993.164 ISBN 0 644 09660 Major review of DOPIE R&D resources andorganisation, resulting in establishment of R&D corporations in attemptto make research more relevant to industry needs, and more productive incommercial consequences. mvk 4.11.93 @\Regreening Australia: the environmental, economic and social benefitsof reforestation \Occasional Paper No. 3 \Eckersley.Richard \ \ \CSIRO \ \Environmental protection \Ecology \Forest research & development \Australia \ \ \1989 June \28p \LG9-80 \Monograph \# G P.56 Argues for national tree planting effort. mvk 5.11.93 @\Australia's Forest and Timber Resources \ \ \ \ \ Resource Assessment Commission \ \ Land use \ Environmental research \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 March \ 79p \ LG9-80 \ Monograph \ #G 1990.44 See also File ZC10/001. Forms background Paper #1 for Forest& Timber Inquiry @\National drought policy. Final report. Volume 1. \ \ \ \ \Drought policy review task force \DOPIE \Disasters \Climatology \Agriculture \Australia \ \ \ \1990 \30p. \LG15-80 \monograph \#G 1995.38 ISBN 0644129743 @ Joint Statement on Australian Agri-Food Industries \ \Button.John \Crean.Simon \ \Australia.Dept. of Industry, Technology & Commerce \Australia. Dept. of Primary Industry \Agricultural research \Primary industry \ \Australia \ \1992 \21p \LG15-80 \Monograph \#G 1996.33 ISBN 0 642 18259 0 Initiative in market intervention to developAsian markets for Australian food products. mvk 16.3.96 @\ Entomological research and development: a high yielding low risk investment,an account of the economic social and environmental benefits arising fromthe research of the CSIRO Division of Entomology, August 1988 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Scientific research \Entomology \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \46p. \LI3-80 \Monograph \Interim report. @\ Advancements in medicine from aerospace research [paper] presented atthe Conference on Space for Mankind's Benefit, Huntsville, Alabama, Nov.16-19,1971 \ \Wooten.F \ \ \Space for Mankind's Benefit \Research Triangle Institute \Space science \Medical research \ \United States \ \ \1971 \8p. \LM3-12 \(paper) \NASA-CR-124614; NASA contract. @\The Ozone Layer and Health \Transactions of the Menzies Foundation \Refshauge.W \ \ \Menzies Foundation \ \Ozone \Global change \ \Australia \ \ \1989 \259p \LM10-80 \Monograph \#G, v15, 1990.4 @\ Ultraviolet-B Radiation Impacts \ IGBP Workshop Reports \ \ \ \ AAS \ \ Global change \ IGBP \ Ozone \ Australia \ Polar regions \ \ 1990 Sept. \ Various \ LM10-80 \ Conference papers (folder) \ #C 1990.86 Papers from Fenner Environmental Conference/IGBP Workshop heldin Canberra (Academy of Science), 19-21 September 1991. JK 2/4/91 @\Phytotron User's Guide \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Plant Industry \ \Agricultural research \Primary industry \ \Australia \ \ \1980 \ \LP1-80 \Monograph \#G P.43 About CERES (National plant growing facility in Canberra). mvk6.3.94 WT03-B26-21IA029-000311-B016-279http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatm.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163032 text/html 20154HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:28:44 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:08 GMTContent-length: 19979 Catalogue Library catalogue M: MARINE SCIENCES & OCEANOGRAPHY including Oceans as geographic regions [SEE ALSO also Remote Sensing (RF) & (RM)] MA Atlantic Ocean MB Marine Biology [see also Life Sciences (L)] MC Chemical Oceanography [see also Chemistry (PC)] MD Dynamics (Physical Oceanography), Shipping channel depths etc, Ocean currents ME Marine environment, environmental oceanography; for climatic aspects[SEE (MW)] MG Marine Geology [see also Terrestrial Geology (T)] MH Instrumentation & equipment MI Indian Ocean [see also Indian Subcontinent (GI)] MN Northern (Arctic) Ocean [see also Polar oceanography (MO); Polar Meteorology (WP); Polar Geography (GP)] MO Polar oceanography, Arctic & Antarctic, combined MP Pacific Ocean [see also Oceania (GO)] MR Marine resources; [see also Marine Geology MG] MS Southern (Antarctic) Ocean [see also Polar oceanography (MO), Polar Meteorology (WP), Polar Geography (GP)] MT Tropical Oceanography [see also Tropical Meteorology (WT)] MW Weather & Climatic Aspects [see also Weather & Climate (W)] MX Films , videos on marine science & oceanography MZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective), general marinescience @\ Ocean color from space \ \ \ \ \ NASA \ National Science Foundation \ Marine science \ CZCS \ Nimbus \ USA \ International \ \ 1989 \ \ MB3-12 \ Folder \ #G, 2 copies, P.9, P.10 @\U.S. GLOBEC Eastern boundary current program: a science plan for the Californiacurrent \U.S. Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics Report Number 11 \ \ \ \US. GLOBEC \ \Oceanography \Global change \Marine biology \United States \ \ \1994 Aug \134p \MB3-12 \Monograph \#G 1994.169 mvk 21.11.94 @\The South East Trawl Fishery: biological synopses & catch distributionsfor seven major commercial fish species \BRR Bulletin \Tilzey.R \Zann-Schuster.M \Klaer.N \BRR \DOPIE \Earth resources \Marine science \Primary industry \Australia \Tasmania \ \1990 \80p \MB3-80 \Monograph \#G 1990.79 ISBN 0 644 12360 5 Bulletin No. 6. @\Cruise Report, FRV Southern Surveyor \FRV Southern Surveyor Cruise Reports \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Fisheries \CSIRO \Marine biology \Marine resources \Marine science \Australia \Oceania \ \HOLD 1992 (SS3, SS1) \Various \MB3-80 \Serial \#G SS3 ISSN 1039 2041 Hobart to Hobart, 15 July to 13 August 1992, 1993.32,mvk 2.6.93; SS1/92 1993.159, 4-13 and 14-25 February 1992, acoustic surveyof Orange Roughy and surface productivity south of Tasmania, mvk 17.10.93 @\Cruise Plan, FRV Southern Surveyor \FRV Southern Surveyor Cruise Plans \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Fisheries \CSIRO \Marine biology \Marine resources \Marine science \Australia \Oceania \ \HOLD 1992 (SS3), 1993 (SS1) \Various \MB3-80 \Serial \#G 1993.160, 15 July -13 August 1992, off St. Helens and off west coastof Tasmania. mvk 17.10.93 ISSN 1039 2041 Townsville to Darwin, 10 Januaryto 12 February 1993, 1993.31, mvk 2.6.93 @\Meeting of the BIOMASS Executive Hobart, Tasmania, Australia 9 September1988 \BIOMASS Report series 57 \ \ \ \SCOR \SCAR \Marine Resources \Oceanography \ \International \ \ \ \1988 \21p. \MB15-05 \Paper \#G1992.297 mvk 11.1.93 @\Concept plan for the optimization of underkeel clearances for bulk ironore and LNG carriers, North Western Australia. \ \ \ \ \Steedman Ltd \ \Oceanography \Ocean dynamics monitoring \Underkeel clearances \Western Australia \Australia \ \1987 \21p. \MD2-86 \Monograph \#G Proposal no. P178, to WA. Department of Resource Development. Marked"For discussion purposes only." Record reconstructed jk 23.4.92 @\ TITLE: Estuarine Research Federation Membership Directory \ SERIES.TITLE Fall, 1991 \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Environmental research \ KEYWORD.2 Marine science \ KEYWORD.3 Coastal zones \ REGION.1 United States \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1991 \ PAGINATION Various \ CLASSC'N ME1-12 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.34 @\Port Phillip Bay Environmental Study: project design \ \ \ \ \CSIRO INRE Project Office \ \Coastal zones \Environmental research \Environmental protection \Victoria \Australia \ \1992 Jan \170p \ME15-83 \Monograph \#G 1994.40 Report to Melbourne Water. Crossland et al. mvk 21.3.94 @\[Collection of papers on Indian Ocean Region, marked Attachments C- D20] \ \Mehmud.S \Alpers.W \Fast.O \UN. Meeting of Experts \ \Remote sensing \Space technology \Oceanography \Indian Ocean \India \Sri Lanka \1986 \n/a \MI1-74 \(papers) \Collection of papers by various authors, inc. above, at United NationsRegional Meeting of Experts on Space Technology Applications in the IndianOcean, Colombo 15-19 September 1986. Record reconstructed jk 23.4.92 @\Declaration and resolutions...on the programme of co-operation and theplan of action: Final document [of] 1st Conference on Economic Scientificand Technical Co-operation in Marine Affairs in the Indian Ocean in thecontext of the New Ocean Regime (1987: Colombo) \IOMAC-1-A/27 \ \ \ \IOMAC \ \Marine science \Marine resources \International relations \Indian Ocean \International \ \1987 \55p. \MI14-74 \Monograph \Final document of final phase of Ministerial -level meeting. @\ First Conference on Economic Scientific and Technical Co-operation inthe Indian Ocean in the field of Marine Affairs in the context of the newocean regime, Final Phase, Colombo, Sri Lanka, 20-28 January 1987 [IndianOcean Marine Affairs Co-operation Conference]: [Announcement] \ \ \ \ \IOMAC \ \Marine science \Marine resources \International relations \Indian Ocean \International \ \1987 \4p. \MI14-74 \(paper) \Photocopy of announcement @\First Conference on Economic Scientific and Technical Co-operation inthe Indian Ocean in the context of the New Ocean Regime: First ConferenceConsultative Meeting, Colombo, Sri Lanka, 15-20 July 1985, Vol. 1, Report.[20 July 1985] \IOMAC-1-A/22 Rev.3 \ \ \ \IOMAC \ \Marine science \Marine resources \International relations \Indian Ocean \International \ \1985 \47p. \MI14-74 \(Conference pub.) \Supported by U.N. Development Programme. 1st Conference held Jan. 1987 @\Tasman Sea Workshop \ \Bindoff.N \Church.J \ \CSIRO \ \Oceanography \Climatology \ \Oceania \Australia \ \1990 \31p \MP3-75 \#G 1992.267 Workshop held in CSIRO Marine Laboratories for the Australia/NewZealand/United Kingdom Tri-partite Climate Change Program, 12-14 November1990. mvk 3.1.93 @\ A manual of survey methods for living resources in coastal areas. Draftdocument. \ASEAN-Australia Economic Co-operation Program \ \ \ \ASEAN-Australia Co-operative Program on Marine Science \AIMS \Marine science \Survey methods \Marine resources \South East Asa \Malaysia \Philippines \1986 \ca 200p. \MR2-65 \Monograph #G Record reconstructed jk 23.4.92. Note: this initiative ledto the widespread use of the microBRIAN system in ASEAN countries. @\ TITLE: Maritime Australia 88: Marine Industries, Science, Technologyand Trading Opportunities \ SERIES.TITLE Occasional Papers in Maritime Affairs \ AUTHOR.1 Galloway.R \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 Australian Centre for Maritime Studies Incorporated \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Marine science \ KEYWORD.2 Oceanography \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1988 \ PAGINATION 154p \ CLASSC'N MR5-80 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G P.169 ISBN 0 9593580 7 2 Proceedings of a conference heldat Canberra 24-25 November 1988 in support of the government review of marinescience and technology. Record reconstructed jk 23.4.92 @\ TITLE: Oceans of Wealth : a report by the Review Committee on MarineIndustries, Science and Technology. \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 McKinnon.K \ AUTHOR.2 Weir.A \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 DITAC \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Technology transfer \ KEYWORD.2 Marine resources \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1989 \ PAGINATION 188p \ CLASSC'N MR5-80 \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.42 ISBN 0 644 096179 Published by AGPS. Review of MarineScience and Technology Grants, marine industry development. Committee ledby Professor K R McKinnon, University of Wollongong, appointed by the Hon.B O Jones, June 1988. @\Oceans Australia Conference Melbourne 10-11 May 1990 \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Marine resources \Technology transfer \ \Australia \ \ \1990 \ \MR5-80 \Conference papers \#C (DITAC) Held at World Congress Centre. G Harris (COSSA) gave addresson Remote sensing. 1992.216.1 Attendance list: 1992.216.2 Programme. mvk22.12.92 @\Marine Industries Development Program \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Marine resources \Marine technology \ \Oceania \Australia \ \1992 \14p \MR15-75 \Monograph \#G 1992.191 ISBN 0 644 14462 9 mk 19.10.92 \ @\Report of a Workshop: managing Australia's fisheries under threat of climatechange impacts, Hobart, 28-30 May 1991 \ \Parslow.J \Jernakoff.P \ \CSIRO \Australia. Dept. of the Arts etc. \Global change \Fisheries \Marine resources \Australia \ \ \1992 \69p \MR15-80 \Monograph \#G 1993.20 ISBN 0 644 14100 X Outcome of workshop to examine impact ofclimate change on Australian fisheries. Includes regional climate change;ecological reponses; biodiversity; case studies in prawns, western rocklobster, south-east trawl fishery. mvk 6.3.93 @\Australian tropical marine science and technology: current status andopportunities \ \Dartnall.A \ \ \AMSTAC \COSSA \Tropical marine science \Marine technology \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \260p. \MT3-80 \Monograph \#G P.79 Contains paper on remote sensing by K.McCracken & J.Kingwell. @\ TOGA CD-ROM \JPL Publication 90-43 \Halpern.D \Finch.C \Ashby.H \NASA \JPL \Data sets \Data products \TOGA \International \United States \ \1990 \439 \MW1-05 \Kit \#CD-ROM No. 6. Includes booklet, "TOGA CD-ROM DESCRIPTION", plusCD Disk and 4 5.25 floppy disks.. CD (labelled USA CIT JPL TOGA 0001) containsmeteorological and oceanographic data for 1985, 1986. 5.6.92 @\Summary Report, Twelth Session, Woods Hole 4-8 June 1991 \ \ \ \ \SCOR \SCOR \Oceanography \Global change \Climatology \International \ \ \1991 \ \MW3-05 \#G 1992.266 Priorities and issues in ocean studies under the Committeeon Climate Changes and the Ocean (of UNESCO, ICSU). mvk 3.1.93 @\Third air-sea interaction conference \ \Jones.I \Young.H \Coleman.R \AMOS \ \Oceanography \Climatology \ \Australia \ \ \1990 Feb \47p \MW3-80 \Monograph \#C (AMOS) 1990.127 ISSN 1031 9441 19.6.92 @\Multiple equilibria in a global ocean general circulation model \BMRC Research Report No. 35 \Power.S \Kleeman.Richard \ \Bureau of Meteorology \ \Oceanography \Climatology \ \Australia \International \ \1992 Nov \25p \MW3-80 \Monograph \#G 1993.100 mvk 21.7.93 @\An Australian Plan for participation in the World Ocean Circulation Experiment \ \Church.J \ \ \Australian Scientific Steering Committee for the World Ocean CirculationExperiment \ \WOCE \Oceanography \Global change \International \Australia \ \1990 Nov \53p \MW15-05 \Monograph \#G 1991.142 Unbound. Dated 26 .11.90. jk 8.7.92 @\21st Century challenge of the sea \ \ \ \ \JAMSTEC \ \Marine science \Marine technology \Oceanography \Japan \International \Oceania \1992 \ \MX2-63 \Video \#G 1994.35 S-VHS format, 22 minute video in English. From JAMSTEC visitto COSSA of 2/93. mvk 20.3.94 @\ Australia's capabilities in marine science and technology: an overview \ \ \ \ \ Commonwealth Government of Australia \ \ Marine science \ Marine technology \ Remote sensing \ Australia \ Southeast Asia \ \ 1989 January \ 32p \ MZ1-80 \ Monograph \ #G P.70 ISBN 0 642 14302 1, Contains section on remote sensing applicationsincluding airborne, OCS, SLAR etc. @\OCEAN : Ocean Color European Archive Network CD-Browser \ \ \ \ \ESA \Commission of European Communities. JRC. ISpra \Data sets \Data products \Marine science \International \Europe \ \1992 \N/A \MZ1-05 \CD-ROM set \#CD-ROM No. 17 1993.50 2 disk set, includes 23p booklet. Developed forESA/ESRIN by Intecs Sistemi SpA, Italy. CZCS browse products generated usingQuick Look software from CEC-Ispra, for Level 1 products. mvk 16.6.93 @\Satellite-derived Multichannel Sea Surface Temperature and PhytoplanktonPigment Concentration Data; a CD-ROM set containing monthly mean distributionsfor the global oceans. \JPL D-10351 \Tran. A \Smith.E \Hyon.J \JPL \NASA \Data sets \Data products \Marine science \International \United States \ \1993 Jan \N/A \MZ1-05 \CD-ROM set \#CD-ROM 1993.131.1 32p booklet (other authors Evans R, Brown, O, and FeldmanG) plus 5-disk set (1993.131.2, CD-ROM No. 33, Vol. 1 CZCS 1978-90; 1993.131.3,CD-ROM No. 34, Vol 2, CZCS 1981-83; 1993.131.4 CD-ROM No. 35, Vol 3, AVHRRSST 1984-86; 1993.131.5 CD-ROM No. 36 Vol. 4, AVHRR SST 1981-86; 1993.131.6CD-ROM No. 37 Vol 5, SST/CZCS 1981-86. Respectively USA_NASA_JPL_PODAAC_A001,USA_NASA_JPL_PODAAC_A002, USA_NASA_JPL_PODAAC_A003, USA_NASA_JPL_PODAAC_A004,USA_NASA_JPL_PODAAC_A005, Produced by Physical Oceanography DAAC of JPL/NASA.mvk 22.9.93 @\Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research - Proceedings \ SCOR Proceedings \ \ \ \SCOR \ISCU \Oceanography \Global change \ \International \ \ \HOLD 1991 \Various \MZ3-05 \Serial \#C (SCOR) 1991.141 (Vol. 26) . Summaries of status of JGOFS, WOCE, IGBP. jk 8.7.92; plus 1992.253 (Vol. 27) mvk 29.12.92 @\Oceanography \CSIRO Research for Australia \CSIRO \ \ \ \ \Oceanography \ \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \75p. \MZ3-80 \Monograph \v.14; #G, ISBN 0 643 03799 3, Chapter on oceanography from space @\ TITLE: Australian Marine Sciences Association and Australian PhysicalOceanography Joint Conference (1987: Townsville) Vol 1 ANSA Abstracts Vol2 APOC Abstracts \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 Marsh.H \ AUTHOR.2 Heron.M \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 AMSA \ CORP.AUTHR.2 APOC Conference \ KEYWORD.1 Marine Science \ KEYWORD.2 Oceanography \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1987 \ PAGINATION Vol 1 73p Vol 2 64p \ CLASSC'N MZ3-80 \ FORMAT Conf pub \ OTHER.DATA Record reconstructed jk 23.4.92 @\ TITLE: Australian Marine Research in Progress \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 CSIRO \ CORP.AUTHR.2 AIMS \ KEYWORD.1 Marine science \ KEYWORD.2 Scientific research \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE HOLD 1985 \ PAGINATION Varies \ CLASSC'N MZ3-80 \ FORMAT Serial \ OTHER.DATA #G Produced from database AMRIP on CSIRONET. Record reconstructedjk 23.4.92 @\ Report on marine sciences and technologies grants [and Queen's Fellowships]for 19--; grants approved and Fellowships awarded \ \ \ \ \Marine Research Allocations Advisory Committee \ \Research grants \Marine science \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1985, 1986, 1987 \35p. \MZ4-80 \Serial \ @\Marine Science and Fisheries Research Review and consultation process:CSIRO Submission \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Government policy \Oceanography \Marine biology \ \Australia \ \ \1993 Sept \ \MZ7-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.193 For attachments see 1994.172. Comprises CSIRO Submission defendingautonomy of CSIRO Divisions of Fisheries, Oceanography in face of SenatorSchacht's proposal to amalgamate them with AIMS. See 1992.42, 1992.216 formore background. mvk 21.12.94 @\Marine Science and Fisheries Research Review and consultation process:CSIRO Submission Attachments \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Government policy \Oceanography \Marine biology \ \Australia \ \ \1993 Sept \ \MZ7-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.172 Comprises bound copy of 18 technical, programmatic and financeattachments to the CSIRO Submission defending autonomy of CSIRO Divisionsof Fisheries, Oceanography in face of Senator Schacht's proposal to amalgamatethem with AIMS. See 1992.42, 1992.216 for more background. mvk 21.11.94 @\Workshop on Future Directions in Marine Science(1987, 26 June:Canberra) \ \ \ \ \AMSTAC \ \Marine science \Future planning \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \varies \MZ15-80 \Conf. pub. \Publication + Supplement: Late Papers. @\Australian Institute of Marine Science Projected Research Activities \ \ \ \ \AIMS \ \Marine science \Scientific research \Future planning \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1986-1987 \varies \MZ15-80 \Serial \Annual. ISSN 0814 1452 @\Australian Institute of Marine Science Projected Research and DevelopmentActivities \ \ \ \ \AIMS \ \Marine science \Scientific research \Future planning \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1991-1996 \varies \MZ15-80 \Serial \#G ISSN 103 1650 1991.138 21.6.92 WT03-B26-22IA029-000311-B017-18http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcato1.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163049 text/html 40367HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:29:07 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:10 GMTContent-length: 40192 Catalogue Library catalogue O: ORGANISATIONS (about, annual reports, activities, personnel,products & services, etc) [SEE ALSO ( I) Industry & (subject) industry] OA Space & Aerospace (Astronomy, Astronautical/Aeronautical) Firms &Agencies: (NASA, COSSA, etc., public or private). Includes Communications firms & agencies involved in space [SEE ALSO Space, Astronautics (A) Flight, Aeronautics (F)] OB Bureaucratic (Public/Civil Sector) Depts, Agencies & Bodies (notAeronautical or Astronautical in nature) (CSIRO, DITAC, their Advisory Committees etc)OC Corporate (Industry, Companies, Business, etc) Sector, other than Space/Aeronautical; Communications bodies usually in (OA) Space [see also (AI), (CI), (FI), & (I)] OG Government & Opposition (Political Sector) [see also Politics (SP)for theory] OH Hobby/Amateur (Groups, Associations, Clubs, etc OM Museum OP Professional & Post Tertiary Institutes, Associations, Academic,etc Bodies OS Secondary Educational [see also Education (SE)] OT Tertiary Educational [see also Education (SE)] OZ General & Collective, Organizations in general. [SEE ALSO (Z) fordirectories etc.] @\ Spaceguard, Orbital Debris Analysts \ \ \ \ \Spaceguard \ \Debris \Space industry \ \Space \ \ \1989 \Varies \OB1-01 \Folder of papers \#O South Australian Company involved in hazards assessment. jk 29.4.92 @\ Canada Centre for Remote Sensing \ \ \ \ \Canada.Energy Mines and Resources \ \Remote sensing \CCRS \ \Canada \ \ \1985 \27p. \OA1-11 \Monograph \ #O 2 copies Reference to MEIS, Multispectral Electro-optical Imaging Scanner.jk 27 4 92 @\Canadian Space Agency \ \ \ \ \Canadian Space Agency \ \Space programs \Space missions \ \Canada \ \ \1994 \ \OA1-11 \Folder \#O 1994.112 Includes bilingual English-French booklet, "Canadian SpaceAgency; 1994-95 Estimates, Part III Expenditure Plan", ISBN 0 660 590212 , 1994.112.1 ; set of OHPs, "The Canadian Space Program", 1994.112.2; leaflet, "backgrounder", 1994.112.3; colour brochure "SpaceScience" 1994.112.4 ( MOPPITT, CSAR, Alouette, COBRA, Viking, Freja,CANOPUS, OEDIPUS); colour brochure "Radarsat" 1994.112.5 ; colourbrochure "The Canadian Space Station Program", 1994.112.6 . FromDirector of External relations Directorate Michel Giroux. mvk 23.7.94 @\SPAR Aerospace Limited \ \ \ \ \SPAR \ \Space industry \Remote sensing \Satellites \Canada \ \ \1991 ? \ \OA1-11 \Monograph \#O 1992.74 2.6.92 @\SPAR Aerospace Limited \ \ \ \ \SPAR Aerospace Ltd, Canada \ \Space industry \Remote sensing \Satellites \Canada \ \ \1991 ? \ \OA1-11 \Monograph \#O 1992.271 Sets of coloured OHPs mvk 3.1.93 @\SPAR Aerospace Limited Annual Report 19__ \ \ \ \ \SPAR Aerospace Ltd, Canada \ \Space industry \Remote sensing \Satellites \Canada \ \ \HOLD 1990 \ \OA1-11 \Serial \#O 1992.272 mvk 3.1.93 @\Annual report, 31 August, Aerospace Industries Association of Canada \ \ \ \ \AIAC \ \Space industry \AIAC \Financial reports \Canada \ \ \HOLD 1983 \varies \OA1-11 \Serial \ @\ Annual Statistics and Highlights Report, National Space Science DataCenter \ \ Green.J \ \ \ NASA \ NSSDC \ Data systems \ Data management \ Data sets \ United States \ \ \ HOLD 1990 \ \ OA1-12 \ Monograph \ #O 1990 report (dated March 1991) is 1991.46 and labelled NSSDC/WDC-A-R&S91-14. Contains overview of CEOS PIDS, glossary, and data & medium standards.See also 1990.81 (ZA1-12), catalogue of products; 1995.24, Catalog interoperabilityWorkshop, and NSSDC News under Periodicals. jk 11/7/9, reconstructed 27.4.92 @\ The National Space Science Data Centre and World Data Center-A for Rocketsand Satellites \ \ \ \ \NASA \NSSDC \Data systems \Data management \Data collection systems \United States \ \ \1989 \43p. \OA1-12 \Monograph \#O @\ Eagle, engineering the future \ \ \ \ \Eagle Engineering \ \Space industry \ \ \United States \ \ \1985 \n/a \OA1-12 \Folder \Company information @\ TRW company capabilities \ \ \ \ \TRW \ \High technology industry \TRW \ \United States \ \ \1982 \n/a \OA1-12 \Monograph \ @\National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service \Fiscal Year Report \Brown.Ronald \Baker.D \Winokur.Robert \NESDIS \NOAA \Meteorology \Environment \Remote sensing \United States \ \ \HOLD 1995, Apri \84p \OA1-12 \Serial \#O 1995.131 Copy 2 at 1996.46 mvk 4.11.95, 4.4.96 @\Europe in space. An overview on ESA activities \ \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space programs \Space technology \ESA \Europe \France \ \1993 \35p. OA1-30 \monograph \#O 1995.30 mvk 23.4.95 @\ Europe into space [report of activities, May 1983] \ \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space programs \Space science \Environmental research \Europe \ \ \1983 \47p. \OA1-30 \Monograph \#O . Former dbase no. 99. @\ESA annual report \ \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space programs \Space science \ESA \Europe \ \ \HOLD 1982; 1984; 1985; 1987; 1989; 1990; 1993 \various \OA1-30 \Serial \#O 1991.61 (1990 Report) ; 1989 is 1990.9 ISSN 0258-025X jk 28.4.92. 1994.197(1993) mvk 21.12.94 @\ European Space Agency a look into the future, background informationon a long term programme \ESA BR-26 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space programs \Space science \ESA \Europe \ \ \1984 \n/a \OA1-30 \Folder \Folder of sheets about activities. Former dbase no. 123 @\ European Space Agency ESA \ ESA f-05 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space programs \ESA \ \Europe \ \ \1987 \n/a \OA1-30 \Folder \Folder of information on ESA activities @\ ESCO, European Satellite Consulting Organization \ \ \ \ \ESCO \ \Space agencies \ESCO \ \Europe \ \ \n.d. \6p. \OA1-30 \Folder \Information on ESCO & its constitutent bodies (Teleconsult, Detecon,Satel Conseil, Telespazio). Former dbase no. 331. @\Institute for Remote Sensing Applications \ \ \ \ \Commission of European Communities.JRC.Ispra \ \Space research facilities \Global change \Remote sensing applications \Europe \International \Italy \1990 \ \OA1-30 \Folder \#O 1992.114 Includes brochures on Ocean Colour European Archive Networkand other aspects of remote sensing at the JRC 18.6.92 @\Institute for Remote Sensing Applications \Annual report \ \ \ \Commission of European Communities.JRC.Ispra \ \Space research facilities \Global change \Remote sensing applications \Europe \International \Italy \HOLD 1990 \ \OA1-30 \Folder \#O 1990 report pub. 1992, #O 1992.115 , CD-NA 14260 EN C 18.6.92 @\Matra Marconi Space. "First international space company offeringtotal space systems and subsystems capability" \ \ \ \ \ \Marconi Space Systems \Space technology \Space industry \ \Europe \France \Britain \1993 (?) \ \OA1-30 \Monograph/set of overheads \#O 1994.97 (Copy 1), 1994.98 (Copy 2) mvk 10.7.94 @\British Aerospace [folder containing] Down to earth space & communications[and] British Aerospace Dynamics Group [booklets] \ \ \ \ \British Aerospace \ \Space industry \Space technology \Communications technology \Great Britain \ \ \n.d. \various \OA1-32 \Monogaphs in folder \1983? @\UK Space Activities \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Space industry \Space Technology \ \Great Britain \ \ \HOLD 1990-91; 1992-93; 1994-95 \Various \OA1-32 \Serial \ #O 1990-91 report was First Annual Report of BNSC , 1992.150. Overviewof expenditure & programs. DTI/PUB/373/20K 7.7.92. 1992-93 report is1993.125; 1994-95 is 1995.146, mvk 31.8.93,, 12.12.95 @\ BAE presentation to CSIRO Space Fact Finding Mission \ \ \ \ \British Aerospace \ \Space industry \British Aerospace \ \Great Britain \ \ \n.d. \n/a \OA1-32 \Monograph \#O CSIRO mission probably in 1984, prior to establishment of COSSA. Formerdbase no. 341. @\ British National Space Centre (BNSC) \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Space agencies \Space programs \ \Great Britain \ \ \Hold 1986, 1990 \Various \OA1-32 \Paper, collection of brochures \ #O 1990 publication is 1991.13: contains number of brochures, programoverview, "Satellites in schools" excellent informative booklet.jk 10/5/91 . 1986 pub. is former dbase no. 532. jk 27.4.92 @\ United Kingdom National Remote Sensing Centre \ \ \ \ \NRSC \ \Remote sensing \Scientific research \ \Great Britain \ \ \n.d. \n/a \OA1-32 \Folder \#O P.Folder of photographs, papers & booklets, dated around 1984. Reclassifiedfrom OA3-32 jk 28.4.92 @\ United Kingdom National Remote Sensing Centre. \ \ \ \ \NRSC \ \Space research facilities \Remote sensing \NRSC \Great Britain \ \ \1984 Oct \29p \OA1-32 \Monograph \#O Former dbase no. 708. Reclassified from OA3-32 jk 28.4.92 @\ National Remote Sensing Centre, an introduction, NRSC Introductory guide,Version 1, June 1986 \ \ \ \ \NRSC \ \Space research facilities \Remote sensing \NRSC \Great Britain \ \ \1986 \36p. \OA1-32 \Monograph \#O Former dbase no. 707. jk 27.4.92 @\Hollandse Signaalapparaten b.v. general company information charts \ \ \ \ \Signaal \ \Communications industry \Space industry \Signaal \Netherlands \ \ \n.d. \ca. 12p. \OA1-34 \Monograph \1984? Former dbase no. 257. jk 27.4.92 @\CNES Annual Report \ \ \ \ \CNES \ \Space science \Space programs \Industrial research & technology \France \ \ \HOLD 1984; 1985; 1986; 1987; 1988; 1989; 1990; 1991; 1993; 1994 \varies \OA1-34 \Serial \ #O, P.73 (1987) , P.170 (1988), 1991.124 (1989), 1992.27 (1990) , 1993.16(1991, mvk 22.2.93) ; 1994.215 (1993), 1995.145 (1994), includes for firsttime analysis of the "socioeconomic impact of CNES/CSG in Guiana",mvk 29.12.94, 12.12.95 @\ Satel Conseil \ \ \ \ \Satel Conseil \ \Space programs \Space technology \ \France \ \ \1984 \16p. \OA1-34 \Monograph \Contains insert: Some Satel Conseil studies. Former dbase no. 328. jk 27.4.92 @\ Intespace Company [France] \ \ \ \ \Intespace \ \Space industry \Intespace \ \France \ \ \n.d. \n/a \OA1-34 \Folder \Looseleaf folder. Information 1986, former dbase no. 747. #O P.188 jk 27.4.92 @\ General Information, International Institute for Aerospace Survey andEarth Sciences \ \ \ \ \ITC \ \Aerospace \Aerial photography \Earth resources \International \Holland \ \1988 \30p \OA1-34 \Brochure \#O General Information Brochure, 3 copies @\ Telespazio S.p.A. per le communicaziani spaziali \ \ \ \ \Telespazio \ \Telecommunications \Communications satellites \ \Italy \ \ \n.d. \19p. \OA1-35 \Monograph \1987? Former dbase no. 293 @\ Bereich Wissenschaftlich-Technische Betriebseinrichtungen, Stand 1983[ in German] \Wissenschaftlich-Technischer Bericht \ \ \ \DFVLR \ \Space science \DFVLR \ \West Germany \ \ \1983 \119p. \OA1-38 \Monograph? \Report on activities, status 1983. Former dbase no. 234. @\DFVLR guide [German Aerospace Research Establishment] Feb. 1985 \ \ \ \ \DFVLR \ \Guidebooks \Space technology \DVLR \West Germany \ \ \1985 \52p. \OA1-38 \Monograph \#O P.210 Reclassified from OA3-38 jk 28.4.92 @\ DFVLR, Deutsche Forscgung- und Versuchsanstalt fur Luft- und Raumfahrt[German Space Corporation information booklet, in English and German] \ \ \ \ \DFVLR \ \DFVLR \Space technology \Space science \West Germany \ \ \1985 \n/a \OA1-38 \Monograph \#O P.211 Reclassified from OA3-38 jk 28.4.92 @\ Space Systems Group, MBB-ERNO \ \ \ \ \MBB \ \Space industry \Space technology \ \West Germany \ \ \n.d. \n/a \OA1-38 \Monograph \Information booklet, before 1986 & after 1983. Former dbase no. 307. @\ Swedish Board for Space Activities, SBSA- a presentation, September 1985 \ \ \ \ \SBSA \ \Space agencies \Space programs \ \Sweden \ \ \1985 \10p. \OA1-39 \Monograph \#O Former dbase no. 548. jk 27.4.92 @\ Ericsson design and manufacture of electronic products at BroadmeadowsVictoria \ \ \ \ \Ericsson \ \Space industry \Communications industry \ \Australia \Sweden \ \1984 \n/a \OA1-39 \Monograph \#O Former dbase no. 911 @\ Annual report \ \ \ \ \Government of India \Department of Space \Space science \Space technology \India. Dept. of Space \India \ \ \HOLD 1983-84; 1985-86; 1987-88; 1988-89; 1990-91; 1991-92 \varies \OA1-53 \Serial \#O 1985-86 report is former dbase no. 834; 1987-88 is P.180; 1988-89 isP.181; 1990-91 Report is 1992.31; 1991-92 report is 1992.137, includes referncesto IRS-1, INSAT 1 & 2. @\Sojuzkarta \ \ \ \Foreign Economic Association \ \Remote sensing \Mapping \ \Russia \ \ \1991 (?) \Various \OA1-56 \Brochure \#O 1991.135 Promotional material, capability statements. Left with COSSAduring 1991 visit. 18.6.92 @\HKAY \ \ \ \ \National Space Agency of Ukraine \ \Space programs \Space industry \ \Ukraine \Euuropean USSR \ \1994 \ \OA1-56 \Folder \#O 1995.154 Collection of information sheets including research aircraft,guidance systems, etc. mvk 30.12.95 @\The Institute of Space and Astronautical Science [Japan] \ \ \ \ \Japan. MOMBUSHO \ISAS \Space science \ \ \Japan \ \ \HOLD 1983, 1987 \Various \OA1-63 \Monograph \Information booklet 1983 ed. \Serial \#O 1983 is P.214; 1987 is P.213. Both reclassified from OA3-63 jk 28.4.92. @\NASDA '... [biennial report] \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \NASDA \Space programs \Space science \Japan \ \ \HOLD 1983-84, 1985-86, 1987; 1991; 1994 \Various \OA1-63 \Monograph \#O 1983-84 is P.219; 1985-86 is P.220 (former dbase no. 126); 1987 is P.221.1983-84 for 15th anniversary. Reclassified from OA3-63 jk 28.4.92. 1991issue (Dec. ) is 1992.301 . 1994 (Feb) report 1994.167, with introductionby Masato Yamano mvk 24.1.93, 20.11.94 @\Space activities, Mitsubishi Electric Corporation \ \ \ \ \Mitsubishi \ \Space industry \Space technology \Satellites \Japan \ \ \n.d. \23p. \OA1-63 \Monograph \1985? Former dbase no. 810. #O P.182 (Copy 1) P.183 (Copy 2) jk 27.4.92 @\Mitsubishi Electric Corporation \ \ \ \ \Mitsubishi \ \Space industry \Space technology \Satellites \Japan \ \ \n.d. \45p. \OA1-63 \Monograph \1987? #O P.184 jk 27.4.92 @\Mitsubishi - the Kamakura Works \ \ \ \ \Mitsubishi \ \Space industry \Space technology \Satellites \Japan \ \ \n.d. \19p \OA1-63 \Monograph \1987? #O P.185 jk 27.4.92 @\Mitsubishi - thermal imager IR-5120A \ \ \ \ \Mitsubishi \ \Space industry \Space technology \Remote sensing instruments \Japan \ \ \1988 \ \OA1-63 \Brochure \1987? #O P.186 (Copy 1) P.187 (Copy 2) jk 27.4.92 @\Rocket System Corporation - taking the lead in a New Age of space transportation \ \ \ \ \Rocket System Corporation \ \Space industry \Launch vehicles \H-2 \Japan \ \ \1990 (?) \Various \OA1-63 \Monograph \#O 1992.60 Brochure of H-2 (H-II) and TR-1A capabilities. Japanese launchcompany, facilities in Tanegashima, HQ in Tokyo. jk 15.5.92. Refer fileND2/030. @\Australian Space Board Annual Report \ \ \ \ \ASO \Australian Space Board \Space industry \Australian Space Board \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1986-87 ; 1988-89; 1989-1990; 1990-91; 1991-92 \Various \OA1-80 \Serial \#O ISSN 1031 1599 . Contains highlights, budget, project summaries. 19.6.92.1988-89 edition published by AGPS, 1990, ISBN 0 644 12373 7 . 1990-91 report(1995.17, pub. 1993) contains Table of 25 project proposals (many from COSSA),most of which were not supported. 1991-92 report was last one, publishedafter August 1993 . Australian Space Council replaced Board under administrativearrangements 1993, then under Australian Space Council Act 1994 from Feb.1994, effective July 1994. Last report includes reports on ISY Land CoverChange, TERSS. mvk 27.7.93, 3.9.94, 16.2.95 @\Landsat 84 Technical exhibition and static displays [Landsat 84 Conference,21-24 May 1984, Surfers Paradise] \ \ \ \ \Landsat 4 Conference \ \Space industry \Organizations \ \Australia \ \ \1984 \25p. \OA1-80 \(Conference pub.) \ #C Lists history of, and information about, exhibitors at the TechnicalExhibition, many Australian. @\ Auspace [company profile] \ \ \ \ \AUSPACE \ \Space industry \ \ \Australia \ \ \n.d. \10p. \OA1-80 \Monograph \Ca 1986. #O P.189 jk 27.4.92 @\ AUSSAT Australia's National Satellite System General Information \ \ \ \ \AUSSAT Ltd \Communication satellites \ Space industry \ \ \Australia \ \ \1984 (?) \ 36p +10 \OA1-80 \Monograph \ #O, outline and prospective. P.235 jk 28.4.92 @\British Aerospace Australia Annual Report \ \ \ \ \Brtish Aerospace Australia \ \Aerospace \Aircraft \Space industry \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1993 \ \OA1-80 \Serial \#O 1995.18 mvk 16.2.95 @\Western Australian Satellite Technology and Applications Consortium \Annual Report \ \ \ \WASTAC \ \Remote Sensing \Satellites \ \Australia \Western Australia \ \HOLD 1990,1992, 1993, 1994 \ \OA1-86 \Serial \#O 1993.118 (1990); 1993.116 (Copy 1) 1993.117 (Copy 2) , 1992 report.Features ISY NOAA 1 km Land Data Project. 1994.141 (1993); 1995.88 (1994)mvk 30.8.93, 30.10.94, 13.8.95 @\David Florida Laboratory and satellite testing in Canada \ \Mamen.R \ \ \David Florida Lab. \Canada. CRC \Space research facilities \Testing \David Florida lab \Canada \ \ \n.d. \7p. \OA2-11 \Reprint \#O P.194 Former dbase no. 692 jk 27.4.92 @\ EOSAT Earth Observation Satellite Company, expanding man's knowledgeof the earth's resources \ \ \ \ \EOSAT \ \Remote sensing satellites \EOSAT \LANDSAT \United States \ \ \n.d. \n/a \OA2-12 \Monograph \ #O P.199 Mentions Daedalus 1260 and Enhanced Thematic Mapper. Former dbaseno. 888 . jk 27.4.92 @\ Groupment pour le Developpement de la Teledetection Aerospatiale, training(GDTA) \ \ \ \ \GDTA \ \Remote sensing \Training \GDTA \France \ \ \n.d. \n/a \OA2-34 \Folder \#O P.200 Former dbase no. 489. GDTA is a joint venture of CNES and theNational Institute of Geography. jk 28.4.92 @\ Groupment pour le Developpement de la Teledetection Aerospatiale, training(GDTA) Formation Training/Formacion \ \ \ \ \GDTA \ \Remote sensing \Training \GDTA \France \ \ \n.d. \n/a \OA2-34 \Folder \#O 1992.298 GDTA is a joint venture of CNES and the National Instituteof Geography. mvk 24.1.93 @\ SEP les nouveaux espaces [in French, booklet about the firm] \ \ \ \ \SEP \ \Space industry \ \ \France \ \ \1985 \16p. \OA2-34 \Monograph \#O P.201 Former dbase no. 634 Rocket, image processing company. jk 28.4.92 @\Space achievements \ \ \ \ \Crouzet \ \Space technology \Space industry \ \France \ \ \n.d. \18p. \OA2-34 \Monograph \ #O P.202 "Extract from Prospace catalog 3rd ed." Lists spceprogram participation up to 1987. jk 28.4.92 @\ Aerospatiale space and ballistic systems \ \ \ \ \Aerospatiale \ \Space industry \ \ \France \ \ \1985 \20p. \OA2-34 \Monograph \#O P.203 Brochure jk 28.4.92 @\ The Israel Space Agency \ \ Weizman.E \ Ne'eman.Y \ \ ISA \ \ Space science \ Space technology \Ofeq \ Israel \ Middle East \ \ 1989 (?) \ 48p \ OA2-46 \ Monograph \ #O P.95 Describes Ofeq, Israeli satellite launched 19.9.88 @\ The Israel Space Agency 1993 \ \ Ne'eman.Y \ \ \ ISA \ \ Space science \ Space technology \Ofeq \ Israel \ Middle East \ \ 1993 \ 48p \ OA2-46 \ Monograph \ #O 1993.55 Describes ISA programs & projects, including Ofeq, Israelisatellite launched 19.9.88, and Ofeq 2, launched 3.4.90. Preface by ProfessorShimon Shetreet, Minister of Science & Technology. mvk 20.6.93 @\ ROMTEL company profile [with] Australia Telescope antennas: Structuralmechanical and servo mechanism features [by] D. Cooper, N.Guoth and RobinEvans \ \Cooper.D \Guoth.N \Evans.R \Macdonald Wagner \ROMTEL \Space industry \Antennas \Australia Telescope \Australia \ \ \1985? \5+8p. \OA2-80 \(paper) \#O Company profile + paper on antenna it produced for the ATNF. Companyalso associated with other telescope construction - Siding Springs, Orroral,Parkes. Summary of Division of Radiophysics earth station activities. Copy1 is P.206, Copy 2 207. jk 28.4.92 @\ FAO Remote Sensing Centre role and activities \RSC Series 12 \ \ \ \FAO \ \Remote sensing \International cooperation \ \International \ \ \1983 \18p. \OA3-05 \Monograph \#O P.208 jk 28.4.92 @\SPAS Annual Report \ \ \ \ \CCRS \Canada. Energy Mines and Resources \Remote sensing information processing \Remote sensing applications \ \Canada \ \ \HOLD 1992, 1993, 1994 \ \OA3-11 \Reports \#O 1993.60, 1993.61 (Copy 2) [1992]; 1994.205 [1993] 1995.74 [1994] ScenePhysics and Analysis Section (SPAS) conducts research and develops new methodologiesand algorithms, based on a fundamental understanding of geophysical andbiophysical interactions, in order to maximise the accuracy and usefulnessof quantitative information derived from satellite and aircraft imageryacquired over natural scenes. Includes staff publication lists and biographies(Teillet, Landry, Guindon et al) Teillet visited COSSA, 1993, 1994. BilingualEnglish/French . mvk 22.6.93, 11.6.95 @\ Annual report, Stichting Ruimteonderzoek Nederland, Space Research OrganizationNetherlands (SRON) \ \ \ \ \SRON \ \Space science \Space technology \Space Programs \Netherlands \ \ \HOLD 1984, 1985, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994 \varies \OA3-34 \Serial \ #O . See also ZA1-34, 1990.45, and COSSA files GS40/008 (Netherlands)and GS40/001 (NIVR). 1986 is P.198; 1987 P.197; 1988 Copy 1 P.195, Copy2 P.196; 1989 is 1990.126, 1990 is 1991.123 . jk 27.4.92. 1991 Copy 1 is1992.200 ; Copy 2 is 1992.201. 1992 copy is 1994.12 , 132p. with index.1993, 122p with bibliography and index, is 1994.196 (Copy 1), 1994.187,(Copy 2) . 1994 report is 127p, including AXAF, Sciamachy, GOME, and otherspace experiments involving Dutch scientists, 1995.141 (copy 1), 1995.142(Copy 2). mvk 2.12.92, 20.2.94, 12.12.95 @\Space Research in Norway 1984 \ \ \ \ \NTNF \ \Space science \Space technology \ \Norway \ \ \1984 \55p. \OA3-39 \Serial \#O P.224 After 1985 SEE [same title (date)] by Norwegian Space Centre.jk 28.4.92 @\ From Earth to space and back \NSC Report \ Holtet.A \ Torbo.P \ \ Norwegian Space Centre \ \ Space science \Space coordination \ \ Scandinavia \Norway \ \ 1990 March \ 48p \ OA3-39 \ Monograph \ #O, 1990.10, NSC-Report (90)2 @\ RESTEC: Remote Sensing Technology Center of Japan [in Japanese] \ \ \ \ \RESTEC \ \Remote sensing \ \ \Japan \ \ \1988 (?) \79p. \OA3-63 \Monograph \#O P.223 ISSN 0289 9086 In Japanese . Has photographs and article on CSIRO/NASDAMOU on MOS-1, July 1987. jk 28.4.92 @\ RESTEC: Remote Sensing Technology Centre of Japan [in Japanese] \ \ \ \ \RESTEC \ \Remote sensing \ \ \Japan \ \ \1986 \19p \OA3-63 \Monograph \#O P.215 In Japanese jk 28.4.92 @\ RESTEC: Remote Sensing Technology Center of Japan \ \ \ \ \RESTEC \ \Remote sensing \RESTEC \ \Japan \ \ \HOLD 1982 (?), 1986, 1988 \Various \OA3-63 \Monograph \#O In English. Includes clear diagrams and coloured illustrations. Givessimple explanation of principles of remote sensing, its applications andindividual satellites. 1982 (?) is P.216; 1986 is P.217; 1988 is P.153.jk 28.4.92 @\ TRW annual report \ \ \ \ \TRW \ \Financial reports \TRW \High technology industry \United States \ \ \HOLD 1983 \varies \OA4-12 \Serial \#O P.226 Former dbase no. 172 jk 28.4.92 @\Performance budget of Department of Space Government of India \ \ \ \ \India. Dept. of Space \ \Space programs \Future planning \Financial reports \India \ \ \HOLD 1988-89; \varies \OA4-53 \Serial \Includes the performance achieved during past yer, as well as future planning.#O P.227 jk 28.4.92 @\ AUSSAT Annual Report \ \ \ \ \AUSSAT Ltd \Communication satellites \ Space industry \Financial reports \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1984, 1984-85, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991 \varies \OA4-80 \Serial \ #O, 1984 is P.228, 1984-85, 1986 Copy 1 is P.229, Copy 2 P.230, 1987 isP.231, 1988 Copy 1 is P.232, Copy 2 P.233, 1989 Copy 1 is P.234, Copy 2is P.35, 1990 Copy 1 is 1990.41, Copy 2 is 1990.42 ; 1991 is 1992.25, subtitled"AUSSAT 10 years" . Note that AUSSAT was sold in late 1991 toOPTUS Communications jk 28.4.92 @\INMARSAT Annual Review \ \ \ \ \INMARSAT \ \ \ \ \International \ \ \HOLD 1989 \Various \OA5-05 \Series \#O P.47 In English, Spanish, French & Russian. mvk 9.3.93 @\ Spinoff \ \Haggety.J \ \ \NASA \ \Space science \Space technology \ \United States \ \ \HOLD 1983, 1986, 1987, 1988 \varies \OA5-12 \Serial \Annual. NASA Technology Utilization Division #O A report on aims and spinofftechnology resulting from secondary application of technology originallydeveloped to meet main goals. 1983 is P.236 ($8.13 , HO Lib MD911 AS:HQ);1988 is P.191 jk 27.4.92 @\ Hughes Aircraft Company 1984, organization, Group responsibilities... \ \ \ \ \Hughes Aircraft Co \ \Space industry \Hughes Aircraft Co \ \United States \ \ \1984 \54p. \OA5-12 \Monograph \ #O P.240 jk 28.4.92 @\Rockwell International - where science gets down to business \ \ \ \ \Rockwell International \ \Space industry \Aircraft technology \Defence equipment \United States \Australia \ \ 1993 (?) \16p \OA5-12 \Brochure \#O 1994.04 Overview of Rockwell including Australian subsidsiary. See also1994.05. mvk 1.2.94 @\Rockwell International Annual Report \ \ \ \ \Rockwell International \ \Space industry \Aircraft technology \Defence equipment \United States \Australia \ \ HOLD 1992 \various \OA5-12 \Brochure \#O 1994.22 mvk 22.2.94 @\At the leading edge: Matra Marconi Space \ \ \ \ \Marconi Space Systems \ \Space technology \Space industry \Defence technology \Europe \France \Britain \1993 (?) \12p \OA5-30 \Folder \#O 1994.95 (Copy 1) 1994.96 (Copy 2) Includes SPOT, ERS-1, Meteosat, SOHO.mvk 10.7.94 @\Putting space to work \ \ \ \ \United Kingdom Industrial Space Committee \ \Space programs \Government policy \Space industry \Great Britain \Europe \ \1991 \ \OA5-32 \Brochure \#O 1994.151 Includes Briefing Paper by Society of British Aerospace Companies,giving recommendations on British space policy. mvk 15.11.94 @\ Norway Exports, Space Technology and Services \ \ \ \ \The Export Council of Norway \Norwegian Space Centre \Space technology \Earth Observation \Telecommunications \Norway \North Sea \Europe \1988 \24p. \OA5-39 \Brochure \ # O P.239 jk 28.4.92 @\Rockwell Systems Australia \ \ \ \ \Rockwell International \Rockwell Systems Australia \Space industry \Aircraft technology \Defence equipment \United States \Australia \ \ 1993 (?) \ \OA5-80 \Folder \#O 1994.05 Overview of Rockwell Systems Australia including Combat Systems,Airborne and Communications Systems, work for Australian armed services.Collins is a part of Rockwell. See also 1994.04 mvk 1.2.94 @\ This is NASA \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \NASA \Space programs \Space missions manned \United States \Space \ \n.d. \34p. \OA12-12 \Monograph \1979? #O P.243 @\ 85-85 [report on Hughes Space and Communications Group, 1985] \ \ \ \ \Hughes Aircraft Co \ \Satellites \Space industry \Communications industry \United States \Space \ \1985 \35p. \OA12-12 \Monograph \#O P.243 jk 28.4.92 \Bibliography of the Nasa histroy series. A special bibliography. \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \NASA \Space programs \ \United States \Space programs \ \United States \Space \ \1995 \19 p. \OA12.12 \monograph \#O.1996.71 mvk 11.7.96 @\ COSSA: years of progress : presentation [folder of overheads etc.] \ \Thorburn.L \ \ \COSSA \ \COSSA \Space science \Remote sensing \Australia \ \ \n.d. \n/a \OA12-80 \Folder \Collection of overheads etc. for a presentation. Not present in shelvesjk 28.4.92 @\Coordination for the next decade \CEOS Yearbook 1995 \ \ \ \ESA \CEOS/Committee on Earth Observation Satellites \Planning \International cooperation \Remote sensing \International \ \ \1995 \133p \OA15-05 \Monograph \#O 1995.125 ISBN 0 9526152 07 Prepared by Smith System Engineering forESA, on behalf of CEOS. See also 1995.124.17a, 1992.196 CEOS 1992 Yearbookmvk 4.11.95 @\OSSA Strategic Plan 19.. \OSSA Strategic Plan \Fisk.L \ \ \NASA OSSA \ \Space science \Space missions \Future planning \United States \International \ \HOLD 1989, 1990 \ \OA15-12 \Serial \#O P.110, 1990.66 @\Strategic Plan for 19..-.... National Aeronautics and Space AdministrationOffice of Space Science. \OSS Strategic Plan \ \ \ \NASA \OSS \Space science \Space missions \Future planning \United States \International \ \HOLD 1995-2000 \ \OA15-12 \Serial \#O 1994.206, pub. September 1994 with preface by Wes Huntress. mvk 24.12.94 @\ Report of the Advisory Committee on the Future of the US Space Program \ \ Augustine.N \ Wilkening.L \ Aldridge.E \ Advisory Committee on the Future of the US Space Program (1990-91) \ \ Management \ Space Programs \ Planning \ United States \ \ \ 1990 Dec. \ 59p \ OA15-12 \ Monograph \ #O 1991.3 Report of Committee established late 1990 by Vice-PresidentQuayle. Promotes priority for Space and Earth Science: critical of NASAmanagement of research jk 28.4.92 @\NASA Strategic Plan \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Planning \Management \Space Programs \United States \ \ \HOLD 1994 \Various \OA15-12 \Series \#O 1994.144 Introduction by Administrator Daniel Goldin mvk 1.11.94 @\ AUSSAT gets government go-ahead for new satellites \ \Evans.G \ \ \AUSSAT Ltd \Communication satellites \ Planning \Government policy \ \Australia \ \ \1988 Jun \ 9p \OA15-80 \Monograph \ #O, Explains decision on AUSSAT B, Long March Launch. COCOM concerns .P.245 jk 28.4.92 @\ Department of Communications \ \ \ \ \Canada. Dept. of Communications \Canada. Minister of Supply and Services \Communications \Space technology \ \Canada \ \ \1983 \n/a \OB1-11 \Monograph \ @\ Department of Communications, an overview \ \ \ \ \Canada. Dept. of Communications \ \Communications \Space technology \ \Canada \ \ \n.d. \36 + 40p. \OB1-11 \Monograph \1982, & before 1983, bound with French language ed. No author/publisheron document. @\ Reaching for tomorrow, Communications Research Centre \ \ \ \ \Canada. Dept. of Communications \ \Communications \Scientific research \Canada.CRC \Canada \ \ \1985 \32p. \OB1-11 \Monograph \CRC includes Space science. @\Natural Environment Research Council \ \ \ \ \NERC \ \Scientific research \Government policy \Environmental research \Great Britain/United Kingdom \ \ \1993 \ \OB1-32 \Monograph \#O 1994.41 Overview of the NERC. Set of Overheads . mvk 21.3.94 @\Natural Environment Research Council Report & Accounts \ \Knill.J \Buttle.Eileen \ \NERC \ \Scientific research \Government policy \Environmental research \Great Britain/United Kingdom \ \ \HOLD 1992-1993 \ \OB1-32 \Monograph \#O 1994.42 Dated 7 December 1993. Annual report of the Council. mvk 21.3.94 @\ Environment and resources: questions, answers, solutions. Natural EnvironmentResearch Council \ \ \ \ \NERC \ \Scientific research \Government policy \Environmental research \Great Britain/United Kingdom \ \ \1993 (?) \ \OB1-32 \Monograph \#O 1994.43 Spiral-bound summary booklet. mvk 21.3.94 @\ The Environmental challenge \ \ \ \ \NERC \ \Scientific research \Government policy \Environmental research \Great Britain/United Kingdom \ \ \1993 (?) \ \OB1-32 \Brochure \#O 1994.44 Descriptive brochure listing areas of interest to NERC and itsresearch institutes. mvk 23.3.94 @\Report of the Science and Engineering Research Council \ \ \ \ \SERC \ \Scientific research \ \ \Great Britain \ \ \HOLD 1982-83, 1984-85 \Various \OB1-32 \#O 1982-83 is P.247; 1984-85 is P.248 ISSN 0261 7005 jk 29.4.92 @\Astronomy 1 Committee Annual Report to the Science and Engineering ResearchCouncil \ \ \ \ \SERC \ \Scientific research \ \ \Great Britain \ \ \HOLD 1984-85 \Various \OB1-32 \#O 1984-85 is P.249 ISSN 0141 0938 Reclassified from OA3-32 jk 29.4.92 [O continues next page] WT03-B26-23IA029-000311-B017-59http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatp.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163122 text/html 53342HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:29:24 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:15 GMTContent-length: 53167 Catalogue Library catalogue P: (PURE) PHYSICAL SCIENCES also General Science [see also Applied Technology (E)] PC Chemistry [see also Chemical Engineering (EC); Chemical Oceanography (MC); Geochemistry (TC)] PE Energy, science aspects. [SEE ALSO (ED) Energy technology PI Scientific instruments & equipment PM Mathematics PN Nuclear science PP Physics [see also Astronomy (X)] PS Science (in general); scientific research, atmosphere-to-core earth sciences, Global Change, Greenhouse PX Films, videos on science. [SEE ALSO Photographic technology & science (EP)] PZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective) @\ Research report 1986-87, CSIRO Division of Applied Organic Chemistry \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Organic chemistry \Scientific research \ \Australia \ \ \1986-87 \48p. \PC3-80 \Serial \#G @\Scientific instrumentation in Australia, capability listing [by Dept.of Science & Technology] \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Science \ \Industrial technology \Scientific instruments \Marketing \Australia \ \ \n.d. \n/a \PI5-80 \Monograph \ @\ Export Development Strategy: Scientific and medical equipment, August1988 \ \ \ \ \AUSTRADE \ \Scientific instruments & equipment \High technology industry \Export trade \Australia \ \ \1988 \52p. \PI5-80 \Monograph \ #G Contains forward by Senator Button ISBN 0 642 10936 2 @\The rise and rise of the Scientific Instrument Industry in Australia.Report of the 45th meeting of the National Science and Industry Forum \Reports of National Science and Industry Forum, Number 29 \ \ \ \AAS \ \Scientific instruments and equipment \Export trade \Industrial research and development \Australia \ \ \1989 \67p \PI5-80 \Monograph \#G 1990.133 ISBN 0 85847 157 4 mk 17.7.92 @\Statistical analysis of spherical data \ \Fisher.N \Lewis.T \Embleton.Brian \ \ \Statistics \ \ \Great Britain \Australia \ \1987 \329p \PM1-05 \Monograph \#G 1993.140 Published by Cambridge University Press. First Paperback Edition(1993), ISBN 0 521 45699 1 . B Embleton became 3rd Head of COSSA, August1993. mvk 27.9.93 @\Mathematical Sciences, Adding to Australia \Australian Research Council Discipline Research Stategies \ \ \ \Australian Research Council \ \Education \Mathematics \Scientific research \Australia \ \ \Jan. 1996 \120p. \PM15-80 \monograph \#G 1996.26 ISBN 0 644 463090 mvk 17.3.96. @\ Nuclear science and technology in Australia: a report to the Prime Minister \ \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \Nuclear science \ \ \1985 \80p \PN3-80 \Monograph \#G ISBN 0 644 04563 9 16.10.92 P.1076 mk @\Small country Big science. A report to the Prime Minister on Australianparticipation in Major International Accelerator and Beam Facilities. \ \ \ \ \Australian Science and Technology Council \ \Scientific Research \Government Policy \ASTEC \Australia \International \ \1990 \60p. \PN15-80 \Photocopy \#G 1992.290 ISBN 0 644 11982 9 This report examines the needs of Australianscientists for access to major scientific research facilities which, becauseof their cost, are not available in Australia. The report focuses on threeareas of immediate need: synchrotron light; neutron scattering; high energyphysics. Recommendations regarding the evaluation and management of projectsare included in the report. mvk 11.1 93 @\Research activities of the CSIRO Division of Radiophysics \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Radio science \Physics \Astronomy \Australia \ \ \1982 \36p. \PP3-80 \Monograph \# G Former dbase no. 298 Ed. R X McGee @\Tenth National Congress Handbook, 10-14 February 1992 \ \Jenkin.J \Finlayson.T \Prawer.S \Australian Institute of Physics \ \Scientific research \Physics \ \1992 \Various \PP3-80 \Conference papers \#C (AIP) 1992.111 Conference abstracts and general information in loosebound volume. 12.6.92 @\Science indicators, report of the National Science Board \ \ \ \ \National Science Board \ \Scientific research \Industrial research & development \Financial statements \United States \ \ \HOLD 1982 \344p. \PS1-12 \Serial \Biennial. 1982 dated 1983 [printed 1984]. Former dbase no. 174 @\ Annual science and technology report to the Congress \ \ \ \ \US. Office of Science & Technology Policy \National Science Foundation \Scientific research \Technology \ \United States \ \ \1982 \116p. \PS1-12 \Serial \# G Former dbase no. 364 @\Science in India, excellence in the midst of poverty \ \Maddox.J \Rich.V \ \Nature \ \Scientific research \Education \Space science \India \ \ \1984 \20p. \PS1-53 \(paper) \Photocopy of pp.581-600 of Nature, Vol.308, April 1984 @\Inventory of global change in Australia. Researchers and institutions. \IGBP/START \Holper, P. \ \ \Australian Academy of Science \IGBP \Global change \Environmental research \ \Australia \International \ \1993 \72p. \PS1-80 \monograph \#G 1995.34 ISBN 0858471833 mvk 23.4.95 @\ A small scale plasmoid formed during the 13 May 1985 AMPTE MagnetotailBarium release \ \ Baker.D \ Fritz.T \ Bernhardt.P \ NASA \ GSFC \ Space science \ Solar terrestrial physics \ \ Space \ United States \ \ 1989 June \ 21p \ PS3-01 \ Paper \ #G, P.87 @\ Japanese Pacific Climate Study (JAPACS) \ Annual Report \ \ \ \ STA Japan \ \ Environmental research \Atmospheric research \Global change \International \Pacific Islands \Japan \HOLD 1989, 1990, 1991 \Various \PS3-05 \Series \#G 1992.179 Written in both English and Japanese. There was a proposalfrom STA in 1992 to conduct part of this study jointly with CSIRO (referfile GS8/002 ?). mk 24.8.92. April 1990 - March 1991 report is 1992.306mvk 24.1.93 April 1989 - March 1990 report is 1991.148 mvk 10.2.93 @\Japanese Study on the behaviour of Greenhouse gases and aerosols \FY 19.. - FY 19.. \Ogawa.T \Aoki.T \Ito.T \STA Japan \ \Environmental research \Atmospheric research \Greenhouse effect \International \Japan \ \1991 \70p \PS3-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.177, 1992.178 (Copy 2) Written in both English and Japanese. Relatesto proposal by STA for joint research with CSIRO, 1992. Reference visitto COSSA by Kawakami (Embassy) and Dr Yukio Makino of JMA, Feb (?) 1992.jk 24.8.92 @\Modeling the earth system in the Mission to Planet Earth era \ \Unninayar.Sushel \Bergman.Kenneth \ \NASA \ \Global change \Earth sciences \EOS \International \United States \ \1993 Jul \133p \PS3-05 \Monograph \#G 1994.53 Includes acronym list, references, participants. Based on literaturesurvey plus outcome of NASA Climate Modeling Workshop of November 13-151991 in Alexandria, Virginia. Examines various modeling problems includingintercomparison, data assimilation; also reviews Eos program. mvk 27.3.94 @\EOS: science strategy for the earth observing system \AIP Press \Asrar.Ghassem \Dozier.Jeff \ \ \ \Eos \Earth Sciences \Global change \International \United States \ \1994, July \119p \PS3-05 \Monograph \#G 1994.152 ISBN 1 56396 198 9 Published for NASA. Forward by Charles Kennel,includes summary of international space segment. mvk 19.11.94 @\Earth observing system, scientific contributions to national goals andinterests \ \Barron Eric J. \Hartmann D. \Schimel D. \ \ \EOS \Global change \Government policy \International \United States \ \March, 1995 \30 p. \PS3-12 \monograph \#G 1996.18 This report is part of the Congressional Record Subcommitteeon Space and Aeronautics, Hearing on NASA, March 16, 1995. Related work:Report by Barron on "policy relevant research" in Minutes EOSInvestigators Working Group Report, 1994 #C 1994.68. mvk 17.3.96 . @\ TIGER: Terrestrial Initiative in Global Environmental Research ProgrammeReport & Science highlights 1990-1992 \ \ \ \ \NERC \ \Scientific research \Global change \Environmental research \Great Britain/United Kingdom \ \ \1993 July \63p \PS3-32 \Monograph \#G 1994.46 ISBN 1 85531 092 9 Describes various UK IGBP-related initiativesincluding studies of trace gas emissions, carbon cycle, energy and geology.Contains lists of awards, financial records, publications, committees etc.mvk 23.3.94 @\ Global Environmental Change: the UK research framework 1993 \ \ \ \ \IACGEC \GER \Scientific research \Global change \Environmental research \Great Britain/United Kingdom \ \ \1993 Sep \55p \PS3-32 \Monograph \#G 1994.50 ISBN 1 85531 097 X Describes various UK global change initiativesbased upon the Inter-Agency Committee on Global Environmental Change (comprisingUK Research Councils, British National Space Centre, and MeteorologicalOffice) and the UK Global Environmental Research Office.mvk 25.3.94 @\IGBP-related research in Belgium : a compendium \ \Vanderborght.O \ \ \Royal Belgian Academies of Sciences \IGBP \Global change \Scientific research \ \Belgium \ \ \1991 \135p \PS3-34 \Monograph \#G 1991.130; 1992.184 (Copy 2) . Covers Belgian work on PAGES: STIB: LOICZ:JGOFS: BAHC: GCTE: GAIM & other IBGP projects. ISBN 90 6569 449 8 3.6.92 @\ Scientific research in Italy \ \Pedrazzini.F \Bernardi.L \ \CNR \ \Scientific research \ \ \Italy \ \ \1986 \36p. \PS3-35 \Monograph \ @\1st General Meeting of Global Research Network System, January 24-25,Tokyo \ \ \ \ \STA \NASDA \Global Research Network System \Global change \Environmental research \Japan \Oceania \International \1994 Jan \ \PS3-63 \Conference papers \#C (GRNS) 1994.54 Folder of presentations from first meeting. Attendedby Paul Tresize (AUSLIG), Jeff Kingwell COSSA, John Parslow CSIRO DoF, MarkStafford-Smith (for Geoff Pickup), CSIRO DWE; also AIMS, BoM. GRNS is a5-year program aimed at developing fundamental data sets for earth systemscience studies in the Asia-Pacific region. Also 1994.135, "Recordof the First                                          < >         """"""" - - " " ' '   X   < > ff  , "               "  " International General Meeting on Studies for Productionof Fundamental Data Sets for Earth Science and Technology Researches byGlobal Research Network System", mvk 27.3.94, 5.10.94 @\2nd General Meeting of Global Research Network System, December 8-9, Kyoto \ \ \ \ \STA \NASDA \Global Research Network System \Global change \Environmental research \Japan \Oceania \International \1994 Dec \ \PS3-63 \Conference papers \#C (GRNS) 1994.200 Folder of presentations from meeting. Attended by PeterHolland (AUSLIG), Jeff Kingwell (COSSA), Vanessa Chewings (for Geoff Pickup),CSIRO DWE; Nicholas Coops (DWE), also AIMS (Pichon, Ayukai). GRNS is a 5-yearprogram aimed at developing fundamental data sets for earth system sciencestudies in the Asia-Pacific region. Also 1994.135, "Record of the FirstInternational General Meeting on Studies for Production of Fundamental DataSets for Earth Science and Technology Researches by Global Research NetworkSystem", and 1994.54, 1st general Meeting. mvk 21.12.94 @\3rd General Meeting of Global Research Network System, January 25-26 1996,Hatoyama \ \ \ \ \STA \NASDA \Global Research Network System \Global change \Environmental research \Japan \Oceania \International \1994 Dec \ \PS3-63 \Conference papers \#C (GRNS) 1996.5 Folder of presentations from meeting. Attended by PeterHolland (AUSLIG), Jeff Kingwell (COSSA), Vanessa Chewings, Brian Ryan andNicholas Coops (CSIRO DWE), John Parslow (CSIRO DoF) and Tenshi Ayukai (AIMS).GRNS is a 5-year program aimed at developing fundamental data sets for earthsystem science studies in the Asia-Pacific region. Also 1994.135, "Recordof the First International General Meeting on Studies for Production ofFundamental Data Sets for Earth Science and Technology Researches (sic)by Global Research Network System", and 1994.54, 1994.200, 1st and2nd general Meeting. mvk 15.2.96 @\Proceedings of Asian Symposium on Global Environmental Change \CGER-1008-'93 \ \ \ \Japan. National Committee for the IGBP \Center for Global Environmental Research \Global change \Environmental research \ \Japan \Asia \Oceania \1993 \140p \PS3-63 \Conference papers |#C (IGBP) 1994.154 . References to START. Preface by Masatoshi Yoshino.mvk 19.11.94 @\ ANZAAS Congress, University of Tasmania 14-15 February 1990, Abstracts \ \ \ \ \ ANZAAS \ \ Scientific research \ Social factors \ Global change \ Australia \ New Zealand \ International \ 1990 \ 221p \ PS3-80 \ Monograph \ #C, 1990.39: Congress Theme - Global Change and the Southwest Pacific @\Australia's renewable resources: sustainability and global change, InternationalGeosphere-Biosphere Programme Australia Planning Workshop, Oct 3-4 1990. \IGBP Workshop Reports \Gifford.R \Barson.M \ \Bureau of Rural Resources \ \Global Change \Earth resources renewable \ \Australia \ \ \1992 \206p \PS3-80 \Conference papers \#C (IGBP) . 1992.209 . BRR Proceeding No. 14 : IGBP Planning Workshop No.14, "Utilization of renewable resources: assessing the past centuryand limits for the next", held Canberra Oct 3-4 1990. Pub. AGPS Canberra.With Index. mvk 22.12.92 @\Grappling with Greenhouse: understanding the science of global change. \ \Mitchell.C \ \ \National Greenhouse Advisory Committee \Australia. Dept. of the Arts etc. \Greenhouse effect \Global change \ \Australia \International \ \1992 \49p \PS3-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.310 ISBN 0 642 17586 1 Fundamentals of the climate system, greenhousegases and their effects, climate scenarios, current areas of uncertainty.Mainly for lay audience. mvk 26.1.93 @\Warming to the issue, Australian science comes to grips with Greenhouse \ \ \ \ \National Greenhouse Advisory Committee \ \Greenhouse effect \Climate change \Environmental research \Australia \International \ \1995 \PS3-80 \monograph \#G 1996.29 ISBN 0642 226784 mvk.17.3.96 @\Climate change projects 1994-95 \ \Mitchell.C \ \ \CSIRO Climate Change Research Program \CSIRO \Greenhouse effect \Global change \Environmental research \Australia \ \ \1995 \140 \PS3-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.100 ISBN 0 643 05754 4 Description of work objectives, budgetsof CSIRO CCRP projects. mvk 19.8.95 @\Scientific aspects of major environmental issues, climate change. \ \ \ \ \Prime Minister's Science Council \ \Scientific research \Climatology \Global change \Australia \International \ \1992 \31p. \PS3-80 \monograph \#G 1995.33 ISBN 0644250658 mvk 23.4.95 @\ Overall priorities in Australian Antarctic Science \Occasional Paper [ASAC] \ \ \ \Antarctic Science Advisory Committee \Australia. Dept. of Science \Scientific research \Antarctic studies \ \Antarctica \Australia \ \1986 \94p. \PS3-95 \Monograph \No. 2 @\ Antarctic research priorities, objectives and achievements, Feb. 1986 \Occasional Paper [ASAC] \ \ \ \Antarctic Science Advisory Committee \Australia. Dept. of Science \Scientific research \Polar Regions \ \Antarctica \Australia \ \1986 \76p. \PS3-95 \Monograph \No. 1 @\ Role of Australian Antarctic scientific activities and priorities forthe Scientific Program, a discussion paper, October 1986 \Occasional Paper [ASAC] \Quilty.P \Budd.W \ \Antarctic Science Advisory Committee \Australia. Dept. of Science \Scientific research \Antarctic studies \ \Antarctica \Australia \Australian Antarctic Territory \1986 \57p. \PS3-95 \Monograph \No. 3 @\ First Forum, Antarctic Science Advisory Committee, 19-20 November 1986. \Occasional Paper [ASAC] \ \ \ \Antarctic Science Advisory Committee \Australia. Dept. of Science \Scientific research \Antarctic studies \ \Antarctica \Australia \ \1986, 1987 \various \PS3-95 \Conference/workshop reports and papers \#C. P.112. Includes submission by COSSA (Vol. 3 p1-10). @\Antarctic research priorities for the 1990s: a review \ \ \ \ \ASAC \ \Antarctic studies \Scientific research \ \Australia \Antarctica \Australian Antarctic territory \1991 \94p \PS3-95 \Monograph \#G 1991.127 ISBN 0 642 16363 4 \ @\ Australian Research Grants Scheme report on grants approved for 19 - \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Science \ \Research grants \Scientific research \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1986 \varies \PS4-80 \Serial \ @\ National energy research development and demonstration program: guidelinesand priorities for grants \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Resources and Energy \ \Research grants \Scientific research \Energy \Australia \ \ \1986 \24p. \PS4-80 \Monograph \ @\Major National Research Facilities: a National program \ \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \Financial assistance \Scientific research \Government policy \Australia \ \ \1992 Mar \60p \PS5-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.106 ISBN 0 644 244747 3.6.92; Copy 2 is 1992.220 mvk 22.12.92 @\Setting Directions for Australian Research: Seminar Proceedings, October1990 \ASTEC Occasional Paper No. 17 \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \Scientific research \Government policy \Industrial research & development \Australia \ \ \1991 \68p \PS5-80 \Conference proceedings |#C (ASTEC) 1991.143 mvk 23.12.92 @\Major National Research Facilities - expressions of interest \Occasional Paper No. 19 \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \Financial assistance \Scientific Research \Government policy \Australia \ \ \1991 Oct \17p \PS5-80 \Monograph \#G ISBN 0 642 16898 9 1992.148, 1992.149 (Copy 2) 7.7.92 @\SCICOMM 91 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \CSIRO INRE \Information dissemination \Media \Public relations \Australia \ \ \1991 \ \PS5-80 \Loose-leaf binder \#G 1994.94 Papers from Conference on Science Communications opened by MinisterRoss Free and examining role of communicators in CSIRO. mvk 8.7.94 @\ Submission to the review of public sector research and development bythe Joint Parliamentary Committee of Public Accounts \ \ \ \ \ CSIRO \ \ Government policy \ Scientific research \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1989 \ 101p \ PS7-80 \ Monograph \ #G P.168 @\Co-operative Research Centres Program : Guidelines for Applicants RoundTwo Applications \ \Slatyer.R \ \ \Co-operative Research Centres Committee \Office of the Chief Scientist \Scientific research \Government policy \Technology transfer \Australia \ \ \1991 Feb \31p \PS7-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.88 ISBN 0 644 13756 8 These Guidelines are for the use of applicantsseeking funding under the second round of the Program . 2.6.92 @\Australia's national interests in Antarctica and international considerationsaffecting Australia's Antarctic policy: implications for Australia's Antarcticscientific research program \Occasional Paper [ASAC] \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Foreign Affairs \Antarctic Science Advisory Committee \Government policy \Scientific research \Antarctic studies \Antarctica \Australia \ \1986 \14p. \PS7-96 \Monograph \No. 4 [ASAC] @\ An evaluation of the attitudes of Australians to Science and Technology \ \ Jones.T \ Hill.T \ \ DITAC \ \ \ \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1991 \ 35p \ PS11-80 \ Paper \ #G 1991.120 Investigates attitudes to S&T held by four groups 1) industryleaders ii) "the learning environment"iii) women and iv) generalpopulation benchmark. Study for the DITAC Science and Technology AwarenessProgramme by Woolcott Research, Sydney. @\International connections \CSIRO Research for Australia \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Scientific research \International relations \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \99 p. \PS14-80 \Monograph \v.13; contains chapter on space, #G, ISBN 0 643 03798 5 @\Workshop Report: Australia/United States Science & Technology WorkshopCanberra August 1990. \ \ \ \ \DITAC \National Science Foundation \Scientific research \International relations \International coordination \Australia \United States \ \1990 \164p \PS14-80 \Bound Workshop papers \#G 1994.73 US, Australian S&T policy summaries; priorities. Case studiesincluding CSIRO Atmospheric Research (Graeme Pearman). mvk 19.6.94 @\ Earth system science: a closer view, a program for global change, reportof the Earth Sciences Committee, NASA Advisory Council \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Earth sciences \IGBP \Future planning \International \United States \ \1988 \208p. \PS15-05 \Monograph \ @\Review of scientific priorities for an atmospheric chemistry mission forthe year 2002 and beyond \ \Emiliani.L \Megie.G \Brasseur.G \ESA \ \Atmospheric research \Future planning \Global change \Europe \International \ \~ 1995 \30p \PS15-05 \Monograph \#G 1996.43 Study for an ESA mission for measurement of ozone, aerosols,trace gasses mvk 5.4.96 @\Global change: reducing uncertainties \ \ \ \ \ICSU \IGBP \Environmental protection \Global change \International cooperation \International \ \ \1992 \40p. \PS15-105 \Monograph \#G1992.294 ISBN 91 630 1086 0 MVK 11.1.93. @\Plant-water interactions in large-scale hydrological modelling \IGBP Report No. 17 \ \ \ \ ICSU \IGBP \Global change \IGBP \ \International \ \ \1991 \44p \PS15-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.120. Report from Workshop in Vadstena, Sweden, 5-8 June 1990. ISSN0284 8015 . 19.6.92 @\Report from the IGBP Regional Meeting for South America \IGBP Report No. 16 \ \ \ \ ICSU \IGBP \Global change \IGBP \ \International \ \ \1991 \58p \PS15-05 \Monograph \#C (IGBP) 1992.121. Report from Meeting in Sao Jose dos Campos, 5-9 March1990. ISSN 0284 8015 . 19.6.92 @\Recommendations of the Asian Workshop New Delhi, India, 11-15 February1991 \IGBP Report No. 18:1 \ \ \ \ ICSU \IGBP \Global change \IGBP \ \International \ \ \1991 \57p \PS15-05 \Monograph \#C (IGBP) 1992.122. ISSN 0284 8015 . 19.6.92 @\Biospheric Aspects of the Hydrological Cycle : the Operational Plan \IGBP Report No. 27 \ \ \ \ICSU \IGBP \Global change \IGBP \BAHC \International \ \ \1993 \103p \PS15-05 \Monograph \#G ISSN 0284 8015 Edited by BAHC Core Project Office, Institut fur Meteorologie,Freie Universitat, Berlin. mvk 20.2.94 @\IGBP in action: Work Plan 1994-1998 \IGBP Report No. 28 \ \ \ \ICSU \IGBP \Global change \IGBP \ \International \ \ \1994 \151p \PS15-05 \Monograph \#G 1994.87 (Copy 1), 1994.88 (Copy 2) ISSN 0284 8015 Includes summary ofCEOS 1 km & pilot high resolution data exchange projects (with CEOS)mvk 7.7.94 @\Relating Land Use and Global Land-Cover Change \IGBP Report No. 24 \ \ \ \International Social Science Council \IGBP \Global change \IGBP \Land use \International \ \ \1993 \65p \PS15-05 \Monograph \#G 1996.34 (Copy 1), ISSN 0284 8015 . Also labelled HDP Report No. 5 mvk16.3.96 @\ Earth system science, a program for global change [folder, containing:]Earth system science: a preview; Earth System Science : Overview \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Earth sciences \IGBP \Future planning \International \United States \ \1988 \ \PS15-05 \Folder \ @\Australian IGBP Workshop No. 9: Global Changes of the Past: recommendationsfor research for the IGBPdecade. \ IGBP Workshop Report \ Wasson.R \ \ \ AAS \ \ Global change \ Climatology \ \ International \ Australia \ Pacific \ 1990 \ 30p \ PS15-05 \ Conference paper \ #C "IGBP" @\ SCOPE Scientific Programme 1990-1992 \ Di Castri.F \ Munn.R \ \ SCOPE \ ICSU \ Environmental research \ Future planning \ Global change \ International \ \ \ 1990 \ 28p. \ PS15-05 \ monograph \ #G 1991.90 @\ IGBP Workshop No. 4, Hydrology \ IGBP Workshop Report No. 4 \ Body.N \ \ \ AAS \ \ Global change \ Water resources research \ Environmental research \ International \ Australia \ \ 1990 Dec \ 50 (approx) \ PS15-05 \ Conference papers \ #C "IGBP" Refers to GEWEX etc. JK 8/4/91 @\ IGBP Workshop No. 5 An Australian JGOFS Program, 20-22 June 1990 Hobart \ IGBP Workshop Report \ Parslow.J \ \ \ AAS \ CSIRO \ Global Change \ Marine science \ Oceanography \ International \ Australia \ \ 1990 June \ 40p \ PS15-05 \ Conference papers \ #C "IGBP" 1990.93 jk 8/4/91 @\ IGBP Workshop, Antarctica \ IGBP Workshop Report \ \ \ \ AAS \ \ Global change \ Antarctic studies \ \ International \ Polar regions \ Australian Antarctic Territory \ 1990 \ 10p \ PS15-05 \ Conference paper \ #C "IGBP" 1990.90 JK 8/4/91 @\ IGBP Workshop No. 7 Extreme events and Global Change, 19-20 July 1990,Macquarie University \ IGBP Workshop Report \ Blong.R \ Power.C \ \ AAS \ \ Global Change \ Disasters \ Climatology \ International \ Australia \ Oceania \ 1990 \ 20 (approx) \ PS15-05 \ Conference papers \ #C "IGBP" 1990.91 Copy 1 1990.92 Copy 2. Includes referenceto International Decade of Natural Disaster Reduction (IDNDR) and considersincidence of tropical cyclones,strom surge, hail, tornadoes, droughts, bushfiress,duststorms and other natural hazards. JK 8/4/91 @\ Remote sensing for Global Change \ (1) IGBP Workshop Reports (2) CSIRO OSSA Publications \ Harris.G (Ed) \ \ \ COSSA \ AAS \ Global Change \ Environmental Research \ Remote sensing \ International \ Australia \ \ 1991 \ 32p \ PS15-05 \ Conference report \ #C "IGBP" . 1991.7 . Report of IGBP Workshop No. 8, held atCanberra 5-7 June 1990. Printed by Goanna for CSIRO OSSA on behalf of theNational Committee for the International Geosphere-Biosphere Program, AustralianAcademy of Science. ISBN 0 643 05207 0, COSSA Publication 027. @\ International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme: a study of global change,IGBP, a plan for action; a report prepared by the Special Committee forthe IGBP for discussion at the 1st Meeting of the Scientific Advisory Councilfor the IGBP, (Stockholm, Sweden, 24-28 October 1988), August 1988 \ IGBP Global Change Report \ \ \ \IGBP \ \Environmental research \Global change \IGBP \International \ \ \1988 \200p. \PS15-05 \Monograph \IGBP Report No.4. @\ IGPB Global Change Report No. 8 : Pilot Studies for Remote Sensing andData Management \ IGBP Report \ Rasool.I \ Ojima.D \ \ ICSU \ \ IGBP \ Global Change \ Information systems \ International \ \ \ 1989 \ 41p \ PS15-05 \ Monograph \ #G P.166 ISSN 0284-8015 @\ Improved Global Data for Land Applications \ IGBP Report \ Townshend.John \ \ \ ICSU \ IGBP \ AVHRR \ Global Change \ Data sets \ International \ \ \ 1991 \ 60p \ PS15-05 \ Manuscript \ #G 1994.119 Draft Version 1.1 . Comprises scientific justification forGlobal 1 km AVHRR Land Data Project 1992 - . Became IGBP Report 20 approx.1992 . mvk 7.8.94 @\ Improved Global Data for Land Applications \ IGBP Report No. 20 \ Townshend.John \ \ \ ICSU \ IGBP \ AVHRR \ Global Change \ Data sets \ International \ \ \ 1992 \ 87p \ PS15-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1995.115 ISSN 0284 8015 Scientific justification for Global 1 km AVHRRLand Data Project (USGS/NASA/ESA/CSIRO) mvk 16.9.95 @\The IGBP Terrestrial Transects: Science Plan \IGBP Report No. 36 \ \ \ \IGBP \ \Global change \Climatic impacts \International cooperation \International \ \ \1995 \61 p. \PS15.05 \serial \2 copies held, #G 1996.27; 1996.28, ISSN 02848015 mvk. 17.3.96. @\ International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme: Coastal ocean fluxes andresources \ IGBP Global Change Report \ Holligan.P \ \IGBP \ \Marine science \Global change \IGBP \International \ \ \1990 \53p. \PS15-05 \Monograph \IGBP Report No. 14. #G 1990.123 ISSN 0284 8015 2.6.92 @\ International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme: Past Global Changes Project- proposed implementation plans for research activities \ IGBP Global Change Report \ Eddy.J \ \IGBP \ \Climatology \Global change \IGBP \International \ \ \1992 \110p. \PS15-05 \Monograph \IGBP Report No. 19. #G 1992.86 An expanded explanation of the PAGES projectplan (refer IGBP Report No. 12. Based upon First Meeting of the PAGES ScientificSteering Committee, 11-13 March 1991. ISSN 0284 8015 2.6.92 @\ Non-modelling research requirements for understanding, predicting andmonitoring global change. \ IBGP Workshop \ Walker.B \ \ \ AAS \ \ Global change \ Environmental research \ \ International \ Australia \ \ 1990 Nov \ 41p \ PS15-05 \ Conference paper \ #C "IGBP". Forms Part II of IGBP Workshop Report No. 11, andrecords outcome of planning meeting held August 29-31, 1989. 1990.96 jk9/4/91 @\ IGBP Workshop 13 on Mathematical and Statistical Modelling of GlobalChange Processes \ (1) Proceedings of the Centre for Mathematical Analysis, Australian NationalUniversity (2) IGBP Workshop Reports \ Latham.G (Ed) \ Taylor.J (Ed) \ \ ANU \ \ Global Change \ Environmental research \ Statistics \ International \ Australian \ \ 1990 \ 279p \ PS15-05 \ Conference proceedings \ #C , under "IGBP". Vol 25 of Proc. Centre for Math. Anal. 1990.87.ISBN 0 7315 0438 0 @\ Report on IGBP Workshop 13 on Mathematical and Statistical Modellingof Global Change Processes \ IGBP Workshop Reports \ Anderssen.R \ \ \ \ \ Global Change \ Environmental research \ Statistics \ International \ Australian \ \ 1990 \ 11p \ PS15-05 \ Conference proceedings \ #C , under "IGBP". Summary of 1990.87, in same classification.1990.97 jk 9/4/91 @\ IGBP Workshop No. 14 : Utilization of renewable resources and globalchange \ IGBP Workshop Report \ Gifford.R \ \ \ AAS \ \ Global change \ Environmental research \ Agricultural research \ International \ Australia \ \ 1990 \ 25p \ PS15-05 \ Conference paper \ #C "IGBP" 1990.98. Report of IGBP Workshop 14 held in Canberra3-5 October 1990. @\ Summary of a Workshop on OASIS \ \ Raupach.M \ \ \ \ \ Global change \ Water resources research \ \ International \ Australia \ NSW \ 1990 \ 8p \ PS15-05 \ Conference Paper \ #C "IGBP" Summary of Workshop in Canberra, 16 October 1990,held to discuss IGBP proposal OASIS or Observations At Several InteractingSites. 1990.99 jk 9/4/91 @\ Global Change System for Analysis, Research and Training (START) \ UCAR Report \ Eddy.J \ Malone.T \ McCarthy.J \ ICSU \ \ Global Change \ IGBP \ Environmental Research \ International \ \ \ 1991 \ 40p \ PS15-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.50 ISSN 0284-8015 Report on a meeting held in Bellagio, 3-7 December1990?) Gives simple explanation of greenhouse effect with diagrams. Lists17 actions which have been identified by ANZEC as the major areas requiringaction and produced for the IGBP Secretariat as Global Change Report No.15. jk 25/7/91. @\Pilot Studies for Remote sensing and Data Management \ IGBP Report \ Rasool.I \ Ojima.D \ \ ICSU \ \ IGBP \ Global Change \ Information systems \ International \ \ \ 1989 \ 41p \ PS15-05 \ Monograph \ #G P.166 ISSN 0284-8015 @\ Basic Plans for research and development on earth science and technology \ \ \ \ \ Japan Counil for Science and Technology \ STA \ Earth sciences \ Global change \ \ International \ Japan \ \ 1990 \ 23p \ PS15-05 \ Monograph \ #G P.167 Overview/long term plan for earth science research, includinginternational aspects and funding. @\ Earth observations and global change decision making: a national partnership.Vol II \ \ Ginsberg.I \ Angelo.J \ \ NASA \ NOAA \ Global change \ Environmental research \ Earth observation \ International \ \ \ 1991 \ 375p \ PS15-05 \ Monograph \ #C 1991.119 . Second copy #G , 1992.28 , on long term loan from HQ (AS:HQ551.5253 Ea). ISBN 0 89464 557 9, ISSN 1056 7178 . Includes index. Editedconference proceedings, including index. Sessions include Earth observationdata policy; Policy response to Global Environmental change; Economics ofglobal Environmental Change; strategies for education. Includes paper byG Harris, Director COSSA (p119-20). @\ Earth observations and global change decision making: a national partnership.Registration list \ \ \ \ \ NASA \ NOAA \ Global change \ Environmental research \ Earth observation \ International \ \ \ 1990 \ 24p \ PS15-05 \ Conference paper \ #C P.173 . See also 1991.119 @\ TITLE: Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research JGOFS Abstracts \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 ICSU \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Global change \ KEYWORD.2 Environmental research \ KEYWORD.3 Marine science \ REGION.1 International \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1990 \ PAGINATION Various \ CLASSC'N PS15-05 \ FORMAT Monograph/conference papers \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.37 Abstracts, 1992.38 Abstracts Addenda. Outcomes ofInternational Scientific Symposium, 26-28 November 1990, National Academyof Sciences Washington . JGOFS Joint Global Ocean Flux Study. Also relatesto North Atlantic Bloom Experiment. @\JGOFS Implementation Plan Working Draft Mon 16 March 1992 \ \ \ \ \ \ \Global Change \Marine Science \Oceanography \International \ \ \1992 Mar \68p \PS15-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.252 Plan, including required resources, national contributions,process study emphases. mvk 29.12.92 @\Joint Global Ocean Flux Study Implementation Plan \JGOFS Report No. 9/ IGBP Report No. 23 \ \ \ \IGBP \SCOR \Global Change \Marine Science \Oceanography \International \ \ \1992 Sep \ \PS15-05 \Monograph \#G 1993.94 Published by ICSU ISSN 0284 8015, 1016 7331. See also 1992.252for draft of Plan, including required resources, national contributions,process study emphases. mvk 19.7.93 @\JGOFS Science Plan \JGOFS Report No. 5 \ \ \ \ICSU \SCOR \Global Change \Marine Science \Oceanography \International \ \ \1990 Aug \61p \PS15-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.278 Plan, including required resources, national contributions,process study emphases. ISSN 1016 7331 mvk 3.1.93 @\Report of the JGOFS/LOICZ Task Team on Continental Margin Studies \JGOFS Report No. 15 \ \ \ \IGBP \SCOR \Global Change \Marine Science \Oceanography \International \ \ \1994 April \20p \PS15-05 \Monograph \#G 1994.202 Published by ICSU ISSN 1016 7331. mvk 26.12.94 @\The Reports of JGOFS Meetings held in Carqueiranne, France, September1993: Eighth Meeting of the JGOFS Scientific Steering Committee; JGOFS SouthernOcean Planning Group Report for 1992/93; Measurement of the parameters ofphotsynthesis. \JGOFS Report No. 13 \ \ \ \ICSU \SCOR \Global Change \Marine Science \Oceanography \International \ \ \1994 Mar \68p \PS15-05 \Monograph \#G 1994.115 Plan, including required resources, national contributions,process study emphases. Attended by John Parslow, CSIRO Fisheries. ISSN1016 7331 mvk 27.7.93 @\Joint Global Ocean Flux Study: Publications, 1988-1994 \JGOFS Report No. 18 \ \ \ \ICSU \SCOR \Global Change \Marine Science \Oceanography \International \ \ \1995 April \39p \PS15-05 \Monograph \#G 1995.94 ISSN 1016 7331 mvk 14.8.95 @\Report of the Ninth Meeting of the JGOFS Scientific Steering Committeeand JGOFS Southern Ocean Planning Group \JGOFS Report No. 16 \ \ \ \IGBP \SCOR \Global Change \Marine Science \Oceanography \International \ \ \1995 Jan \50p \PS15-05 \Monograph \#G 1996.60 mvk 8.4.96 @\ The International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) Programme - a CoreProject of the International Geosphere- Biosphere Programme \ \Galbally.I \ \ \Commission on Atmospheric Chemistry and Global Pollution \IAMAP \IGBP \Global change \ \International \ \ \1989 \55p \PS15-05 \Monograph \#G 1990.62 ISBN 0 643 05062 0 @\ Scientists' Agreement and Disagreement about Global Climate Change :evidence from surveys \ \Stewart.T \Mumpower.J \Reagan-Ciincione.P \ \ \Environmental research \Global change \ \International \ \ \1992 Apr \25p \PS15-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.180 Describes nature and extent of agreement among scientists abouthuman-induced greenhouse warming. There is more agreement about fundamentalscientific principles, observations and general policy directions. Thereis less agreement about issues relating to prediction of the precise magnitudeand rate of climate change. mk 24.8.92 @\Evolution of the climate and the global environment - the French contributionin 1991 \ \Buat-Menard.P \ \ \ France. Ministere de la recherche et de la technologie \ \WCRP \IGBP \Global change \France \ \ \1992 Feb \58p \PS15-34 \Monograph \#G 1992.154a, 1992.155 (Copy 2) ISBN 2 11 087018 4 jk 8.7.92 @\Evolution of the climate and the global environment - the French contribution1992 \ \ \ \ \Ministere de l'enseignement superieur et de la recherche \ \Global change \Topex-Poseidon \IGBP \France \International \ \1992 (?) \63p \PS15-34 \Monograph \#G 1993.90 See also 1992.154. Describes French research programs, includingrole in IGBP-DIS, Topex-Poseidon, JGOFS, ECLAT. mvk 18.7.93 @\ Towards a National Greenhouse strategy for Australia; a summary report. \ \ \ \ \ ANZEC\Australian and New Zealand Environment Council \ \ Environmental protection \ Global change \ Social factors \ Australia \ New Zealand \ \ nd \ 8p \ PS15-80 \ Leaflet \ #G P.155 @\ Global climate change - issues for Australia \ \ \ \ \ Prime Minister's Science Council \ \ Earth resources \ Environmental protection \ Coastal zones \ Australia \ \ \ 1989 \ 197p \ PS15-80 \ Monograph \ #G P.154 @\ Rural industries: workshop on climate change, Canberra, 10 November 1989. \ BRR Report, No. R/3/90 \ Barlow.S \ Barson.M \ \ BRR \ DOPIE \ Agriculture \ Earth resources \ Global change \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 \ 52p \ PS15-80 \ Monograph \ #G 1992.10 @\Comparison of two greenhouse targets \A series of Greenhouse Studies Number 6 \ \ \ \Dept of the Arts, Sport, the Environment, Tourism and Territories \ \Global change \Environmental research \Greenhouse effect \ Australia \ \ \1991 Feb \26p and appendices various \PS15-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.83 ISBN 0 642 16666 8 . Report prepared by consultants (Deni GreeneConsulting Services) for DASETT. 2.6.92 @\Overcoming barriers to energy efficiency \A series of Greenhouse Studies Number 7 \ \ \ \Dept of the Arts, Sport, the Environment, Tourism and Territories \ \Global change \Energy \Greenhouse effect \ Australia \ \ \1991 Jul \83p \PS15-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.82. ISBN 0 642 16357 X Report prepared by consultants (Deni GreeneConsulting Services) for DASETT. 2.6.92 @\Energy conservation and efficiency measures in other countries \A series of Greenhouse Studies Number 8 \Sorensen.B \ \ \Dept of the Arts, Sport, the Environment, Tourism and Territories \ \Global change \Energy \Greenhouse effect \ Australia \ \ \1991 Mar \Various \PS15-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.87 ISBN 0 642 16888 1 A survey on energy conservation and efficiencymeasures relevant to reduction of Greenhouse impacts. Report prepared forDASETT. 2.6.92 @\Technology transfer opportunities for reducing Greenhouse gas emissions \A series of Greenhouse Studies Number 9 \ \ \ \Dept of the Arts, Sport, the Environment, Tourism and Territories \ \Global change \Technology transfer \Greenhouse effect \ Australia \ \ \1991 Sep \Various \PS15-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.84 ISBN 0 642 16986 1 Report prepared by consultants (Coffey MPW)for DASETT. 2.6.92 @\Greenhouse Action Australia \ \ \ \ \Commission for the Future \ \Global change \Greenhouse effect \ \Australia \ \ \1989 \13p \PS15-80 \Leaflet \#G 1990.113 @\Global Change: a research strategy for Australia 1992-96 \ \Thom.B \ \ \AAS \ \Environmental research \Greenhouse effect \Global Change \Australia \ \ \1992 June \178p \PS15-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.237 ISBN 0 85847 179 5 mvk 28.12.92 @\Predicting and managing Global Change: preparing for the needs of thefuture \ \ \ \ \WASTAC \ \Remote sensing \Training \Future planning \Western Australia \ \ \1990 \10p \PS15-86 \Monograph \#G 1992.75 . A strategic plan for a West Australian Earth System ScienceCentre based upon a Comparative Advantage and National Need. @\ 1986-87 approved ANARE Scientific Program \ \ \ \ \Antarctic Div. \ \Scientific research \Antarctic studies \ \Antarctica \Australia \ANARE \1986 \116p. \PS15-95 \Serial? \ @\ Technological change and its impact on policy planning, address by PeterWilenski... to the ANZAAS Centenary Congress, The Media Industry- Challengeand Change in Australia, Syndey University, 19 May 1988 \ \Wilenski.P \ \ \ANZAAS Congress \ \Technological change \Government policy \Media \Australia \ \ \1988 \16p. \PZ3-80 \(paper) \ @\ DCI for airborne interferometry [paper presented at the ANZAAS CentenaryCongress, Sydney University, 19 May 1988] \ \Brunker.S \Rossiter.R \ \ANZAAS Congress \DSTO \Remote sensing instruments \Interferometry \Defence technology \Australia \ \ \1988 \ca 14p. \PZ3-80 \(paper) \DCI: Double Cats Eye Interferometer @\An Australian Science and Technology Information Service: paper presentedat the ANZAAS Symposium Promoting Public Understanding of Science- the Practiceand Perils, 18 May 1988 \ \Crompton.R \ \ \ANZAAS Congress \ \Scientific research \Information dissemination \ \Australia \New Zealand \ \1988 \6p. \PZ3-80 \(paper) \#C ANZAAS @\AUSSAT-B Program [paper] by Wayne Nowland...ANZAAS Space Symposium, May16 1988, University of Sydney \ \Nowland.W \ \ \ANZAAS Congress \ANZAAS Space Symposium \Space programs \Communications satellites \AUSSAT \Australia \Space \ \1988 \14p. \PZ3-80 \(paper) \# C ANZAAS @\ANZAAS Congress [papers and symposia papers etc] \ \ \ \ \ANZAAS Congress \ \Scientific research \Industrial technology \ \Australia \New Zealand \ \HOLD [check ANZAAS Box] \n/a \PZ3-80 \(papers) \Conferences and conference papers to be classed & held together atPZ3-80 even if individually catalogued. Some publications & papers havebeen separately classified (e.g. Section C, 57th 1987: Townsville= RS3-80)(see also) @\Mirrabooka X-Ray astronomy satellite exxperiment [sic] [presented at 1988ANZAAS Congress symposium, 16 May; Section 3.] \ \Greenhill.J \ \ \ANZAAS Congress \ \Astronomy \Satellite observatories \Mirrabooka \Australia \Space \ \1988 \5p. \PZ3-80 \(paper) \#C ANZAAS @\ From the sun to the universe, the Wooley and Bok directorships at MountStromlo [paper presented at ANZAAS Congress 1988 symposium, 18 May 1988,Section A] \ \Hyland.A \Faulkner.D \ \ANZAAS Congress \ \Astronomy \Mount Stromlo Observatory (ANU) \History \Australia \Space \ \1988 \10p. \PZ3-80 \(paper) \#C ANZAAS @\ Space activities in New Zealand [paper] presented at ANZAAS CentenaryCongress Symposium "Towards the International Space Year:1992"University of Sydney, 16 May 1988 \ \Ellis.P \Bellis.S \ \ANZAAS Congress \NZ.DSIR \Space programs \Space science \Space technology \New Zealand \ \ \1988 \6p. \PZ3-80 \(paper) \ #C ANZAAS @\ Australia's space policy, speech by R.D.Somervaille,... to the BicentennialCongress of the Australian and New Zealand Association for the Advancementof Science, 16 May 1988 [to a symposium] \ \Somervaille.R \ \ \ANZAAS Congress \ \Space programs \Government policy \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \16p. \PZ3-80 \(paper) \#C ANZAAS Congress 1988, Sydney. Flags support for Space Science by AustralianSpace Board, refers to "support" role of ASO in Board initiatives.Raises figure of 20% of Board funds as science target. jk 30.4.92 @\ Space activities: peaceful uses of the international aerospace club [paperpresented at the ANZAAS Congress symposium May 1988, Sydney] \ \Thorburn.L \Astley-Boden.C \ \ANZAAS Congress \COSSA \Space industry \International relations \Peaceful uses \International \Australia \ \1988 \14p. \PZ3-80 \(paper) \#C ANZAAS @\ Why scientists don't get more money [paper] presented at the Scienceand Society Conference, U. of Sydney Faculty of Science Centenary Celebrations15-17 May, 1985 \ \Johnston.R \ \ \Science and Society Conference [U. of Sydney] \ \Scientific research \Economics \Financial assistance \Australia \ \ \1985 \20p. \PZ4-80 \(paper) \ WT03-B26-24IA029-000311-B017-102http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatr1.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163145 text/html 48562HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:30:00 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:20 GMTContent-length: 48387 Catalogue Library catalogue R: REMOTE SENSING. [SEE ALSO (FR) Research aircraft] RA Agricultural/Forestry Applications; Drought; Agricultural land use; [not Land Use in general (RE); not Land use mapping aspect, (RC) nor Soil science(RT)] RC Cartographic (Mapping) Applications; Mapping aspect of Land Use & Vegetation, Surveying applications. [SEE ALSO (RT)] RD Defence/Surveillance, Arms Treaty Verification Applications [SEE ALSO(CN) Distress systems of Search & rescue; AD for Space Weapons] RE Environmental Applications; Land use in general; earth resources, geographical applications (land + people); regional & town planning applications,vegetation index; Fire detection; mixed applications RF Fisheries Applications (salt or freshwater) RH Hydrological Applications; fresh water resources applications apart from fisheries RI Instrumentation & equipment, instrument systems, emphasis on measurement technology [SEE RS for satellites, mission descriptions] RK Airborne research, aircraft carried remote sensing missions [SEE ALSO(FR) research aircraft, emphasis on aircraft] RM Marine/Oceanographic Applications, includes Coastal zones, [BUT SEE (RD) Surveillance, (CN) Distress systems] RR Remote sensing information & image processing, computer programs,facilities including Remote Sensing Groundstations [but SEE CN for navigation, communication ground facilities], Geographic Information Systems [SEE ALSO (RI) instruments, (CC) computers , (CL) Information systems, (CN) navigation, reception etc.] RS Remote sensing satellites (SPOT, Landsat, ERS-1, Polar Platform, MOS-1etc.); Earth observation satellites [multipurpose satellites SEE AN; Astronomical satellites SEE (XF) etc.] RT Terrestrial, Geological Applications; minerals & mining; Magneticsapplications; Glaciology applications; Topographical applications other than mapping;[SEE ALSO (TC- TZ)] ; Land Surveying etc., Topographic mapping SEE (RC) RW Weather (Forecasting) & Meteorological Applications, Atmospheric,Climate, Rainfall applications [if not (RH)] . Prefer (W) Weather if emphasis on discipline rather than remote sensing methods RX Films & videos on remote sensing RZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective); General remotesensing; overviews, scientific methods, calibration and validation where not specificto discipline; training, tenders for RS items. [ SEE ALSO Science & Environment side (TR), (PS)] @\Agricultural Remote Sensing in CSIRO : Report to the Agricultural RemoteSensing Committee \ \Jupp.D \ \ \COSSA \CSIRO Division of Water and Land Resources \Remote Sensing Applications \Agricultural research \Land Data Systems \Australia \ \ \April 1987 \55p \RA1-80 \Monograph \#G ISBN 0 643 03860 4 COSSA Pub No. 015 @\Overview of Agricultural Remote Sensing in Australia \ \Thorburn.L \Till.M \ \COSSA \ \Remote Sensing Applications \Agricultural research \Land Data Systems \Australia \ \ \1988 (?) \Various \RA1-80 \Monograph \#G P.1179 ISBN 0 643 04760 3 COSSA Pub No. 023 mvk 10.2.93 @\Report of the Economic Summit of Panel of Experts on Remote Sensing fromSpace on the Use of Remote Sensing Technology in Africa for Drought EarlyWarning and Monitoring (Brussels: 1986: 16-17 July) \ \ \ \ \Economic Summit of Industrialized Nations( Bonn: 1986) \Meeting of Experts \Remote sensing applications \Environmental research \Drought forecasting \Africa \ \ \1986 \ \RA2-40 \[conference pub.] \ Panel was precursor to CEOS @\ Developing and evaluating of satellite system for monitoring perennialtree crops (draft) \ \ \ \ \Malaysia. Dept. of Agriculture \NSW. Dept. of Agriculture \Remote sensing \Mapping \Forest research and development \Malaysia \ \ \1986? \30p. \RA2-67 \Monograph \#G Jointly prepared by Department of Agriculture in Malaysia and in NSW @\Remote sensing: use in agricultural and resource management- a conceptualframework for economic analysis \ABARE Research Report 95.5 \Watson.Bill \Anandajayasekeram.Ponniah \Miller.Elton \ABARE \BRS \Agricultural research \Remote sensing applications \Economic impact \Australia \ \ \1995 \80p \RA2-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.128 (Copy 1), 1995.152 (Copy 2) ISSN 1037 8286 ISBN 0 642 226512 . Other authors Robert Allen, Robert Curtotti, and Robyn Johnston. Fundedby ASO. See also RA9-80, 1990.68 mvk 6.11.95, 20.12.95 @\The global forest ecosystem as viewed by ERS-1, International Forest Inventory \Remote Sensing from Space Programme \Sieber.A \ \ \Commission of the European Communities. JRC. Ispra \ \Remote sensing applications \Forest research and development \ERS-1 \International \Europe \ \1986 \112p. \RA3-05 \Monograph \ #G IFI International Forest Inventory . CEC Doc. T.N.1.04.E2.86.105 @\ Report of the...International Training Course on remote sensing applicationsto operational agrometeorology and hydrology, sponsored by the Governmentof Ecuador (Quito: 1986: 21 Oct.-7 Nov.) \FAO Remote Centre Training Courses \ \ \ \COPUOS \WHO/FAO/ESA International Training Course \Remote sensing applications \Meteorology \Hydrology \South America \International \ \1986 \22p. \RA3-20 \Monograph \A/AC.105-379 @\Tropical deforestation and habitat fragmentation in the Amazon: satellitedata from 1978 to 1988 \Science, Vol. 260 \Skole.David \Tucker.Compton \ \NASA \ \Global change \Remote sensing applications \Land use \South America \Brazil \ \1993 June \6p \RA3-20 \Reprint \#G 1994.38 Reprint from Science, 260, 1905-10, 25 June 1993. Argues thatalthough satellite-based estimates of gross deforestation are lower thanearlier thought, the resultant fragmentation into small forest areas hascaused serious loss of biological diversity. mvk 21.3.94 @\The economic value of improved agricultural information: a case studyfor the assessment of a European remote-sensing satellite system \ \Sand.F \Jaskolla.F \ \ECON \ZGF Institute \Agriculture \Economic impact \Remote sensing appliations \Europe \ \ \1980 \6p. \RA3-30 \(paper) \#G From Proceedings of International Colloquium on Economics of Space andOther Advanced Technologies (1980,28-30 April: Strasbourg). @\Satellite radar in agriculture: experience with ERS-1 \ESA SP-1185 \Wooding.M \Attema.E \Aschbacher.J \ESA \ \ERS-1 \Remote sensing applications \Land use \Europe \International \ \1995 \71p \RA3-30 \Monograph \#G1996.38 ISBN 92 9092 339 3 mvk 5.4.96 @\ AGRISAR 86: preliminary Investigator's report \ \Sieber.A \ \ \Commission of the European Communities. JRC. Ispra \ \Remote sensing \Agricultural research \SAR \Europe \ \ \1987 \183p. \RA3-30 \Monograph \Remote Sensing from Space Programme @\Proceedings of the Regional Conference on Multi-level Remote Sensing forForestry Application (Quezon City, the Philippines: 1984: 8-12 Oct. \ \ \ \ \ESCAP \NRMC \Remote sensing applications \Forest research and development \ESCAP/NRMC Regional Conference \South East Asia \Phillipines \ \1984 \255p. \RA3-65 \Monograph \UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme (UNDP-RAS 81-034) @\ Report of the Regional Training on Digital Image Interpretation for ForestryApplications(Quezon City, Philippines: 1984: 15-26 Oct.) \ \ \ \ \ESCAP \NRMC \Remote sensing applications \Forest research and development \Remote sensing information processing \South East Asia \Philippines \ \1984 \297p. \RA3-65 \Monograph \UNDP/ESCAP Remote Sensing Programme (UNDP-RAS 81-034) @\Final report July 1985, Regional Remote Sensing Programme Pilot Projectson Forestry in Thailand, the Philippines and Indonesia \ \ \ \ \ESCAP \ \Remote sensing applications \Forest research and development \Mapping \Thailand \Philippines \Indonesia \1985 \148p. \RA3-65 \Monograph \UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme @\Assessment of the fertilizer requirement of improved pasture from remotesensing information \ \Vickery.P \Hedges.D \Duggin.M \Remote Sensing of Environment \CSIRO \Remote sensing applications \Agricultural research \ \Australia \ \ \1980 \18p. \RA3-80 \(paper) \Reprint from Remote Sensing of the Environment 9, 1980, pp. 131-148. Formerdbase no. 136 @\Australian Vegetation Watch: Final report \ \Smith.Richard \ \ \CSIRO \Western Australia. Dept. of Land Administration \Remote sensing applications \Vegetation index \Fire \Australia \Western Australia \ \1994 July \112p \RA3-86 \Monograph \#G 1994.171 Report of Smith's study using NOAA NDVI to monitor bushfiredanger and crop production, under a major grant from Rural Industries Researchand Development Corporation. mvk 21.11.94 @\Effects of waterlogging on crop and pasture production in the Upper GreatSouthern, Western Australia. \Technical Bulletin No. 86 \McFarlane.D \Wheaton.G \Negus.T \Western Australian Department of Agriculture \ \Remote sensing applications \Agricultural research \Soils \Western Australia \Australia \ \1992 Mar \43p \RA3-86 \Periodical \#G 1993.62 Other author Wallace.J (Jeremy) . Ed. by Johnston.D and McFarlane.M.ISSN 0083 8675 mvk 24.6.93 @\Mapping the extent of waterlogged crop using satellite imagery. \Journal of Agriculture No. 2 \Wallace.J \Wheaton.B \ \Western Australian Department of Agriculture \ \Remote sensing applications \Agricultural research \Soils \Western Australia \Australia \ \1990 \3p \RA3-86 \Serial/reprint \#G 1993.63 WA J. of Agriculture, 31, 48-50. Use of TM to map waterloggedcrop, in order to manage farms and catchments. mvk 24.6.93 @\Mapping waterlogged crops using remotely sensed data. \ \Wallace.J \Wheaton.G \ \Western Australian Department of Agriculture \CSIRO \Remote sensing applications \Agricultural research \Soils \Western Australia \Australia \ \1989 Apr \38p \RA3-86 \Monograph \#G 1993.64 Use of TM to map waterlogged crop, in order to manage farmsand catchments. Research supported by Wheat Industry Research Committee.mvk 24.6.93 @\An investigation of the mapping of waterlogged crops using remotely senseddata. \ \Wheaton.B \Wallace.J \ \Western Australian Department of Agriculture \CSIRO \Remote sensing applications \Agricultural research \Soils \Western Australia \Australia \ \1988 Jan \28p \RA3-86 \Monograph \#G 1993.65 Use of TM to map waterlogged crop, in order to manage farmsand catchments. Research supported by Wheat Industry Research Committee.mvk 24.6.93 @\Final Report on Project No. W/06/038//W Wheat Industry Research Committeeof Western Australia: winter waterlogging effects on crop and pasture productionin the Upper Great Southern. \ \McFarlane.D \Wheaton.G \Negus.T \Western Australian Department of Agriculture \ \Remote sensing applications \Agricultural research \Soils \Western Australia \Australia \ \1989 Sep \55p \RA3-86 \Monograph \#G 1993.66 Use of remotely sensed data (satellite and airborne) to mapwaterlogged crop, in order to manage farms and catchments. Research supportedby Wheat Industry Research Committee. mvk 24.6.93 @\Remote sensing of Dieback on the South Coast (Study Area: Two PeoplesBay Nature Reserve) \ \Behn.G \Wallace.J \Hick.P \CALM \CSIRO \Agricultural research \Forest research & development \Remote sensing applications \Western Australia \ \ \1990 Aug \ \RA3-86 \Monograph \#G 1993.69 Illustrated report using Airborne Multispectral Scanner (AMSS)of Geoscan Ltd. mvk 29.6.93 @\Remote sensing of Dieback on the South Coast (Study Area: Gull Rock NatureReserve) \ \Behn.G \ \ \CALM \ \Agricultural research \Forest research & development \Remote sensing applications \Western Australia \ \ \1990 Dec \ \RA3-86 \Monograph \#G 1993.71 (See also 1993.69) Illustrated report using Airborne MultispectralScanner (AMSS) of Geoscan Ltd. mvk 29.6.93 @\The use of Airborne Multispectral Scanner data for the detection and mappingof insect damage in the Jarrah forest. \ \Behn.G \Wallace.J \Hick.P \CALM \CSIRO \Agricultural research \Forest research & development \Remote sensing applications \Western Australia \ \ \1990 (?) \27p \RA3-86 \Monograph \#G 1993.70 Illustrated report using Airborne Multispectral Scanner (AMSS)of Geoscan Ltd., over Collie area. mvk 29.6.93 @\Dieback assessment using multispectral data over the Stirling Range NationalPark \ \Behn.G \Campbell.N \ \CALM \CSIRO \Remote sensing applications \Agricultural research \Forest research & development \Western Australia \ \ \1992 May \ \RA3-86 \Monograph \#G 1993.72 Uses TM imagery. Not a conclusive investigation. mvk 29.6.93 @\Vegetation mapping and dieback hazard assessment in the northern Jarrahforest using remotely sensed image data: a report for Alcoa Australia. \ \Wallace.J \Palmer.M \Furby.S \CSIRO \ \Remote sensing applications \Agricultural research \Forest research & development \Western Australia \ \ \1992 (?) \ \RA3-86 \Monograph \#G 1993.73 Uses Geoscan MSS imagery. mvk 29.6.93 @\Mapping Land Degradation Using Remote Sensing: Interim Report - MappingDryland Salinity in the Moora District. \National Soil Conservation Programme Number 7405 \Wallace.J \Wheaton.B \ \Western Australian Department of Agriculture \CSIRO \Remote sensing applications \Agricultural research \Soils \Western Australia \ \ \1990 Jul \24p \RA3-86 \Monograph \#G 1993.74 Uses Landsat TM imagery. mvk 30.6.93 @\Economic assessment of a European Remote Sensing Satellite System forAgricultural Applications VOL 1 Summary \ \Niederau.G \Heiss.K \Bodechtel \ESA \ECON Economic impact \Agriculture \ \Europe \West Germany \ \1981 \28p. \RA4-30 \Monograph \Photocopy of Vol.1. from U.S. Technical Information Unit. ESA Contract4186/79/F(SC) @\Economic effects of remote sensing: Benefits of a European land observationsystem for agricultural applications; preprint from International AstronauticalFederation Congress (33: 1982:Paris), paper no. IAF-82-112 \ \Niederau.G \Bodechtel.J \ \IAF \ \Remote sensing applications \Agriculture \Economics \Europe \ \ \1982 \6p. \RA4-30 \(paper) \Paper a condensed version of report: Economic assessment of a Europeanremote sensing satellite system for agricultural applications, ESA Contractby OECON/ZGF, Munich, & ECON, Princeton, N.J.,US. HOLD Vol.1 Summaryof this, at RA4-30 @\ Space and forest management: current event session , International AstronauticalFederation, 41st IAF Congress, Dresden Germany 1990 \ \ Rao.U \ \ \ ISRO \ IAF \ Remote sensing applications \ Earth resources \ Developing countries \ International \ India \ China \ 1991 \ 69p \ RA9-05 \ Monograph \ #C 1991.122 (IAF) The role of remote sensing for ecological and economicaspects of forest management, with particular reference to India, China,Africa. Includes illustrations and graphs. @\Remote Sensing for agricultural production and resource management inAustralia \BRR Bulletin \Kelly.G \Hamblin.A \Johnston.R \BRR \DOPIE \Land use \Earth resources \Agriculture \Australia \ \ \1990 \70p \RA9-80 \Monograph \#G ISBN 0644 13267 1 1990.67, 1990.68 (copy 2). BRR Bulletin No. 8, AGPSCanberra Cat No. 90 1981 4. See also RE9-80, 1990.33, 1990.69. #G 1991.93(copy 3) @\Report of a workshop on the use of remote sensing in agricultural landmanagement. \BRR Report No. R/3/91 \Johnston.R \ \ \BRR \DOPIE \Agriculture \Environmental Protection \Primary Industry \Australia \ \ \1991 \41p. \RA9-80 \ \#C 1991.94 Report of a workshop of the 5th Australasian Remote SensingConference, Perth, October 1990 ISBN 0 644 14577 3 @\The 10 year research and development plan for the application of remotesensing in agricultural statistics \ \Meyer-Roux.M \ \ \Commission of the European Communities. JRC. Ispra \ \Remote sensing applications \Agriculture \Statistics \Europe \ \ \1987 \23p \RA15-30 \Monograph \#G Remote sensing programme Agriculture project. @\Satellite surveying; theory, geodesy, map projections, applications, equipment,operations. \ \Hoar.G \ \ \Magnavox \ \Surveying \Remote sensing applications \Satellites \International \ \ \1982 \ca.130p. \RC2-05 \Monograph \Pub by Magnavox, Torrance California. Covers theory of map projections;datums; doppler positioning; applications in mapping. P.259 jk 4.5.92 @\The Alaska High-altitude Aerial Photography Program (AHAP): a State/Federalcooperative program \ \Brooks.P \ \ \AHAP Program \ \Aerial photography \Mapping \AHAP Program \Alaska \ \ \1988 \8p. \RC1-12 \Monograph \Promotional booklet @\Eighth United Nations Regional Cartographic Conference for Africa, AddisAbaba, Ethiopia, 22-26 February 1993 \ \ \ \ \Economic Commission for Africa \ \Cartography \Mapping \Land Use \Africa \ \ \1993 \39p \RC1-40 \Monograph \#G 1993.162 Summary of proceedings. mvk 4.11.93 @\Cartography and Remote Sensing Bulletin Second Edition \ \ \ \ \Economic Commission for Africa \ \Cartography \Mapping \Remote sensing applications \Africa \ \ \1992 \32p \RC1-40 \Monograph \#G 1993.163 Includes articles on International Space Year, Cadastral andLand tenure policies in Africa, and the Regional Centre for Training inAerospace Surveys. mvk 4.11.93 @\ Status report on remote sensing activities within the Division of NationalMapping, prepared by the Remote Sensing Committee, Jan. 1985 \ \ \ \ \NATMAP \ \Remote sensing \Mapping \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \6p. \RC1-80 \Monograph \#G @\Earth imaging from space and thematic mapping [with] price list of standardEarthnet products 1984 \ \ \ \ \Earthnet \ESA \Remote sensing applications \Mapping \Data price lists \International \Space \Europe \1984 \varies \RC2-30 \Folder \ @\ Remote sensing and digital mapping: Vol. 1, Report [of] Select Committeeon Science and Technology, House of Lords \House of Lords, Session 1983-84 \Shackleton.L \ \ \U.K. Select Committee on Science and Technology \ \Remote sensing \Mapping \Data policy \Great Britain \ \ \1983 \88p. \RC2-32 \Monograph \Photocopy (2 copies, one former dbase no. 793, now P.1178, 24.1.93 mvk). @\Report of the training course on remote sensing applications in vegetationand land-use classification and mapping \ESCAP/UNDP Regional Remote Sensing Programme \ \ \ \ESCAP \Papua New Guinea. Dept. of Forests \Remote sensing applications \Vegetation index \Mapping \Papua New Guinea \ \ \1986 \100p. \RC2-76 \Monograph \#C (ESCAP) UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme (UDP/RAS 81-034) @\Remote sensing in the Pacific Islands: combined reports of the PacificIsland Regional Remote Sensing Workshop and Training Course on ResourceMapping (1986 Jan.-Feb: Suva) \ESCAP/UNDP Regional Remote Sensing Programme \ \ \ \ESCAP \ADAB \Remote sensing \Mapping \ \Pacific Islands \ \ \1986 \87p. \RC2-77 \Monograph \#C (ESCAP) ESCAP/UNDP Regional Remote Sensing Programme (UDP/RAS 81-034)2 copies. @\Mapping Antarctica and Greenland with Shuttle Imaging Radar, a report,September 1985 \ \Carsey.F \Holt.B \ \JPL \ \Mapping \Remote sensing instruments \SIR instruments \Antarctica \Greenland \Polar Regions \1985 \18p. \RC3-90 \Monograph \Photocopy #G @\Remote Sensing Forestry Map of Europe \ \ \ \ \ESA \ \Mapping \Forest research & development \Remote sensing \Europe \ \ \1993 \ \RC9-30 \Map with explanatory brochure \#G 1994.102 The European Forest Map is at scale 1: 6 000 000 based on theclassification from multi spectral NOAA-AVHRR data. Production of the mapstarted Jan. 1992 and was completed November 1992. Prepared by EuropeanSpace Agency as a contribution to the World Forest Watch (WFW) project ofInternational Space Year. mvk 10.7.94 @\ GIS: Geographic Information Systems \ UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme \ \ \ \ ESCAP \ NRCT \ Geographic Information Systems \ International cooperation \ Education \ Southeast Asia \ Pacific \ \ 1988 \ 86p \ RC14-65 \ Monograph \ #C ("ESCAP"), P.85, RAS/86/141 @\Ocean-sensing Spacecraft \Technology Assessment Paper \Morgan.G \ \ \DOD \ \Remote sensing \Oceanography \Surveillance \International \ \ \1976 \154p + \RD3-05 \Monograph \#G P.622 Unclassified as of 13.4.87. Copy No. 37 of TAP-05-76. @\ Maritime surveillance system \ \ \ \ \Swedish Space Corp. \ \Remote sensing applications \Surveillance systems maritime \ \Sweden \International \ \n.d. \8p. \RD2-39 \Monograph \After 1981. 2 copies. #G @\Ericsson SLAR side looking airborne radar, a mapping radar for maritimesurveillance and oil spill detection [with other SLAR booklets] \ \ \ \ \Ericsson \ \Remote sensing instruments \SLAR \Surveillance systems maritime \Sweden \International \ \1986 \various \RD2-39 \Folder \Folder includes photographs @\Earthnet: remote sensing and earth resources [booklet and] Earthnet Landsat4 coverage index [map] etc.[kit] \ \ \ \ \ESA \ \Remote sensing \Information systems \Earthnet \International \Europe \ \1982? \varies \RE1-05 \Kit in folder \Map in 4 sheets; booklet; poster; 2 photographs; 6 sldes in case; informationsheet. @\ Eye on the earth: environmental science from space \ \ \ \ \BNSC \NERC \Remote sensing applications \Environmental research \ \Great Britain \ \ \1992 Mar \19p \RE1-32 \Brochure \#G 1994.52 ISBN 1 85531 062 7 Case studies of earth observation in marine,polar, atmospheric, terrestrial & freshwater research applications.Includes reference to international environmental projects BOREAS, GEWEX,OTTER, FIFE, TIGER. mvk 27.3.94 @\Natural Resources Management - a new perspective \ \Karale.R \ \ \India. Dept. of Space \ISRO \Remote Sensing applications \Data Management \IRS \Indian Subcontinent \India \International \1992 \525p \RE1-50 \Monograph \#G 1993.78. First Edition, Published 1992 by Indian Space Research Organisation,Bangalore. Mainly about IRS. Illustrated in colour. Many examples of remotesensing applications for sustainable development in agriculture & forestry.Undertaken by National Natural Resources Management System. mvk 14.7.93 @\ Report on the Regional Seminar on Remote Sensing Applications for LandResources Management, 19-22 Nov, 1984, Kuala Lumpur,Malaysia \ \Pech.R \ \ \CSIRO \ \Remote sensing applications \Earth resources \ESCAP Regional Seminar \Australia \East Asia \Pacific \1984 \8p. \RE1-60 \(paper) \ @\ ARGOS location and data collection system \ \ \ \ \CLS \ \Data collection systems \Satellites \ARGOS \International \France \ \1987 \16p \RE2-05 \Monograph \#G @\ Examining a blue-green gem, Impact of Science on Society \Unesco No.140; \ \ \ \UNESCO \ \Remote Sensing \Environmental science \Geographic Information Systems \International \ \ \1985 \345p \RE2-05 \Serial \ISSN 0019 2872 Pub by UNESCO. Serial which we get from time to time. Containsarticle by former COSSA member C Astley-Boden. @\ Satellite-based location and data collection system ARGOS \ \ \ \ \Service ARGOS \ \Data collection systems \ARGOS \ \International \France \ \n.d. \4p. \RE2-05 \Folder \CNES/NASA/NOAA project @\ARGOS satellite-based data collection system and platform location system \ \ \ \ \Service ARGOS \ \Remote sensing information processing \Data collection systems \ARGOS \International \ \ \1984 \10p. \RE2-05 \Monograph \ @\ ARGOS Data Collection and Location Satellite System \ \ \ \ \Service ARGOS \ \Data collection systems \Environmental research \ARGOS \France \International \ \1985 \14p. \RE2-05 \Monograph \ @\ Location and data collection satellite system user's guide ARGOS \ \ \ \ \Service ARGOS \ \Data collection systems \Guides \ARGOS \France \International \ \1984 \36p. \RE2-05 \Monograph \ @\Remote sensing for desertification and vegetation mapping \ESCAP/UNDP Regional Remote Sensing Programme \ \ \ \ESCAP \ \Remote sensing applications \Vegetation index \Mapping \International \Iran \ \1990 \134p \RE2-05 \Conference papers \#C (ESCAP) RAS/86/141, Report of Workshop on remote sensing applicationsto desertification/vegetation mapping, organised jointly by the ESCAP/UNDPRegional Remote Sensing Programme and the Iranian Remote Sensing Center,Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 21 - 26 August 1990. jk 15.5.92 @\Fire detection using the NOAA series satellites \NOAA Technical Report \Matson.M \Schneider.S \Aldridge.B \NOAA \ \Remote sensing applications \NOAA satellites \Fire \United States \ \ \1984 \34p. \RE2-12 \Monograph \ #G P.1052 NOAA Technical Report NESDIS 7 . mk 16.10.92 @\Use of satellite data for environmental purposes in Europe: a study forthe European Commission \ \ \ \ \Scot Conseil \Smith System Engineering Ltd \Agriculture \Environmental protection \Remote sensing applications \Europe \International \ \1994 June \ \RE2-30 \Folder \#G 1994.124 Study Contract No. ETES-0039-D for the European CommissionJoint Research Centre. Lists missions, data requirements for various environmentalapplications in Europe, both on country and regional scales. mvk 3.9.94 @\SPOT simulation Europe 82: final report \ \Reiniger.P \ \ \Commission of European Communities. JRC. Ispra \EARSEL \Remote sensing \SPOT \Land use \Europe \ \ \1984 \258p. \RE2-30 \Monograph \Includes mapping, forest damage, and radiometric characteristics and correction.P.124 jk 23/5/91 @\ Analysis of multi-level measurements of spectral signatures for lessfavoured areas: Ardeche 1984-1985 \Environment and quality of life \Maracci.G \Andreoli.G \Hosgood.B \Commission of the European Communities. JRC. Ispra \ \Remote sensing applications \Mapping \Vegetation index \France \ \ \1987 \43p. \RE2-43 \Monograph \EUR 10863 EN @\ Remote sensing applications to highland development: proceedings of theRegional Seminar (Kathmandu: 1985:7-11 Dec.) \ \ \ \ \ESCAP \Nepal. National Remote Sensing Centre \Remote sensing applications \Highland development \Environmental research \India \Nepal \International \1985 \194p. \RE2-50 \Monograph \ #C (ESCAP) UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme (UNDP/RAS 81-034) @\ Status of Earth Observation Activities in India \ \Rajan.Y \Manikiam.B \Behera.G, Chandrasekhar.S \ISRO \ \Space \Remote Sensing Applications \Co-operation \India \ \ \After 1986 \12p. \RE2-53 \Paper \#G @\Remote sensing in vegetation studies, report of the ESCAP-BIOTROP TrainingCourse on Remote Sensing Techniques Applied to Vegetation Studies, (1985,4-13 Dec.: Bogor, Indonesia) \ \ \ \ \BIOTROP \ESCAP \Remote sensing applications \Vegetation \Training \Indonesia \East Asia \Pacific \1985 \339p. \RE2-60 \Monograph \#C (ESCAP) UNDP-ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme (RAS/81-034) @\Remote Sensing for Urban Surveys and Human Settlement Analysis : reportof the training course jointly organised by the Indian Institute of RemoteSensing and the ESCAP/UNDP Regional Remote Sensing Programme \ \ \ \ \ESCAP \ \Geographic Information Systems \Mapping \Training \Asia \North east Asia \International \1987 (?) \193p \RE2-60 \Monograph \#C (ESCAP) P.1170 . Course held at Dehra Dun , India, 8-31 December 1987.mvk 31.12.92 @\The OLIVIA programme, operational low-cost integrated vital informationaccess: co-ordinated implementation of information technologies for naturalresources and environmental management in the Asia and Pacific region \ \ \ \ \FAO \United Nations Environment Programme \Environmental research \Information systems \International co-operation \ESCAP region \South East Asia \Oceania \1994, March \59p \RE2-60 \Monograph \#G 1994.191 (Copy 1), 1994.192 (Copy 2) Mission report by Professor OlivierCogels, Ronald Lake, Willem Looyen, Michael Saunby, Professor Shunji Murai,Dr Jim Williams, Jelle Hielkema, Thailand, China, Pakistan and Philippines,1994. mvk 22.12.94 \@\ Australian Landsat Station \ \ \ \ \Australian Landsat Station \NATMAP \Ground communications stations \Australian Landsat Station \Remote sensing \Australia \ \ \1985? \18p. \RE2-80 \Monograph \ @\ Report on remote sensing applied to renewable resources, prepared forthe 2nd United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses ofOuter Space (1982, Aug.: Vienna) \RSC Series 6 \ \ \ \FAO \ \Remote sensing applications \Earth resources renewable \ \International \ \ \1982 \48p. \RE3-05 \Monograph \ @\ LANDSAT for monitoring the changing geography of Canada; a special reportfor COSPAR by the Geography Working Group, Canadian Advisory Committee onRemote Sensing \ \Thompson.M \Howarth.P \Ryerson.R \CCRS \ \Remote sensing \Geography \LANDSAT \Canada \ \ \1982 \84p. \RE3-11 \Monograph \ @\Passive Microwave observing from environmental satellites, a status reportbased on NOAA's June 1-4, 1987 Conference in Williamsburg, V. \NOAA Technical Report NESDIS 35 \Fischer.J \ \ \NOAA \ \Satellites \Remote sensing \Environmental research \United States \International \ \1987 \292p \RE3-12 \Monograph \#G @\Evaluation of AVHRR data to develop Fire Fuels information as an inputto IAMS: final report [internal;not edited for conformity] \ \Miller.W \Chine.E \Howard.S \US. Geological Survey \NOAA \Fire \AVHRR \Vegetation index \United States \ \ \1983 \77p. \RE3-12 \Monograph \#G P.1053 mk 16.10.92 @\ Archimedes 1 experiment [report] \Environment and quality of life \Gillot.R \Toselli.F \ \Commission of European Communities. JRC. Ispra \ \Remote sensing \Archimedes 1 \Hydrocarbons \Europe \ \ \1985 \223p. \RE3-30 \Monograph \ ISBN 92 825 5699 9 @\Remote sensing for advanced land applications: revision 1, May 1987 \ESA SP-1075 \Battrick.B \Rolfe.E \ \ESA \ \Remote sensing applications \Advanced Land Application Mission \Environmental research \Europe \International \ \1987 \123p. \RE3-30 \Monograph \#G @\ Remote sensing from space, a research activity of the Commission of theEuropean Communities \ \ \ \ \Commission of European Communities \ \Remote sensing applications \Agriculture \Environmental protection \Europe \ \ \n.d. \27p. \RE3-30 \Monograph \1982? Study of use of remote sensing in agriculture (TELLUS Project); seaprotection (EURASEP; ARCHIMEDES; ISOWAKE); SAR 580 campaign. @\ Remote sensing correlation. \Remote sensing from space programme \Fraysse.G \Hartl.P \Sieber.A \Commission of European Communities \ \Remote sensing applications \Agriculture \SAR \Europe \ \ \1985 Nov \208p. \RE3-30 \Monograph \#G P.507 Study Contract No. 1997-82-11 ED ISP D. Interpretation of SARdata and correlation with optical MSS data. Case studies from SIR and SAR580 campaign. @\ Evaluation of SPOT simulation imagery over the Derbyshire test site,summary report \ \ \ \ \Hunting \NRSC \Remote sensing applications \Imagers & imaging \SPOT \Great Britain \ \ \n.d. \21p. \RE3-32 \Monograph \Imagery 1982. Contract report for National Remote Sensing Centre @\Monitoring the grasslands of semi-arid Africa using NOAA-AVHRR data \ \Justice.C \ \ \International Journal of Remote Sensing \ \Remote sensing applications \AVHRR \Environmental research \Africa \ \ \1986 \[239]p. \RE3-40 \Monograph \Reprint of special issue of Journal, v.7, no. 11 No. 1986. @\African land-cover classification using satellite data \ \Tucker.C \Townshend.J \Goff.T \Science \ \Remote sensing applications \Vegetation index \Agricultural research \Africa \ \ \1985 \4p. \RE3-40 \Reprint \#G Reprint of pp.369-375 of Science, Vol.227, no4685, 25 Jan. 1985 @\Projet Regional Joliba Programmes CILSS "Prevision des productionnsrizicoles par teletection" et "Surveillance des ressources naturellesrenouvelables au Sahel. Rapport d'activite du 31-12-1982 au 31-12-1984 \Projets Regionaux F.E.D. \Berg.A \Gregoire.J \Hubaux.A \Commission of EuropeanCommunities. JRC. Ispra \ \Remote sensing applications \Earth resources \Joliba Regional Project \Guinea \Africa, central \ \1984 \51p. \RE3-43 \Monograph \# G In French. @\ Report of the Workshop on High Resolution Satellite Data (1987, 19-21Oct: Jakarta) \ \ \ \ \LAPAN \ESCAP \Remote sensing applications \Data \High-resolution satellite data \Indonesia \Eastern Asia \ \1987 \89p. \RE3-60 \Monograph \#C (ESCAP) UNDP/ESCAP Remote Sensing Programme (RAS 86-141) @\Proceedings of the Regional Symposium on Remote Sensing Applications forSocio-Economic Aspects of the Environment (1985 4-9 March: Yogyakarta, Indonesia) \ \ \ \ \PUSPICS (Indonesia) \ESCAP \Remote sensing applications \Environmental research \ \Indonesia \East Asia \International \1985 \291p. \RE3-60 \Monograph \#C (ESCAP) UNDP/ESCAP Remote Sensing Programme (RAS/81-034) @\Proceedings of the Regional Seminar on Remote Sensing Applications forLand Resources Management, Nov.19-22, 1984 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia \ \ \ \ \ESCAP \MARDI \Remote sensing applications \Earth resources \ \East Asia \Pacific \Malaysia \1984 \208p. \RE3-60 \Monograph \ #C (ESCAP) Photocopy. UNDP/ESCAP Remote Sensing Programme (UNDP-RAS 81-034) @\Remote sensing for tropical ecosystem management: Report of the RegionalRemote Sensing Seminar on Tropical Ecosystem Management, Bali, Indonesia,23-28 August 1994. \ST/ESCAP/1455 \ \ \ \ESCAP \NASDA \Remote sensing \Geographic Information Systems \Tropical ecology \ESCAP Region \Asia \Indonesia \1994 \RE3-60 \Monograph \#C ESCAP) 1995.133 Copy 2 is 1995.138 Also sponsored by LAPAN. mvk 6.11.95,10.12.95 @\ The Economics of remote sensing. Report of the Regionall Conference onthe assessment of the economics of remote sensing applications to naturalresources and environment Development Projects in the ESCAP Region \ UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme (RAS/86/141) \ \ \ \ UNDP/ESCAP \ \ Earth resources \ Economics \ \ East Asia \ Pacific \ International \ 1990 \ 79p \ RE4-60 \ Monograph \ #C 1992.3 Sponsored by ESCAP/UNDP and the Asian Development Bank, hostedby the National Remote Sensing Centre of the Chinese State Science and TechnologyCommission. @\United Nations Regional Meeting of Experts on Space Science and Technologyand its application (1984, May 23-24: Jakarta, Indonesia), [Papers]: [with]Overseas visit report [on ESCAP meeting and on] 1st meeting of IntergovernmentalConsultative Committee on Regional Remote Sensing Programme (1984, 26 May:Jakarta)[with Papers] \ \Grant.I \ \ \U.N. Meeting of Experts \ESCAP \Remote sensing \Space science \Communications \International \East Asia \Pacific \1984 \various \RE7-60 \(Conference papers) \#C (ESCAP) Includes agreed terms of reference of UNDP/ESCAP Regional RemoteSensing Programme, Consultative Committee for the Asia Pacific region. Seealso P.483, 1992.32 (RZ1-60). @\ The Cutting Edge of Global Change: a report on the activities of theISY Global Land Cover Change Working Group. \COSSA Publication No. 033 \Graetz.D \ \ \CSIRO Division of Wildlife and Ecology \COSSA \International Space Year \Land Data Systems \Global Change \Australia \International \ \1993 \28p \RE9-05 \Monograph \#G 1993.79 (Copy 1), 1993.80 (Copy 2) ISBN 0 643 04768 9 ISSN 0818 4291. Comprises the report of the International Space Year Global Land CoverChange Working Group, co-chaired by Dean Graetz of CSIRO. Shows changesto vegetation and soils at representative land uses internationally, includingCairo, Dallas, Lake Chad, Amazon during the period 1972-1992, using mainlyLandsat MSS data. Companion volumes are CD-ROM Disk, COSSA Publication 031,see 1993.27, 1993.28, and "Looking Back", COSSA Publication 029,see 1993.25, 1993.26, GO9-80. mvk 14.7.93 @\Operational satellites: sentinels for the monitoring of climate and GlobalChange \Global and Planetary Change \Ohring.G \McClain.E \Ellis.J \ \ \Global change \Environmental protection \Climate \International \ \ \1991 July \328p \RE9-05 \serial \#C 1996.51 ISSN 0921 8181 Special issue(Vol 4 No. 1-3) comprising proceedingsof OPSAT '90 conference, NOAA, Washington DC 16-19 October 1990. Includesapplications (vegetation, snow, ice, winds, ...., as well as calibrationand data availability. mvk 8.4.96 @\Applications of remote Sensing in Asia and Oceania \ \Murai.S \ \ \Asian Association on Remote Sensing \ \Remote sensing applications \Remote sensing \ \North East Asia \International \ \1991 \372p \Monograph \RE9-60 \#g 1993.54 Long term loan from HQ Library, AS:HQ 333.7095 Ap . $US30, distributedby Geocarto International. Covers variety of applications, emphasis on environmentalchange, especially agriculture, deforestation, desertification, land use,disaster monitoring, mapping, snow and ice, geology, and coast. mvk 17.6.93 @\ An assessment of the use of remote sensing techniques in land degradationstudies \ BRR Bulletin \ Johnston.R \ Barson.M \ \ \ \ Land use \ Environmental research \ Global change \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 \ 64p \ RE9-80 \ Monograph \ #G 1990.33, 1990.69 (copy 2) ISBN 0 644 11830 X, BRR Bulletin No. 5 @\Seminars of the United Nations Programme on Space Applications. Selectedpapers on remote sensing technology \ \ \ \ \United Nations \ \Remote sensing applications \Space technology \Developing countries \International \ \ \1990 \209p \RE14-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.85 Copy 2 1995.68 A/AC.105//443 12.6.92, 7.6.95 @\Establishment of control points for accurate co-registration of AVHRRdata for the Murray-Darling Basin \Technical Memorandum 93/7 \McVicar.T \Mashford.K \ \CSIRO \CSIRO Division of Water Resources \Water Resources Research \AVHRR \Remote sensing applications \Australia \ \ \1993 \69p \RH2-80 \Monograph \#G 1993.49 ISBN 0 643 05469 3 mvk 9.6.93 @\ An exploratory study of inland water and land altimetry using SEASATdata: final report Feb. 1987 \ESA Contract Report 6483-85-NL/BI \Rapley.C \ \ \University College London \ESA \Remote sensing applications \Hydrology \Altimetry \International \ \ \1987 \ca.350 \RH3-05 \Monograph \ # G University's Mullard Space Science Laboratory. @\ Report of the workshop on the application of remote sensing techniquesto water resources development (Seoul: 1986: 29 Oct.-3 Nov.) \ \ \ \ \ESCAP \ \Water resources research \Remote sensing applications \ \International \ \ \1986 \28p. \RH3-05 \(conference pub.) \#G Photocopy. For participants only. UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote SensingProgramme (UNDP/RAS 81-034) @\Remote sensing of change in components of the Regional Water Balance ofthe Murray Darling Basin using satellite imaged and spatially registeredenvironmental data, Final report to the land and water resources researchand development corporation \LWRRDC Project CWA6 \Jupp, David \McVicar, Tim \CSIRO Division of Water Resources \ \Water resources research \AVHRR \Australia \ \ \1992 \7p. \RH3-80 \monograph \#G1995.47 @\ The Indian National Satellite (INSAT) system, report for Jan. 1985- March1986 \ \ \ \ \India. Dept. of Space \ \Satellites \Remote sensing \INSAT \India \ \ \1986 \16p. \RI1-53 \(paper) \#G @\Global Ozone monitoring experiment: GOME . User's manual \SP-1182 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Ozone \Remote sensing instruments \Global change \International \ \ \1995 Sept \123+ \RI2-30 \Monograph \#G 1996.40 ISBN 92 9092 327 X Mainly by DFD/DLR for ESA. mvk 5.4.96 @\SLAR, side looking airborne radar systems: SLAR 100 ...system description,submission date: March 1986 \ \ \ \ \Canadian Astronautics \Astro Pacific \Remote sensing instruments \SLAR \ \Canada \ \ \1986 \ca.27p. \RI2-11 \Monograph \#G Joint venture Astro Pacific Ltd.(Canberra) with Canadian Astronautics(Ottowa) @\Two stars for successful sensing systsem [Star-2 , Sea-ice and TerrainAssessment Radar SAR system] \ \ \ \ \Canada Weekly \ \Remote sensing instruments \Star \SAR \Canada \ \ \1985 \1p. \RI2-11 \Journal article \On p.1 of Canada weekly, Vol.13, no.26, June 26, 1985 @\Applications of airborne multispectral imagery \ \ \ \ \Moniteq \ \Remote sensing applications \Imagers & imaging \ \Canada \ \ \n.d. \4p. \RI2-11 \Folder \Folder with insert on PMI, Programmable Multispectral Imager @\ Optical sensor for RADARSAT [paper presented at 8th Canadian Symposiumon Remote Sensing, 1984?] \ \Cihlar.J \O'Neil.R \Ahern.F \Canadian Symposium on Remote Sensing \ \Remote sensing instruments \Optical sensors \RADARSAT \Canada \ \ \1984 \13p. \RI2-11 \(paper) \Photocopy of pp. 49-62 of unidentified [serial?]. Former dbase No. 619 [ R continues next page ] WT03-B26-25IA029-000311-B017-125http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcats.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163206 text/html 35891HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:30:25 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:33 GMTContent-length: 35716 Catalogue Library catalogue S: SOCIAL SCIENCES SA Anthropology, Archaeology & Ancient History SE Education SF Finance & Economics; Economic programs, economic impact, Employment, Overseas aid. [SEE ALSO (I)Industry] SG Geography (Principles & Practice) [see also Regions (G)] SH History (Modern) SI International Relations SL Law & Legal Affairs, Controls, Bills & Acts of Parliament etc SM Mental Health & Psychology SO Organizational Management/Administration; Industrial Relations. [SEEALSO (IM) Industrial management, (CP) Public relations, advertising.] SP Politics & Government [prefer OG for organisational details, reports] SR Religion & Theology SS Sociology SZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective), Social scienceasin general @\ Living in space, Operation Liftoff elementary space program: a resourceguide with activities for elementary school teachers \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Teachers guides \Space technology \ \Space \United States \ \198... ? \Varies \SE1-01 \Kit \#G P.540 @\Education, training, research and Fellowship opportunities in space scienceand technology and its applications: a directory. \ \ \ \ \UN \ \Education \Space science \ \International \ \ \1986-7; 1989 \various \SE1-05 \Monograph in 2 vol. \1986 Edition in two parts ; A/AC.105-366 and A/AC.105-366-Add.1 (pub. 1987),P.532 and P.533 respectively. 1989 Edition is A/AC.105/432, 1992.47. #G @\ TITLE: Education, Training, Research and Fellowship Opportunities inspace science and technology and its applications \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 U.N. \ CORP.AUTHR.2 COPUOS \ KEYWORD.1 Directories \ KEYWORD.2 Training \ KEYWORD.3 International cooperation \ REGION.1 International \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1989 \ PAGINATION 326p \ CLASSC'N SE1-05 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.47 @\ International Space Year Educational Activities Catalogue \ NASA PED \ McGee.S \ Owens.F \ \ NASA \ \ ISY \ Education \ Teachers guide \ International \ United States \ \1991 Jan \ 22p \ SE1-05 \ Monograph \ 1991.2 #G Includes "Space Enough to Learn" Conference, Canberra1992. @\NASA's Central Operation of Resources for Educators \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Education \Directories \Teachers guide \United States \ \ \HOLD 1993 \80p \SE1-12 \Serial \#G 1994.39 Catalog from National Distribution Center for Aerospace Materials,a joint venture of NASA/ Lorain County Joint Vocational School, Oberlin,Ohio. CORE = Central Operation of Resources for Educators. The catolog list& describes videocassettes, slide sets and other material, with orderinginformation, prices etc. mvk 21.3.94 @\ Higher education: a policy discussion paper [green paper] \Policy discussion paper \ \ \ \Australia. Minister of Employment Education and Training \ \Education \Government policy \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \126p. \SE1-80 \Monograph \#G P.534 ISBN 0 644 07102 8 Green paper on higher education @\CSIRO submission on the Government Policy Discussion Paper on Higher Education,March 1988 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Education \Government policy \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \5p. \SE1-80 \Monograph \#G P.535 Reply to [green paper, see P.534] @\Education and Training in Australia \ \Castles.I \ \ \Australian Bureau of Statistics \ \Education \Government policy \Training \Australia \ \ \1992 \198p \SE1-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.211 ABS Catalogue No. 4224.0 RRP $45.00 ISBN 0 642 17203 X Detailedstatistics on educational expenditure and attainment. mvk 22.12.92 @\ Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology Profile 1988 \ \ \ \ \RMIT \ \Education \Training \Syllabus \Melbourne \Australia \ \1988 \17p. \SE1-83 \Syllabus of courses offered at RMIT during 1988 \#G P.536 Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology @\ Kangaroo Creek Gang [part of Multi-media package; Sponsorship proposal,and A teachers' resource file by A. Dewsbury and K.Kovalevs] \ \Dewsbury.A \Kovalevs.K \ \Kangaroo Creek Gang Ltd \ \Education \ \ \Western Australia \ \ \n.d. \various \SE1-86 \Monograph \#G 2 different vols. about the Primary School multi-media package; P.537- a sponsorship proposal. @\Measures necessary for improving education in space technology and applicationsin developing countries, report by the Secretariat \ \ \ \ \COPUOS \ \Space technology \Education \ \International \ \ \1987 \18p. \SE2-05 \Monograph \#G P.539 A/AC.105/394 @\ Courses available, International Development Progam of Australian Universitiesand Colleges \Studies in Australia \ \ \ \International Development Progam of Australian Universities and Colleges \ \Education \Training \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \47p. \SE2-80 \Catalogue \#G P.541 @\ Information and Education for the Mining and Petroleum Industries, FirstHalf 1989. \ \ \ \ \Australian Mineral Foundation \ \Courses \Syllabus \Seminars \Australia \ \ \1989 \19p. \SE2-80 \Brochure \#G P.542 @\ Education Services, The Future is in Education. Catalogue of IBM EducationCourses in Australia \ \ \ \ \IBM Australia \ \Course \Teaching \Education \Australia \ \ \1989 \441p \SE2-80 \Catalogue \#G P.572 @\ Postgraduate course in Aeronautical and Space Technology, option: spaceFIAS SUP'AERO \ \ \ \ \FIAS \ENSAE SUP'AERO \Space technology \Postgraduate courses \ \France \ \ \1984 \4p. \SE3-34 \Folder \Brochure on course in Toulouse. #G P.543 @\ The universities and NASA space sciences: initial report of the NASA/UniversityRelations Study Group \ \ \ \ \NASA/University Relations Study Group \ \Space science \Education \ \United States \ \ \1983 \varies \SE4-12 \Monograph \#G P.544 @\Training in remote sensing applications, space and education, Report ofthe Deauville Conference on Education and Applications 12-15 February 1990. \ ESA SP \ \ \ \ ESA \ CNES \ Education \ ISY \ Remote sensing applications \ Multinational \ France \ Europe \ 1990 \ 73p \ SE14-15 \ Conference Publication \ #C, Education, ISBN 92-9092-092-0, ESA SP-1130. Copy 2 is 1992.63 in #G. @\ Commitment to change: strategic plan 1988-1992 \ \ \ \ \ANU \ \Education \Future Planning \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \37p. \SE15-80 \Monograph \#G P.545 @\ A.C.E.T. 7th biennial National Conference Report: Strategies for Change,(1986: Canberra) \A.C.E.T. National Conference Report \ \ \ \A.C.T. Schools Authority \Australian Council for Education Through Technology \Education \Technological change \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \95p. \SE15-80 \Monograph \#G P.546 ISBN 0 642 10986 9 @\ Economic impact of simulated technological activity: final report, summary \ \ \ \ \Midwest Research Institute \NASA \Economic impact \Space technology \Satellites \United States \ \ \1971 \46p. \SF4-12 \Monograph \#G P.551 photocopy @\ The Economic Impact of NASA R&D Spending \ NASA CR \ Evans.M \ \ \ Chase Econometrics Associates \ \ Economic impact \ Technological change \ Industrial research & development \ United States \ \ \ 1976 Apr \ 122p \ SF4-12 \ Monograph (photocopy of original). \ #G P.140 , unbound. Final report to NASA under NASA CR 144352. Gives detailedcost/benefit methodology disaggregated by industrial sector, and shows imputedbenefit to US economy of NASA budget increases (with no net increase inFederal budget). Also contains statistics and references on social benefit(cf private marginal gain) of public funded R&D (former about 2X latter).Photocopy as P.558 (Copy 2)jk 20.8.91 @\ Future impact of space technology in the public sector \ \ Philips.R \ \ \ NASA \ \ Economic impact \ Technological change \ Industrial research & development \ United States \ \ \ ? \ Various \ SF4-12 \ Monograph (photocopy of original). \ #G P.569 . Marked "US File 1970". @\ Impact of NASA research and development expenditures on technologicalinnovation and the economy [paper from] International Colloquuium on EconomicEffects of Space and other Advanced Technologies (1980, 28-30 April: Strasbourg) \ \Hertzfeld.H \ \ \International Colloquium on Economic Effects of Space and Other AdvancedTechnologies \ESA \Space technology \Innovations \Economics \United States \ \ \1980 \14p. \SF4-12 \(paper) \#G P.552 Reprint of pp. 81-94 from ESA SP-151, September 1980 @\Economic benefits of ESA contracts, Phase 2 Final Report: Vol.2: Mainreport; September 1981 \ \Niederau.G \Fitoussi.J \Brendle.P \BETA \ESA \Economic impact \ESA \Space programs \Europe \ \ \1981 \130p. \SF4-30 \Monograph \ESA Contract to Theoretical and Applied Economics Department, Faculty ofEconomic Sciences, Louis Pasteur University Strasbourg. Study managers:Niederau & Fitoussi. Brendle: 1st author. #G P.547 @\ Impact of ESA expenditure on Europe's technological independence [Section4 of Economic benefits of ESA Contracts Phase 2 Final Report, V.2, MainReport, pp.41-131.] \ \ \ \ \BETA \ESA \Economic impact \Space programs \ESA \Europe \ \ \1981 \ca.130p. \SF4-30 \(papers) \#G P.548 See also P.547. Concludes that Europe has achieved stronger, moreinnovative industries and management through ESA's space budget. @\Proceedings of International Colloquium on Economic Effects of Space andOther Advanced Technologies, Strasbourg 28-30 September 1980 \ESA SP-151 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space technology \Economic impact \ \Europe \International \ \1980 \varies \SF4-30 \(papers) \#G P.567 (Part 1), P.568 (Part 2) Papers by Lebeau; Mansfield; Intriligator;Irvine; Amndola. Other papers held catalogued by authors. Monograph versionof SP-151 not held. @\ Australian S & T budget brief \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Technology \Scientific reearch \Budget \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1987 \varies \SF4-80 \Serial \#G P.555 ISSN 0818 4755 For Ministerial Science and Technology Budget papers,see #O OG4-80. @\ Doubling Australia's technology exports: report of the 40th Meeting ofthe National Science and Industry Forum (1987: Thredbo) \National Science and Industry Forum report \ \ \ \AAS \ \Industrial research and development \Export trade \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \75p \SF4-80 \Monograph \#G P.553 ISBN 0 85847 141 8 . Reports of the National Science and IndustryForum, No. 25 @\ Industry Technology and Commerce Budget 1986-87 \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Budget \Industry \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \31p. \SF4-80 \Monograph \#G P.560 @\Building a competitive Australia. Statements by Prime Minster Bob Hawke,Treasurer Paul Keating; Industry Minister John Button. \ \Hawke.R \Keating.P \Button.J \Australia. Dept of Prime Minister and Cabinet \ \Economics \Government policy \Industrial technology \Australia \ \ \1991 Mar \Various \SF4-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.80 ISBN 0 644 13982 X 12.6.92 @\Remote Sensing use in tree cover mapping and pasture management \ABARE Research Report 94.11 \Watson.W \ \ \Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics \ \Economic impact \Remote sensing applications \Agricultural research \Australia \ \ \1994 \94p \SF4-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.142 and Copy 2 at 1995.143 ISSN 1037 8286 , ISBN 0 642 21222171, ABARE Project 30.008, funded by ASO. Assisted by Peter Vickery of CSIROAnimal Production and others including Robyn Johnston of BRS. Examines costbenefits of remote sensing in limited land use areas, but does not takeinto consideration subsidies upon which these benefits may depend (eg ACRESoperating costs). mvk 1.11.94, 12.12.95 @\ Government financial assistance programs in Canada. 2nd ed. [by] J.PeterJohnson. \ \Johnson.J \ \ \Price Waterhouse \ \Financial assistance \Government policy \Industry \Canada \ \ \1982 \506p. \SF5-11 \Monograph \#G P.559 ISBN 0 409 85975 3 @\ Role of R&D in high-technology trade: an empirical analysis \ \Le.C \ \ \International Atlantic Economic Conference(1986: Boston) \Canada. Government \Industrial research & development \Economics \ \Canada \ \ \1986 \37p. \SF5-11 \(conference paper) \photocopy. #G P.570 . Covering letter from Rod Murnain. @\Science and technology in the Budget: a national forum (1987, 5-6 Nov.:Eagle Hawk Hill Complex, Canberra) [being the 2nd NSTAG report, 1987] \ \Bartels.D \ \ \NSTAG \ \Scientific research \Technology \Economics \Australia \ \ \1987 \various \SF5-80 \Monograph \#G P.554 Papers presented at the Forum. Includes loose copy of paper byA.S.Podger. @\ Basic data on science research and innovation, levels of R & D inAustralia, Commonwealth funding of science and innovation, internationalR & D comparisons and trends; prepared for the NSTAG Review Meeting,Canberra, 3-4 November 1988 \ \ \ \ \NSTAG \DITAC \Industrial research & development \Financial assistance \Innovation \Australia \ \ \1988 \ca 11p. \SF5-80 \(paper) \# G P.565 @\Science and technology in the budget, a preliminary report [to Forum,Canberra, Nov. 1986] \ \ \ \ \NSTAG \ \Scientific research \Technology \Economics \Australia \ \ \1986 \45p. \SF5-80 \Monograph \#G P.566 Cover title: Science & technology in Australia, a review ofgovernment support. @\Science, technology and the economy \University of NSW Occasional Papers \ \ \ \University of NSW \ \Economics \Industrial research & development \Scientific research \Australia \ \ \1985 \36p. \SF5-80 \Monograph \#G P.561 No. 11, 1986 @\ Australian government Offsets Program guidelines for participants, March1986 \ \ \ \ \DITAC \Australian Government Offsets Program \Industrial research & development \Offsets programs \Guidelines \Australia \ \ \1986 \46p. \SF5-80 \Monograph \#G P.562 ISBN 0 644 04777 1 @\ Offsets '88 Conference program [ and papers] (1987 9-10 Nov.: Sydney) \ \ \ \ \Calcutt Watson & Assoc. \Coopers & Lybrand \Economics \Offsets programs \Export trade \Australia \ \ \1987 \ca. 200p. \SF5-80 \(Conf. pub.) \Looseleaf. Not found 20.5.92 @\ Australian Government Offsets Program [information folder with emphasison space industry] \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Industrial research & development \Offsets programs \Space industry \Australia \International \ \1986 \n/a \SF5-80 \Folder \#G P.563 Folder contains: Guidelines for participants, Australian SpaceBoard Open letter, Offsets backgrounder issues no.1 & 2, Schedule ofOverseas Companies participating..., Commonwealth Purchasing Circular CPC83-4,and brochures @\ Joint submission to the Committee of Review on Government High TechnologyPurchasing Arrangements, October 1986 \ \ \ \ \DITAC \Australia. Dept. of Local Govt. \Economics \Government purchasing \Government policy \Australia \ \ \1986 \221p. \SF5-80 \Monograph \#G P.564 @\Economic evaluation of CSIRO Industrial research \BIE Research Report No. 39 \ \ \ \Bureau of Industry Economics \ \Industrial Research & Development \Economics \Technology transfer \Australia \ \ \1992 \52p \SF5-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.221 ISBN 0 644 22360 X Important analysis of case studies of costbenefit. Concludes that factors external to CSIRO are important in evaluatingresearch results (can't just use internal CBA), and that of case studiesexamined, benefits exceeded costs by any measure employed. Cases includedsatellite communication groundstation antenna. mvk 23.12.92 @\ An Economic evaluation of the National Space Program \BIE Research Report No. 43 \ \ \ \Bureau of Industry Economics \ \Industrial Research & Development \Economics \Technology transfer \Australia \ \ \1992 \173p \SF5-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.279; 1994.01 Copy 2 kept by JK. ISBN 0 644 24971 4 Important analysisof economic outcome of DITAC's National Space Program. Uncomplimentary inparts, takes viewpoint that there is no justification for a separate SpaceProgram (apart from normal industry, education support programs), diametricallyopposed to Expert Panel NSP Review of same year. mvk 3.1.93, 1.2.94 @\ Ensuring Canada's competitive future, STEP: support for technology enhancedproductivity \Discussion paper \Lumley.E \ \ \Canada. Government \ \Economics \Industrial technology \Government policy \Canada \ \ \1982 \40p. \SF7-11 \Monograph \#G P.550 @\Technological change and employment, a report to the Prime Minister, preparedby the Technological Change Committee, June 1983 \ \Slatyer.R \ \ \ASTEC \ \Technological change \Employment \Industrial technology \Australia \ \ \1983 \168p. \SF11-80 \Monograph \#G P.557 ISBN 0 644 02657 X @\Introduction to personal career planning: self-paced manual \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Human Resources Branch \ \Employment \Technological change \ \Australia \ \ \1994 \89p \SF11-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.66 With covering letter from Carmel Macpherson, General ManagerHuman Resources Branch. Designed to help employees of CSIRO plan careerchanges & personal development. mvk 1.6.94 @\ Report the Committee to Review the Australian Overseas Aid Program, March1984 [Chaired by Sir R. Gordon Jackson] \ \Jackson.R \ \ \Australia. Committee to Review the Australian Overseas Aid Program \ \Developing countries \DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE \Government policy \Australia \International \ \1984 \276p \SF14-80 \Monograph \#G P.549 ISBN 0 644 03344 4 (report), 0 644 03345 2 (Summary). @\Aid and the Environment \AIDAB Development Paper 1989 No. 3 \ \ \ \AIDAB \ \Development assistance \Environmental protection \Government policy \Australia \International \ \1989 \29p \SF14-80 \Monograph \#G 1991.144 ISSN 1031 1475 Describes Environmental Assistance Program,EAP. mvk 23.12.92 @\Australia reconstructed: ACTU/TDC Mission to Western Europe \ \ \ \ \ \ \Economics \Technological change \Industrial relations \Australia \International \ \1987 \221p \SF15-80 \Monograph \#G P.556 ISBN 0 644 06535 4 . Report of visit led by Bill Kelty, MartinFerguson. @\Compendium of social development indicators in the ESCAP region: qualityof life in the ESCAP region \ESCAP ST/ESCAP/1293 \ \ \ \ESCAP \UN \Economics \Development assistance \Sociology \North east Asia \East Asia \ESCAP region \1993 \152p \SG1-60 \Monograph \#G 1994.58 Tables and statistics of social development factors in the AsiaPacific Region mvk 9.4.94 @\ Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Usesof Outer Space, Report of the Conference (1982, 9-21 Aug.: Vienna) [UNISPACE'82] \ \ \ \ \UN \UN Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space \Space cooperation \Space technology \International relations \Space \International \ \1982 \167p \SI2-05 \Conference pub. \#G P.575, UN Doc. A/CONF.101/10. Draft report at P.574, A/Conf.101-3. @\Japan: how to make collaboration work, a study with special referenceto pre-competitive research and development \ \Utick. \Weir.A \ \DITAC \ \International coordination \Culture Japanese \Industrial research & development \Japan \Australia \ \1988 \41p. \SI5-63 \Monograph \#G P.576 ISBN 0 644 08113 9 @\ Australia India Relations, Trade and Security \ \ Maguire.G \ \ \ Senate Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade \ \ International relations \ \ \ India \ Australia \ \1990 July \ 125p \ SI7-53 \ Monograph \ #G 1990.22. Contains CSIRO OSSA submission on CSIRO/ISRO space scienceand technology MOU, see P15. ISBN 0 644 11026 0 See also 1992.77 for responseof Government. @\The response of the Government to the report of the Senate Standing Committeeon Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade, on Australia-Indian relations : Tradeand Security. \Evans.G \ \ \Australia . Dept. of Foreign Affairs and Trade \ \International relations \ \ \Australia \India \ \1990 Dec \30p \SI7-53 \Unbound monograph \#G 1992.77 Mentions role played by an agreement fostering co-operationin science and technology, under which a number of projects are being pursuedin space science, meteorology etc. 12.6.92 @\Australia's relations with Thailand \ \ \ \ \Senate Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade \Joint Standing Committee onn Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade \International cooperation \Development assistance \ \Thailand \Australia \South East Asia \1995 Oct \303p \SI7-68 \Monograph \#G 1995.149 Contains strong CSIRO (COSSA) case before Committee, in favourof closer scientific interaction with Thailand and with ESCAP. Resultedin several positive recommendations supporting COSSA view. mvk 20.12.95Copy 2 is #G 1996.56 ISBN 0644 34681 7 mvk 10.6.96 \@\The Guide to Australian Lawyers \ \Tilbury.Christine \ \ \ \ \Directories \Guide books \ \Australia \ \ \1994 \222p \SL1-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.72 ISBN 0 646 14194 5 Pub. by PB Marketing & Media, Balmain.Lists lawyers in various specialist fields inc. science and technology.2nd Edition. mvk 19.6.94 @\Telesat Canada Act 1968-69], an act to establish a Canadian corporationfor telecommunication by satellite... \ \ \ \ \Canada. Parliament \ \Telecommunications \Satellites \Legal affairs \Canada \ \ \1969 \27p. \SL2-11 \Reprint \Reprinted act, Chapter T-4. #G P.579 @\ Industry Research & Development bill 1986 \ \Button.J \ \ \Australia. Parliament \ \Legal affairs \Industrial research & development \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \n/a \SL5-80 \Monograph \#G P.581. In folder marked "Innovation in Australia" @\A User's Guide to Copyright \Australian Copyright Council Bulletin 74 \ \ \ \ Australian Copyright Council \ \Guides \Legal affairs \Information technology \Australia \ \ \1991 \37p \SL5-80 \Monograph as series \#G 1994.150 Main emphasis on works of art. Specific instructions on proceduresto get clearances. mvk 15.11.94 @\ National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, as amended, and related legislation,prepared at the request of Don. Fuqua, Chairman Committee on Science andTechnology, 98th Congress, October 1983 \[Committee print] \ \ \ \US. Congress \ \Legal affairs \National Aeronautics and Space Act \Space Law \United States \ \ \1983 \212p. \SL6-12 \Monograph \#G P.583 @\ Appendix D, Public Law 98-365, (An Act to establish a system to promotethe use of land remote-sensing satellite data. 98th Congress, July 17, 1984. \ \ \ \ \Senate and House of Repreentatives of the United States of America in Congress \ \Remote Sensing \Landsat \ \United States \Space \ \1984 \Varies \SL6-12 \Paper \ #G P.584 . Also known as "Land Remote-Sensing Commercialisation Act1984" @\Space Law Teaching in Europe \ \ \ \ \European Centre for Space Law \ \Space Law \International cooperation \Education \Europe \International \ \1993 \125p \SL6-30 \Monograph \#G 1994.69 Contains bibliography, Index, lists of country contact points,space law periodicals. mvk 8.6.94 @\Australian Space Council Act 1994 \ \ \ \ \Australia.Parliament \ \Government policy \Planning \Space programs \Australia \ \ \1994 \9p \SL7-80 \Reprint \#G 1994.145 Act No. 27 of 1994. Legislative basis for establishment ofAustralian Space Council. AGPS 9 780644 306522 Cat. No. 94 4170 7 mvk 1.11.94 @\ Australian controls on the export of technology with civil and militaryapplications: a guide for importers and exporters \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Defence \ \Export trade \Military applications \Industrial technology \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1987, 19917 \16p. + supplements \SL8-80 \Monograph \#G P.580 Refers to Australian accession to COCCOM restrictions. Bookletsin folder. 1994.59 (1991 version) in green binder. mvk 11.4.94 @\The Reluctant Nation \ \Toyne.Phillip \ \ \ \ \Legal affairs \Environmental protection \ \Australia \ \ \1994 \228p \SL9-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.10 ISBN 0 7333 0375 7 Includes acknowledgement to COSSA for frontcover illustration taken from Looking Back. mvk 2.1.95 @\Space Law - development and scope \ \Jasentuliyana.Nandasiri \ \ \U.N. \ \Space Law \Government policy \Developing countries \International \ \ \1992 \281p \SL14-05 \Monograph \#G 1993.156 ISBN 0 275 94036 5 From DA Books $88, Long Term Loan HQ (AS:HQ341.47 Sp , 3 9009 00298957 8 CLIS/388) Includes bibliography . mvk 17.10.93 @\Convention of the European Space Agency & rules of procedure of ESACouncil \ \ \ \ \ESA \ \International conventions \Space programs \Space law \Europe \ \ \1984 \117p. \SL14-30 \Monograph \Text of Convention. #G P.577 (Copy 1), P.578 (Copy 2, photocopy in folder) @\ The safe use of pesticides in CSIRO \ \ \ \ \ CSIRO Occupational Health and Safety Section \ \ Safety aspects \ Industrial safety \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 \ 19p \ SO10-80 \ Monograph \ #G 1990.52 @\ Annual report Occupational Health and Safety \ OHS Annual report \ \ \ \ CSIRO Occupational Health and Safety Section \ \ Safety aspects \ Industrial safety \ Management \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1988-89, 1989-90 \ \ SO10-80 \ Monograph \ #G P.104, 1990.51 @\Working together for a safer work environment \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \ Safety aspects \ Industrial safety \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1992 \ 18p \ SO10-80 \ Monograph \ #G 1993.92 CSIRO Occupational Health and Safety Agreement. mvk 19.7.93 @\ Access and Equity Plan, Industry Technology and Commerce Portfolio \ Access and Equity Report No. 13 \ \ \ \ Office of Multicultural Affairs \ Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet \ Management \ Human relations \ Personnel \ Australia \ \ \1990 February \ 67p \ SO11-80 \ Monograph \ #G P.63 Access and Equity Report No. 13. AGPS 89/21736, Cat No. 89 20473. ISBN 0 644 11024 4. Section on CSIRO. @\What is fair? What is not? A hitchhiker's guide to Legislation underpinningHuman Resource Management Practices \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Management \Industrial relations \Personnel \Australia \ \ \1995 June \98p \SO11-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.129 ISBN 0 643 055762 5 mvk 4.11.95 @\CSIRO Property Management \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Industrial research & development \Industrial management \Planning \Australia \ \ \1994 Dec \57p \SO11-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.103 Describes property approach, including leasing, allowed areafor grades of staff. mvk 1.9.95 @\CSIRO Property management status report on major initiatives/issues \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Industrial management \Planning \ \Australia \ \ \Dec. 1994 \[9] p. \SO11.80 \monograph \#G 1996.11. See also #G 1995.103 for more detailed information on Propertymanagement. mvk 17.3.96. @\ Industrial democracy and employee participation: a policy discussionpaper, summary and overview \Policy discussion paper \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Employment and Industrial Relations \ \Industrial relations \ \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \15p. \SO15-80 \Monograph \#G P.585 ISBN 0 644 05579 0 @\Living by our wits, a selection of speeches by Barry O. Jones, Ministerfor Science \ \Jones.B \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Science \ \Speeches \Technological change \Government policy \Australia \ \ \1986 \70p. \SP1-80 \Monograph \#G P.586 ISBN 0 644 04704 6 Speeches on science, technological change,& political and economic impact. @\Commonwealth Government Directory \ \ \ \ \Commonwealth Government of Australia \ \Directories \ \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1993 June-Aug; 1994 June-Aug; 1995 Jun-Aug \ \SP1-80 \Serial \#G 1993.114 ; 1994.184 ; 1995.110 ISSN 1030 3170 Lists of portfolios, seniorofficers, Ministers, Senators, Members of Parliament, Committees. mvk 15.8.93,20.12.94, 16.9.95 @\ Right direction stronger steps, Red report of the Industries PoliciesCommittee, Science Council of Canada, Revised Draft, February 1984; [withcovering commentary from Australian High Commission, Ottawa]; Confidential \ Red report \ Pollock.R \ \ \Science Council of Canada \ \Industry \Technological change \Government policy \Canada \ \ \1984 \121p. \SP5-11 \(paper) \#G P.582 Draft paper, restricted until after publicatio @\Disaster management \ \ \ \ \Australia.Parliament \Senate Standing Committee on Industry, Science, Technology, Transport,Communications and Infrastructure \Disasters \Government policy \ \Australia \ \ \1994 June \160p \SP11-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.168 ISBN 0 642 20377 6 Includes evidence from COSSA (Harris, Kingwell).Recommends that Emergency Management Australia convenes a working groupto evaluate role of remote sensing technology in disaster management: alsorecommends support for CSIRO's development of multi-spectral technologies.mvk 20.11.94 @\ Science Policy "Preparing today for tomorrow" \ \ \ \ \ Liberal and National Parties \ \Government policy \Industrial technology \Scientific research \Australia \ \ \1990 (?) \5p \SP15-80 \Monograph \#G 1993.155 1990 Pre-election manifesto. mvk 10.10.93 @\The Liberal and National Parties' Science and Technology Strategy : "Creating an Innovative Culture" \ \ \ \ \ \ \Government policy \Industrial technology \Scientific research \Australia \ \ \1993 March \35p \SP15-80 \Monograph \#G 1993.85 Pre-election manifesto. mvk 16.7.93 @\ The Right Climate \ \ \ @\ Notes on minimising or dealing with vandalism, harassment & otherthreats \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Harassment \ \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \5p. \SS1-80 \Monograph \#G P.587 Copy 1, P.588 Copy 2 (with cover note from H Kwong). WT03-B26-26IA029-000311-B017-153http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatt.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163218 text/html 21432HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:30:36 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:34 GMTContent-length: 21257 Catalogue Library catalogue T: TERRESTRIAL (GEOLOGICAL) SCIENCES [see also Marine Geology (MG); Mining (EM); Remote Sensing (R-)] TC Geochemistry [see also Chemistry (PC)] TD Disasters (Natural), including earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, mudslides,floods [see also TW for mitigation aspects of floods; also Weather Disasters (WD)] TE Environmental Geology [SEE ALSO (LE) Ecology & environment, (RE) Remote sensing TG Glaciology, ice sheets, the Cryosphere TH Historical Geology [see also Fossils (LF)] TM Mineralogy & Mining (geological aspects) [SEE TR resources aspects] TP Geophysics; Geodesy; Surveying; Magnetics; Measurements. [SEE ALSO Remote sensing applications (R-); Upper Atmospheric sciences (WA); Solar terrestrial physics (XP)] TR Resources (Economic Geology), Mining , economic aspects, mining exploration [SEE ALSO (RE) and (RT] TS Structural Geology, Geodynamics, Plate tectonics, landforms, geomorphology; SEE ALSO (TP) Geodesy & geophysics TW Water Resources & Hydrology, flood mitigation [SEE TD for floodsas disasters] TX Films, videos on terrestrial geological science TZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective) @\Geological Hazard Photos \ \ \ \ \US. Dept. of Commerce \National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin. \Geology & geophysics \Disasters \Earthquake \International \United States \ \1993 \ \TD1-05 \CD-ROM kit \#AV 46 Boxed set includes 2 floppy disks (GeoVu Access Software and Hazardphotos) and 2 CDs (Vol. 1 Earthquakes; Vol. 2 Volcanoes and other phenomena).mvk 19.8.95 @\ICAO Journal Vol 47 No 12 : special article on "Volcanic Ash: predictingthe dispersion of hazardous atmospheric material \ICAO Journal \ \ \ \ICAO \ \Disasters \Volcanoes \International \ \ \1992 \ \TD2-05 \Journal \#G 1993.48 Describes dispersion of atmospheric material hazardous to aviation mvk 9.6.93 @\Volcanic Ash and Aircraft Operations Regional Handbook 1993 \ \ \ \ \ICAO \ \Volcanoes \Disasters \ \International \ \ \1993 \180p \TD2-05 \Monograph \#G 1993.47 Written with help of Vulcan-AUS, advise for aviators in eventof volcanic ash encounter. mvk 9.6.93 @\First International Symposium on Volcanic Ash and Aviation Safety \U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1065 \Casdevall, Thomas J. (ed) \ \ \ \ \Volcanoes \Disasters \Aircraft industry \United States \International \ \1991 \58p. \TD3-05 \monograph \#G1995.45 @\Volcanic ash and airports, discussions and recommendations from the workshopon impacts of volcanic ash on airport facilities, Seattle, Washington, April26-28,1993. \U.S.Geological Survey Open File Report 93-518 \Casadevall. Thomas J. \ \ \ \ \Volcanoes \Aircraft industry \ \United States \International \ \1993 \53p. \TD3-12 \monograph \#G 1995.44 @\Pinatubo volcano wakes from 4 century slumber \ \ \ \ \Phillipine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology \ \Disasters \Volcanoes \Phillipines \ \ \1992 \35p. \TD9-72 \monograph \#G 1995.46 @\ ? Image Atlas of Glaciers of the World \ USGS Professional Papers No. 1386 -H \ Williams.R \ Ferrigno.J \ Allison.I \ USGS \ \ Atlases \ Glaciology \ Geomorphology \ International \ \ \ 1988 \ 48p \ TG1-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.63 . Paper 1386-H is the 8th of 11 chapters of the complete SatelliteImage Atlas, and includes "Glaciers of Irian Jaya, Indonesia",by I Allison and J Peterson, and "Glaciers of New Zealand", byT Chinn. The Atlas uses 1972-1982 Landsat MSS and Return Beam Vidicon (RBV)images to construct a snapshot of global glaciers, for comparison with extantmaps, field measurements and aerial photographs. jk 14.10.91 @\ Workshop on the U.S. Antarctic meteorological data delivery system (1987,10-11 Sept.:Boulder, Colo.) \Glaciological Data Report GD-20 \Hanson.C \Stearns.C \ \National Snow and Ice Data Centre \World Data Center for Glaciology [Snow and Ice] \Glaciology \Meteorology \Information dissemination \Antarctica \United States \ \1988 \76p. \TG1-95 \Monograph \#G P.590 Copy 1, P.591 Copy 2 . ISSN 0149 1776 @\Proceedings Pacific Rim Congress 90 Gold Coast Queensland 6-12 May 1990 \Pacrim Congress \ \ \ \The Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy \ \Mining \Geology & Geophysics \Earth resources \Australia \Oceania \Queensland \1990 \746, 864p \TM2-80 \Conference proceedings \#C (PACRIM) , 1993.44.1 (Vol II), 1993.44.2 (Vol III). ISBN 0949 10647X, 0949 106488. NB Proceedings of PACRIM 87 were designated "Vol I"of series. PACRIM is an international conference on the geology, structure,mineralisation, & economics of mining development in the Pacific Rim.See also P.425 (paper from PACRIM 87). mvk 4.6.93 @\ The Application of Sirotem in Weathered Terrain \ \Buselli.G \ \ \CSIRO Division of Mineral Physics & Mineralogy \ \Mineral Mining \Geology \Surveying \Australia \ \ \1980 \Varies \TM3-80 \Paper \#G P.592 Published in Bull. Aust. Soc. Explor. Geophys. v.11 No.3, Sept.1980. @\Land Information Management in Australasia \ \ \ \ \Australia New Zealand Land Information Council \ \Geographic Information Systems \Mapping \Data policy \Australia \New Zealand \Oceania \HOLD 1990-92 (pub1992) \96p \TP1-80 \Serial \#G 1993.35 (Copy 1), 1993.36 (Copy 2) ISBN 0 644 25798 9 [See also 1992.227ISSN 1039 2742 , Annual Report of Council 1991-92]. Pub by AGPS Canberra.ANZLIC is the peak council of land information management in the two countries,includes State Ministers . mvk 1.6.93 @\Issues in Land Information Management: Privacy, Confidentiality and Accessto information in Land Information systems. \Issues in Land Information Management: Paper No. 5 \ \ \ \Australia New Zealand Land Information Council \ \Geographic Information Systems \Mapping \Data policy \Australia \New Zealand \Oceania \1992 Sept \15p \TP1-80 \Monograph published as Serial \#G 1994.21 ISBN 0 644 25602 8 . Pub by AGPS Canberra. ANZLIC is the peakcouncil of land information management in the two countries, includes StateMinisters . mvk 30.6.92 @\Rural addressing: a model for the systematic addressing of rural properties \ \ \ \ \ \Land data systems \Mapping \Geographic information systems \Australia \New Zealand \ \1995 May 23 \22 \TP1-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.99 Prepared by ad hoc working group on Rural Street Addressing,comprising delegates from each State, plus New Zealand. mvk 19.8.95 @\Keeping the West in control, products and services guide, Geodetic Branch,Dept of Land Administration [WA] \ \ \ \ \Western Australia. Geodetic Branch \DOLA \Surveying \ \ \Western Australia \Australia \ \n.d. \16p. \TP1-86 \Monograph \After 1983. #G P.594 @\An assessment of the internal precision and quality of GPS data from theS.A. geodetic network project \School of Applied Science Research Project Report \Morgan.P \Xing.C \Rogers.C \CCAE \ \GPS \Surveying \Geodetic measurement \Australia \South Australia \ \1986 Aug \ 58p + \TP2-80 \Monograph \#G P.863 21.6.92 @\Biennial Report Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska, Fairbanks \ \ \ \ \University of Alaska \ \Space Physics \Ionosphere \Geophysics \Alaska \Arctic \Polar \After 1986 ; also hold 1993, 1993-94. \196p; 200p. \TP2-13 \Report \#G P.595; 1991-1992 report is 1994.93, including separate treatment ofremote sensing (Fairbanks Alaskan SAR Facility, a NASA DAAC). volcanologicalstudies, Poker Flat Rocket Launch Facility mvk 8.7.94 1993-94 report is#G 1996.45 mvk 10.6.96 @\BMR Geology and Geophysics Work Program \Work Program \ \ \ \BMR \DOPIE \Geology & Geophysics \Earth sciences \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1991 \Various \TP2-80 \Serial \#G 1992.68 (1991 @\ AGSO Yearbook \Yearbook of the Australian Geological Survey Organisation \ \ \ \AGSO \DOPIE \Geology & Geophysics \Earth sciences \Development assistance \Australia \Oceania \ \HOLD 1993 \Various \TP2-80 \Serial \#G 1994.108 (1993) ISSN 1039 5679 AGSO, created circa 1993, was formerlyknown as BMR, Bureau of Mineral Resources. Yearbook gives fairly detaileddescriptions of program structure and projects, including internationaldevelopment assistance. mvk 21.7.94 @\ Government Geoscience Database Policy Advisory Committee: ProceedingsGeoscience Data Storage Workshop 29 August 1994 \GGDPAC/Government Geoscience Database Policy Committee/AGSO Record 1994/49 \ \ \ \AGSO \DOPIE \Geology & Geophysics \Earth sciences \Data policy \Australia \Oceania \ \1994 \84p \TP2-80 \Conference papers \#G 1995.83 ISSN 1039 0073 ISBN 0 642 22088 3 AGSO, created circa 1993,was formerly known as BMR, Bureau of Mineral Resources. Record 1994/49 givesconclusions and deliberations of Workshop, inc. archive media, data preservaton,data holdings. mvk 09.7.95 @\Research, Investigations and technical developments, National MappingProgram, 1985-1986 \USGS Open-File Report 87-86 \ \ \ \US Geological Survey \National Mapping Division, Department of the Interior \Aerial Photography \Mapping \United States \North America \ \ \1988 \139p. \TP3-12 \Monograph \Summaries of selected research and development 1985-86. #G P.589 @\The Spring 1985 high precision baseline test of the JPL GPS-based geodeticsystem \ \Davidson.J \Thornton.C \Stephens.S \NASA \ \Geodetic measurements \NAVSTAR satellites \ \United States \ \ \1987 \67p. \TP3-12 \Monograph \#G P.606 NASA Jet Propulsion Lab. Publication 87-35 @\Geoscience mapping towards the 21st Century \1989 Research Symposium \ \ \ \BMR \ \Mapping \Geology and geophysics \Geographic information systems \Australia \ \ \1989 \Various \TP15-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.197 Collection of papers from the 1989 Symposium, National ConventionCentre Canberra 7-9 November . Gives overview of possible new directionsfor Australian geoscience maps & databases and shows how particularresearch fields in Australia may need to change in the future. mvk 30.11.92 @\ Mineral resources of the Australian Antarctic Territory \ANARE Research Notes \Quilty.P \Tingey.R \ \Antarctic Div. \ANARE \Minerals & mining \Earth resources \ \Australian Antarctic Territory \Polar Regions \ \1985 \215p. \TR3-96 \Monograph \#G P.597 ANARE Research Notes No. 27 @\Mineral sands in Asia and the Pacific \Mineral concentrations and hydrocarbon accumulations in the ESCAP RegionVolume 4 \ \ \ \ESCAP/United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific \BMR/Bureau of Mineral Resources/Australia \Minerals and mining \Earth resources \ \North east asia \ \ \1989 ? \126p \TR5-60 \Monograph \#G 1990.107 15.6.92 @\Global geodynamics \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing applications \Geology & geophysics \Geodynamics \International \United States \ \n.d. \14p \TS3-05 \Monograph \#G P.598 Dated ca.1982 @\ Geomorphology from space, a global overview of regional landforms \NASA SP-486 \Short.N \Blair.R \ \NASA \ \Geomorphology \Atlases \Remote sensing applications \International \ \ \1986 \717p. \TS3-05 \Monograph \#G P.573 @\ NASA Geodynamics Program: Annual Report and Bibliography \ NASA Technical Memoranda \ \ \ \ NASA OSSA \ \ Earth sciences \ LAGEOS \ VLBI \ United States \ \ \ HOLD 1990 August \ 164p \ TS3-12 \ Monograph \ #G 1990.65 NASA TM -4220. Seventh Geodynamics Program report: summarisesprogram activities and achievements during 1988, 1898. Includes 115 p bibliographyof NASA Geodyn. publications since 1979. @\ Geodetic measurement of crustal deformation in the Australian region,a submission ...from a Working Party of the National Committee for SolidEarth Sciences, June 1985. \ Quadrennial report series \ Stolz.A \ \ \ AAS \ \ Geodetic measurement \ Structural geology \ Remote sensing applications \ Australia \ \ \ 1985 \ 47p. \ TS3-80 \ Monograph \#G P.599 @\ Space and Flood Management \ \ Rao.U \ Ramamoorthi.A \ Florenzano.T \ ISRO \ \ Flood mitigation \ Disasters \ Remote sensing applications \ International \ Indian subcontinent \ South America \ 1990 \ 57p \ TW1-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1990.102 (copy 1), P.50 (Copy 2) Reprint of papers from Special CurrentEvent Session, International Astronautical Federation, 40th Congress, MalagaSpain October 1989. jk 29/5/91 @\ Services to the Water Industry, Objectives of the Water Research Centre,Accredited Teaching Programs \ \ \ \ \CCAE \Water Research Centre, School of Applied Science \Water resources \Water quality \hydrology \Australia \1988 \Varies \TW1-80 \Brochure \#G P.596 Research projects resumes. @\ Guidelines for flood mitigation, Tung Kula Ronghai, northeast Thailand;August 1979 \ \Whitehouse.G \Ruangsiri.P \ \ADAB \Thailand. Tung Kula Ronghai Project \Flood mitigation \Hydrology \Tung Kula Ronghai project \Thailand \ \ \1979 \46p. \TW2-68 \Monograph \#G P.602 @\Water \CSIRO Research for Australia \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Water resources research \Hydrology \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \78p. \TW3-80 \Monograph \CSIRO Research for Australia no.18. #G P.603 ISBN 0 643 03803 5 @\ Water Research In Australia \ Streamline \ \ \ \ DOPIE \ \ Water resources research \ Hydrology \ Earth resources \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1990 \ \ TW3-80 \ SERIAL \ 1990.53 #G ISSN 0810736X @\Development and conservation of ground-water resources and water-relatednatural disasters and their management in selected least developed countriesand developing island countries in the ESCAP Region \Water Resources Series No. 66 \ \ \ \ESCAP \United Nations \Water resources research \Disasters \Flood mitigation \North east Asia \International \Pacific Islands \1989 \102p \TW9-60 \Monograph \#G 1990.140 Includes case studies of cyclones in Philippines, Kirabati,Tonga. mvk 31.12.92 @\ Murray Basin 88, Geology, Groundwater and Salinity Management - ConferenceSummary Report - Canberra, 23-26 May 1988 \Record 1988-43, Division of Continental Geology Groundwater \ \ \ \DOPIE \Groundwater Working Group of the Murray-Darling Basin Ministerial Counciland the Australian Geoscience Council \Rainfall \Afforestation \Hydrology \Riverina \Victoria South Australia \1988 \32p. \TW9-80 \Report \#G P.600 @\The Algal Management Strategy for the Murray Darling Basin \ \ \ \ \Murray Darling Basin Commission \ \Water resources research \Environmental research \Primary industry \Australia \New South Wales \Queensland \1994 Oct \33p \TW9-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.1 (Copy 1), 1995.2 (Copy 2). Describes component of the NaturalResources Management Strategy. mvk 1.1.95 @\ TITLE: Geodetic Glossary \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 National Geodetic Survey \ CORP.AUTHR.2 US. Dept. of Commerce \ KEYWORD.1 Surveying \ KEYWORD.2 Geodesy & geophysics \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 International \ REGION.2 United States \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1986 \ PAGINATION 274p \ CLASSC'N TZ1-05 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.51 Library of Congress 86-61105 Obtained free on exchangefrom USGS Library, 1992. @\ TITLE: Bibliography of Map Projections \ SERIES.TITLE U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin 1856 \ AUTHOR.1 Snyder.J \ AUTHOR.2 Steward.H \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 US. Dept. of Commerce \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Mapping \ KEYWORD.2 Surveying \ KEYWORD.3 Geology & geophysics \ REGION.1 International \ REGION.2 United States \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1988 \ PAGINATION 110p \ CLASSC'N TZ1-12 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.52 Library of Congress 88 6--174 Obtained free on exchangefrom USGS library, 1992. @\NASA Geology Program Bibliography \NASA Technical Memorandum 4277 \ \ \ \NASA \ \Bibliographies \Geology & Geophysics \Geodynamics \United States \ \ \1991 \94p \TZ1-12 \Monograph \#G 1992.112 Inc. author index. Bibliography of scientific pubs. based onwork of NASA Geology Program, in period 1980-90. 15.6.92. @\Australian Geoscience 1984, annual report of the Australian GeoscienceCouncil Inc., the Council of Earth Science Societies in Australia \BMR report \Roberts.J \ \ \BMR \AGC \Geology & geophysics \Earth sciences \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \50p. \TZ1-80 \Monograph \#G P.604 ISBN 0 644 04049 ISSN 0084 7100 Report 268. Includes p.42:(E)GAD!:Expanding geoscientific acronym dictionary. @\BMR 85 Yearbook of the Bureau of Mineral Resources... covering geoscientificresearch , resources assessment and database development for the year 1July 1984 to 30 June 1985 \ \ \ \ \BMR \ \Geology & geophysics \Scientific research \BMR \Australia \ \ \1985 \200p. \TZ3-80 \Serial \#G P.601 ISSN 0158 7285 @\Program summary 19- \ \ \ \ \BMR \ \Geology & geophysics \Earth sciences \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1985-86; \various \TZ3-80 \Serial \ #G P.605 Annual. Lists research programme details. @\Solid Earth science in the 1990s Volume 1 - Program Plan \NASA Technical Memorandum 4256 \ \ \ \NASA \ \Geodynamics \Geology & geophysics \Planning \United States \ \ \1991 Feb \68p \TZ15-12 \Monograph \#G 1992.156 Published by Office of Space Science & Applications, SolidEarth Science Branch. First of 3 vols., vol 2 is panel report from Conf.in WV 1989, vol 3 on Measurement Techniques. jk 8.7.92 @\Towards 2005: a prospectus for research and research training in the AustralianEarth Sciences \ARC Discipline Research Strategies \ \ \ \AGC \Australian Research Council \Training \Geology & geophysics \ \Australia \ \ \1992 \113p \TZ16-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.285 ISBN 0 644 25501 3 Part of series on research planning, sponsoredby Australian Research Council, National Board of Employment, Educationand Training. mvk 9.1.93 WT03-B26-27IA029-000311-B017-183http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatw.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163232 text/html 28701HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:30:50 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:36 GMTContent-length: 28526 Catalogue Library catalogue W: WEATHER & CLIMATE (ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES) [see also Marine Meteorology (MW); Remote Sensing (RW)] WA Upper Atmosphere & Magnetosphere research [SEE ALSO Geophysics (TP), Solar terrestrial physics (XP)] WC Climatology (General), atmospheric science WD Disasters (Natural): Floods (meteorological aspects), cyclones, droughts,fires etc [SEE ALSO Geological Disasters (TD), Flood mitigation (TW) Drought forecasting (RA)] WG Global weather and climate WH Instrumentation & equipment [SEE ALSO Remote sensing instruments(RI)] WM Meteorology (General), weather forecasting WP Polar [see also Polar Oceanography (MN)(MO)(MS); Polar Geography (GP)] WR Rainfall, study of, statistics, specific research, Drought [SEE ALSODrought forecasting , remote sensing applications to (RA); also (MW), (RW),(RH), (WC), (WD), (WT)] WT Tropical [see also Tropical Oceanography (MT)] WX Films & videos on weather & atmospheric science WZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective) @\Strong electron bidirectional anisotropies in the distant tail: ISEE-3observations of polar rain \ \Baker.D \Baume.S \Feldman.W \Los Alamos National Laboratory \ \Atmospheric research \Geomagnetic tail \ISEE \International \United States \ \1985 \38p. \WA3-90 \(paper) \#G P.608 Preprint of paper submitted to Journal of Gephysical research @\ TITLE: Sunsets, twilights, and evening skies \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 Meinel.A \ AUTHOR.2 Meinel.M \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Atmospheric research \ KEYWORD.2 Stratosphere \ KEYWORD.3 Volcanoes \ REGION.1 \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1991 \ PAGINATION 163p \ CLASSC'N WC1-02 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.41 ISBN 0 521 40647 1 Many beautiful colour plates,especially of sunsets with statospheric aerosols from Agung and other volcaniceruptions, green flash, airglow. On long term loan from HO Library, AS:HQ 551.566 Me , October 1991. Borrowed by JK 11.3.92 @\International Station Meteorological Climate Summary \ \ \ \ \NOAA \US.Navy \Climatology \Data sets \Meteorology \International \ \ \1992 Jun \N/A \WC1-05 \CD-ROM \#CD-ROM No. 18 1993.51 Ver 2.0 of issue by NOAA National Climate Centerand Naval Oceanography Command Detachment Asheville, issued under authorityof Commander Naval Oceanography Command for general release . Includes brochure.No instruction manual, but has extensive on-line help. CDRM 1015950 . Acquired6.5.93, $US71. mvk 16.6.93 @\ Global Transport and Inter-Reservoir Exchange of Carbon Dioxide withParticular Reference to Stable Isotopic Distributions \Journal of Atmospheric Chemistry 4 (1986) \Pearman.G \Hyson.P \ \CSIRO DAR \ \Carbon dioxide exchange \carbon cycle \biosphere \Space \ \ \1986 \Varies \WC3-02 \Paper \#G P.609 Published in Journal of Atmospheric Chemistry 4 (1986) 81-124 @\Report on concentrations, lifetimes, and trends of CFCs, halons, and relatedspecies \NASA Reference Publications 1339 \Kaye.J \Penkett.S \Ormond.F \NASA \ \Atmospheric research \Stratosphere \Global change \International \ \ \1994 Jan \247p \WC3-02 \Monograph \#G 1994.158 From NASA Office of Mission to Planet Earth. mvk 19.11.94 @\Japanese Pacific Climate Study (JAPACS), Annual Report, April 1987-March1988, September 1988 (Phase 1 1987-1989) \ \ \ \ \Research and Development Bureau, Science and Technology Agency, Japan \ \TOGA \Climatology \Meteorology \Japan \Pacific \ \1988 \196p. \WC3-63 \Monograph \ #G P.612 Contribution to World Climate Research Programme @\Papers in Meteorology and Geophysics \Vol.42 No.1 Special issue : International Strato/ Tropospheric Air Chemistry ( INSTAC ) \ \ \ \Meteorological Research Institute, Japan. \ \Climatology \Meteorology \ \1991 \50p. \WC3-63 \Journal \#G 1992.287 Hold 2 copies. Relates to Australian F-27. @\ Report on Australian Climate Research Present and Future Workshop, 1990 \ AMOS Publication Number 6 \ Simmons.I (Convenor) \ \ \ AMOS \ \ Global Change \ Climatology \ Planning \ Australia \ Pacific \ \ 1991 \ 12p \ WC3-80 \ Conference report \ #C ("AMOS") 1991.41.1 Summary and Recommendations, 1991.41.2Abstracts, of AMOS Workshop held Melbourne University, 27-28 November 1991.jk 20/6/91 @\ Climate Activities in Australia: a report on Australian participationin International scientific climate programs \ \ \ \ Bureau of Meteorology \ National Committee for Climate and Atmospheric Sciences \ \ Global Change \ Climatology \ Atmospheric research \ Australia \ Pacific \ \ HOLD 1995 \ 148p \ WC3-80 \ Monograph \ #G 1995.63 A similar publication in 1993. Forward by John Faulkner, Ministerfor the Environment, Sport and Territories. mvk 5.6.95 @\ Atmospheric carbon dioxide measurements in the Australian region: datafrom surface observtories \ \Beardsmore.D \Pearman.G \ \CSIRO DAR \ \Carbon cycle \Atmosphere \ \Space \Atmosphere \Australia \1987 \Varies \WC3-80 \Paper \#G P.610 Paper appeared in Tellus (1987), 42-66 @\Baseline Atmospheric Program Australia 1989 \ \Wilson.S \Gras.J \ \Bureau of Meteorology \CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research \Atmospheric research \Global change \Climatology \Australia \ \ \1991 \87p \WC3-80 \Monograph \#G Covers programs of the BAPMon (Background Air Pollution Monitoring Network)station at Cape Grim, part of GAW (Global Atmospheric Watch). 1992.283 mvk3.1.93 @\Atmosphere: weather, climate and pollution \Science and our future \Holper.Paul \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research \Atmospheric research \Environmental research \Climatology \Australia \ \ \1994 \81p \WC3-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.185 ISBN 0 521 43639 7 Pub. Cambridge University Press/CSIRO. Overviewof weather and climate, with emphasis on CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Researchprograms, for secondary school students and teachers. Long term loan fromCSIRO HQ Library AS:HQ 551.6994, 3 9009 00326285 0 mvk 20.12.94 @\ Evidence of changing concentrations of atmospheric CO2, N2O and CH4 fromair bubbles in Antarctic ice \ \Pearman.G \Etheridge.F \de Silva.F \DAR \ \Carbon dioxide \Atmosphere \Greenhouse \Antarctica \ \ \1986 \3p. \WC3-93 \Paper \#G P.613 Other author: Fraser.P, Reprinted from Nature. @\Synoptic climatology in environmental analysis \Studies in Climatology Series \Yarnal.B \ \ \ \ \Climatology \Meteorology \Environmental protection \International \ \ \1993 \195p \WC9-05 \Monograph \#G 1993.22 ISBN 1 85293 117 5 Pub. by Belhaven Press, London. Long termloan from HQ library, 3 9009 00289150 1 , AS:HQ 551.6 Ya . Introduces relationshipbetween atmospheric circulation and the surface environment, and appliesmethods to urban air quality, acid rain, crop yield, and fluvial hydrology.mvk 9.3.93 @\Strategy for ozone protection \ \ \ \ \Australian Environment Council \ \Global change \Ozone \Atmospheric research \Australia \ \ \1989 Aug \91p \WC15-80 \Monograph \#G 1990.105 ISBN 0 642 14752 3 16.6.92 @\Report of Workshop on Australian participation in GCOS/GOOS, Melbourne17 December 1992 \ \ \ \ \Bureau of Meteorology \ \Data acquisition \Data collection systems \Climatology \Australia \International \ \1993 \35p \WC15-80 \Workshop report \#G 1994.75 Workshop established an Australian committee for the GlobalClimate Observing System and Global Ocean Observing System. Attended byKingwell for COSSA, who used Global 1 km Data Project as a model for inter-agencyco-operation in earth observation. mvk 19.6.94. @\ ESCAP/WMO Typhoon Committee Annual Review 1987 \ ESCAP/WMO Typhoon Committee Annual Review Third Issue \ \ \ \ UNDP/ESCAP \ WMO \ Tropical cyclones \ Disasters \ Meteorology \ International \ East Asia \ \ 1988 \ 124p \ WD1-60 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.111 Describes work of Committee in meteorology, hydrology, disasterprevention, training & research. Useful lists of 1987 cyclones and associateddamage, casulaties (p30, 31). 22.12.91 @\ Climate change : the IPCC Impacts assessment. Report prepared for IPCCby Working Group II. \ \ Teggart.W \ Sheldon.G \ Griffiths.D \ DASETT \ WMO \ Global change \ Climatology \ \ International \ \ \ 1990 \ 200p (approx) \ WG1-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.17 . "The Policymaker's Summary" in separate volume,32p, ISBN 0 644 13496 8 , 1990, at 1992.69. Published in Australia by DASETTon behalf of WMO/UNEP Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. See also1992.33 for IPCC Working Group 1 Report (Scientific Assessment) jk 10/5/91 @\ Climate change : the IPCC Scientific assessment. Report prepared forIPCC by Working Group I. \ \ Houghton.J \ Jenkins.G \ Ephraums.J \ UNEP \ WMO \ Global change \ Climatology \ \ International \ \ \ 1990 \ 365p \ WG1-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1992.33 . Published by Press Syndicate of University of Cambridge.ISBN 0 521 40720 6 . On long term loan from HQ library. See also 1991.17(Working Group 11 Report, Impact Assessment) 9.3.92 @\ WMO-UNEP Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Sixth Session of theIPCC, Geneva 29-31 October 1991 and Fifth Session of IPCC Working GroupIII, Geneva 1-2 November 1991: Australian delegation report. \ \ McG Tegart.W \ Zillman.J \ Morvell.G \ UNEP \ WMO \ Global change \ Climatology \ Government policy \ International \ \ \ 1991 \ 129p \ WG1-05 \ Monograph \ #C (IPCC) 1992.321 . mvk 2.6.93 @\Data Requirements for Climate Change Research \ \Stott.Z \Mitchell.D \Elliott.C \Smith Associate Limited \ \Climatology \Global change \Data \International \Great Britain \ \1991 Mar \178p \WG2-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.281 Report prepared for the UK Department of the Environment mvk3.1.93 @\The description of the ECMWF\WCRP level III, a global atmospheric dataarchive. Technical attachment. \ \ \ \ \ECMWF \ \Climatology \Data sets \ \International \ \|1993 \49p. \#GWG2-05 \monograph \#G1995.37 @\Proceedings of a Workshop on Developing Inventories of Greenhouse GasEmissions for Australia, 22 May 1991, Canberra \ \Taylor.J \ \ \ANU \ \Global change \Greenhouse effect \ \Australia \International \ \1991 \77p \WG2-80 \Conference proceedings \#G 1992.312 ISBN 0 86740 402 7 Conference held at ANU Centre for Resourcesand Environmental Studies and sponsored by DASETT. mvk 26.1.93 @\Proceedings of a Workshop on Greenhouse Sinks in Australia, 23 May 1991,Canberra \ \Taylor.J \ \ \ANU \ \Global change \Greenhouse effect \ \Australia \International \ \1991 \60p \WG2-80 \Conference proceedings \#G 1992.313 ISBN 0 86740 403 5 Conference held at ANU Centre for Resourcesand Environmental Studies and sponsored by DASETT. mvk 26.1.93 @\The global climate system: a critical review of the climate system during1982-1984 \ \ \ \ \WMO \WCDP-CSM Project \Climatology \Atmospheric research \Global climate system \International \ \ \1985? \52p \WG3-05 \Monograph \#G P.614 @\Our changing Planet : the FY 1991 Research Plan \ \Bromley.D \ \ \US. Office of Science & Technology \ \Global change \ \ \United States \ \ \1990 Oct \Various \WG3-12 \Monograph \#G 1992.81 Report by the Committe on Earth and Environmental Sciences.15.6.92 @\Our changing Planet : the FY 1992 US Global Change Research Program \ \Bromley.D \ \ \US. Office of Science & Technology \ \Global change \Scientific research \Government policy \United States \ \ \1991 ? \90p \WG3-12 \ \#G 1992.78 Report by the Committee on Earth and Environmental Sciences. Supplement to the US. President's Fiscal Year 1992 Budget. 15.6.92 @\The Southern Ocean Cloud Experiment, Research Proposal, April 1992 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research \ \Atmospheric Research \Environmental research \Global change \Indian Ocean \Antarctica \Australia \1992 April \25p \WG3-74 \Monograph \#G 1992.187 Proposal to use F-27 research aircraft to study climatic roleof cloud condensation nuclei in the southern ocean. mvk 19.10.92. @\CSIRO Climate change research program, DASETT-funded research progressreport 1989-1990 \ \ Pearman.G \ Faragher.S \ \ CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research \ CSIRO INRE \ Global change \ Climatology \ Environmental research \ Australia \ International \ \ 1990 \ 29p \ WG3-80 \ Monograph \ #G 1990.1 @\CSIRO Climate change research program. Annual Report 199--199-- \ \ Pearman.G \ Mitchell.C.D. \ \ CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research \ CSIRO INRE \ Global change \ Climatology \ Environmental research \ Australia \ International \ \ HOLD 1990-1991; 1991-92 \ \ WG3-80 \ Series \ #G, 1991-92: 1991.76 #G, 1991.77 (Copy 2) This report provides a briefinsight into the nature of the INRE Climate Change Research Program theresearch carried out in the second year of the program and some aspirationsfor the future. Details of individual projects are given in a more technicalcomparison report. Mitchell and Pearman(1991) Projects of the INRE ClimateChange Research Program 1991-92 CSIRO INRE, Melbourne. 1991-92 Report (1993.82) covers scientific highlights, funding, external relations. ISSN1035 6614 . mvk 14.7.93 @\INRE Climate Change Research Program Advisory Panel Report 199_ - 199_. \ \ \ \ \ CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research \ CSIRO INRE \ Global change \ Climatology \ Environmental research \ Australia \ International \ \ HOLD 1992-93 \ Various \ WG3-80 \ Monograph \ #G 1992.311 Advisory Panel was Prof B Osmond, Prof W Budd, Dr M Lumb,and Dr M Manning. CCRP Coordinator is Graeme Pearman, mvk 26.1.93 @\Climate change impacts: research in progress \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of the Arts etc. \CSIRO \Global change \Environmental research \Greenhouse effect \Australia \ \1992 \94p \WG3-80 \Monograph \#G 1993.19 ISBN 0 642 18468 68 2 Directory produced for DASET by CSIROInformation Services and Information Technology Services Branches. mvk 6.3.93 @\Climate change science: current understanding & uncertainties. SteeringCommittee of the Climate Change Study \ \ \ \ \AAS \Australian Academy of Technological Science \Global change \Climatology \WCRP \Australia \International \ \1995 Feb \100 \WG3-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.139 ISBN 0 646 22704 1 Also sponsored by Academy of the SocialSciences in Australia mvk 10.12.95 @\The IPIECA Clouds & Climate Research Programme 1990-1994 \ \ \ \ \International Petroleum Industry Environmental Conservation Association \Meteorological Office \Global change \Atmospheric research \Research aircraft \United Kingdom \International \ \1994 Feb \ \WG9-32 \Monograph \#G 1994.159 Report on research programme (stratocumulus cloud's role inclimate; SAFIRE and other airborne instruments for studying atmosphericradiation; model parameterisation for cloud properties) sponsored by IPIECAand carried out by U.K. Meteorological Research Flight, Met. Office, Universityof Manchester, and Hadley Centre. mvk 20.11.94 @\ The Global Climate Observing System \ \ \ \ \ The Meteorological Office \ \ Data collection systems \ Climatology \ GCOS \ International \ UK \ \ 1991 Jan \ \ WG15-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.38 Proposal for an operational global climate observing system(similar in concept to World Weather Watch but with greater capability especiallyin oceanographic observations), prepared by an ad hoc group convened byChairman of the Joint Scientific Committee for the World Climate ResearchProgramme at a meeting in Winchester, UK 14-15 January 1991. Sole southernhemisphere representative Director of Meteorology Dr J W Zillman. ISBM (sic)0 86180 285 3 jk 14/6/91 @\Report on Workshop on the planning of the Global Climate Observing System(GCOS), Winchester UK 14-15 January 1991 \ \ \ \ \ \ \GCOS \Global climate system \Global change \International \Great Britain \ \1991 \104p \WG15-05 \Papers (unbound) \#G 1992.161 An informal workshop convened by the World Climate ResearchProgramme (WCRP) and hosted by the UK Meteorological Office, to developa conceptual plan for a Global Climate Observing System. This proposal originatedfrom discussions at the Second Wold Climate Conference (SWCC) in Genevain Oct-Nov 1990. mk 16.7.92 @\Scientific plan for the world climate research programme, Sept. 1984 \WCRP82-84; a contribution to GEMS \ \ \ \ \WMO \WCDP-CSM Project \Climatology \Planning \Global climate system \International \ \ \1984 \95p \WG15-05 \Monograph \#G P.611 . WCRP Publications Series No. 2 @\Natural hazards, Global Change and Meteorology. World Meteorological DayAddress, 1993 \ \Hallgren.Richard \ \ \WMO \Bureau of Meteorology \Atmospheric research \Global change \International co-operation \International \ \ \1993, March \11p \WG15-05 \Brochure \#G 1994.194 Hallgren was President of American Meteorological Society.mvk 21.12.94 @\ METEOHYDREX '87 \ \ \ \ \ WMO \ \ Instrumentation \ \ \ International \ \ \ 1987 \ 38p \ WH1-05 \ Leaflet \ #G P.151 Catalogue of an exhibition organised by the WMO for the TenthWorld Meteorological Conference, 7-13 May 1987, Geneva. @\REMTECH General Catalogue \ \ \ \ \REMTECH \ \Meteorological instruments \Remote sensing instruments \ \1992 \Various \WH1-34 \Folder \#G 1992.162 REMTECH is a company (offices France, US) which manufacturesDoppler SODAR, Fluxmeters, RASS (Radio Acoustic Sounder System) and DopplerSONAR. mk 16.7.92 @\What the world needs now \ \ \ \ \Monitor Sensors \ \Meteorological instruments \Meteorology \Atmospheric research \Australia \ \ \1990 \na \WH5-80 \Brochure \#G 1990.137 Contains leaflets on automatic weather stations, price lists,client lists. Monitor is an Australian company (including ex-CSIRO staff)specialising in digitalised meteorological and environmental measuring andrecording instruments. mvk 20.7.92 @\Drifting buoy co-operation panel Annual Report \ \ \ \ \WMO \Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission \Oceanography \Climatology \Global Change \International \ \ \ HOLD 1992 \ \Serial \WH15-05 \#G 1992 report is 1994.55 Describes floating buoy programs of Australia,France, USA, Japan and other countries in support of WOCE, TOGA and relatedclimate programs. mvk 27.3.94 @\Project Development Plan - Radiation Network \ \Forgan.Bruce \ \ \Bureau of Meteorology \ \Radiation \Data collection systems \Climatology \Australia \ \ \1994 Dec \54p + \WH15-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.67 Implementation plan and background to BoM (Observation &Engineering Branch) proposal for major upgrade to baseline solar radiationmeasuring network of 14 stations around Australia. Background details includeSolar Insolation Monitoring Study consortium of Sate and Territory powerinstrumentalities initially funded under ERDC Board grant (consortium wantsBoM to take over): requirements for more accurate UV and radiation budgetsfor climate monitoring purposes; and synergy with satellite data calibrationnetworks such as CIGSN, and field experiments such as ADEOS IMG. mvk 6.6.95 @\The next decade. Meteorology and operational hydrology in the serviceof mankind, a policy for advancement. \WMO-627 \Obasi.G \ \ \WMO\ World Meteorological Organization \ \Water resources research \Hydrology \Meteorology \International \ \ \1984 \37p \WM1-05 \Monograph \#G P.1051 ISBN 92 63 10627 4 Defines socio-economic roles of meteorology,hydrology; deficiencies and requirements; World Weather Watch Programme,World Climate Programme; Hydrology and Water Resources Programme; Educationand Training. mvk 25.8.92 @\ Recollections of the achievements of the International MeteorologicalOrganization and the World Meteorological Organization. \ \Gibbs.W.J \ \ \WMO\ World Meteorological Organization \Bureau of Meteorology \Climatology \Hydrology \Meteorology \International \Australia \ \1994 \8p \WM1-05 \Brochure \#G 1995.4 Comprises text of World Meteorological Day Address, in Melbourne,18 March 1994. mvk 1.1.95 @\Meteorological support for space operations: review and recommendations[report of] Panel on Meteorological Support for Space Operations, NationalResearch Council \ \Hosler.C \ \ \NRC \ \Meteorology \Launch sites \Launch vehicles \United States \ \ \1988 \77p \WM1-12 \Monograph \#G P.617 Report commissioned by NASA after Challenger accident. @\Weather factors affecting rocket operations: a review and case history \ \Kingwell.J \Shimizu.J \Narita.K \ \ \Launch sites \Launch vehicles \Meteorology \International \Japan \Australia \1991 \16p \WM3-05 \Paper \#G P.618 Copy 1 P.619 Copy 2 . Reprint from Bulletin American MeteorologicalSoc., 72, 778-793. @\ 25th International Conference on Radar Meteorology \ \ Jorgensen,D \ Gilet,M \ \ American Meteorological Society \ World Meteorological Organisation UNESCO \ Meteorology \ \ \ International \ \ \ 1991 \ 1018p. \ WM3-05 \ Monograph \ #C 1991.107 The 25th International Conference on Radar Meteorology isthe second of the AMS radar conference series to be held outside of NorthAmerica. Because of the great interest of the U.S. and European communitiesin improvements in short-range weather predication and warnings using radar,the theme of this conference is the applications of radar to nowcasting.See also #C 1991.108 @\ Fourth International Conference on Aviation Weather Systems June 24-28,1991, Paris, France \ \ \ \ \ WMO \ American Meteorological Society \ Aircraft \ Meteorology \ \ International \ \ \ 1991 June \ 392p \ WM3-05 \ Conference proceedings \ #C 1991.108. Conference held jointly with the 25th International Conferenceon Radar Meteorology (see 1991.107) @\NESDIS Office of Research and Applications Research Programs \ORA Research Programs \ \ \ \NESDIS \NOAA \Scientific research \Meteorology \Remote sensing satellites \United States \ \ \HOLD 1994 Dec \163p \WM3-12 \Monograph \#G 1995.75 Describes research and development activities at the Officeof Research & Applications, National Environmental Satellite, Data,and Information Service. Includes soil moisture by SSM/I; DMSP soundings;cloud drift winds; intercalibration from successive TOVS; volcanic aerosols;calibration of color, SST and Global Precipitation Climatology Project,etc. mvk 11.6.95 @\Research in BMRC \ \ \ \ \Bureau of Meteorology \ \Meteorology \Atmospheric research \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1987; 1988; 1989; 1990; 1991; 1993; 1994; 1995 \varies \WM3-80 \Serial \ #G 1987 is P.615; 1988 is P.616; 1989 copy is #G 1991.83; 1990 is #G 1991.84; 1991 copy is #G 1991.53. 1993 copy is 1993.122. 1994 copy is 1994.122. 1995 copy is 1995.92 mvk 31.8.93, 7.8.94, 14.8.95. @\ Applied Atmospheric Resources Research Program in Thailand. Interim ScientificReport August 1989 \ \ Medina.J \ Rasmussen.R \ Dennis.A \ US Agency for International Development \ \ Atmospheric research \ \ \ Thailand \ United States \ \ 1989 \ 134p \ WR2-68 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.116. Relates to proposed SE Asian use of F-27 and sponsored scientificanalysis by DAR. 22.12.91 @\Atmospheric and climate sciences in Australia \ \ \ \ \National Committee for Climate and Atmopsheric Sciences \AAS \Atmsopheric research \Climatology \ \Australia \ \1990 \30p \WZ1-80 \Monograph \#G 1990.37 , 1990.128 (Copy 2), ISBN 0 85847 162 0 19.6.92 @\The Wonders of the Weather \ \Crowder.Bob \ \ \Bureau of Meteorology \ \Meteorology \Climatology \ \Australia \ \1995 \270p \WZ1-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.62 ISBN 0 644 35020 2 AGPS 9 780644 350204 Forward by John Zillman.Written by ex-Deputy Director Services of BoM. mvk 4.6.95 @\ Weather & climate \CSIRO Research for Australia \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Meteorology \Climatology \Environmental research \Australia \ \ \1986 \92p. \WZ3-80 \Monograph \#G P.620 Copy 1, P.621 Copy 2. CSIRO Research for Australia No.7, ISBN0 643 03792 6 @\Research report 1985- 1988 \ \Holper.P \ \ \CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research \ \Environmental research \Global change \Remote sensing applications \Australia \ \ \1989 \107p \WX3-80 \Monograph \#G P.58 ISSN 08170576 12.6.92 WT03-B26-28IA029-000311-B017-215http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatx1.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163258 text/html 34573HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:31:13 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:38 GMTContent-length: 34398 Catalogue Library catalogue X: EXTRATERRESTRIAL, ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES. [SEE ALSO (A) Space, Astronautics; (AN) Satellites, unmanned spacecraft, general purpose] XA Astronomy, general surveys, planning & research, overviews, astronomical space science, humans & the stars etc [social/philosophical side] [SEE(XZ) principles & practice, astrophysics, [mathematics, science side] XC Cosmology, about the cosmos XE Exobiology; Extraterrestrial Biology, intelligence, SETI/CETI [see alsoBiology (LB)] XF Astronomical satellites, & Satellite observatories, Space probes,general purpose, mixed (stars & planets etc.); [SEE ALSO (XI) Star probes; (XL)Lunar probes; (XP) Planetary probes, (XS) Sun probes; (XT) Observatories & telescopes on the ground.] XG Galactic Astronomy XH Instrumentation & equipment, antennas for Radio telescopes [BUT NOT Telescopes - see (XT)] XI Interstellar & Stellar Astronomy, Programs & Probes [see also(XF) general Astronomical satellites; Astronautical Programs (AP)] XL Lunar Astronomy, Programs & Probes [see also Astronautical Programs(AP), general Astronomical satellites (XF)] XM Misc. Frequencies Astronomy (UV, IR, X-Ray, etc Astronomy); Cosmic rays, electromagnetic spectrum research etc, Radiation XO Optical Astronomy, science etc. [SEE ALSO (XT) Telescopes & observatories, (XF) astronomical satellites] XP Solar System & its Planetary Astronomy, Programs & Probes (inc.asteroids, meteors, comets, etc) Solar system in general, Solar terrestrial physics.[see also Space Programs (AP), general Astronomical satellites (XF), Astrophysics(XZ)] XR Radio Astronomy and VLBI XS Solar Astronomy, Programs & Probes [see also Space Programs (AP),general Astronomical satellites (XF), Solar terrestrial physics (XP)] XT Telescopes; Observatories. [SEE ALSO Satellite observatories (XF); Astronomical instruments, hardware (XH)] XX Films & videos on astronomical subjects XZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective); astrophysics, astronomicalscience, mathematics, research results & technical reports, etc. [SEE ALSO (XA)for general surveys, overviews of astronomical science, research planning & funding etc.] @\ Future Lunar Base. Special Issue ACTA Astronautica. Papers presentedat the 37th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation, Innsbruck,Austria, 4-11 October 1986 \ACTA Astronautica \Koelle.H Guest Editor \ \ \IAA \ \Moon \Space exploration \Lunar Laboratory \Space \ \ \1988 Jul \750p.* * Continuation of Journal of the International Academy of Astronautics \XL3-01 \Journal Special Issue \#G P.691 ISSN 0094 5765 IAA (International Academy of Astronautics) @\ Lunar Bases and Space Activities of the 21st Century \ \Mendell.W (Ed.) \ \ \NASA \Lunar and Planetary Institute, Houston \Moon \Lunar laboratories \Space laboratories \Moon \ \ \1985 \865p \XL3-01 \Papers in Monograph form \#G P.692 ISBN 0 942862 023 . Inc. index. Number of authors inc. Duke.M,Logsdon.J. @\ Experimental Limit on Low Energy Antiprotons in the Cosmic Radiation \ \Streitmatter.R \Stochaj.J \Ormes.J \NASA \ \Astrophysics \Astronomical instruments \Spectrometer \Space \ \ \1989 \12p \XM2-01 \Monograph \#G P.693 NASA GSFC 89-006 @\ Multipoint Measurements of Energetic Particles in the Magnetosphere \ \Baker.D \ \ \NASA \ \Magnetosphere \Upper Atmosphere \Atmospheric Research \Space \ \ \1988 \12p. \XM3-01 \Paper \#G P.694 Published in Adv. Space Res. Vol.8, No.9-10 @\ Contributions to the 20th International Conference on Cosmic Rays (Moscow:1987):preprints and abstracts [by staff at] Enrico Fermi Institute, U. of Chicago \EFI preprint no. 87-23 \ \ \ \Enrico Fermi Institute \International Conference on Cosmic Rays \Cosmic rays \Astronomy \ \Space \ \ \1987 \ca.50p. \XM3-01 \Monograph \#G P.696 EFI Preprint 87-23 @\ Contributions to the 19th International Cosmic Ray Conference, La Jolla,Calif., Aug. 11-23, 1985 [by the staff of ] the Space Radiation Laboratory,California Institute of Technology \SLR 85 05-15 \ \ \ \California Institute of Technology \International Conference on Cosmic Rays \Cosmic rays \Astronomy \Remote sensing \Space \United States \ \1985 \ca. 50p. \XM3-01 \Monograph \#G P.697 @\ Cosmic Ray NM-64 Neutron Monitor Data - XLV ; XLVIII \ \Wilson.M \Bercovitch \ \National Research Council Canada \ \Tables \ \ \Canada \ \ \1988 ; 1990 \Varies \XM3-11 \Monograph \#G P.699 Data from 4 ground sites in Canada for 1986 ; 1992.152, data fromDeep River, Goose Bay & Inuvik, Jan-Dec 1989. @\Sulphur Mountain cosmic ray intensity records \ \Venkatesan.D \Mathews.T \ \Sulphur Mountain Cosmic Ray Laboratory \ \Cosmic rays \Sulphur Mountain Cosmic Ray Laboratory \ \Canada \ \ \1985 \various \XM3-11 \Monograph \#G P.700 ISBN 0 919813 09 7 Laboratory operated 1956-1978. @\Norton's 2000.0 Star Atlas & Reference Handbook \Norton's Star Atlas Eighteenth Edition \Ridpath.Ian \ \ \ \ \Guides \Astronomy \Guide Books \Space \ \ \1991 \179 \XO1-01 \Monograph \#G 1995.134 $US47.95 CLIS CSIRO HQ Library 3 9009 00372966 8 Longman Scientific& Technical ISBN 0 470 2146 0 First published 1989, reprinted 1990,1991. mvk 10.12.95 @\ Planetary Geosciences - 1988 \ NASA SP \ Zuber.M \ James.O \ MacPherson.G \ NASA \ \ Geology & Geophysics \ Planets \ Geodynamics \ Space \ \ \ 1989 \ 108p \ XP1-01 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.43 Scientific findings and projects of NASA Planetary GeosciencesPrograms. NASA SP-498. On loan term loan from HO Library (AS:HQ 559.9 Pl)jk 9/7/91 @\ The Geology of the Terrestrial Planets \ NASA SP-469 \ Carr.M \ \ \ NASA \ \ Geology & Geophysics \ Planets \ Geodynamics \ Space \ \ \ 1984 \ 317p \ XP1-01 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.44 Long loan, HQ Library, 599.9. NASA SP-469 jk 9/7/91 @\ Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby Mission a search for our beginnings \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space probes \Comets \Origin of life \Space \ \ \1987 \79p. \XP1-01 \Monograph \#G P.710 @\Encounter '86: an international rendezvous with Halley's comet \ \Longdon.N \ \ \ESA \Inter-Agency Consultative Group \Halley's comet \Space probes \ \Space \ \ \1986 \Various \XP1-01 \Monograph \#G P.705 ISSN 0250 1589 @\ The Halley armada \ \ \ \ \Inter-Agency Consultative Group \NASA \Halley's comet \Space probes \Satellites \Space \ \ \1985 \12p. \XP1-01 \Monograph \#G P.706 @\Effects of the solar-terrestrial environment on satellite operations [paper] submitted to Proceedings of Solar-Terrestrial Prediction Workshop in Meudon,France 18-19 June, 1984 \ \Baker.D \ \ \Los Alamos National Laboratory \ \Satellites \Radiation effects \Magnetosphere \Space \ \ \1984 \ca. 16p. \XP2-01 \(paper) \#G P.698 Preprint LA-UR-84-3325 @\ Giotto, ESA's mission to Halley's Comet \ \ \ \ \ESA \Arianespace \Launch programs \Giotto \Ariane program \Europe \Space \France \1985 \76p. \XP2-01 \Monograph \#G P.702 @\Japanese Halley missions with Sakigake and Suisei \ \Oya.H \ \ \EOS Transactions \ \Halley's Comet \Space probes \Sakigake \Japan \Space \ \1986 \2p. \XP2-01 \(paper) \#G P.703 Photocopy of pp.? & 66, EOS Transactions, Vol.67, no6, 11Feb. 1986. Includes Susei spacecraft. @\Atlas of Neptune \ \Hunt.Garry \Moore.Patrick \ \ \ \Neptune \Planets \Voyager \Space \ \ \1994 \84p \XP2-01 \Monograph \#G 1994.77 ISBN 0 521 37478 2 Hardback . Long term loan from HO Library,AS:HQ 523.481 Hu CLIS/477 3 9009 00304021 5 . $36 from Cambridge UniversityPress. Mentions important role of Tibdinbilla and Parkes in 1989 Voyagerencounter. Many illustrations, also history of discovery and observationof Neptune. mvk 25.6.94 @\ AGORA, asteroid gravity optical and radar analysis [project], assessmentstudy, Septermber 1983 \ESA SCI(83)5 \Langevin.Y \ \ \ESA \ \Astronomy \Asteroids \AGORA \Space \Europe \ \1983 \65p. \XP2-30 \Monograph \#G P.704 Mission proposal for asteroid space probes. @\ Linear prediction filter analysis of relativistic electron propertiesof 6.6 RE \ \ Baker.D \ McPherron.R \ Cayton.T \ NASA \ GSFC/Goddard Space Flight Centre \ Magnetosphere \ Solar terrestrial physics \ \ Space \ \ \ 1990 \ 20p \ XP3-01 \ Monograph \ #G P.157 Includes 3 related articles by these authors (with Klebesadel.R) @\ The CDAW-8 Substorm Event on 28 January 1983: A detailed global study. \ \Baker.D \Craven..J \Elphic.R \NASA \ \Magnetosphere \Atmospheric Research \Solar terrestrial physics \Space \ \ \1988 \6p. \XP3-01 \Paper \#G P.695 Published in Adv. Space Res. Vol.8, No.8, 1988 @\ Plasma electrons as tracers of distant Magnetotail structure : ISEE-3 \ \Baker.D \Bame.S \Gosling.J \NASA \ \Magnetosphere \Upper Atmosphere \Atmospheric Research \Space \ \ \1988 \4p. \XP3-01 \Paper \#G P.701 - Published in Adv. Space Res. Vol.8, No.8 @\ Voyager 2 at Uranus \JPL Fact Sheet \ \ \ \NASA \ \Uranus \Space probes \Voyager \Space \United States \ \1985 \6p. \XP3-01 \(paper) \#G P.707 Photocopy. See also special issue of J Geop. Res. with same title,P.713 . @\ Exploring the inner planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars) \About space and aeronautics \Siegel.V \ \ \NASA \ \Planets \Astronomy \Space probes \Space \ \ \1979 \8p. \XP3-01 \(paper) \#G P.708 ASA 79-9 @\ Giotto and the journey to Halley's Comet \ \Jenkins.R \Simpson.J \ \New Scientist \ \Halley's Comet \Space probes \Giotto \Space \ \ \1985 \4p. \XP3-01 \(paper) \#G P.709 Photocopy from New Scientist,27-6-85 pp.50-53 @\ Mission to Jupiter/Saturn, Voyager project \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Voyager \Space probes \Planets \Space \United States \ \1979 \11p. \XP3-01 \(paper) \#G P.687 Educational publication of Jet Propulsion Lab. @\ Voyager at Neptune and Triton: 1989 \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space probes \Neptune \Voyager \Space \ \ \n.d. \n/a \XP3-01 \Monograph \#G P.711 1984? @\Cosmic-ray picture of the heliosphere \ \Venkatesan.D \ \ \Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest \ \Astronomy \Solar system \Cosmic rays \Space \ \ \n.d. \16p. \XP3-01 \Reprint \#G P.712 Reprint of pp.4-19 of Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest Vol.6,no.1. @\Role of plasmas in solar-terrestrial relations: a fragmentary overview[part of a document,pp.21-36] \ \ \ \ \ \ \Astronomy \Solar terrestrial physics \Plasmas \Space \ \ \n.d. \16p. \XP3-01 \(paper) \#GH P.714 Photocopy of part of a document, mentions ISEE results,[pub.ca.1985] & ISTP programme of ESA & NASA.[planned ca 1983+] @\Extreme energetic particle decreases near geostationary orbit: a manifestationof current diversion within a plasma sheet \ \Baker.D \McPherron.R \ \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Atmospheric research \Solar terrestrial physics \ \Space \United States \ \1989 Dec \22p \XP3-01 \Reprint \#G 1990.124 Preprint of Joun. Geophys. Res., Dec 1989. 16.6.92 @\Understanding the Sun-Earth Environment: Multiple Mission Campaign Coordinationthrough the Inter-Agency Consultative Group for Space Science \ \ \ \ \IACG \ESA \Solar terrestrial physics \Solar terrestrail interaction \Space science \Space \International \ \1992 \16p \XP3-01 \Monograph \#G 1992.259, 1992.260 (copy 2) mvk 2.1.93 . @\Voyagers to the Outer Planets \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Data sets \Space probes \Planets \Space \ \ \1991 (?) \ \XP3-01 \CD-ROM Set \#CD-ROM . Set comprising Description, 1993.95.1 (by Randy Travis, 1991June): pamphlet on IMDISP Image Display Software for IBM, 1993.95.2 (M Martin,F Evans, D Nakamura, 1989); software in 3.5 & 5.25 floppy disks (1993.95.3,1993.95.4); and 12 volumes of CD-ROM disks of compressed images from Voyagervisits to Uranus, Neptune, Saturn , Jupiter (Vol 1 Uranus, 1993.95.5, CD-ROMNo. 19, US..NASA..PDS..VG..0001; Vol 2 Uranus, 1993.95.6, CD-ROM No. 20,US..NASA..PDS..VG..0002; Vol 3 Uranus, 1993.95.7, CD-ROM No. 21, US..NASA..PDS.VG.0003;Vol 4, Saturn, 1993.95.8, CD-ROM No. 22, US..NASA..PDS.. VG..0004; Vol 5,Saturn, 1993.95.9, CD-ROM No. 23, US..NASA..PDS..VG..0005; Vol 6, Jupiter,1993.95.10, CD-ROM No..... 24, US..NASA..PDS..VG..0006; Vol 7, Jupiter,1993.95.11, CD-ROM No. 25, US..NASA..PDS..VG..0007; Vol 8, Jupiter, 1993.95.12,CD-ROM No. 26, US..NASA..PDS..VG..0008; Vol 9, Neptune, 1993.95.13, CD-ROMNo. 27; US..NASA..PDS..VG..0009; Vol 10, Neptune, 1993.95.14, CD-ROM No.28, US..NASA..PDS..VG..0010; Vol 11, Neptune, 1993.95.15, CD-ROM No. 29,US..NASA..PDS..VG..0011; Vol 12, Neptune, 1993.95.16, CD-ROM No. 30, US..NASA..PDS..VG..0012.Developed by NASA, Planetary Data System (PDS), JPL, and University of Colorado.mvk 20.7.93 @\Comet and atsteroid impacts : does earth need protection? \Current Issues Brief No.15,1994 \Brown, Gary \James, Matthew \ \Parliamentary Research Services \ \Disasters \Asteroids \Comets \Space \Australia \ \August,1994 \14 p. \XP3-01 \monograph \#g 1996.36 ISBN 132111560 @\AMPTE, active magnetospheric particle tracer explorers \ \Haerendel.G \Scholer.M \ \MPE \ \Solar terrestrial physics \AMPTE \Space probes \Space \International \ \n.d. \21p. \XP3-05 \Monograph \#G P.717 1985? @\ The Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Explorers (AMPTE) Program \ \Krimigis.S \Haerendel.G \McEntire.R \ \ \Solar terrestrial physics \Space probes \AMPTE \Space \International \ \1982 \6p. \XP3-05 \Reprint \#G P.721 Reprint of pp.843-850 of EOS, Vol. 63, no.45. Nov. 9.1982 @\Solar-terrestrial energy program 1990-1995 : initial research projects \ \ \ \ \ICSU \SCOSTEP \Planning \Solar terrestrial physics \STEP \International \Space \ \1990 \26p \XP3-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.117 18.6.92 @\ Project Galileo \JPL Fact Sheet \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space probes \Galileo mission \ \United States \Space \ \1984? \7p. \XP3-12 \(paper) \#G P.718 Photocopy. On pub. 8-2?/84DB. @\ CLUSTER, study in three dimensions of plasma turbulence and small scalestructure, assesment study Sept. 1983 \ \Haerendel.G \ \ \ESA \ \Astronomy \Space probes \CLUSTER \Space \Europe \ \1983 \58p. \XP3-30 \Monograph \#G P.719 SCI(83)4 @\ Solar System Committee annual report \ \ \ \ \SERC \ \Astronomy \Solar system \Space science \Space \Great Britain \ \HOLD 1983-1984; 1984-85; \varies \XP3-32 \Serial \1983-4 is P.715; 84-85 is P.716 . @\ Proposal for a UK sub-satellite on AMPTE, June 1981 \ \ \ \ \Rutherford Appleton Lab. \ \Space probes \Astronomy \AMPTE \Space \Great Britain \ \1981 \69p. \XP3-32 \Monograph \#G P.720 @\Project Phobos \ \ \ \ \Soviet Space Program \ \Phobos project \Space probes \Mars \Space \USSR \ \1986 \54p \XP15-01 \Monograph \#G P.728 Planning booklet. @\ Report of the Long Range Planning Committee to the Scientific Committeeon Solar-Terrestrial Physics (SCOSTEP), Sept. 1984 \ \ \ \ \SCOSTEP \ \Solar terrestrial physics \Space science \ \International \ \1984 \Various \XP15-05 \Monograph \#G P.725 @\International solar-terrestrial physics program ; a plan for the corespaceflight missions \ \ \ \ \NASA \ESA \Solar system \Solar terrestrial physics \ISTP \International \ \ \ \21p \XP15-05 \Monograph \#G P.722 1983 ? Prepared for NASA, ESA, ISAS. @\ Solar-system space physics in the 1980's: a research strategy [by] Committeeon Solar and Space Physics, Space Science Board, Assembly of Mathematicaland Physical Sciences, National Research Council \ \ \ \ \NRC \ \Solar system \Astronomy \Space science \Space \United States \ \1980 \82p. \XP15-12 \Monograph \#G P.723 @\ Planetary exploration through year 2000, a Core program, part 1 of areport by the Solar System Exploration Committee of the NASA Advisory Council,Executive summary \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Astronomy \Space programs \Solar system \Space \United States \ \1983 \29p. \XP15-12 \Monograph \#G P.724 @\Priorities in solar-system space physics: an implementation plan, Draft3, August 1984 [by] Space Science Board Committee on Solar and Space Physics \ \ \ \ \Space Science Board \ \Solar terrestrial physics \Astronomy \ \United States \ \ \1984 \ca. 150p. \XP15-12 \(paper) \#G P.726 Photocopy. Probably NASA document. Marked "Limited use, donot quote or cite". @\Galileo to Jupiter, probing the planet and mapping its moons \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space probes \Galileo mission \Jupiter \United States \ \ \1979 \20p \XP15-12 \Monograph \#G P.727 Inc. colour pictures. @\Propagation effects in Space VLBI ; Proceedings of a Workshopp held atthe Special Astrophysical Observatory, Leningrad, USSR, 28-30 May, 1990. \ \Gurvits.L \ \ \ \ \Radioastron \VLBI \VSOP \Russia \Space \International \1993 \104p \XR3-05 \Conference proceedings \#G 1993.53 Edited by Gurvits, sponsored by P N Lebedev Physical Institute,Moscow; National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center, New York; and SpecialAstrophysical Observatory, Zelenchukskaya. Received 4.6.93 . mvk 22.6.93 @\ Radio astronomy \CSIRO Research for Australia \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Astronomy \Telescopes \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \63p. \XR3-80 \Monograph \#G P.729 CSIRO Research for Australia No. 5, ISBN 0 643 03790 X @\ Ulysses, a voyage to the sun \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Ulysses project \Space probes \Sun \Space \ \ \1986 \26p. \XS1-01 \Monograph \#G P.730 @\ Selected bibliography on helioseismology \Global Oscillation Network Group Report \Leibacher.J \ \ \National Solar Observatory \ \Astronomy \Bibliography \Helioseismology \Space \United States \ \1985 \224p. \XS1-01 \Monograph \#G P.731 Report no. 2. @\ Space science & applications notice, Solar Maximum Mission GuestInvestigator Program \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Guidelines \Astronomy \SMM \Space \United States \ \1985 \7p. \XS2-12 \Monograph \#G P.733 Guidelines for applications @\SOHO Solar and Heliosperic Observatory [project], assessment study \ESA SCI(83)3 \Malinovsky.M \ \ \ESA \ \Satellite observatories \Sun \SOHO \Space \Europe \ \1983 \61p. \XS2-30 \Monograph \#G P.734 @\ 10 years HELIOS: publication celebrating the 10th anniversary of thelaunch of HELIOS on Dec. 10th 1974 \ \Porsche.H \ \ \DFVLR-GSOC \ \HELIOS project \Space probes \Space science \Space \ \ \1984 \200p. \XS3-01 \Monograph \#G P.735 ISBN 3 88135 156 6 In German and English @\ Canada-France-Hawaii telescope [Maunea Kea, Hawaii] \ \ \ \ \Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope Corp. \National Research Council Canada \Telescopes \Observatories \Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope \Hawaii \Canada \ \1979 \15p. \XT1-14 \Monograph \#G P.736 @\ Space VLBI Week, 22-26 April 1991. \ \ \ \ \ ATNF \ CSIRO Division of Radiophysics \ Satellite observatories \ Radioastron \ VSOP \ International \ Space \ Australia \ 1991 Apr \ Various \ XT2-05 \ Conference papers \ # C "Space VLBI Week". 1991.8 Collection of meeting reports,agendas and opening speech (by Dr J Stoker, CSIRO CEO, 22/4) for numberof international meetings held at ATNF/Division of Radophysics, Epping,April 1991. These included VSOP Review meeting, 12th Biannual RadioastronReview, Inter- Agency Consultative Group (IACG) on Space VLBI. jk 26/4/91 @\ The 14th semi-annual Radioastron review meeting and Russian and JPL visitsreport \ \ Jauncey.D \ \ \ ATNF \ \ Satellite observatories \ Radioastron \ VSOP \ International \ Space \ Australia \ 1992 May \ \ XT2-05 \ Report \ # C "Radioastron/VLBI. 1993.24 Report to DITAC on meeting held atUniversity of Calgary, Alberta, Canada, 6-14 May 1992. mvk 9.3.93 @\ Technical Report No.35, A Computer-controlled Triple-Fabry-Perot UniversalFilter for Solar Research, Lest Foundation \ \Bray..R \ \ \Lest Foundation \CSIRO Division of Applied Physics \Solar Research \Astrophysics \Instrumentation \International \ \ \1988 \25p \XT2-05 \Monograph \#G P.746 @\ Mauna Kea: a guide to the upper slopes and Observatories \ \Cruikshank.D \ \ \University of Hawaii. Institute for Astronomy \ \Mt. Mauna Kea \Observatories \Guidebooks \Hawaii \ \ \1986 \58p. \XT2-12 \Monograph \#G P.738 @\Australia telescope compact array at Culgoora \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Telescopes \Astronomy \Australia Telescope \Australia \New South Wales \ \1983? \n/a \XT2-80 \Folder \#G P.740 Folded sheet brochure @\ Fifth Annual Report of the Australia Telescope Project \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \Australia Telescope \Observatories \Astronomy \ \Space \ \ \December 1988 \62p. \XT2-80 \Monograph \#G P.741 @\ An Australian Ground Station for the Infrared Space Observatory \ \Tuohy.I \ \ \ANU. Observatories \ \Radio astronomy \ISO \Telescopes \Australia \Canberra \ \July 1988 \5p. \XT3-01 \Abstract \#G P.742 ANU Observatories for Mt Stromlo and Siding Spring Observatories @\ European Consortium for Very Long Baseline Interferometry, an advancedscience and technology network \ \Setti.G \ \ \European Consortium for VLBI \ \Astronomy \VLBI \Telescopes \Europe \ \ \n.d. \21p. \XT3-30 \Monograph \#G P.745 1985? @\ Very long baseline radio interferometry using a geostationary satellite,study of the ground segment, August 1981 \ ESA SCI(81)5 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Astronomy \VLBI \Remote sensing information processing \Europe \ \ \1981 \69p. \XT3-30 \Monograph \#G P.744 @\ Arcetri Astrophysical Observatory Annual Report 1991 \ \ \ \ \Arcetri Astrophysical Observatory \Osservatorio Astrofisico di Arcetri \Astronomy \VLBI \Observatories \Italy \ \ \1991 \34p \XT3-35 \Serial \#G 1994.06 Forward by Franco Pacini, Director. Covers role of observatoryin astronomical technology including VLBI, TIRGO, Solar Physics and Columbus.A ddress is Largo E. Fermi 5, 50125 Florence Italy, ph 55 27521, telex 572268ARCETR I fax 55 220039 e-mail @astrfi.astro.it mvk 2.2.94 @\ The CSIRO 210-foot Radio Telescope \ \ \ \ \ Australian Telescope Radio Astronomy Observatory \ \ Space science \ Astronomy \ \ Australia \ \ \ Unknown, probably early 70s \ 17p \ XT3-80 \ Monograph \ #G P.82 @\ LEST, Large Earth based Solar Telescope, an overview \ LEST Foundation Technical Reports \ Wyller.A \ \ \ LEST Foundation \ \Telescopes \ Observatories \ \ International \ Scandinavia \ \ 1986 \ 32p \ XT15-05 \ Monograph \ #G 2 copies P.17 P.18 @\ New telescopes for Australian astronomy in the 1990s, a report to thePrime Minister, May 1982 \ \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \Telescopes \Astronomy \ \Australia \ \ \1982 \12p \XT15-80 \Monograph \#G P.747 ISBN 0 644 01858 5 @\Yohkoh Soft X-Ray telescope NASA X-Ray corona of the Sun 1991.11.11-27 \ \ \ \ \ISAS \ \X-ray astronomy \Space science \Space probes \Japan \Space \ \1991 \ \XX3-63 \Video \#G 1993.76 Presented to COSSA by Australian Academy of Science , honoringvisit by Professor Minoru Oda, May 1993. mvk 30.6.93 @\Hidden Visions : the story of CSIRO's Australia Telescope \ \ \ \ \ATNF \CSIRO \Astronomy \Telescopes \Observatories \Australia \ \ \1992 \ \XX12-80 \Video \#G 1993.52 18 min., VHS format, produced by Provision, Annandale. mvk 16.6.93 @\Proposal for the production of an OMNIMAX/IMAX film "Halley'sComet over Australia", producer Wayne Young, director Michael Glasheen \ \Glasheen.M \ \ \Tetravision Productions \IMAX Systems Corp. \Halley's Comet \Motion pictures \IMAX 70mm film \Australia \ \ \1985 \n/a \XX15-80 \Monograph \#G P.748 Lists space theatres & planetariums using the IMAX/OMNIMAXlarge format film & its associated projection systems. @\Quasars, pulsars, black holes ... and HEAO's \ \Doolitle.R \Moritz.K \Whilden.R \TRW Systems \ \Space science \HEAO \ \Space \ \ \1974? \22p. \XZ1-01 \Monograph \#G P.749 Publicity booklet. @\ Databases and on-line data in astronomy \ Astrophysics and space science library. Vol. 171. Instrumentation \ Albrecht.D (ed) \ Egret.D (ed) \ \ \ \ Astronomy \ Information systems \ \ International \ \ \ 1991 \ 273p. \ XZ1-05 \ monograph \ #G 1992.20 This work includes a series of clear and up-to date descriptionsof available data systems world-wide. First part describes astronomicalarchives (space missions and large ground-based observatories ) and databases(SIMBAD, NED). Second part describes informattion systems currently underdevelopment, (ESIS in Europe and ADS in the US ) and on-line services. Lastpart deals with related issues : bibliographical services, astronomicaldirectories, science networks, user interfaces in astronomy and a briefdescription of the FITS format of common use in many systems. @\ The Cambridge Atlas of Astronomy \ \ Audouze.Jean \ Guy.IsraLGuy.Israel \ \ Cambridge University Press \ Encyclopaedia Universalis \ Space science \ Astronomy \ \ Space \ International \ \ 1994 \ 470p \ XZ3-01 \ Monograph \ #G 1995.77 Purchased HQ Library, CLIS/586, $120, 8.6.95. Third Edition;originally published as "Le Grand Atlas de l'Astronomie, 1983. Prolificillustrations from space missions Voyager, Galileo, Hubble etc ISBN 0 52143438 6 mvk 13.6.95 @\Astronomy: practical benefits, our goals, ...... \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Astronomy \Satellite observatories \Space research \Space \United States \ \n.d. \6p. \XZ3-01 \(paper) \#G P.750 By Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA, before 1977, after 1974. @\Photon-photon absorption and the uniqueness of the spectra of active galacticnuclei \NASA Technical Memorandum 86117 \Kazanas.D \ \ \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Astronomy \Space science \ \Space \United States \ \1984 May \16p \XZ3-01 \Monograph \#G 1990.122 16.6.92 @\X-ray spectra of clusters of galaxies \NASA Technical Memorandum 86115 \Mushotzky.R \ \ \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Astronomy \Space science \ \Space \United States \ \1984 May \10p \XZ3-01 \Monograph \#G 1990.121 16.6.92 @\LHEA contributions to the future of ultraviolet astronomy based on sixyears of IUE Research \NASA Technical Memorandum 86098 \Mushotzky.R \Urry.R \ \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Astronomy \Space science \ \Space \United States \ \1984 Apr \13p \XZ3-01 \Monograph \#G 1990.120 16.6.92 @\An X-ray survey of variable bright Quasars \NASA Technical Memorandum 86094 \Henriksen.M \Marshall.F \Mushotzky.R \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Astronomy \Space science \ \Space \United States \ \1984 Apr \26p \XZ3-01 \Monograph \#G 1990.119 16.6.92 @\X-ray spectra and time variability of active galactic nuclei \NASA Technical Memorandum 86071 \Mushotzky.R \ \ \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Astronomy \Space science \ \Space \United States \ \1984 Feb \25p \XZ3-01 \Monograph \#G 1990.116 16.6.92 @|Thermal detectors as X-ray spectrometers \NASA Technical Memorandum 86092 \Moseley.S \Mather.J \McCammon.D \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Astronomy \Space science \ \Space \United States \ \1984 Apr \25p \XZ3-01 \Monograph \#G 1990.117 16.6.92 @\ Experimental tests of a single-photon calorimeter for X-ray spectroscopy \NASA Technical Memorandum 86093 \McCammon.D \Moseley.S \Mather.J \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Astronomy \Space science \Instrumentation \Space \United States \ \1984 Apr \16p \XZ3-01 \Monograph \#G 1990.118 16.6.92 @\ Essays in space science: proceedings of a symposium, NASA Goddard SpaceFlight Centre (Greenbelt,Md.: 1985: April 23) \NASA Conference pub. \Ramarty.R \ \ \NASA \ \ \Astronomy \Space science \ \Space \United States \1987 \423p. \XZ3-12 \Monograph \#G P.751 A tribute to Frank B. McDonald. @\Major directions for space science, 1995-2015 \ \Giacconi.R \Pinkau.K \ \Task Group on Astronomy and Astrophysics \ \Space science \Future planning \ \International \United States \ \ \ \XZ15-05 \Photocopy \#G P.752 [ X continues next page ] WT03-B26-29IA029-000311-B017-253http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatz.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163318 text/html 32588HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:31:35 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:44 GMTContent-length: 32413 Catalogue Library catalogue Z: GENERAL REFERENCE WORKS, DIRECTORIES, DICTIONARIES ETC. ZA Astronautics, Space sciences in general, satellites [not Remote Sensing,SEE (RS)] ZB Biography, Collective (Who's Who, etc) ZC Communications, Information & Associated Technologies ZE Engineering & Applied Technology ZF Flight (Aeronautics, Aviation, e.g. aircraft, balloons) ZG Geographic Regions (Atlas, etc) ZH Humanities: language, the Arts, English etc. dictionaries ZI Industry, Technology, R&D, etc, Business directories etc ZL Life Sciences ZM Marine Sciences & Oceanography ZO Organisations , esp. directories of. [SEE (O) for reports, profiles ofindividual organisations] ZP Physical Sciences, general science ZR Remote Sensing ZS Social Sciences, law, history, politics ZT Terrestrial (Geological) Sciences ZW Weather & Climate ZX Astronomy, Extraterrestrial Sciences ZZ General & Collective (Encyclopaedias, etc) @\Orbital Motion \ \Roy.A \ \ \ \ \Space science \Astronomy \Trajectories \Space \ \ \1991 \532p \ZA1-01 \Monograph \#G 1992.206 ISBN 0 85274 229 0 . First pub. 1988 by Adam Hilger. ThirdEdition, Student Text. Long term loan HQ Library, AS:HQ 521.3 Ro , 3 900900247457 1 . Textbook on celestial mechanics, general principles includingsatellite orbits. Biblio. and references at end of each chapter. RRP $ 47.45.mvk 22.12.92 @\ Education, Training, Research and Fellowship Opportunities in Space Scienceand Technology and its Applications, A Directory \ \ \ \ \UN \ \Space industry \Space agencies \Space research \International \ \ \1989 \326p. \ZA1-05 \Directory \#G P.753 . Another copy at SE1-05 (1992.47). @\ NASA Thesaurus. Vol.1 Hierarchical Listing 1985 Edition, NASA Thesaurus,Vol.2 Access Vocabulary 1985 Edition \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Indexes \Directory \Terminology \International \ \ \1985 \838p. \ZA1-05 \Directory \#G P.754.1 (Vol 1) & P.754.2 (Vol 2). @\ The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Space \ \ Rycroft.M \ \ \ Cambridge University Press \ Encyclopaedia Universalis \ Space science \ Space technology \ Rockets \ Space \ International \ \1990 \ 386p \ ZA1-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.37 On long loan from Corporate Library (629.4) . Revised, Englishlanguage version of La Grand Atlas de l'espace, Encyclopaedia Universalis1987, 1989. ISBN 0 521 36426 4 jk 5/6/91 @\ International satellite directory. Flight data. [from : Flight International,12-Jan./1985] \ \Warwick.G \ \ \Flight International \ \Satellites \Directories \ \International \ \ \1985 \11p. \ZA1-05 \(papers) \#G P.755 Photocopy. @\Space Satellite Handbook \ \Curtis.Anthony.R \ \ \ \ \Handbooks \Directories \Satellites \International \Space \ \1994 \346p \ZA1-05 \Monograph \#G 1996.3 $64.95 from HQ library, 3 9009 00373885 9 ISBN 0 88415 152 1In popular style, collection of tables, text about various classes of satellites.mvk 4.1.96 @\Information systems on space science and technology, a directory \ \ \ \ \COPUOS \ \Information systems \Space science \Space technology \International \ \ \HOLD 1988, 1992 \Various. \ZA1-05 \Monograph \#G P.756 (1988), 1992.240 (1992) , A/AC.105/517 . Directory of information& data services in language of contribution. @\Directory of solar-terrestrial physics monitoring stations Edition 2 \Monsee Special Publication No. 2 \Shea.M \Militello.S \Coffey.H \SCOSTEP \Air Force Geophysics Laboratory \Directories \Solar terrestrial physics \ \International \ \ \1984 \474p \ZA1-05 \Monograph \#G P.732 Published jointly by Air Force (US) and World Data Center A forSolar-terrestrial Physics. Special Reports No. 239, AFGL TR 84 0237. OtherAuthor Allen.J. @\Dictionary of Space Technology \ \Williamson.M \ \ \ \ \Space science \Space technology \ \Space \International \ \1990 \401p \ZA1-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.208 Pub. by Adam Hilger, Bristol. $78.80. Long term loan from HQLibrary, AS: HQ 629.4 Wi 3 9009 00247 456 3 ISBN 0 85274 339 4 mvk 22.12.92 @\Academic Press Dictionary of Science and Technology \ \Morris.Christopher \ \ \Academic Press \ \Technology \Technological change \Scientific research \International \ \ \1992 \2432p \ZA1-05 \Monograph \#G 1993.112 ISBN 0 12 200400 0 Contains 133 000 entries on scientific andtechnological topics. $166 , LTL from HQ Library, received 22.10.92 . mvk29.7.93 @\European Spacecraft Directory \ \Williamson.Mark \ \ \Matra \Marconi Space Systems \Satellites \Space industry \Space programs \International \Europe \Space \HOLD 1991, 1992, 1993 \ \ZA1-05 \Serial \#G 1991 version is 1993.104 (2nd Edition); 1992 is 1993.105 (3rd Edition),1993/94 (4th Edition) is 1993.106. Handy illustrated summary of basic spacecraftinformation. mvk 23.7.93 @\Earth Observation Spacecraft Directory \ \Williamson.Mark \ \ \Matra \Marconi Space Systems \Satellites \Space industry \Space programs \International \Europe \Space \HOLD 1992, 1993 \ \ZA1-05 \Serial \#G 1992 version is 1993.107 (1st Edition); 1993/94 is 1993.108 (2nd Edition).Handy illustrated summary of basic spacecraft information. mvk 23.7.93 @\World Spacecraft Directory \ \Williamson.Mark \ \ \Matra \Marconi Space Systems \Satellites \Space industry \Space programs \International \Europe \Space \HOLD 1993 \ \ZA1-05 \Serial \#G 1993/94 version is 1993.109 (1st Edition). Handy illustrated summaryof basic spacecraft information. mvk 23.7.93 @\Janes's Space Directory \ \Wilson.Andrew (Ed.) \ \ \Jane's Information Group \ \Space programs \Space technology \Space industry \International \Space \ \HOLD 1993-94 (pub. 1993) \603p \ZA1-05 \Serial (annual?) \#G 1994.11 Published by Jane's Information Group, Surrey; Hinton InformationServices, Eastwood NSW, $364. Long term loan from HQ Library, AS;HQ 629.4, 3 9009 00299226 7 . ISBN 0 7106 1075 0 . Entries from ASO, ASC, CSIRO,COSSA. 1993-94 is 9th Edition. Includes Space Log (to 1992), space programmes,launchers, communications, navigation, earth observation, microgravity,world space centre, space industry & the solar system. mvk 16.2.94 @\Canada in Space, 1982 \ \ \ \ \Canada. Science & Technology \ \Space industry \Space science \Directories \Canada \ \ \1982 \94p. \ZA1-11 \Monograph \#G P.764 Directory of Space research organizations and space industry @\A Guide to the National Space Science Data Catalogue \ \Green.J \ \ \NASA National Space Science Data Center \ \Space science \Directories \Data sets \United States \ \ \1990 \68p \ZA1-12 \Monograph \#G 1990.81 NSSDC 90-07 Contains acronym & abbreviation list. @\The National Space Science Data Center \NSSDC 88-26 \Green.J \ \ \NASA National Space Science Data Center \ \Space science \Handbooks \Information science \United States \ \ \1989 Jan \43p \ZA1-12 \Monograph \#G P.996 NSSDC 88-26. Overview of Center Contains acronym & abbreviationlist 11.8.92. @\Descriptions of data sets from planetary and heliocentric spacecraft andinvestigations \Data catalog series for space science and applications flight missionsVol. 1B \Horowitz.R \Jackson.J \Cameron.W \NASA \NSSDC \Space probes \Data sets \Space technology \Space \ \ \1987 \159p. \ZA1-12 \Monograph \#G P.757 Includes index by region, discipline, spacecraft,and investigator. @\ Data Catalogue Series for Space Science and Applications Flight MissionsVol 6: Master Index Volume \ Data Catalogue Series for Space Science and Applications Flight Missions \ Horowitz.R \ Ross.P \ King.J \ NASA National Space Science Data Center \ GSFC \ Satellites \ Rockets \ Directories \ United States \ \ \1989 October \ 159p \ ZA1-12 \ Monograph \ #G P.78 NSSDC/WDC-A-R&S-89-25 @\ Netherlands Space Catalogue \ Netherlands Space Catalogue \ \ \ \ NIVR \ \ Space science \ Space industry \ Space co-ordination \ Holland \ Europe \ \ HOLD 1990, 1992 \ \ ZA1-34 \ Serial \ #G 1990.45 , 1992.124 Describes policies, organisational responsibilitiesand Dutch Space industries. See also OA3-34 (SRON Annual Reports) and COSSAfiles GS40/001 (NIVR) and GS40/008 (Netherlands). jk 3/6/91, 19.6.92 @\Scientific and Technical Aerospace Reports. Star, An Abstract Journal,Vol.26 No.3; Vol.26 No.24; Vol.27 No.1; Vol.27 No.2; Vol.27 No.3; Vol.27No.4; Vol.27 No.6; Vol 27 No.7 \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Abstracts \ \ \International \Space \ \1988 \Varies \ZA2-05 \Serial Journal \#J (in periodicals section) Bibliography - lists availability of abstractreports from various sources @\University of Hawaii space directory: programs and personnel ... involvedrelated research and teaching \ \ \ \ \University of Hawaii \ \Space science \Personnel \Directories \Hawaii \ \ \1987 \23p. \ZA1-14 \Monograph \#G P.758 @\ 1983 in space, a list of significant events \ \ \ \ \United Kingdom Industrial Space Committee \ \Space technology \Satellites \ \Great Britain \Space \ \1983 \24p. \ZA2-32 \Monograph \#G P.760 @\International programs, January 1973 [with] Addendum July 1974 \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space programs \International cooperation \ \International \ \ \1973 ? \70p+16p \Monograph \ZA3-05 \#G P.761 Includes statistical summary of exchange personnel etc. @\ Program [of] the 15th International Symposium on Space Technology andScience, Tokyo, 1986, (15th ISTS-TOKYO, 1986) \ \ \ \ \International Symposium on Space Technology and Science \Nippon Toshi Center \Space technology \Conference programs \ \Japan \International \ \1986 \71p. \ZA3-05 \Monograph \#C (ISTS) P.763 Lists papers to be presented at the conference, with authorindex. @\Goddard Space Flight Center Project management handbook, Second Draft,May 10, 1982 \GHB 7150.1B \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space missions \Handbooks \ \United States \ \ \1982 \various \ZA4-12 \Monograph \#G P.765 Written on document: Preliminary. @\ Aviation Week Buyers'Guide 198- \ \ \ \ \Aviation Week \ \Space industry \Trade catalogues \Directories \International \United States \ \HOLD 1987 \varies \ZA5-05 \Serial \#G P.766 @\ Directory of UK space capabilities \ \ \ \ \ BNSC \ \ Directories \ Space industry \ Space technology \ Great Britain \ \ \1987 Feb; update 1993 \ \ ZA5-32 \ Monograph \ #G P.26; 1993 Supplement is 1993.123, "BNSC Space Directory Supplementfor 1993", Ed. Mike Blackwell, ISBN 0 9519612 2 5 , mvk 31.8.93 @\Planned unmanned spacecraft activities: an up-to-date compilation of dataon all planned spacecraft [publicity copy] \ \ \ \ \International Space Information Systems \North-Holland(Elsevier) \Spacecraft \Satellites \Directories \International \ \ \1987 \36p. \ZA15-05 \Serial \#G P.759 Publicity copy, to be issued in 3 ring-binders + quarterly updates, to be 2700p. @\ Historical Records of Australian Science \Vol.7 Number 3 \ \ \ \AAS \ \Bibliography \Biography \Historical \Australia \ \ \1988 \370p \ZB1-80 \Serial \#G P.767 Once a year serial @\Curtin University's Research Directory CONTACTS : how to reach the expertsfaster \ \ \ \ \ Curtin University \ \Directories \Biographies \ \Western Australia \ \ \1992, 1994 \Various \ZB1-86 \Monograph \#G 1993.6 (1992); 1994.147 (1994) Curtin University of Technology Perth37222-1-92 mvk 11.2.93, 11.14.94 @\AUSMARC Bibliographic Format \ \ \ \ \National Library of Australia \ \Data management \Libraries \Guides \Australia \ACT \ \1992 \454p \ZC1-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.226 ISBN 0 642 10515 4 Guide to standard formats for bibliographicrecords in machine readable form. Refers to maps, books and manuscripts,music, visual materials, computer files etc. $20.00 mvk 24.12.92 @\Global Telecoms Business Yearbook \ \Russell-Walling.Edward \ \ \ \ \Communications industry \Telecommunications \Directories \International \ \ \HOLD 1995 \144p (1995) \ZC5-05 \Serial \#G 1995.148 Published by Euromoney Publications PLC, London. Lists attributesof regulators, players in international telecommunications business. mvk20.12.95 @\Australian Aerospace Industry Capability Directory \ \ \ \ \Association of Australian Aerospace Industries \Department of Industry Technology & Commerce \Industrial technology \Space industry \Aircraft industry \Australia \ \ \1991 \83p \ZF5-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.141 23.6.92 @\Macquarie Illustrated World Atlas \ \ \ \ \NATMAP \NZ.Dept. of Lands & Survey \Atlases \ \ \International \Australia \ \1984 \512p. \ZG1-05 \Monograph \#G P.768 On long term loan from HO Library (AS:HQ 912 Ma Copy 2) NB Usuallyin foyer or conference room @\Your stay in Guiana; votre sejour en Guyane \ \ \ \ \Arianespace \ \Guidebooks \Ariane program \Launch sites \French Guiana \ \ \1985 \n/a \ZG1-26 \Monograph \#G P.769 Guide to Cayenne & Kourou etc. for visitors to the Space Centre @\ Landsat Atlas: Japan \ \ \ \ \ \ \ Atlases \ Landsat \ Remote sensing applications \ Japan \ Pacific \ \ pre 1987 (?) \ 64p \ ZG1-63 \ Monograph \ #G P.137 ISBN 4 14 008366 2 C0044 Series of Landsat (MSS?) images andaccompanying maps of Japan. jk 7.8.91 @\Map Collections in Australia: a Directory \ \O'Connor.M \ \ \National Library of Australia \ \Data products \Directories \Mapping \Australia \ACT \ \1991 \146p \ZG1-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.225 ISBN 0 642 10483 2 4th Edition. Lists major map holding institutions(by state) and their functions. Addresses, indexes. $25.00. mvk 24.12.92 @\Style Manual For authors, editors and printers \Fourth Edition \ \ \ \Commonwealth Government of Australia \ \Guide books \Guides \ \Australia \ \ \1998 (reprinted with corrections 1992) \409p \ZH1-80 \Monograph \#G 1993.115 ISBN 0 644 07123 0 Guide to editing, writing, honorifics, grammaretc. mvk 15.8.93 @\ TITLE: The Australian Pocket Oxford Distionary \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 Johnston.G \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 \ KEYWORD.2 \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1976 \ PAGINATION 975p \ CLASSC'N ZH1-02 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G P.260 ISBN 0 19 550537 9 jk 6.5.92 @\ The Macquarie dictionary. Revised edition. \ \ \ \ \ \ \Dictionaries \Language \ \Australia \Multinational \ \1985 \2009 p. \ZH1-80 \monograph \#G.1996.79. ISBN 0949757233 mvk 11.7.96. @\ Directory of Australian defence and offsets oriented industry \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Defence Support \ \Defence industry \Offsets programs \Directories \Australia \ \ \1984 \713p. \ZI1-80 \Monograph \#G P.762 ISBN 0 644 03000 3 @\Scientific and Technical Research Centres in Australia \ \Ermers.A \ \ \CSIRO \ \Reference \Organisations \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \527p \ZI1-80 \Monograph \#G P.770 List of all Australian Universities, Institutes and Research Centres @\Register of Development Research & Expertise \ \Thomas.P \Remenyi.J \ \The Australian Development Studies Network \ACIAR \Scientific research \Development assistance \Overseas aid \Australia \ \ \1986 \200p \ZI1-80 \Monograph \#G P.771 Biographical list of researchers in international agriculturalassistance. ISBN 0 86784 888 X @\Australian Aerospace Industry Capability Directory 1991 \ \ \ \ \AAAI\Association of Australian Aerospace Industries \ \Space industry \Directories \Aircraft industry \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1991 \84p \ZI1-80 \Serial \#G 1995.132 Company profiles. mvk 4.11.95 @\ Technology directory: a comprehensive guide to technology developmentassistance in Australia \ \Ford.J \ \ \Scitech Pub. \LES \Industrial research & development \Financial assistance \Directories \Australia \ \ \1986 \121p. \ZI4-80 \Monograph \#G P.772 (Copy 1) P.773 (Copy 2) ISBN 0817 9905 @\ Scitech Technology directory : a comprehensive guide to technology &industry development assistance in Australia \ \ Ford.J \ Harman.David \ \Scitech Pub. \ \Industrial research & development \Financial assistance \Directories \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1992, 1993, 1994; 1995 \262p, 262p, 262p. \ZI4-80 \Serial (annual) \#G 1992.241; 1993.41; 1994.47. 1995.23 [$135] ISSN 1030 4649 mvk 28.12.92,2.6.93, 25.3.94; 19.2.95 @\ MTIA research & development handbook: guide to government benefits \ \ \ \ \MTIA \IR & D Australia \Industrial research & development \Financial assistance \Directories \Australia \ \ \1986 \60p. \ZI4-80 \Monograph \#G P.774 @\ Space Technology International \ Space Technology International \ Turnill.R \ \ \ \ \ Space industry \ Space technology \ Space commercial use \ International \ Europe \ \ HOLD 1989, 1990, 1991, 1992 \ Varies \ ZI5-05 \ Serial \ #G P.19, 1990.12, 1991.14 (copy 1), 1991.15 (copy 2); 1992.71 jk 10/5/91 @\The International Space Directory \ \Parker.I \ \ \Space \ \Directories \Space technology \ \International \ \ \HOLD 1989-90; 1990-91; 1991-92; 1992-93 \ \ZI5-05 \Serial (annual) \#G 1993.145 (1989-90); 1993.146 (1990-91); 1993.147 (1991-92); 1992.246(1992-93) . Published by Shephard Press. Lists Space Agencies, Companies,Products. mvk 29.9.93, 29.12.92 @\Technology Directory of Australia: the source book of Australian technology,research & development \ \ \ \ \ \ \Directories \Industrial research & development \Technology \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1995 \ \ZI5-80 \Serial (annual) \#G 1995.91 ISSN 1323 9791 . With index. COSSA entry p63. Published by AssociatedPublishing Company. mvk 13.8.95 @\ Earth resources: a continuing bibliography with indexes \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Earth resources \Remote sensing \Bibliographies \International \ \ \HOLD 41(1984); 44(1985); 51(1986); 57(1988); 58 (1988); 59 (1988); 60 (1989);61 (1989) ; 62 (1989) \varies \ZP1-05 \Serial \#G 61, 62 are P.149, P.150. 63 is P.775. NASA SP-7041 @\Researchers National Laboratories in Japan \ \ \ \ \Research Development Corporation of Japan \ \Directories \Scientific research \Industrial technology \Japan \ \ \HOLD 1993 \909 \ZP1-63 \Serial (?) \#G 1994.76 Complimentary copy from JRDC of Kawaguchi. User's Guide, personnelby institution, biographical index. Does not include NASDA or Universities.mvk 25.6.94 @\Register of Science and Technology Communicators \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Directories \Media \Information dissemination \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1992 \ \ZP1-80 \Monograph as series \#G 1994.86 Second Edition 220pp . ISBN 0 644 25054 2 Published AGPS forDITAC Science & Technology Awareness Program. 92/21341 Cat. No. 92 1965XLists S&T Communicators, their interests and audiences. Section on "Projects"inc. ISY Land Cover change. mvk 7.7.94 @\Directory of Radio Science activities in Australia 1986-1989 \ \Lucas.G \ \ \AAS \National Committee of Radio Science \Radio science \Scientific research \Directories \ Australia \ \ \1990 Jul \97p \ZP3-80 \Monograph \#G 1991.131 16.6.92 @\Challenge to leading edge of science and technology: Special CoordinationFunds for promoting science and technology (SCF) ....and THE NEXT \ \ \ \ \STA \ \Research grants \Research and Development \Science and Technology \Japan \International \ \1992 (?) \ \ZP5-63 \Monograph \#G 1994.178 Small brochure describing special funds and targets (includingJAPACS, Japanese Pacific Climate Study, and Japanese Ocean Circulation Experiment,under principles established by Council for Science and Technology. mvk22.11.94 @\ Measures of science and innovation \ \ \ \ \ DITAC \ \ Scientific research \ Technology transfer \ Research grants \ Australia \ \ \ 1987 \ 392p \ ZP5-80 \ Monograph \ #G, P.20, Written in Department of Science before DITAC takeover. ISSN1030 4673 @\Funds for International scientific activities \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \CIRC \Research grants \Financial assistance \Development assistance \Australia \International \ \1993 Sept \120p \ZP5-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.165 Directory of funding sources. mvk 20.11.94 @\French-English glossary on SPOT, remote sensing and their applications \ \Dyson.S \ \ \ \ \Glossaries \SPOT \ \International \ \ \1986 Sep \193p \ZR1-05 \Monograph \#G 1990.115 ISBN 2 9501571 0 6 Copy 148 16.6.92 @\ Regional remote sensing bibliography, July 1988 \ \ \ \ \ESCAP \ \Remote sensing \Bibliographies \ \East Asia \Pacific \International \1988 \343p. \ZR1-60 \Monograph \#G P.776 UNDP/ESCAP Remote Sensing Programme (RAS/86-141) @\Atlas of Meteosat imagery, Atlas Meteosat, May 1981 \ESA SP-1030 \Brimacombe.C \ \ \ESA \ \Meteorology \Atlases \Meteosat \International \Europe \ \1981 \493p. \ZR3-05 \Monograph \Atlas of Remote sensing imagery: photographs & text @\Remote sensing publications by University staff and students \ \ \ \ \University of NSW. Centre for Remote Sensing \ \ \ \ \NSW Australia \ \1986 \14p \ZR3-82 \Monograph \#G P.777 @\ Remote sensing information exchange and education/training in the ESCAPregion. Report of the Working Group Meeting of the regional informationservice and education networks of the Regional Remote Sensing Programme \ UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme (RAS/86/141) \ \ \ \ UNDP/ESCAP \ \ Remote sensing \ Information dissemination \ \ International \ East Asia \ Pacific \ 1990 \ 29p \ ZR16-60 \ Monograph \ #G 1992.2 Bangkok, 11-17 December 1990. See also Directory of Remote SensingEducation and Training in the ESCAP Region, 1991.115. @\Directory of remote sensing education and training in the ESCAP Region \ \ \ \ \ UNDP/ESCAP \ \ Directories \ Education \ Training \ East Asia \ Pacific \ International \ 1990 \ 121p \ ZR16-60 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.115 RAS/86/141 22.12.91 @\Countries of the world and their flags, from Afganistan to Zimbabwe \ \ \ \ \Reader's Digest \ \Flags \ \ \International \ \ \1987 \52p. \ZS7-05 \Monograph \#G P.778 Usually with JK @\ Diplomatic List and List of Representatives of International Organisations \ \ \ \ \ Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade \ \ Directories \ \ \ International \ Australia \ \ 1990 \ 97p \ ZS14-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.112 ISSN 1030 7392. Information current at 1/2/90. Protocol Branchof DFAT can update/answer queries. 22.12.91 @\International Lithosphere Program, Directory 1988, Report No.10 \ \ \ \ \ICSU \Inter-Union Commission on the Lithosphere \Directories \Geology \Geoscience \Multinational \International \ \1988 \86p. \ZT1-05 \Booklet \#G P.779 @\ National Environmental Satellite Service Catalog of Products (3rd Ed) \ \ Dismachek.D \ Booth.A \ Leese.J \ NOAA \ NESS (later NESDIS) \ Environmental research \NOAA \ Climatology \ United States \ International \ Space \ 1980 Apr \ 120p \ ZW1-12 \ Monograph \ #G P.118 @\Guide to WMO Binary Code Forms: Part 1 Guide to FM 94 BUFR Part 2 Guideto FM-92 GRIB \World Weather Watch Technical Report No. 17 \ \ \ \WMO \ \Guide books \Handbooks \ \International \ \ \1994 May \117p \ZW2-05 \Monograph \#G 1994.170 BUFR Binary Universal Form for the Representation of meteorologicaldata, GRIB GRIdded Binary, a vehicle for transmitting high volumes of griddedmeteorological data over high speed telecommunication lines. mvk 21.11.94 @\Directory of climate and atmospheric research in Australia \ \ \ \ \AAS \National Committee on Climate and Atmospheric Sciences \Directories \Atmospheric research \Climatology \ Australia \ \ \1991 \153p \ZW3-80 \Monograph \#G 1991.136, 1991.137 (Copy 2) ISBN 0 85847 1736 0 19.6.92 @\ Astronomical phenomena for the year 1991 \ \ \ \ \ Nautical Almanac Office, US Naval Observatory \ Her Majesty's Nautical Almanac Office \ Astronomy \ Almanacs \ \ Space \ \ \ 1988 \ 77p \ ZX1-01 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.45 ISBN 0 11 886933 7 Long loan from HQ Library (523.05) Datesand times of eclipses, conjunctions, phases of moon, sunrise & set etc.jk 10/7/91 @\ International Directory of Astronomical Associations and Societies, IDAAS1988 \ \Heck.A \Manfroid.J \ \Centre de Donnees de Strasbourg, Observatoire Astronomique de Strasbourg \ \Astronomy \Observatory \ \International \Multinational \ \1988 \515p. \ZX1-05 \Directory \#G P.780 @\ International Directory of Professional Astronomical Institutions , IDPAI \ \Heck.A \ \ \Observatoire Astronomique de Strasbourg \ \Astronomy \Observatory \ \International \Multinational \ \1989, 1990 \492p, 650p. \ZX1-05 \Directory \#G IDPAI 1989 is P.781 . IDPAI 1990 (published 1989) is 1990.101. jk 10/5/91 @\American Astronomical Society Membership Directory \ \ \ \ \American Astronomical Society \ \Astronomy \Directories \ \United States \ \ \HOLD 1995 \ \ZX1-12 \Serial \#G 1995.20 Lists members' names & addresses, including AT, DRP in CSIROmvk 16.2.95 @\ Acronyms & Abbreviations in Astronomy, Space Sciences & RelatedFields \ \ Heck.A \ \ \ Astronomical Observatory of Strasbourg \ \ Astronomy \ Directories \ \ International \ \ \ 1991 \ 604 pp \ ZZ1-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.42 Pub. 4.6.91. Contains approx. 41 000 entries plus list of mathematicaland physical symbols. jk 8/7/91 @\StarBriefs: a Dictionary of Abbreviations, Acronyms, and Symbols in Astronomy,Space Sciences & Related Fields \ Publication Speciale du C.D.S. no. 19 \ Heck.A \ \ \ Astronomical Observatory of Strasbourg \ \ Astronomy \ Directories \ \ International \ \ \ 1992 \ 772 pp \ ZZ1-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1992.229 ISBN 2 908064 17 0 , ISSN 0764 9614 . Contains approx. 55000 entries plus list of mathematical and physical symbols. $101.61 . Longterm loan from HQ Library AS: HQ 520.3 St 3 9009 00288609 7 . mvk 24.12.92 @\Microsoft Bookshelf for Windows \ \ \ \ \Microsoft Corporation \Creative Labs. Inc. \Reference publication \Atlases \ \International \United States \ \1991 \ \ZZ1-05 \CD-ROM Kit \#CD-ROM No. 7 1992.146.1 is 31p booklet; 1992.146.2 is CD Disk (CDRM 8147002 ) Includes animated encyclopedia, atlas, book of quotations, thesaurus,and facts & figures. 26.6.92. @\ Project help for students of all ages 19 - Education Annual no.- \ \ \ \ \Australian Social Studies \ \Encyclopaedias etc \Education \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1988 \various \ZZ1-80 \#G P.782 @\The Australian dictionary of acronyms and abbreviations. \ \Jones, David J. \ \ \ \ \Dictionary \ \ \Australia \ \ \1995 \472 p. \ZZ11-80 \monograph \#G 1996.54 ISBN 0 868 04 521 7 mvkl10.6.96 WT03-B26-30IA029-000311-B017-272http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/abtspin.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163337 text/html 1313HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:31:58 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:08 GMTContent-length: 1139 About SpIN About SpIN ... SpIN is published bimonthly in February, April, June, August, October andDecember, by: CSIRO Office of Space Science & Applications GPO Box 3023 Canberra ACT 2601 Phone: +61 6 216 7200 Fax: +61 6 216 7222 To obtain a printed copy of SpIN, or to add or remove yourself from themailing list, please contact the CSIRO Information Officer, WayneDeeker. For information or suggestions regarding this website contact SusanCampbell. Editor: Jeff Kingwell Editorial consultant: Brian Embleton  CSIRO Australia, Canberra 1996 Contributed articles should arrive by the beginning of the month of publication.Material published in SpIN may be quoted or reproduced with acknowlegementto CSIRO. WT03-B26-31IA029-000311-B017-298http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/spin692.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163350 text/html 4322HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:32:10 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 10 Jul 1996 23:51:38 GMTContent-length: 4148 CEOS assesses Global Observing Strategy CEOS assesses Global Observing Strategy About 50 leading scientists and space agency officials met in Seattle, WashingtonState USA, 27&shyp;29 March 1996, to consider the advancement of an internationalstrategy for long-term global observation measurements required for climatechange studies, disaster monitoring, and other research or operational needs. The Seattle meeting, formally titled the 'Ad Hoc Meeting on Space Componentfor an Integrated Global Observing Strategy', was convened by the Committeeon Earth Observation Satellites, CEOS (see Box), and hosted by the U.S.National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and National Aeronauticsand Space Administration (NASA). Dr Brian Embleton, Head of CSIRO Officeof Space Science & Applications/Earth Observation Centre, was the chairthroughout the 3-day meeting. The main aim of the gathering was to consider how the international communitymight best meet future needs for global measurements of natural phenomena.In particular, the meeting considered how space-based observations mightbe better planned and co-ordinated, in order to meet the research and operationalneeds of international programs such as the Global Ocean Observing System(GOOS), the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS), and the InternationalGeosphere Biosphere Programme (IGBP). Amongst other items, the meeting paid special attention to how user requirementsmight be specified and incorporated into the Earth observation activitiesof CEOS members; the potential role of CEOS in a future Integrated GlobalObserving Strategy; and the interdependencies of satellite operators; serviceusers; and space-based and local measurement. Later in the year, in September at Geneva, a related ad hoc meeting willconsider the co-ordination of local or 'in situ' measurements, for similarpurposes. This meeting will be convened by GCOS. For continuity and integration,the organising committee will share several members with the group whichorganised the Seattle meeting. About CEOS ... The Committee on Earth Observation Satellites was formed in 1984, and isdedicated to optimising the benefits of Earth observation, acting as a focalpoint for mission co-ordination; and exchanging policy and technical informationabout Earth observation programs, missions, and data systems. Further informationabout CEOS can be found on the CEOS Information System, at http://gds.esrin.esa.it/Cceosinfo NASDA and CSIRO renew agreement During the Seattle meeting, CSIRO and the National Space Development Agencyof Japan (NASDA) finalised an amendment to their agreement on the directreception and distribution of MOS-1 data. The initial agreement, signedin 1987 and subsequently amended twice, allows for commercial distributionof the Marine Observation Satellite (MOS) data, received on behalf of CSIROin Australia by the Australian Centre for Remote Sensing. The new amendment, effective from 1 April 1996, moves the emphasis of theco-operative project towards non-commercial research use. WT03-B26-32IA029-000311-B017-329http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/spin693.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163422 text/html 2699HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:32:30 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:11 GMTContent-length: 2525 PM announces Australia's new Science Ministry PM announces Australia's new Science Ministry Prime Minister John Howard announced his new front bench on Friday 8 March,reducing in size both the Cabinet and Ministry. The new Science Ministers are: The Hon John Moore (Lib), Minister for Industry, Science andTourism, and Vice President of the Executive Council. Mr Peter McGauran (Nat), Minister for Science and Technology, also DeputyLeader of the House. Mrs Bronwyn Bishop (Lib), Minister for Defence Industry, Science and Personnel. Mr Moore has held the Queensland seat of Ryan since 1975. Presidentof the Queensland Liberal Party from 1973&shyp;1976 and again from 1984&shyp;1990,Mr Moore served as Federal Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs from1980&shyp;82. In opposition, he worked on several parliamentary committees,with numerous shadow appointments: Finance; Communications; Local Governmentand Northern Development; Transport and Aviation; Business and ConsumerAffairs; and, to 1990, Business, Privatisation and Consumer Affairs. Mr McGauran has been the member for Gippsland since 1983. A formerbarrister and solicitor, Mr McGauran has served on parliamentary committeesincluding: Transport Safety; Legal and Constitutional Affairs; Public Accounts;National Crime Authority; ASIO; and Telecommunications Interception. Mrs Bishop, also a former solicitor, was first elected to the Senatein 1987. She held the Shadow Ministry for Public Administration, FederalAffairs & Local Government from 1989&shyp;1990 and, following her electionto the House of Representatives in 1994, held various Shadow Ministries.She has served on several parliamentary finance and other committees. Minister Moore and the Minister for Small Business and Consumer Affairs,Geoff Prosser, met representatives of industry bodies on 11 April to discussthe impact of proposed modifications to the Tariff Concession System. WT03-B26-33IA029-000311-B018-6http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/spin695.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163513 text/html 3125HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:33:13 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:11 GMTContent-length: 2951 Collaboration in Global Change data studies Collaboration in Global Change data studies About 100 specialists in Earth observation data and applications met inHatoyama, near Tokyo, on 25&shyp;26 January 1996, for the Third GeneralMeeting of the Global Research Network System. GRNS is a special 5-yearprogram, funded by the Science and Technology Agency of Japan and managedby the National Space Development Agency, with participation from severalcountries and organisations, mainly in the Asia&shyp;Pacific region. The program's objectives are to: produce fundamental data sets in key areas of Earth science (includingvegetation, oceanography, desertification, and hydrology), with an emphasison the Asia&shyp;Pacific region; improve understanding of data-set management , including base map referencingand data integration; support international research efforts in global change; and create a human and information network among research institutes inthe region. An international steering committee, with experts from Japan, the USA(NASA, NOAA), Thailand (UNEP/GRID) and Italy (European Space Agency) helpsto guide the program, which comprises research and data projects carriedout by institutions in Australia, China, Indonesia, Thailand and Japan. Australia/Japan collaboration The Australia/Japan collaborative agreement is co-ordinated by AUSLIG (AustralianSurveying and Land Information Group) and NASDA, respectively. Researchersand data project managers from the following Australian organisations takepart in GRNS, and attended the recent meeting: Australian Institute of Marine Science (Coral reef studies) Australian Surveying and Land Information Group (Program managementand data set standardisation) Bureau of Meteorology (Hydrology) CSIRO Division of Fisheries (Ocean Colour studies) CSIRO Office of Space Science and Applications/Earth Observation Centre(Ocean Colour studies) CSIRO Division of Wildlife and Ecology (Vegetation and Desertificationstudies). WT03-B26-34IA029-000311-B018-45http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/spin697.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163551 text/html 5661HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:33:55 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:11 GMTContent-length: 5487 SPOT turns 10 FEATURE ARTICLE by Wayne Deeker SPOT turns 10 This month, SPOT (Systme Pour l'Observation de la Terre) celebratesten years of successful operation. Europe's SPOT was the first remote sensingsatellite system designed to operate commercially, and has grown to becomea versatile and successful global commercial service. France's space agency, CNES, designed SPOT's satellite and ground stationsystem. In 1984, France unsuccessfully sought partnership arrangements withthe European Space Agency and US Government. The international scientificcommunity has also from time to time expressed doubts about SPOT's commercialfocus, although today the scientific community is a frequent user of SPOTdata. France in 1984 took a long term view of the development of commercial Earthobservation systems, constructing the system with support from Belgium andSweden. SPOT uniquely offered high resolution, frequently resampled colour images,available in stereo (see "SPOT Images").The images compared in quality and resolution to aerial photography, thoughcosting much less, with a global coverage. SPOT weathered the initial critical response, gradually entering traditionalremote sensing markets (cartography, coastal monitoring, agricultural forecasting)and establishing new ones. After a few years, SPOT was in profit, and untilthe launch of IRS-1C in 1995, was regarded as the best civilian technologyavailable in terms of spatial resolution. In 1994, SPOT earned approximatelyA$60 million. Now, SPOT is used more for public-interest resource management, and lessfor private commercial gain, than predicted. The world's many governmentresource-management agencies, SPOT's largest market, use the images in diverseways (see "Some SPOT Applications"). SPOT data also contribute to international research programs, includingglobal change monitoring. For example, COSSA/EOC purchased a number of SPOTscenes under a special arrangement with SPOT Imaging Services, in conjunctionwith a High Resolution Data Set Pilot Project within the Committee on EarthObservation Satellites. These scenes provided cover of the Northern Australian Tropical Transect(NATT); scientists around the world use these data to study climate variabilityand its interaction with agriculture and pastoralism. SPOT's onboard recording system can be programmed to acquire data fromvirtually of anywhere on Earth (See "SPOT Satellites").Program requests can be arranged through SPOT Image or any of its agents,and are then ordered from SPOT Imaging Services. The Data Acquisition Facilityof the Australian Centre for Remote Sensing (ACRES) receives and distributesAustralasian SPOT data. SPOT has utilised three identical satellites since 1986. SPOT-1 is dormant in a holding pattern. SPOT-2, launched in 1990, and SPOT-3,launched in 1993, operate simultaneously, partly to meet demand for SPOTimagery of the Northern Hemisphere growing season. Customers may quicklyobtain any of the 4 million archived images. SPOT-4 is under construction, scheduled for launch in early 1998. Whileearlier satellites were identical for image continuity, SPOT-4 offers severalimprovements. Its lifetime will be 5 years, not 3, and it will carry twicethe previous payload. Both HRV instruments ("SPOTSatellites") will be programmable for independent acquisition,greatly increasing imaging opportunities. Other improvements include a precision positioning system, 10 m colour pixels,simultaneous high/low resolution, and a new detector receiving infraredin the 1.5&shyp;1.7 micron band. Atmospheric water does not reflect thesewavelengths, but plant-tissue water does. The detector will enable measurementof plant water stress, providing harvest estimates and many other uses. Beyond that, SPOT-5A and 5B, due for launch after 2000, will further thesensor and tracking improvements. SPOT should be around well into the 21stCentury; users will continue to benefit from detailed high quality images,made to order. Further information and inquiries: SPOT Imaging Services Australia 156 Pacific Highway St Leonards, NSW 2065 Ph: 02 9906 1733 Fax: 02 9906 5109 WWW: http://www.spotimage.fr/ Australian Centre for Remote Sensing Dunlop Crt Fern Hill Park Bruce, ACT 2617 Ph: 06 201 4201 Fax: 06 251 6326. WT03-B26-35IA029-000311-B018-82http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/spin696.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163629 text/html 2019HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:34:41 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:11 GMTContent-length: 1845 New Publication: Climate and soils databases NEW PUBLICATION: Climate and soils databases Proceedings No. 63 'Matching Trees and Sites', produced by the AustralianCentre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR), describes the developmentof climate and soils databases potentially complementing remotely sensedland-use data. For example, a paper by Zuo et al. describes the development of a 1/20thdegree climatic database across China, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Thailandand Peninsular Malaysia. Monthly mean estimates of maximum temperature,minimum temperature, precipitation, solar radiation and evaporation wereobtained using the ANUSPLIN package for about 400,000 locations. Other papers describe how these and other data were used to explain whereand how well particular trees will grow in different environments. Examplesinclude work from China, Southeast Asia, Central America, Africa and Australia. Copies of these proceedings are available from: Bibliotech GPO Box 4 Canberra ACT 2601 Australia (fax +61 6 257 5088). Price A$50 plus postage and packaging: $5 in Australia; $7 Asia/Pacific;$10 rest of the world. WT03-B26-36IA029-000311-B018-123http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/spin6910.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163711 text/html 2938HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:35:26 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:10 GMTContent-length: 2764 CEOS reports on uses of Earth Observation Satellite Data CEOS reports on uses of Earth ObservationSatellite Data Copies of a CEOS Special Report on Successful Applications of EO SatelliteData are now available from COSSA. The report details CEOS (Committee onEarth Observation Satellites) member bodies' successful use of satellitedata, and the resulting civil, scientific and other benefits. Members includeall civil agencies managing Earth Observation (EO) satellites and thosereceiving or processing the data. The report outlines EO projects with applications to: agriculture; resource management and surveying; hazard monitoring and disaster assessment; civil mapping and planning; ice monitoring; coastal zone management; and oceanography. Climate change and meteorological applications are excluded, as these usesare documented elsewhere. All CEOS bodies and related organisations supplied project details, butthe report includes only mature, operational applications showing practicalresults. The thirty-six described projects employ a variety of passive and activesensors, covering a large spectral range. Most are imaging sensors, eitheroptical or radar. Optical instruments, such as carried on SPOT and LANDSAT,are best established, though radar detectors offer sensing advantages andare developing rapidly. In addition to project successes, the report examines technological problemsand deficiencies, exploring the future of remote sensing. It concludes withannexes about member organisations, project details, and sensing instruments. COSSA is currently preparing, with assistance from NASDA, a CD&shyp;ROMcontaining case studies and data sets in Earth observation. This disk willinclude extended versions of some of the applications featured in the CEOSSpecial Report. Copies of the 101-page report are available from the COSSAInformation Officer, ph 06 216 7216, fax 06 216 7222, at a cost of $10to cover postage and handling, payable to Collector of Public Moneys, COSSA. WT03-B26-37IA029-000311-B018-156http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/spin698.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163733 text/html 2022HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:35:43 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:12 GMTContent-length: 1848 CEOS Working Group on Information Systems and Services FORTHCOMING MEETING Environmental satellite direct broadcast services The theme of the 4th International Satellite Direct Broadcast Symposiumfor NOAA Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental Satellites (POES), tobe held on 10&shyp;12 June 1996 at Annapolis, Maryland, USA, will be toinform users of current and future plans of U.S. and international polarsatellite systems, and to discuss the changes to NOAA's new polar orbitingsatellites (NOAA&shyp;K, L, M) and their direct broadcast systems. Day one will focus on the NOAA's polar satellite programs, specificallyenhancements to data formats and sensor payloads. Days two and three willconcentrate on direct broadcast systems: users, applications and informationsources. Two workstations will be available for viewing near real-time global datasets and NOAA-K change documentation. Demonstrations of satellite communicationsand data handling will also be running throughout the symposium. Registration may be arranged over the World Wide Web, at <http://infrmtcs.com/~poesuser/>. The symposium program, and further details, are available from the COSSAInformation Officer, ph: (+61 6) 216 7216; fax: (+61 6) 216 7222 WT03-B26-38IA029-000311-B018-186http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/spin699.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163749 text/html 2686HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:36:09 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:12 GMTContent-length: 2512 ER Mapper enters southern Africa ER Mapper enters southern Africa ... ER Mapper, the Western Australian-based international producers of satellite-imageprocessing software, recently expanded into southern Africa. Company executivesreturned from a two-week trip to Botswana, Zimbabwe and South Africa, pleasedat the successful launch of ER Mapper 5.0 in those countries and the establishmentof a network of African training centres. Following praise for the training seminars from experienced ER Mapper usersand novices, ER Mapper, in conjunction with their South African partnerGeodass, plan to establish a network of dealerships, supplying PCs and ERMapper 5.0 to the southern African remote-sensing community. Offices of Poseidon Geophysics in Botswana and Zimbabwe have already agreedto become distributors. ER Mapper executives hope to see the formation of a southern African usergroup, bringing together users and dealers for exchange of ideas and comments. ... and establishes more training centres ER Mapper also recently established training centres in Southeast Asia andNorth America. The first Asian centre was the Hong Kong Productivity Council, a joint showpiecefor the Hong Kong and Chinese governments, established to promote technologyin these markets. Earth Resources Mapping runs both UNIX and PC versionsof ER Mapper from HKPC's Computer Aided Design Centre, providing a trainingfacility for the China region. The next facility was the Asian Institute of Technology in Bangkok, a UnitedNations-supported centre for training people in developing Asian nations.The centre has 5 UNIX and 5 PC ER Mapper licences, and has run several successfulcourses. In addition, the University of Pittsburgh's training centre operates 15 Sun workstations, while Simon Fraser University in British Columbia provides20 Pentium PCs. ER Mapper will continue to establish training centres throughout the world. . WT03-B26-39IA029-000311-B018-219http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/spin6911.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163758 text/html 3416HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:36:19 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:10 GMTContent-length: 3242 OBITUARY Stanley Keith Runcorn OBITUARY Stanley Keith Runcorn Professor Keith Runcorn, a founder of modern Geophysics, was murdered inDecember 1995 in San Diego, while on a US lecture tour. Professor Runcorn,aged 73, disturbed a thief in his motel room. Professor Runcorn pioneered studying the Earth through physics and mathematics.In particular, he used palaeomagnetic records to clarify the Earth's history. Runcorn was born in Southport, Lancashire, in 1922, then educated at a localgrammar school and Cambridge. During World War II he studied mechanicalsciences, and in 1943 started work at the Radar Research and DevelopmentEstablishment. In 1946 Runcorn joined Manchester University staff and collaborated withProfessor Patrick Blackett, then working on the origin of the Earth's magneticfield. Over successive appointments, at Cambridge in 1950 then the Universityof Newcastle-Upon-Tyne in 1955, Runcorn developed Blackett's magnetometer,applying it to studying fossil magnetism. Runcorn and colleagues later turnedtheir new geophysical techniques to the question of continental drift. Several eminent scientists 'proved' this then-unpopular theory 'impossible'.Runcorn himself did not initially support the idea. But after further investigation,Runcorn countered, using American and European rocks of varying geologicalages to establish that continents had moved relative to each other and theEarth's axis. During the 1960s and early 1970s, Runcorn conducted conferences under theauspices of the NATO Advanced Study Institute. This annual series of geophysicalmeetings furthered the University of Newcastle-Upon-Tyne's scientific standing.Also in the 1960s, NASA appointed Runcorn principal investigator to itsApollo lunar program, where he greatly developed understanding of the moon'smagnetic field. His honours include the highest prizes offered to Earth scientists: theVetlesen Prize (1971); the Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society(1984); and the John Adams Fleming Medal of the American Geophysical Union.He was also a member of the prestigious Pontifical Academy of Sciences. Runcorn lectured widely on his other areas of interest: architecture, plusart-, national- and religious-history. A sincere and caring man, Professor Runcorn is survived by his sister andmother, and many friends and colleagues with whom he kept in touch despitehis frenetic lecture and travel schedule. A colleague recently wrote that his reputation as one of the foremost geophysicistsof his generation will persist long after his death, as will memories ofhis warmth and sincerity. B.J.J. Embleton WT03-B26-40IA029-000311-B018-245http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/spin6912.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163810 text/html 3468HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:36:27 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:10 GMTContent-length: 3294 Conference calendar CONFERENCE CALENDAR* Dates; Title / Topic; Venue 1996 19&shyp;25 May; 20th International Symposium on Space Technology and Scienceand 8th International Astrodynamics Symposium;Gifu, Japan 23&shyp;24 May; EURISY Colloquium: Space and Its Contribution to EcologicalSafety; St Petersburg, Russia 27&shyp;31 May; 3rd Asia&shyp;Pacific Conference on Multilateral Cooperationin Space Technology and Applications; Seoul, Korea 28&shyp;30 May; Geomatics 1996: 8th International Conference on Geomatics;Ottawa, Canada 10&shyp;12 Jun; 4th International Satellite Direct Broadcasting ServicesSymposium for NOAA Polar-orbiting Environment Satellites (POES) (see itemon page 8 of this issue); Annapolis, Maryland, USA 24&shyp;27 Jun; 2nd International Airborne Remote Sensing Conference andExhibition; San Francisco, California, USA 24&shyp;28 Jun; 3rd International Symposium: Small Satellite Systems andServices; Annecy, France 14&shyp;21 Jul ; 31st COSPAR Scientific Assembly; Birmingham, U.K. 20&shyp;22 Aug; Pecora 13 Symposium, Human Interactions with the Environment:Perspectives from Space; Sioux Falls, South Dakota, USA 12&shyp;14 Sep; "RSS 1996", 22nd Annual Conference and Exhibitionof the Remote Sensing Society; Durham, U.K. 16&shyp;20 Sep; Meteorological Satellite Data Users' Conference, GeostationarySystems; Vienna, Austria 23&shyp;26 Sep; "Mapping Sciences 96"; Canberra, Australia 24&shyp;27 Sep; Submillimetre and Far-Infrared Space Instrumentation; Noordwijk,Netherlands 7&shyp;11 Oct; "Enlarging the Scope of Space Applications", 47thIAF International Astronautical Congress and Exhibition; Beijing, China 4&shyp;7 Nov; IAA Symposium on Small Satellites for Earth Observation; Berlin,Germany 13&shyp;15 Nov; 10th CEOS Plenary; Canberra, Australia 26&shyp;28 Nov; 3rd ESA International Conference on Spacecraft Guidance,Navigation and Control Systems; Noordwijk, Netherlands 2&shyp;6 Dec; SPARC 96, 1st SPARC General Assembly; Melbourne, Australia 1997 19&shyp;24 Jan; International Association of Vulcanology and Chemistry ofthe Earth's Interior, General Assembly; Puerto Vallarta, Mexico 1&shyp;9 Jul; Joint Assemblies of International Association for Meteorology& Atmospheric Sciences, and International Association for Physical Sciencesof the Ocean; Melbourne, Australia 16&shyp;20 Sep; The Transparent Universe; St Malo, France * COSSA can provide contact points and further information for most of thesemeetings. WT03-B26-41IA029-000311-B018-279http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/spin6913.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163829 text/html 6403HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:36:50 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:10 GMTContent-length: 6229 Earth Observation Centre progress Earth Observation Centre progress Dr David Jupp Science Program Leader CSIRO Earth Observation Centre The following is an excerpt from the Foreword of the CSIRO Earth ObservationCentre's Science Plan. In the period between now and the year 2000, Australia is set to bepart of a rapid development of Earth Observation technology and opportunities.The application of Earth observing technologies throughout our region andthe world will be a major activity as resource and environmental assessmentand monitoring is done at many scales and over vast areas of the land andocean. Australia will certainly be a developer of advanced methods and technologiesfor Earth Observation, surveillance and monitoring from satellite and aircraftplatforms and may have a developing satellite launch, sensors, and servicesindustry. In addition, in an era of data encryption and 'closeable' skies,Australia will need to gather, process and interpret a significant amountof its own resource and environmental data and information. Taking charge of innovation In order to show leadership in this area, Australian scientists and industrymust decide that we are to be more than a launch site provider, data consumerand user of other nations' technology. We must 'take charge' of the innovationthat is needed to own the advances that will emerge. Industry and scientistsmust work together to make the results of research create competitive advantagesthrough products having the highest quality and meeting the strictest internationalstandards. Showing national leadership in this task is a role CSIRO canand should take. The need for a CSIRO Earth Observation Centre (EOC) has developed as thevalue of focusing the skills of CSIRO scientists in Earth Observation Sciencehas become clear and the disadvantages of dispersed activities have becomepatent. Modern Earth observing research has advanced from description, datagathering and exploratory image processing to a point where the value ofremote sensing data as measurements is paramount. Remotely sensed measurementscan be collected in a range of data dimensions and at time and space scaleswhich cannot be accessed in any other way. This has enabled geographical applications of Earth Observation to proceedin terms of scientific models and process understanding. The physical linkbetween the data and the parameters of interest to users is providing thereturns that previous image processing and 'correlation' based approachescould only suggest as being possible. In the generic development of thisopportunity, the CSIRO EOC can create a base of knowledge that will underpinremote sensing applications in CSIRO Divisions, and build competitive advantagefor value-adding industry. Focus on generic Earth Observation science In 1994&shyp;95, an extended review of CSIRO's efforts in Earth observationdata use was carried out under the chairmanship of Dr James Simpson of theUniversity of California in San Diego (COSSA Publication 034). This reviewrecommended greater collaboration and rationalisation plus much greateremphasis on algorithm development and value adding. In the pursuit of theReport's primary recommendation, to form an EOC, it was realised that theneed for focus and collaboration extended well beyond data acquisition-whichis, in the end, primarily an Agency responsibility. The development of anEOC founded on generic, multi-disciplinary and cross-Divisional issues includingscene and atmospheric measurement models and algorithms was perceived asa basis for developing collaboration and rationalisation throughout theEarth Observation activities of CSIRO. EOC projects will be outcome orientatedand collaborative, with the outcomes owned by all of the participating groups.The move to form an EOC has recognised that there are issues of Earth Observationscience that are common to many groups and that focusing teams on resolvingthese issues was vital to the needs of all, but beyond the capacity of anyone current group. In particular, the need for special focus on generic Earth Observation scienceis paramount to the successful development of clients and markets addressedby CSIRO Divisions and the Australian product delivery industry. These developmentsand client acceptance of the products are currently highly sensitive tothe quality of the data products and value adding and hence to focused inputfrom the base of excellent scientists that CSIRO has in Earth Observation.The 'delivery ratio' of generic research to market satisfaction can be veryhigh. CSIRO has an opportunity for niche development in generic Earth Observationscience and the provision of Best Practice methods which have immediatepayoffs in environmental and resource applications and to the developingspace and aircraft based mapping and monitoring industries. Science Plan A Science Plan has been developed and has been discussed widely in CSIRO.The Plan has taken the input material and the responses of scientists andgroups interested in the EOC. The Plan seeks to help Australia's efforts in the field of Earth Observationfrom space and aircraft platforms. One of the Centre's objectives is forthe associated services industries to be recognised and successful throughoutour region and a leader in worldwide applications. It provides a means forCSIRO excellence becoming standard practice in the industries addressedby CSIRO Divisions and in the information delivery industry that Australiawill continue to develop in the coming years. WT03-B26-42IA029-000311-B018-313http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/spin6914.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163846 text/html 5729HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:37:04 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:10 GMTContent-length: 5555 VARIABLE ORBITS VARIABLE ORBITS A round-up of other national and international news Spaceworks 96 From 25&shyp;29 March, Canberra hosted Spaceworks 96, a large and well-attendedevent combining: the 4th Australian Space Development Conference; the 8thAustralian Remote Sensing Conference and Workshops; and the 10th Space EngineeringSymposium, and Workshops. SpIN's next issue will include reports on conferencesand international visitors, plus workshop descriptions. Student space science club If your kids are excited about space, consider Galactic Circle, an Australianchildren's space science club. Galactic Circle inspires students about spacescience, illustrating the benefits of space technology. With support fromprofessional science organisations, members can participate in space camps,excursions, lectures and more. Members receive Galactic Gazette, the clubnewsletter, and other material. Galactic Circle can also assist teacherswith educational resources and materials for school chapters. Membershipcosts $20. For further information contact: Centre for Australian Space Education 1/19 Tarlington Place Smithfield, NSW 2164 Phone: 02 609 1388 Fax: 02 725 4269 "Looking Around" CD available The CD "Looking Around", an electronic version of BiodiversitySeries, Paper No. 7, "Landcover Disturbance Over the Australian Continent:A contemporary assessment", is now available from COSSA. The CD extends the printed report, which uses satellite images from 1990&shyp;92to document Australian landcover change and examine its effect on biodiversity.The CD text is more comprehensive, though written for non-scientists inan accessible and personal style. The CD images are also more numerous,and clicking them reveals larger versions. In an uncommon move for scientific publications, the CD contains all dataunderlying the conclusions, to encourage comparison and evaluation. Andas with many electronic documents, the text is cross-referenced with hypertextlinks, and pages can be turned using the forward/back buttons, just likea book. Dean Graetz, Murray Wilson and Susan Campbell, 1995, Looking Around: A contemporaryassessment of landcover disturbance for the Australian Continent. CSIROEarth Observation Centre, Canberra. Price: $10, including postage and handling. Place orders with the COSSA Information Officer,phone: 06 216 7216; fax: 06 216 7222. Electronic maps aid Bosnian peace Serbian, Croatian, and Bosnian delegates to the recent peace conferencein Dayton, Ohio, were able to negotiate border changes quickly, thanks tothe Imagine software from ERDAS. Imagine, a sophisticated Geographic Information System, allowed delegatesto visualise how proposed border changes would affect roads, towns, anduse of natural resources. Delegates drew boundaries on acetate maps, and technicians from the US DefenceMapping Agency applied the changes to maps already loaded in the US ArmyMultispectral Imagery Production System (MSIP). MSIP is a terrain visualisationtool, using ERDAS Imagine for image analysis and map updating. Changing the borders took minutes, requiring only drawing lines on a screen,then printing the new maps. Maps were printed using the DMA's Remote ReplicationSystem (RRS), a mapping package also based on Imagine. During the three-week negotiations, the Imagine systems created, revisedand printed over 3000 maps. The final Bosnian peace agreement included over100 computer-produced maps, initialled and officially sealed by the Presidentsof the three countries. Imagine technology, having aided in negotiating the agreement, is also helpingin its maintenance. US pilots and troops rehearse and plan for missionslong before they arrive in the region. Early in the NATO operation, few maps were available for even the simplestnavigations. But within days, field troops could make their own maps usingMSIP computers equipped with Imagine. Global Positioning Systems Summit The Global Positioning Systems Asia '96 Summit and Exhibition will be heldin Singapore's Marina Mandarin Hotel, 18&shyp;21 June 1996. The conference organisers have brought together a senior panel of expertsfrom leading GPS organisations, to illustrate regional uses of Global PositioningSystems. The conference consists of two tracks, offering attendees informationmore focused to their needs: Land and Vehicular Applications, and Civiland Aviation Applications. An exhibition of the latest GPS products will run throughout the event,and the following workshops will be available: Fundamentals of GPS; andDifferential GPS Engineering & Design, for advanced users. For further information, contact COSSA InformationOfficer, phone: 06 216 7216; fax: 06 216 7222. . WT03-B26-43IA029-000311-B018-349http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/spin694.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163907 text/html 795HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:37:29 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:11 GMTContent-length: 622 CEOS Working Group on Information Systems and Services Apology ... The AVHRR poster reproduced in SpIN 68 was a joint production between GeomaticsCanada and the U.S. Geological Survey, not the U.S. Geological Survey aloneas credited. WT03-B26-44IA029-000311-B018-366http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin70/spin702.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163919 text/html 742HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:37:40 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 18 Jul 1996 07:23:00 GMTContent-length: 569 SpIN no.70 WT03-B26-45IA029-000311-B019-12http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin71/7102.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114163930 text/html 761HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:37:48 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:29 GMTContent-length: 588 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-46IA029-000311-B019-51http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/firstup.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164037 text/html 6856HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:38:46 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 04:19:54 GMTContent-length: 6682 Welcome to Looking Around A contemporary assessment of landcover disturbance for theAustralian Continent by Dean Graetz, Murray Wilson and Susan Campbell, CSIRO Earth Observation Centre, Australia. This electronic document reports a scientific assessment of thecurrent state of the landcover of the Australian continent undertakenby CSIRO. Through this study, we wanted to establish a continentalpicture of the extent and severity of landcover disturbance, thechanges in the vegetation and soils, as of the beginning of thisdecade. We undertook this study to provide a contemporary understandingand to relate the findings to the continuing problem of the lossof biodiversity. We publish the findings in this format to makethem accessible to all who are interested. How you proceed through this publication is entirely up to you. We want to communicate to you four messages: Why we studied landcover disturbance for the continent How we did it; What we found; What it all means. We tell this story in two different formats, and in one of theseformats, this compact disk, we tell the story in two differentways. Our story is told in printed format as a report entitled 'Landcover disturbance over the Australian continent: A contemporaryassessment'. by R.D. Graetz, M.A. Wilson and S.K. Campbell, 1995. Biodiversity Series, Paper No. 7. A copy of the printed report can be obtained from the Biodiversity Unit of DEST. When you see highlighted text (as in the last sentence), youmay click on it to link to further or related information on theCDROM. NB: Throughout this report you may click on small pictureslike this to see a larger version. The second format of our story is the one you are using now. With an electronic document such as this you may navigate atwill through the sections using the "go forward" or"go back" facilities of your browsing software, andby clicking on highlighted words or phrases. Additionally youmay use other features of your browsing software to, for example,print a section of interest. At the bottom of each electronic page you will see three buttons.One button returns you to the "Contents" page, the othertwo enable you to step forwards or backwards through the wholedocument just as you would with a paper book. Apart from the electronic document, the CDROM version containscopies of the actual data used to arrive at our conclusions. Thissummary of the project is a critical component of the scientificculture. Science is a process of testable inquiry and it is importantthat the findings of a research project are available for scrutinyby others. However, this data-only version of the story is unlikely to interestthe majority of readers. For more information about the datasetsprovided on the CDROM refer to the general readme fileand the readme file in the datasets directory. The complete, and therefore longest way, is the narrative pathby which the project will unfold in a logical sequence. At theend, you will have the best overview of what we did, why we didit, what we found, and what it all means. However, with this format of electronic document, the reader isfree to move to whatever section desired. Before you continue with Looking Around, we raise a number ofpoints. Whatever path you take through this electronic publication, youare reading a document prepared by scientists. This is a scientificdocument prepared and reviewed in the traditions of applied scientificresearch - to provide the best answers possible to the significantquestions of our time. The second point is that it is not common for scientific researchto be reported in a widely accessible format like compact disk.It is not common, but it is not impossible to do so. Dramaticchanges in technology over the last three years now facilitatecommunication between all sectors of society that was previouslynot possible. We believe that all the components of this story,objectives, methods and results, may be of interest to a wideaudience. Therefore, we have embraced the technologies necessaryto tell the story of this project in this enduring format. Lastly, the style in which we write is personal and direct andin contrast to the majority of science writing. This contrastis not because scientists are all dull and boring, without passionand character. Far from it. Scientists nearly always write forother scientists: both parties know and understand the personalcommitment to scientific research and the agonies and ecstasiesin conducting it so they concentrate on only the objective details. In this publication, we are communicating with non-scientists(we think) so we have included details of the strengths and weaknessesof the methods that were used and the difficulties that were encountered. Moreover, we write in a personal and direct style because we wantyou to be aware of how important we think this issue is, and howgood or bad a job we have made of the study. Does a passion for your subject diminish the objectivity withwhich you can conduct research? It can; but we believe it hasn't.If you are interested in thinking about this further, then readthe small section called A Personal Note . Finally, this document contains many images. They are not includedjust for cosmetic reasons. Each image reinforces points that weremade in the text. Consider each image carefully and make a systematiceffort to interpret what you see. If you do this, we are certainit will increase your enjoyment of this electronic document. WT03-B26-47IA029-000311-B019-85http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/ausindex.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164129 text/html 4784HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:39:48 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:25:21 GMTContent-length: 4610 Australia 1:1,000,000 Map Sheets Full resolution mosaic is available from GeoImage. Click on Map Sheet of interest... WT03-B26-48IA029-000311-B019-110http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap1a.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164143 text/html 4902HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:40:01 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 26 Feb 1996 04:03:52 GMTContent-length: 4728 Introduction This chapter is the first of two that justify the project. Itbegins to answer the question of why we did what we did by statingthe nature of the problem that we addressed. It is a reflection upon both the maturity of Australian societyand on the nature of the principal issues that there is substantialand persistent public interest in the state of the environment:the well being of the entire Australian continent. Three issues dominate contemporary public debate about the stateof the nation's environment. They are: sustainable landuse, theloss of biodiversity, and the potential for climate change drivenby the Enhanced Greenhouse Effect (EGE). All three issues are perceived by the public and by policy-makersto be intimately related to the quality of life enjoyed by Australiansociety; see, for example Bridgewater (1994),Broome (1992), Cocks (1992),Roberts (1995). All three issues contain considerable uncertainty: What is the nature of the problem?; How serious is it?; What can be done about it? Our basic proposition is that there is a thread that links allthree issues. That thread is landcover; the cover of vegetationand soils. Changes in landcover, in vegetation and in soils, usually havesignificant consequences for biodiversity, sustainable landuse,and for changing the greenhouse gas composition of the globalatmosphere. Therefore, a focus on landcover can contribute understanding toall three issues. Landcover is another name for the land surface that is theboundary between the atmosphere and the lithosphere. For the Australiancontinent, it is predominantly vegetation and soils with a minorpercentage of dry salt lakes. The landcover of very large areasof other continents consists only of snow and ice. In this document we report the strategy and findings of an assessmentthat we made of landcover disturbance for the entire Australiancontinent. The assessment had two objectives: to use contemporary (1990-1992) satellite image data to mapthe type, severity and extent of landcover disturbance; to integrate these data with existing understanding to explorethe implications of the landcover disturbance for biotic impoverishment,the loss of biodiversity. We believe the findings presented here will interest a wide audiencebecause of their continental scope and currency: this is whatthe nation's landscapes are like, now. What was achieved here was built on earlier efforts. In the sameway, while we hope our undertaking will contribute to increasedoverall understanding, it is far from the last word and will alsoserve as a stepping stone for future efforts. For example, within two years, we will publish our next step:a more finely detailed assessment of the landcover clearing rateover the last decade. Until these and other studies are completed,we offer this document as a contemporary mapping of the disturbancelevel of continental landcover, and an assessment of its consequencesfor biotic impoverishment, both existing and potential. Something To Think About We have set ourselves the goal of undertaking a survey of theentire continent to examine the big picture. For the reader tobegin to appreciate the spatial scales of this report we recommendthat you examine this image of Australia and navigate your wayaround it using the geographic knowledge that you have. This is a contemporary image of the nature and condition ofthe landcover of the entire continent. The ecological informationthat can be extracted from this image is both empowering and unique.For a continental assessment - the big picture - space data isa critical prerequisite. WT03-B26-49IA029-000311-B019-136http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/estlink.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164202 text/html 1585HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:40:24 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 05:35:58 GMTContent-length: 1411 Establishing The Links The acceptance of the findings reported here will largely be determinedby the credibility of the argument that links biodiversity withcontemporary satellite measurements of landcover. The followingsections establish those links. We begin the argument with thisimage. We present an uncommon view of biodiversity. It is a landscapescaled view, an overview like this image, that seeks understandingof general trends rather than detail. Concern for biodiversityis sometimes disparagingly called biological stamp collecting.Using this metaphor, our concern is to understand the workingsof the postal system. A View Of Biodiversity A View Of Landcover The View From Space WT03-B26-50IA029-000311-B019-162http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164211 text/html 1682HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:40:32 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 05:24:08 GMTContent-length: 1508 Strategy Of Assessment Strategy Of Assessment To achieve the objectives of this project, a three part strategywas developed. The integrity of each part and its synergy withthe other two is critical to the credibility of the assessment.Therefore, the strategy, ie what we did, is outlined below. The island state of Tasmania resolved with a ground resolutionof 0.005 x 0.005; or approximately 25 ha. Tasmania is aland of forests that apparently are relatively little disturbed. Dividing Up The Continent Landuse Zones - Intensive And Extensive Landcover Type Quantifying The Disturbance Clearing Grazing And Burning Doing it Yourself Adding What Is Known Tenure Feral Animals Fire Season And Frequency WT03-B26-51IA029-000311-B019-187http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap3.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164221 text/html 1888HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:40:42 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:25:21 GMTContent-length: 1714 The Big Picture: A National Summary Of Disturbance The Big Picture: A National Summary Of Disturbance The continental overview that we have assembled was made up oftwo separate pictures. For the ILZ, which is 39% of the continent, computer processingof satellite data compiled a high resolution image of clearing. For the ELZ, based on expert interpretation of satellite images,the remaining 61% of the continent was allocated into three levelsof landcover disturbance resulting from grazing and, to a muchlesser extent, burning. In this chapter, these two primary datasets are brought togetherto provide a national overview, the big picture. These data arepresented according to a sequence of questions that might flowfrom the generic one - what did we find? Clearing Aggregate Area Distribution Landcover Type Tenure Grazing Aggregate Area Distribution Landcover Type States And Territories Additional Disturbance Factors A Bigger Picture WT03-B26-52IA029-000311-B019-213http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap4a.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164233 text/html 4925HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:40:53 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 04:07:18 GMTContent-length: 4751 The Detailed Picture: Individual Landcover Types The previous chapter reported the big picture; an overview ofthe continent and States and Territories. This section is a preparation for the next on Case Studies.Both of these sections report in detail on individual landcovertypes. Before doing so, we remind the reader that the primary focus ofthis project was the entire continent: we systematically soughtto derive a consistent overall view. This objective required thatwe worked at coarse spatial scales and what is particularly relevanthere, paid equal attention to all landcover types. As a consequence, the results may be puzzling. Some of the landcovertypes that are the subject of frequent public debate do not occupya central place, or even seem important. One such example is the closed forests of the tropical coasts(xTML4 - the closed forests), which cover only a few percent ofthe area of the continent; see Table 3 and the following imageof Townsville. The 1: 1, 000, 000 scale map sheet TOWNSVILLE covering thetropical Queensland coast and inland; total area approximately120, 000 km2. A very large proportion of the tropical rainforestswas located in this region. A moment's interpretation of the coloursand patterns in this image results in the conclusion that thelandscapes are now significantly modified. Landuse has, and continues,to influence this landcover type. We also remind the reader that we have no index of biodiversityimportance with which to sensitise or further stratify our analysis. No doubt, because of their intrinsically high biodiversity complement,the tropical rainforests have high conservation value. Unfortunately,the equivalent data and understanding are lacking whereby theremaining landcover types can be ranked for biodiversity significanceor even conservation status. At present, importance for biodiversity is most commonly assignedsimply on the basis of the presence of small populations of arare species, usually fauna. We would prefer to assign importanceand stratify our study on the basis of continental datasets ofthe level of endemism, and on the nature and level of threat.We believe this report contributes to the latter approach. Unfortunately, there is no continental assessment of endemism. The remainder of this chapter details how and what will be reportedin Case Studies. If you are interested in the Case Studies, then it is worth yourwhile to continue with this section. Reporting Methodology The current level of landcover disturbance and vulnerability tofurther disturbance were separately assessed for each of the 33landcover types within both the ILZ and ELZ. From this complete list, a subset of 16 types is presented indetail with this common format of reporting and scoring. Description Each landcover type is identified with its number and symbol,described in terms of the structural and floristic grouping, andillustrated with a landscape photograph. To convey an overall impression of where a particular landcovertype is found in a regional landscape, a pair of satellite imagesis provided. The first image of the pair shows the entire regionallandscape: the second shows just the landcover type. Size And Location A tabular summary of the absolute and relative aggregate areawithin the ILZ and ELZ is provided along with an image of therelative size and distribution of all locations of this landcovertype for the following: Disturbance By Clearing Disturbance By Grazing Vulnerability To Future Disturbance Disturbance By Habitat Invasion Disturbance By Fire Report Card WT03-B26-53IA029-000311-B019-239http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/content5.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164333 text/html 1630HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:41:08 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:25:23 GMTContent-length: 1456 Case Studies Disturbance Summaries For Selected Landcover Types Closed forests xTML4 Forests eTML3 wTML3 Open forests eM2 eL2 wL2 xL2 Sparse forests eM1 eL1 Tall shrublands eS3 wS3 Tall open shrublands eS2 xS2 Tall sparse shrublands eS1 Low open shrublands xZ2 Grasslands xG3 WT03-B26-54IA029-000311-B019-268http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap6a.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164413 text/html 11326HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:42:25 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 04:39:52 GMTContent-length: 11151 Looking Forward This project was the result of two separate activities: the interpretationof landcover disturbance from satellite data and the integrationof these interpretations with ancillary data. A satellite data-set was used because it was contemporary, objectivelyacquired, and digitally malleable. The ancillary data-sets were used to interpret (landcover, tenure),enhance (feral animals and fire), and report (ILZ, ELZ, Statesand Territories) the interpreted satellite data. The objective was to present an assessment of the landcover disturbancefor the continent, and to interpret this assessment in terms ofpresent and potential loss of biodiversity. The acceptance of the findings presented here is largely determinedby the credibility of the interpretation of landcover disturbancefrom satellite data because it underpins all else. The interpretationthat was finally used was one of many that were exhaustively testedduring the lifetime of this project. Errors of commission and omission were unavoidable. We stroveto minimise both. Nonetheless, uncertainty remains: most criticallywith the assessment of clearing. Where possible, we tested ourfindings against other estimates to indicate the direction andmagnitude of error. The results are presented in a pragmatic spirit of applied science- to present the best continental picture possible at this time.This is the same spirit and intent that motivated the publicationof the Atlas of Australian Resources series; in particular, themost recent Vegetation volume; AUSLIG (1990).Australia is, as the result of considerable effort, a well-mappedcontinent. This raft of resource knowledge supports not only governmentpolicies but also public debate about those policies. We hopethat this work will also contribute to a better understandingof the Australian continent. Five significant points emerged at the end of this study. Thefirst was that the level of thinning and clearing was high. Evenallowing for an omission error as high as 20%, the area was muchlarger than has been generally appreciated. Most of this unrecognisedclearing was in the traditional pastoral areas of Queensland andNorthern NSW where areas of sown pastures have expanded at theexpense of open eucalypt and acacia woodlands. Also, to a muchsmaller extent, we suspect that there has been a loss of largeremnants within the core areas of the croplands. This speculationwill only be tested by a continental study of the rate of changeover the last few decades. The aggregate tables of clearing and the graphics illustratingfragmentation of clearing do not convey the same impact as theview from space. The established cereal cropping areas of southernAustralia present a particularly bleak panorama: especially thoseof Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia. They are extensivelycleared. As habitats, they are irreversibly altered. Those remnantsremaining are both small and isolated. The second point was that the ELZ was, in contrast to the ILZ,much less disturbed by grazing landuse on a continental scale.This reduced level of disturbance owes more to the intrinsic resilienceof the more extensive landcover types, the grasslands and lowshrublands, than to the conservative management of pastoral landuse,past and present. Considered together, the disturbance of clearing and grazing musthave been, and will continue to be, a significant driver of theprocess of biotic erosion. The landcovers that have been mostdisturbed are the best country; those that enjoy the highest rainfalland therefore have the highest productivity. While we do not yethave the quantitative functional relationships to support thisconclusion, we believe it must be so. Between them, the landusesof agriculture and pastoralism have 'taken the eyes of the land'.The case studies support this view. The third point was the exacerbating impact of feral animals.Where landuse disturbance was high, so also was the density offeral animals. The next point was not illustrated by data in this report butit bears heavily on any conclusions that can be drawn from it.Simply: Of the two drivers of future biotic erosion, the contributionof landuse, from clearing and poor grazing management is manageablewhile that from feral animals is not; or not yet, although concertedefforts are underway to achieve this goal. Finally, the basic premise of this project - that there is a relationshipbetween disturbance and biodiversity - remains qualitative andthe limiting factor in translating this or any other measure oflandcover disturbance into quantitative estimates of biotic erosion.While we hold that habitat destruction by clearing or grazing,and habitat invasion by feral species are the two most significantdrivers of biotic erosion, we cannot translate the assessmentswe have compiled here into any action. Why not? Two key relationships are missing. These are for any landcovertype, the relationship between species abundance and disturbance,and between the level of endemism and the level of disturbancethreat. These two relationships are considered sequentially. The firstrelationship, displays species abundance within a landcovertype as a function of its use of landcover geography; ie in spaceand time (x, y, z, t). While this relationship is strictly a multidimensionalsurface, and not necessarily continuous, three hypothetical responsesare presented. Whatever the shape of the curve, it representsa means of evaluating the current level of Threat. That is, giventhis general relationship and actual measures of the current stateof landscape disturbance dimensioned in (x, y, z, t), then thespecies response to Threat, in terms of its abundance in timeand space, can then be estimated. An idealised framework for relating species abundance in timeand space to the time and space dimensions of habitat disturbance.Three plausible response relationships are presented: a speciesdeclines in linear proportion to the degree of disturbance (1);a species shows resilience, then catastrophe (2); a species ishighly sensitive to disturbance (3). The second relationship is between threat to a landcovertype and the level of endemism within that species complement.We presume that endemism is the ultimate measure of irreplaceability.Landcover types will be distributed within this two dimensionalspace as indicated by hypothetical examples. The purpose of mappingthis relationship is to determine priority for action. Even thesimplest partition of this space into two levels, low and high,would be more informative than our current understanding. Hypothetical relationships between the overall level of speciesendemism for landcover types and the level of Threat to whicheach landcover type is exposed. By partitioning this space intohigh and low, priorities for management can be rationally determined.For example, landcover types 2 and 7 score the highest priorityfor conservation management. In closing, we bring attention to the issue of the location andrate of landcover change; the dynamics of disturbance that wasoutside the scope of this project. Obviously, clearing was an essential part of agricultural development.However, land degradation is an unnecessary consequence of poorpastoral management. The expansion of these two agents of landcover disturbance hasbeen driven and controlled by social forces, both local and international. These forces are dynamic. Highly favourable commodity export pricesfor wool, grain and beef come and go: those for the first twoare unlikely to ever be quite so favourable as in the past. In the last two decades, changes in the values society attachesto all the resources that land has to offer have found politicalexpression with most State Governments altering legislation, orits management expression, relating to clearing and to pastoralmanagement. The motivation has been a long-term concern aboutsustainability, and the expensive experience that the past approacheswere not perfect. Given these changes, what are the dynamics of landcover change? It is surprising, given the pivotal role of this question, thatit cannot be accurately answered; see Biodiversity Unit (1995). An aggregate, non-spatial summary from data held by the ABS hasbeen compiled but not yet published by Bullen (F. Bullen, personalcommunication). This time series shows the great expansion ofclearing post-World War II. This clearing was both for cerealcrops (WA, SA, NSW and Qld) and for pastures (principally Qld). Noting that these ABS figures report less than 50% of the areathat we have found to be thinned and cleared, they also suggestthat clearing is slowing. However, non-systematic sampling surveysusing satellite data show the loss of uncleared remnants withinthe core agricultural land continues; Graetz et al (1992), Sivertsen (1994).In terms of biotic erosion, the loss of these remnants is farmore critical than indicated by their small areas. The historical time course of clearing for crops and pastures.Since the beginning of this century, the area cleared for pastureshas exceeded that for crops culminating in a marked expansionfrom 1950 onwards. Land management decisions at the level of the individual and ofgovernments will continue to influence the rate and directionof the process of biotic erosion. The objective of this projectwas to provide a contemporary assessment of the landcover conditionof the continent. This assessment in a small way will supportthat decision making. WT03-B26-55IA029-000311-B019-301http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/end.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164438 text/html 6134HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:42:57 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 04:12:46 GMTContent-length: 5960 The Summary: What It All Means A Personal Note This project was the work of a team. Of that team, one of us,Dean Graetz, did all the writing. Therefore, the style and motivationthat shaped this electronic document largely reflect the interestsand passions of one person, me, the writer of the words you read. I conceived and ran with this project. I did so because I believedthe issue of landcover disturbance to be important; not just tothe continuing loss of biodiversity but also to climate changeand the issue closest to my heart, sustainable landuse. How this nation addresses these three issues over the next fewyears will be determined by society through the normal processesof political representation and debate. As a scientist employed to contribute through research to thewell-being of all Australians, I can contribute in a small wayto this process of change through the conduct of research suchas we report here. My role is to inform the debate by undertakingthis type of research and disseminating its findings as widelyas I can to all who are interested. As an ecological patriot with wide experience of Australia bothfrom on the ground and the view from space, I can try to persuadeall who read what I write that the long term well-being of theland is important to all Australians, no matter where they liveor what they do. My colleagues and I began this process with twopublications several years ago; see Graetz et al (1992) and Wilson et al (1993). As an individual I can share with you the endless delight andenjoyment that I derive from the Australian environment. I aminterested in and experience pleasure from any part of my country,but most especially from the bush, the outback. The desire toshare these experiences and to conserve the source for all futureAustralians is my personal motivation. Poetry is the most succinct way to communicate emotions. Considerthis poem about a very common tree in eastern Australia, the poplaror bimble box (Eucalyptus populnea) BIMBLE BOX (an Australian eucalypt) The girl with English eyes said, 'Cautious tree,Leaves waxed and edge-on to the sun'She saw the sky part-broken by the limbsAnd felt the shade was dappled sunlight. Look to the ground - see cracks that tear the roots.Read of earthquakes and know the treacheryOf a seeming solid that will gape and swallow.These cracks are a slow shrinkage. They do not close.Thrust down an arm and feel the dryness. DropA pebble, hear it rattle fifteen feet.What would your English tree transpire but life -Its umbrella of flat leaves searing? This tree will live. Most surface roots will dieTorn by the crazed earth or exposed.Desperate then the tree will reject its leavesAnd dry earth receive them unawareOf this pretence at mulching much too late.Deep down the roots will prod in clay for sapTo support the few stiff leaves the tree retained.This tree will live and when it rainsThere'll be no burst of growth above the ground.The healed earth will be laced with unseen roots.There'll be an immeasurable swelling of the trunkAnd a handful of new leaves edgewise to the sunEric C. Rolls I have long admired this poem (used with kind permission of EricRolls). With a clarity I envy, it expresses observations of theliving characteristics of a common rural gum tree. The poet'sinterpretation of the behaviour of this tree through the seasons,obviously based on patient observation, is scientifically sound.I know of no better description of the adaptation of a nativetree to the unpredictable Australian environment. The irony is that no matter how well adapted to the infertilesoils and harsh climate bimble box may be, fine tuned by evolutionover tens of thousands of years, this tree together with manyother tree species has suffered its greatest decline in the pastcentury as the direct result of clearing by European man for farming.And Eric Rolls is a farmer. We cannot live without agriculture. We will not survive withouttransforming our environment to suit the well-being of human species.That is not the question. The question is about balance: how muchdo we change and how much do we use in other ways; how much ischanged now for the short term benefit of individuals comparedwith that which is left for the collective benefit of societyin the long term? The future of the biodiversity of Australia will be determinedby the Australians that inhabit this landcover type, the builtenvironment of our cities. Through strong feedbacks, the conditionof the continent far away from the cities will determine the well-beingof the urban Australia. This situation offers both opportunities and threats. WT03-B26-56IA029-000311-B019-318http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/thank.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164448 text/html 2369HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:43:09 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 26 Feb 1996 06:04:42 GMTContent-length: 2195 We Acknowledge . . . This publication describes the objectives, strategy, findingsand limitations of a continent-wide assessment of landcover disturbanceundertaken by CSIRO staff on behalf of the Biodiversity Unit,Environmental Strategies Directorate, Department of the Environment,Sport and Territories (DEST), Canberra. A distilled version is available as a printed report entitled'Landcover disturbance over the Australian Continent: A contemporaryassessment'. Biodiversity Series, Paper No. 7, available fromthe Department of the Environment, Sport and Territories, Canberra,Australia. The research reported in this publication was supported in partby the Biodiversity Unit of DEST, and by the CSIRO Climate ChangeResearch Program. We Thank . . . Both this document and Looking Around were refereed by colleaguesand friends: Sarah Ryan, Barney Foran and Steve Morton of CSIRODivision of Wildlife and Ecology, Jo Mummery of the BiodiversityUnit of DEST, and Michele Barson, Bureau of Resource Sciences,Department of Primary Industries and Energy (DPIE). The authors acknowledge this supportive and critical contribution. In particular, we are grateful to Jo Mummery for her enthusiasm,wise guidance and firm management throughout the lifetime of theproject. Finally, we express our appreciation to Michele Barsonand Liz Poon for the provision of photographs, and to Bob Walkerof GeoImage, Brisbane, for cooperationand help freely given in the use of the continental Landsat mosaic. This CDROM was finalised with support of the CSIRO, Office ofSpace Science and Applications / Earth Observation Centre followingthe transfer of the authors to this organisation in 1995. WT03-B26-57IA029-000311-B019-348http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/disclaim.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164528 text/html 1374HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:43:41 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 26 Feb 1996 06:05:22 GMTContent-length: 1200 Copyright: CSIRO and Commonwealth of Australia, 1996. Information presented in this document may be copied for personaluse or published for educational purposes, provided that the sourceis acknowledged. Disclaimer: The views expressed in this document are those of the authorsand do not necessarily represent the views of CSIRO, or the Commonwealthof Australia. To the extent permitted by law, CSIRO accepts no responsibilityfor the way information or opinions in this publication are interpretedor used. Publication Details: Published by CSIRO, Office of Space Science and Applications,GPO Box 3023, Canberra, ACT, 2601, Australia, 1996. Inquires to : Information Officer. COSSA Publication 035, ISSN 0818 4291, ISBN 0 643 04770 0. WT03-B26-58IA029-000311-B019-375http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/exec.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164545 text/html 6891HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:44:04 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:25:36 GMTContent-length: 6717 The Summary: What It All Means This document outlines the objectives, strategy, findings andlimitations of a continent-wide assessment of landcover disturbanceundertaken by CSIRO staff on behalf of the Biodiversity Unit ofDEST. The assessment had two objectives: to use contemporary (1990-1992)satellite image data to map the type, severity and extent of landcoverdisturbance across the continent; and to integrate these datawith existing understanding to explore the implications of thelandcover disturbance for biotic impoverishment, the loss of biodiversity. In the formulation of these two goals, it was argued that landcoveris a tangible surrogate for habitat for all terrestrial life,and that disturbed landcover represents a change in habitat suitabilitythat was usually a deleterious change. The principal findings were three. First, within the intensivelanduse zone of the continent, we found that as of 1990, a totalof 1, 550, 000 km2 of forests and woodlands have been clearedor thinned over the preceding 200 years. This represents 52% ofthis landuse zone and 20% of the entire continent. These figures are unexpectedly high, but nevertheless plausible.Assuming a worst-case error analysis, the minimum figure was atleast 1, 240, 000 km2. Either of these two values revise the currentestimates of clearing upwards. Within this landuse zone, individuallandcover types have levels of clearing that range between 30%and 99%, with an overall mean value of 47%. Almost everywherewithin this landuse zone, the degree of fragmentation of the remaininglandcover was high. Second, within the remaining 4, 708, 000 km2 of the continent,the extensive landuse zone, 37% of the continental area was assessedto be slightly disturbed, 9% was substantially disturbed, with15% interpreted as significantly disturbed. This distributionof disturbance more strongly reflects the resilience of differentlandcover types than the standard of pastoral management. Combining these figures indicates that more than one third (35%)of the continent was significantly disturbed out of the total81% that was subject to active landuse. The remainder was allocatedto unused (12%) or conservation reserves (7%). Thus almost halfof the landcover subject to landuse was significantly disturbed.A global comparison indicates that Australasia and South Americahave equal lowest proportions of significantly disturbed landcover(38%), with Europe containing the highest (86%). While the landscapes of Australia are not as disturbed as thoseof Europe, the extent of clearing is pervasive. The view fromspace of the agricultural areas of this continent reveals thelittle native vegetation that is left with which to conserve theremnant biodiversity for the future. By comparison, in the extensive landuse zone, the Australian Outback,the prospect is far less daunting. Though disturbed, the landcoverremains relatively intact, and the standard of land managementcan always be improved. Considered together, the disturbance of clearing and grazing hasbeen, and will continue to be, a significant driver of the processof biotic erosion; perhaps the most significant driver. The landcoversthat have been most disturbed were the richest country; thosethat enjoy the highest rainfall and therefore have the highestproductivity. Between them, the landuses of agriculture and pastoralismhave 'taken the eyes of the land'. While we do not yet have thequantitative functional relationships to support this conclusion,we speculate that it must be so. The case studies, which coverthe bulk of the continent, support this view. Third, by examining the protection offered by the different tenuretypes across the continent, we conclude that the vulnerabilityto future disturbance is high for all landcover types. Lookingto the future from the landscapes of today, it is evident thatconservation management by means of tenure protection, ie thededication of land in reserves or parks to preserve biodiversity,is a limited strategy. Effective, off-park conservation strategiesare required to integrate the conservation of biodiversity withother present and future landuses. While it will be difficult, the broad scale integration of conservationand landuse in the future is possible. Landuse is a social activityand is therefore manageable by social means. Unfortunately, onesignificant threat to the success of future conservation effortsremains. Analysis of the distribution of four feral species (rabbit,cat, fox, pig) thought to be significant drivers of biotic erosionsuggests that their presence exacerbates the effects of landcoverdisturbance. While cats were mostly evenly distributed acrossthe continent, the highest densities of rabbits, foxes and pigscoincide with the most severe and extensive landcover disturbance,clearing. The acceptance of the findings presented here is largely determinedby the credibility of the interpretation of landcover disturbancefrom satellite and its linkage with biodiversity. The interpretationthat was finally used was one of many that were exhaustively testedduring this project. We strove to minimise errors of both commissionand omission, and where possible, we tested our findings againstother estimates to indicate the direction and magnitude of error.Nonetheless, uncertainty remains; most critically with the assessmentof clearing. . The results are presented in a pragmatic spirit of applied scientificresearch - to present the best understanding possible at thistime. This was the same spirit and intent that motivated the publicationof the Atlas of Australian Resources series; in particular, themost recent Vegetation volume (AUSLIG 1990). Australia is, asthe result of considerable past efforts, a well-mapped continent.This raft of resource knowledge supports not only government policiesbut also public debate about those policies. We hope that thiscompact disk, and its summary in printed format, Graetz et al,(1995), will also contribute to a better understanding of theAustralian continent. WT03-B26-59IA029-000311-B020-28http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/tutorial/tutorial.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164630 text/html 29045HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:44:23 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 03:22:44 GMTContent-length: 28870 Satellite Images: The new view of Earth. This section is an extract from "Looking back" by Graetz et al 1992. It is an overview of some of the principles of interpeting satelliteimagery. What is special about satellite images? My answer is everything. Satellite images are really something different: They are uniqueand immensely powerful in conveying information about the environment. Satellite images are powerful not in themselves but in the waythat they empower every one of us who has the opportunity to usethem. To examine a satellite image of your own city, town or farm,is to experience something that virtually no one else has done.You become one of the very few; a genuine minority member. Youhave experienced a new and potent view of your country. Genuine hands-on access to satellite images was very limited untilquite recently. This restricted access is the consequence of alack of awareness and easy public availability. I believe thelack of access to satellite images by the Australian public hascrippled contemporary environmental debate. What is the best way to describe the view of life on Earth thatsatellite images can provide? It is difficult to find the words to convey my enthusiasm andexcitement for satellite images because so many of the powerfulwords that were once reserved for special occasions are now usedfor the ordinary and the commonplace. Let me start by admitting that each time I examine a satelliteimage, I am excited by and engrossed in what I see. No matterwhat part of Earth is captured by the image, I am enthralled bythe information that space images convey to me, and captivatedby their novelty and magnificence. My response to space images is not only from my head. It is notjust the information content of space images that excites me.My sense of delight is also involved because the view of Earthfrom space is intrinsically beautiful and enchanting. I have had this affair with satellite images for two decades.It began with love at first sight in 1972. My passion remainsas strong as ever. I still can recall the excitement of the firstencounter, and the feeling of disbelief at what was captured bya lifeless machine onboard a spacecraft 900 km out in space thatwas (and still is) ceaselessly circling the planet. I know that I am not alone in my feelings. I know of many otherswho also appreciate the beauty of space images or who use theirpower to communicate ideas and information. I am very confidentthat I can convey at least some of my enthusiasm for the spaceview of Earth and convince you of its potential. Let me begin to infect you with this excitement and sense of wonderby examining the following satellite image. This is a marvellous image of part of the Simpson Desert, NT.This space image is approximately 30 000 km2 in area and it captureshow this remote part of Australia looked from 900 km out in spaceon June 7, 1981. There is spectacular and intriguing pattern withinthis image. The patterns of colour and texture are the consequenceof natural processes that have been operating in these landscapesover the last million years or so. To me, the most eye catchingpatterns are those which are the most recent; they were generatedin only the last ten years or so. Are you able to interpret theimage and identify these patterns as well as speculate on theircauses? This image was deliberately chosen to be strange and mysterious,although the details of the landscape are still discernible. Details: The image identification is WRS 107-077, 22328-00052,07/06/81. The image size is 91.5 km by 86.2 km, or ~7, 890 km2. The next image does not offer quite such a synoptic view , butit is spectacular nonetheless, and instantly recognisable. It is an image of a Dry Season wildfire in Arnhem Land, NT, asrecorded by an imaging system called the Multi-Spectral Scanner(MSS) onboard spacecraft number 5 of the Landsat satellite seriesat 0930 hours AEST on September 2, 1986. This looks just likea fire viewed from an aircraft. Remember, this image was recorded900 km above the surface of Australia. Details: The image identification is WRS 104-069, ID 58267-00414,02/09/86. If you examine the image closely, you can discern a great dealof detail about the fire: the actively burning fire front, themany smoke plumes, and the colours and shapes of the unburnedlandscape as well as the fire footprint (scar) left behind asthe fire advances. I still find it an amazing realisation that this scene was recordedby an imaging device onboard the Landsat spacecraft, which isthe size of a Volkswagen sedan car, orbiting the Earth some 900kilometres above that fire. The steps in the process were these. First, sunlight was reflectedfrom the fire through the atmosphere to the spacecraft where itwas optically captured and converted to a coded electrical signal.This signal was in turn converted to a radio signal that was transmittedback to Earth, received at Alice Springs and converted back toan electrical signal. The very long sequence of electrical signalsthat comprise this image was stored as numbers on a magnetic tape.I purchased a copy of that magnetic tape and, using a computerand other hardware, converted the electronically coded numbersinto light signals that were focussed onto optical film. The resultis the image you have just examined. By using relatively simple technology we can in effect put ourselvesinto the Landsat spacecraft to obtain this remarkable view ofthe Earth. This view is an awe inspiring panorama, the like of which is entirelyunobtainable on Earth. What is more, the image that we are analysing will never die. What was happening on the ground in Kakadu National Park on themorning of September 2, 1986 is stored on magnetic tape in severallocations. Forever into the future, this image can be recalledand reanalysed whenever and wherever anyone is interested. With these thoughts in mind, what else can be interpreted fromthe wildfire image? What other information can be extracted? With a little thought and no specialised knowledge, it is possibleto infer other details of this wildfire and of the environmentalconditions at 0930 hours AEST on September 2, 1986. For example,it is possible to determine which direction is North and thendecide the direction as well as the speed of the prevailing windon that morning. The second answer follows from the first. Thefirst answer can be arrived at by recalling the time of Landsatoverpass, then deducing where in the sky the sun will be. Thelocation of the shadows of the smoke plumes is useful here. After answering these questions, at least two others become obvious:What size is this fire or what is the scale of the image and whyis the smoke grey-white while the land surface is yellow-red? To satisfactorily answer these and other questions about the natureof satellite images, it is useful to step back from the detailand think about this topic in a general way. What is special aboutthe view of Earth from space? This question began this section; the title of which suggeststhat the view from space is a new view.That is correct. It is a new view but it is new in two ways: itis new in time and it is new in experience. The novelty to thehuman experience is the more important. The view from space is above all; an un-human view. It representsa perspective of planet Earth that was until 1972 absolutely externalto the human experience throughout our entire existence as a species. Besides the attribute of newness, in what other ways does theview of Earth from space differ from the everyday one of humanexperience? Four differences are particularly significant andcritical to developing an appreciation of, and familiarity withsatellite images. The first and most obvious of the differences between the viewfrom space and our view of planet Earth is in perspective. Thespacecraft imaging devices look straight down at the surface froma great height with monoscopic vision. They use only one eye,so to speak. This perspective is in sharp contrast to our viewof Earth that is oblique, from a very low level and in stereo.This oblique, stereoscopic view is processed by our brains toprovide (relative) distance and context information. This is howwe judge distance and height. Using stereo pairs of aerial photographs,this human capability has proved remarkably useful and accuratein assessing apparent height. Over the last 50 years, much ofthe topography of the land surface of the Earth has been laboriouslymapped in this way. The second important difference between the view from space andour view of planet Earth is in spatial resolution. With our imagingsystem the human eye we capture the world as a dense array ofpoints, each of which is infinitely small. This array is combinedby our brain to form an image with considerable detail. In addition,we have used our brains in other ways to enhance the spatial resolutionof the eye with microscopes, telescopes and spectacles. In contrastto the array of infinitely small points resolved by the humaneye, the spatial resolution of the satellite sensor discussedhere resolves the Earth's surface into points that are about 60x 80 metres in size. This means that all the spatial detail withinthat 60 x 80 metres area is lost because it is represented onlyin an averaged way. This smearing or averaging of spatial detailis a new way of thinking about what you are seeing. With experience,this concept will becomes less disquieting. The third important difference between the view from space andour view of planet Earth, is its spectral characteristics. Satelliteimaging systems are designed to record the world in spectral wavebands,or colours, that are very different from our visual system. Thereforean obvious and correct conclusion to draw is that the coloursof satellite images must be 'false'. The colours in the satelliteimages used in this book are not 'true' in human terms even thoughthey are natural. The fourth, last, and most un-human characteristic of satellitedata is that it is acquired by machines: machines that are designedto acquire data objectively and repetitively.These two adjectives, objectively and repetitively, say it allbecause they describe the two characteristics of satellite imagedata that contribute the most to assessing or monitoring the environment. It is the two characteristics of objectivity and repetition thathave encouraged me to devote my research career to encouragingthe use of satellite data for monitoring the Australian environmentand for renewable resource management. Of the four characteristics of satellite data discussed, by farthe most critical to us are the spectral and spatial properties.It is these two features that underpin the obvious questions askedof the wildfire image above: what size is this fire or what isthe scale of the image and why is the smoke grey-white while theland surface is yellow-red? The first of these two questions is the easiest to answer andit will help introduce the more difficult answer to the secondquestion. The size of the fire and the scale of the wildfire can be calculatedby looking at the whole satellite image, of which the fire areawas but a small part. An entire image from the MSS imaging deviceof the Landsat satellite series measures 185 x 185 kilometresand is therefore about 34, 000 square kilometres in area. The entire image of the Dry Season wildfire in Arnhem Land, NT,as recorded by Landsat Multi-Spectral Scanner (MSS) at 0930 hoursAustralian Eastern Standard Time (AEST) on September 2, 1986.The centre of this scene is 13 2' South, 133 29' East. Details: The image identification is WRS104-069, ID = 58267-00414,02/09/86. The image size is 185 km by 185 km, or ~34,225 km2. Obviously this wildfire was not the only one burning in this partof the Northern Territory on this date. Several smaller firesare visible, and you can easily detect the footprints of others.A close examination of the surface shows it criss-crossed withenormous cracks or fissures. Each of these fissures is filledwith a crimson ribbon of rainforest. The view from space showsus the bones of the country. This image gives us an insight intothe geological forces that shape the Arnhem Land plateau. It isnot difficult to speculate as to the how and why of these hugecracks. Also, if I tell you that the eastern edge of this imagecovers part of Kakadu National Park, then you will be able tointerpret the nature and location of one of this Park's most spectacularattractions. Even though the image was acquired in September, The Dry seasonin the NT, it is not unreasonable to expect that at least partof the landcover, the vegetation would be green. If the colourof the smoke plumes in these two images is white and that of thefire footprint is black, both of which are natural colours, whyis the landcover yellow-red and not green? The colours that wesee in this image are not the same as we experience on the ground. Very simply, the answer to all these questions is the same. Thecolours of this image are false. There are good reasons why it is necessary to use false coloursin space images. It is necessary now to include a little moredetail of the process by which space images are acquired and displayed.The principal issues are the spatial and spectral representationsof the surface of the Earth. The sensors onboard satellites image the Earth's surface by opticallycapturing the sunlight reflected from the surface through theatmosphere. This imaging process is not the same as a camera thatrecords all the scene (field of view) at the instant the shutteris activated. Rather, the imaging device samples the reflectedsunlight continuously by scanning across the direction (path)of the satellite's movement. As the satellite moves in its orbit, so the imaging device scansthe land surface 900 km or so below. Each scanning unit is a pixel(picture element). In the Landsat satellite series this scanningis effected by a moving mirror. The overall process is not verydifferent from that used in digital 35 mm cameras. It is justthat the satellite imaging systems operating at the height theydo must be uncommonly accurate and precise. All satellite imaging devices do not record the reflected solarradiation from the Earth's surface in all wavelengths (colours).Rather, they are designed to filter the incoming light into alimited number of groups of wavelengths (wavebands) to reducethe amount of data that have to be recorded to that which is ofmost interest. For example the Landsat MSS instrument that providedalmost all the images in this book records the reflected lightfrom the surface in just four wavebands. The four channels of data created by the MSS device are mysteriouslynamed MSS#4 - MSS#7, rather than MSS#1 - MSS#4, because thereonce was an associated imaging device called the Return Beam Vidicon(RBV) that generated the absent channels #1 - #3. The four wavebands are describedby the range of wavelengths of light that the filtering deviceslet through. As an example, the MSS#4 waveband includes all wavelengthsof light from 500 - 600 nanometres (nm), where a nanometre isone billionth (0.000000001) of a metre. The wildfire scene that we examined earlier is presented hereas four black & white images: one for each of the four MSSwavebands. The grey tone in each image is a linear measure ofthe reflectance of the landscape: the brighter the tone, the greateris the reflectance (brightness) of the landscape in that waveband.The information in these four images is contained in the differencesbetween images. For example, check out how the brightness of therainforests within the fissures changes between MSS wavebands. MSS Band 4 GREEN (500-600 nm) MSS Band 5 RED (600-700 nm) MSS Band 6 Near Infrared (700-800 nm) MSS Band 7 Near Infrared (800-1100 nm) I have associated a colour with each of the first two MSS wavebands(MSS#4 = green, MSS#5 = red), but it is important to rememberthat colour is a psycho-physical phenomenon. It is a human definitionand a concept derived from the structure and functioning of oureyes combined with the processing of this information by our brains. Colour is not an objective physical phenomenon. The wavelengths of radiation perceived by human eyes (400 - 700nm) are collectively called visible light. Human eyes have theirpeak sensitivities in the yellow-green, this is most probablya consequence of the evolutionary history of hominids that beganin canopies of rainforest trees. The important point is that visible light is not in any physicalway different from those wavelengths that we cannot see, eg. thenear-infra red channels MSS#6 and MSS#7, nor from the thermalwavelengths that we can feel as heat but are also unable to see. Why are wavelengths that we cannot see imaged by satellites? There are two explanations. The first is related to the scatteringproperties of the atmosphere that is always in between the spacecraftand the earth's surface. The scattering of light by the atmospheregenerates fuzzy images of little value. The smaller wavelengths,MSS#4 and MSS#5, are more affected by this atmospheric scatteringthan the longer ones, MSS#6 & MSS#7. Thus one explanationfor recording reflected radiation outside the visible wavebandsis the provision of images least affected by atmospheric haze. The second and more important explanation why satellite imagingdevices record wavelengths to which the human eye is not sensitiveis that outside our visible world some really interesting thingsoccur. Various parts of the landscape are very reflective (bright)or poorly reflective (dull) in different wavelengths. These differencesin the reflectance characteristics of soil, plants, water, shadows,etc, in the non-visible wavebands are a little difficult to comprehendat first contact because they are outside our experience. It is helpful to begin with an example: vegetation. Actively growing vigorous plant leaves are quite familiar in thevisible: they appear green because they are very reflective (bright)in the green wavelengths (ie. MSS#4) and poorly reflective (dull)in the red (MSS#5). Outside our visible world, instruments tellus that these plant leaves are very bright in the near infraredwavebands, MSS#6 & MSS#7. As leaves become older and lessvigorous, they lose their high reflectivity in the near infrared. On the basis of this information on the spectral attributes ofvegetation in the MSS wavebands, we could design a test for greenvegetation. If a target was dull (poorly reflective) in the red(MSS#5) as well as being bright (highly reflective) in the nearinfrared (MSS#6 or MSS#7), then that target is actively growingvegetation. This test for vegetation is straightforward reasoning from whatwe know about reflectance. Note that the test did not use the one characteristic that wehumans use to decide whether vegetation is green or not, its colour.The green waveband (MSS#4) was not used at all. The high reflectance in the near infrared of growing vegetationis not apparent to the human eye in any way; this has been exploitedin military activities involving camouflage. Camouflage is non-living plant material, eg. canvas, colouredand shaped to resemble foliage, used to cover equipment from hostileattack. Well-made camouflage can mislead the trained but unaidedeye. So the unaided human eye was assisted by a special photographicfilm with dyes sensitive in the near-infrared wavelengths. Thephotographic image collected on this camouflage-detection filmclearly showed real vegetation as bright and false vegetationas dull. The near infrared wavebands of spacecraft imaging devices aredesigned for the same reasons but for a very different purpose.The non-colour wavebands are included to provide information aboutthe condition or vigour of vegetation. The spectral characteristicsof landscape components other than vegetation will be discussedas they occur in later images. There is one remaining step to answer the most puzzling questionthat flowed from our wildfire image: given that the colours arefalse, why is the land surface yellow-red? This step completes the loop from sunlight reflected from thesurface of the Earth, its electronic capture by the imaging deviceonboard the satellite to the coloured prints in this book. The MSS imaging device electronically records a scene as an arrayof numbers which represent the brightness values of the Earth'ssurface in each of the four wavebands for every pixel. This array,about 28 000 000, was relayed to a ground receiving station. Herethese numbers were archived onmagnetic tape, carefully preserving their spatial pattern. A useful analogy at this point is to think of an image as beinga mosaic or jigsaw puzzle of very tiny identically shaped tiles.The brightness value of each tile, in each of four colours, isrecorded as a digital number (DN) between 0 and 255. The imagemosaic will only retain its information content if the spatialpattern of the four brightness numbers is preserved absolutely,that is the spatial correspondence between the brightness valuesfor each of the four wavebands is retained for every one of the28 000 000 pixels. The next procedure is to take the array of numbers stored on magnetictape which has no meaning for the human eye, and faithfully recreatean image. This image must be an exact spatial and spectral copyof the original scene. The human eye and brain are superbly efficientat analysing the spatial patterns of colours that make up an image.In a few ways, the human capacity for image analysis still cannotbe matched by a computer. If the spatial pattern of the pixels can be preserved and displayed,what options are there to display the spectral information? The most common method of colouring the image is to combine thecolours in an additive way. That is, the primary colours of blue,green and red are combined on a black background to generate thecolour spectrum. The additive mixing process is controlled bythe recorded intensities, the DN values, of the reflected lightin three channels of the satellite image. In recreating an image,the DNs control the intensities of spots of blue, green and redlight focussed onto a photographic film in a hardcopy output device. With four original channels of data in the original MSS imageand only three primary colours available, a choice in the assignmentof colour to waveband must be made. For Landsat MSS, the most frequent assignment of colours to MSSwaveband intensities is blue to MSS#4, green to MSS#5 and redto MSS#7. The data in MSS#6 are thus ignored. For any one of themillions of pixels in the output image, the recorded brightness(DN) of the land surface in MSS#4 (green) controls the amountof blue colour added. The DN for MSS#5 (red) controls the amountof green added to each pixel in the image and the MSS#7 (nearinfrared) DN controls the amount of red. Recreating an image by using colour additive mixing and this colourassignment results in a traditional False Colour Composite (FCC)image. It is not the only way of recreating an MSS image. It is possibleto use a subtractive rather than additive colour mixing processin which the yellow, magenta and cyan primaries subtract froma white background to generate the colour spectrum. In addition,the colour assignment between MSS channels is variable becausethere are 22 different possible ways of combining three channelsfrom four. All of the 22 combinations will produce a false colourcomposite image. The choice finally depends on the gamut of coloursthe interpreter prefers. Finally, let's complete the loop that we challenged ourselveswith after examining the wildfire image. Why, in that image isthe land surface yellow-red? The explanation now seems simple. If we had an area of landscapein the NT on the morning of September 2, 1986 that had a coverof green vigorous vegetation, it would have been recorded as brightin the near infrared wavebands (MSS#6 and MSS#7). Therefore when we come to translate this digital record back intohardcopy and colours, green, vigorous vegetation will appear redin the output FCC image. The Landsat image archive for Australiabegan in late 1972 with the launch of Landsat-1. As I write, Landsat-5is the operational satellite that is still steadily and systematicallyobserving the Earth using both the MSS and the Thematic Mapper(TM) imaging systems. The MSS imaging system will eventually be replaced by the ThematicMapper (TM) imaging system that has higher spatial resolution,30 x 30 metre pixel size rather than the 60 x 80 metres of MSS,and higher spectral resolution, operating with seven spectralwavebands rather than the four of the MSS system. The MSS systemhas acquired data that now form an enormous image archive of theEarth. The total number of images is not precisely known, butit is more than 2 million. The principal imaging device aboard Landsat 1-5 has been the MSS.With the launch of Landsat-4 in 1983, the Thematic Mapper (TM)was added to the payload with higher spectral and spatial resolutionbut with the same swathe width and revisit time. In summary: Satellite images are unique and extremely powerfulin conveying information about the environment. They are unusualand unfamiliar because the view that they provide is new and challenging.We can use that view to provide an objective assessment of thestate of environment twenty years ago and as it is today. Satellitedata are a new truth and a new history.We can use it to detect the changes that have taken place overthat time span and to determine whether those changes were forthe better, benign, or for the worse. We can objectively determinethe rates of change, the spatial location of change and, mostimportantly, who was responsible for that change. The managementof the Earth has never had such a powerful tool at its disposal,yet that tool resides 900 kilometres out in space. Additional reading Calder, N., 1991., 'Spaceship Earth'. Penguin Books Ltd, London. Drury, S.A., 1990., 'A guide to remote sensing: Interpreting imagesof the Earth'. Oxford Science Publications, Oxford. Harrison, B.A. and Jupp, D.L.B., 1989., 'Introduction to remotelysensed data'. CSIRO, Australia. Sheffield, C., 1981., 'Earth Watch: A survey of the world fromspace'. Hutchinson Group (Australia) Pty. Ltd., Richmond, Victoria. WT03-B26-60IA029-000311-B020-47http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/gloss.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164659 text/html 1944HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:45:12 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 04:42:44 GMTContent-length: 1770 Glossary and Abbreviations MSS: Multispectral Scanner. The principal instrument carriedby the Landsat satellite series. ELZ: Extensive Landuse Zone. The central core of the continentwhere the principal landcover disturbance threat is from grazingor fire. ILZ: Intensive Landuse Zone.The more heavily populatedcoastal regions, where the principal landcover disturbance threatis from clearing for crops, pastures and forests. pfc: Projected Foliage Cover, measured as a percentagefrom a vertical view. EGE: Enhanced Greenhouse Effect LGA: Local Government Area SLA: Statistical Local Area. AUSLIG: Australian Surveying and Land Information Group.Part of the Australian Government Department of AdministrativeServices and responsible for many map based products. ACRES: Australian Centre for Remote Sensing. Part of AUSLIGand responsible for Landsat reception in Australia. ABS: Australian Bureau of Statistics. The Australian Governmentbody responsible for collecting statistical information on manyfacets of Australian life. AEST: Australian Eastern Standard Time. Albers Projection: A map projection, such that equal areason the map correspond to equal areas on the ground. WRS: World Reference System. An identification system usedto refer to the position of a satellite scene on the surface ofthe earth. WT03-B26-61IA029-000311-B020-79http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/tables.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164716 text/html 4339HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:45:35 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:25:21 GMTContent-length: 4165 Table 1: The absolute and relativesizes of the two principal strata, the ILZ and the ELZ, used todivide the continent. Table 2: A summary descriptionof the 34 landcover types derived from the original 230 categoriesof the Natural Vegetation dataset of AUSLIG (1990). The figurein brackets under the Code symbol is the percentage projectedfoliage cover (pfc). Table 3: A statistical summaryof the 34 landcover types that were the basic ecological stratafor this study. The nature and severity of disturbance are determinedfor each strata within the Intensive and Extensive Landuse Zones.The areas are in km2. The most extensive landcover type in eachzone (rank 1) is underlined. Table 4: The aggregation of theAUSLIG tenures into six groups that offer different levels ofprotection against future landcover disturbance. Table 5: A summary of the fiveclasses of clearing disturbance aggregated for the Intensive landuseZone (ILZ) and for the continent. Table 6: A summary of the relativedistribution (%) of clearing within each landcover type. The grasslands(xG) and low shrublands (xZ2) were excluded. The index Loss wasthe sum of the cleared and thinned classes. Table 7: The distribution of absolutearea (km2) of the three critical disturbance classes within thesix tenure types of the ILZ. Table 8: The distribution of thearea of the ELZ among the four landcover disturbance classes. Table 9: The proportion of eachlandcover type within the ELZ allocated to each of the four disturbanceclasses. Table 10: The proportion of theILZ of each state in the three critical disturbance classes. Thefirst column is the proportion of each state within the ILZ. Table 11: The proportion of theELZ of each state in the three critical disturbance classes. Thefirst column is the proportion of each state within the ELZ. Table 12: Combining the ILZ andELZ disturbance classes to produce a continental aggregate ofdisturbed area. Table 13: A summary of the areas(km2) in each of the three key disturbance classes for each ofthe landcover types of the ILZ. The index Loss was calculatedas the percentage of the total area of each landcover type thatwas thinned and cleared. The disturbance score was assigned thus:no clearing (-); <10% (*); 11-30% (**); >31% (***). Table 14: The distribution ofrelative area (%) of the four disturbance levels for all landcovertypes within the ELZ. The score was based on the sum of the productsof the percentage areas and the disturbance ratings, slight (0)to significant (2), and assigned 0-50 was low (*); 50-100 wasmoderate (**); >100 was high (***). Table 15: The distribution ofrelative area (%) of the six tenure levels for all landcover typeswithin the ILZ and ELZ. The score was based on the mean sum ofthe products of the percentage areas and the tenure protectionratings that are lowest with tenure type 1 and highest with tenuretype 6. Table 16: A summary of the scoresassigned to each landcover type based on the relative distributionof the densities of the four feral species in both the ILZ andELZ. Table 17: A summary of the disturbancescores assigned to each landcover type based on fire season andfire frequency in both the ILZ and ELZ. WT03-B26-62IA029-000311-B020-114http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/figs.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164745 text/html 2122HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:46:00 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:27:24 GMTContent-length: 1948 Figures Stratification of the continent by the landcover consequence of landuse The relative size and distribution of the 34 landcover types over the Australian continent. The size and distribution of the six tenures that reflect protection against future landcover disturbance. The density distributions of the four feral animal species used in the project The continental distribution of fire season The continental distribution of fire frequency The continental distribution of disturbance by clearing Loss index (thinned and cleared) and area for the ILZ landcover types Landcover types arranged in descending order of the total absolute area disturbed The relative area of the six tenure types within the ILZ The relative area of thinned and cleared landcover within each of the six tenure types The pattern of assessed disturbance for all landcover types within the ELZ The contrast in relative distribution of feral animals between ILZ and ELZ A comparison of the proportion of five continents that is significantly disturbed A comparison of the cumulative distribution of proportional uncleared patch size WT03-B26-63IA029-000311-B020-143http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/refs.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164813 text/html 9229HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:46:23 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:25:37 GMTContent-length: 9055 References References ABS, 1994 Year Book Australia, 1994. Australian Bureau of Statistics,Canberra, Australia. Allison, G.B., Cook, P.G., Barnett, S.R., Walker, G.R., Jolly,I.D. and Hughes, M.W., 1990. Land clearance and river salinisationin the western Murray Basin, Australia. J. Hydrology. 119:1-20. AUSLIG, 1990. Vegetation. Atlas of Australian Resources, Vol.6., Australian Surveying and Land Information Group, Canberra,Australia. AUSLIG, 1994. Land Tenure. Australian Surveying and Land InformationGroup, Canberra, Australia Barrett, G.W., Ford, H.A., and Recher, H.F., 1994. Conservationof woodland birds in a fragmented rural landscape. Pacific ConservationBiology 1: 245-256. Bell, S.B., McCoy, E.D., and Mushinsky, H.R. (eds) 1991. HabitatStructure: The physical arrangements of objects in space. Chapmanand Hall, London. Benson, J., 1991. The effect of 200 years of European settlementon the vegetation and flora of New South Wales. Cunninghamia,23: 343-70. Biodiversity Unit, 1993. Biodiversity and its Value. BiodiversitySeries, Paper No. 1. Department of the Environment, Sport andTerritories, Canberra, Australia. Biodiversity Unit, 1994. Australia's Biodiversity: an overviewof selected significant components. Biodiversity Series, PaperNo. 2. Department of the Environment, Sport and Territories, Canberra,Australia. Biodiversity Unit, 1995. Native vegetation clearance, habitatloss and biodiversity decline. Biodiversity Series, Paper No.6. Department of the Environment, Sport and Territories, Canberra,Australia. Bridgewater, P.B., 1994. Conservation strategy and research inAustralia - how to arrive at the 21st century in good shape. InMoritz & Kikkawa (1994), loc. cit., pp 17-25. Broome, J., 1993. Counting the cost of Global Warming. The WhitehorsePress, Cambridge, England. Burch, G.J., 1986. Land clearing and vegetation disturbance InRussell, J.S. and Isbell, R.F. eds. Australian Soils: The HumanImpact. University of Queensland. Press, Brisbane, pp. 154-184. Cale, P.G. and Hobbs, R.J., 1994. Landscape heterogeneity indices:problems of scale and applicability, with particular referenceto animal habitat description. Pacific Conservation Biology 1:183-193. Caughley, G., 1994. Directions in conservation biology. Journalof Animal Ecology 63:215-244. Cocks, K.D., 1992. Use with Care: Managing Australia's NaturalResources in the 21st Century. UNSW Press, Sydney, Australia. Crome, F.H.J., 1994. Tropical forest fragmentation: some conceptualand methodological issues. In Moritz & Kikkawa (1994), loc.cit., pp 61-76. Gillard, P., Williams, J. and Monypenny, R. 1989, Clearing treesfrom Australia's semi-arid tropics, Agricultural Science 2, pp.134-39. Graetz, R.D., Wilson, M.A., and Campbell, S.K., 1995. Landcoverdisturbance over the Australian Continent: A contemporary assessment.Biodiversity Series, Paper No. 7. Department of the Environment,Sport and Territories, Canberra, Australia. Graetz, R.D., Fisher, R.P, and Wilson, M.A., 1992. Looking Back:The changing face of the Australian continent, 1972-1992. CSIRO,Australia. Hannah, L., Lohse, D., Hutchinson, C., Carr, J.L., and Lankerani,A., 1994. A preliminary inventory of human disturbance of worldecosystems. Ambio 23: 246-250. Hannah, L., Carr, J.L., and Lankerani, A., 1995. Human disturbanceand natural habitat: a biome level analysis of a global data set.Biodiversity and Conservation 4: 128-155. Hobbs, R.J., 1994. Landscape ecology and conservation: movingfrom description to application. Pacific Conservation Biology1: 170-176. Hobbs, R.J. and Saunders, D.A., 1994. Effects of landscape fragmentationin agricultural areas. In Moritz & Kikkawa (1994), loc. cit.,pp 77-95. Hobbs, R.J., Saunders, D.A., Lobry de Bruyn, L.A., and Main, R.A.,1993. Changes in biota. In R.J. Hobbs and D.A. Saunders, eds.Reintegrating Fragmented Landscapes: Towards sustainable productionand nature conservation. Springer-Verlag, New York, pp 65-106. Humphries, S.E., Groves, R.H., and Mitchell, D.S., 1994. Plantinvasions: homogenising Australian ecosystems. In Moritz &Kikkawa (1994), loc. cit., 149-170. James, C.D., Landsberg, J., and Morton, S.R., In Press. Ecologicalfunctioning in Arid Australia and research to assist conservationof biodiversity. Pacific Conservation Biology, forthcoming. Luke, R.H., and McArthur, A.G., 1978. Bushfires in Australia.AGPS, Canberra. Moritz, C. and Kikkawa, J. (eds), 1994. Conservation Biology inAustralia and Oceania. Surrey Beatty & Sons, Sydney, Australia. Murcia, C., 1995. Edge effects in fragmented ecosystems: implicationsfor conservation. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 10: 58-62. Nadolny, C., 1991. The dilemma of rural tree clearing. Search22: 43-46. Nix, H., 1994. The Brigalow. In: S. Dovers (ed) Australian EnvironmentHistory: essays and cases. Oxford University Press, Melbourne,pp. 198-233. Newsome, A.E., 1994. Wildlife conservation and feral animals:the Procrustes factor. In Moritz & Kikkawa (1994), loc. cit.,pp 141-148. Noble, I.R. et al, in preparation. Land Resources. In, Departmentof the Environment, Sport and Territories, State of the EnvironmentReport. Northcote, K.H. et al 1975. A description of Australian Soils.CSIRO, Australia. Pickard, J., 1994. Land degradation and land conservation in thearid zone of Australia: grazing is the problem and the cure. InMoritz & Kikkawa (1994), loc. cit., pp 131-137. Pressey, R.L., 1995. Crown jewels or leftovers? Search 26: 47-51. Pressey R.L, and Logan, V.S., 1995. Level of geographic subdivisionand its effects on assessment of reserve coverage: A review ofregional studies. Conservation Biology 8: 1037-1046. Pyne, S.J. 1991. The burning bush: A fire history of Australia.Henry Holt and Company, New York. Recher, H. and Lim, L., 1990. A review of current ideas of extinction,conservation and management of Australia's terrestrial vertebratefauna. Proceedings of the Ecological Society of Australia 16:287-301. Recher, H., 1994. Why conservation biology?: An Australian perspective.In Moritz & Kikkawa (1994), loc. cit., pp 1-15. Reed, P.C., 1990. A historic perspective on "Conserving What?"- The basis for nature conservation reserves in New South wales1967-1989. Australian Zoologist 26: 85-91. Roberts, B.R. 1995. The quest for sustainable agriculture andland use. UNSW Press. Saunders, D.A., 1994. Habitat fragmentation: a symposium overview.In Moritz & Kikkawa (1994), loc. cit., pp 57-59. Saunders, D.A., Hobbs, R.J. and Margules, C.R., 1991. Biologicalconsequences of ecosystem fragmentation: a review. ConservationBiology 51:18-32. Saunders, D.A., Hopkins, A.J.M., and How, R.A. (eds), 1990. AustralianEcosystems: 200 years of utilisation and degradation and reconstruction.Proceedings of the Ecological Society of Australia, Vol. 16. SurreyBeatty & Sons: Chipping Norton. Saunders, D.A. et al, in preparation. Biodiversity. In, Departmentof the Environment, Sport and Territories, State of the EnvironmentReport. Sivertsen, D., 1994. The native vegetation crisis in the wheatbeltof NSW. Search 25: 5-8. Short, J., and Smith, A., 1994. Mammal decline and recovery inAustralia. Journal of Mammalogy 75: 288-297. Short, J., and Turner, B., 1994. A test of the vegetation mosaichypothesis: A hypothesis to explain the decline and extinctionof Australian mammals. Conservation Biology 8: 439-449. Solbrig, O.T., van Emden, H.M., and van Oordt, P.G.W.J., (eds),1994. Biodiversity and Global Change. CAB International, Paris. Turner, M.G., 1990. Spatial and temporal analysis of landscapepatterns, Landscape Ecology 41:21-30. Walker, J., 1981. Fuel dynamics in Australian vegetation. In Gill,A.M., Groves, R.H., and Noble, I.R. (eds) Fire and the AustralianBiota. Australian Academy of Science, Canberra, Australia. Walker, J., Bullen, F. and Williams, B.G., 1993. Ecohydrologicalchanges in the Murray-Darling Basin. I. The number of trees clearedover two centuries, Journal of Applied Ecology, 30: 265-273. Wilson, M.A., Fisher, R.P., Graetz, R.D., Campbell, S., &Wilson, S. (1993) Auswatch; Data Sets for the Study of LandcoverChange. CSIRO, Australia. Wilson, G., Dexter, N., O' Brien, P., and Bomford, M., 1992. Pestanimals in Australia. Bureau of Rural Resources and Kangaroo press,Canberra. WT03-B26-64IA029-000311-B020-174http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin72/7204.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164854 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:46:46 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:15 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-65IA029-000311-B020-209http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/dis1a.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114164925 text/html 9705HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:47:43 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:05 GMTContent-length: 9531 Airborne Sensing at CSIRO Water Resources 1. INTRODUCTION The work done at CSIRO Division of Water Resources (DWR), based on the Itres(Canada) CASI airborne spectral imaging instrument, is an Applications Basedsystems development. This development is a package consisting of an IntegratedAirborne (spectral) Sensing (IAS) instrument, ancillary instrumentationand processing modules. Together, these can provide high resolution informationfor environmental resource assessment in a form immediately useful to endusers of the products. The Applications area defined for this IAS involvesintegrating models and methods based on CSIRO DWR core knowledge and skillswith a general system comprising data collection instruments, processingmethodologies and processing hardware and software systems. 2. APPLICATIONS AREA MODEL The outputs of the Applications system are final products that users wantand are prepared to contract commercially to a processing service bureau.The necessary Application template for an imaging spectrometer such as (butnot limited to) the CASI, takes into account the special circumstances providedby a fully calibrated spectral instrument. It integrates its output witha range of other airborne and ground based measurements and has nine maincomponents. Figure 1. Simplified Applications AreaStructure Schematic The subcomponents (primary processes) of this system have been studied ina detailed form as a cost/time and work/duration processing model throughapplications carried out by the established processing group at CSIRO DWR.That model and possible extensions based on queuing theory have been investigatedat CSIRO DWR and by CSIRO DWR's commercial product developers as part ofthe Applications model. This model has been set up to help manage and monitorthe progress of actual Applications projects. Figure 1 shows the main structureof the model: 2.1 Flight Mission (Planning and Execution) Every application will have special considerations with respect to channelschosen for targeting user needs, environmental conditions, data scale andresolution. CSIRO DWR uses a set of software items which implement the flightplanning and measurement models. These can be used to plan prior to flightsand during the mission. 2.2 Lab and Field Data Collection & Processing Some field data are collected at the time of each mission and some at othertimes. Data which must be taken at the time of flights is environmental(such as atmospheric data). Data such as characteristic spectra can be collectedat other times. Separation of field and laboratory from flying missionsis a key development in the measurement model approach being discussed here.Software to analyse the Lab and Field data for each measurement model forthe analyses have been developed to implement this area. 2.3 Base Data Processing CASI Suppliers (Itres, Canada) software is used to take image, attitude(roll and pitch) and GPS data from the aircraft and process them to calibratedand (by single run) geometrically resampled images in a form ready for imageprocessing. There is a future need to develop software to use the GPS datato more effectively and accurately model the attitude of the aircraft forIAS applications. This is under development by CSIRO DWR in combinationwith Itres and the CSIRO DWR commercial product developers. 2.4 Mosaicking and Normalisation The Base Processed airborne sensor data are assembled into mosaicks andatmospherically corrected in this component. Atmospheric correction meansthe data from different runs and times become normalised to surface reflectance.Only real differences in surface reflectance are left. At the heart of thisprocess is an integrated spectral and geometric model for the data. Thismodel is also the basis for fusion of the data with other data types - suchas satellite data, other airborne data and GIS data at various scales. 2.5 Image Processing The necessary functions of the image processing system can be fully describedby function rather than by options in any single image processing system.At present, microBRIAN (MPA and CSIRO developed software) is being usedfor the CASI based prototype Projects. The use of this specific softwarefor an advanced IAS is sufficient but not necessary. CSIRO DWR supervisingsoftware exists for the current system which makes processing tasks quickerand minimises operator action. 2.6 Measurement Models The primary taxonomy of 'applications' from the Application system pointof view is by measurement model. At present there are an atmospheric andsix main surface measurement models: n water bodies and water covered targets (eg sea grass, reefs, water quality) n dense woody vegetation (eg forests & mangroves) n open forests & woodlands (eg woody weeds) n short grass and crops (eg crops and grasslands) n bare targets (eg soils) n (modulated by) flat and sloping ground effects The measurement models provide the link between the parameters of interestand concern to the user and those of direct significance in forming thesignal measured by the instrument. The CASI measures radiance in the visibleand near infrared so that CASI measurement models involve primarily radiativetransfer and scattering in the surface layer and atmosphere. However, userswant to know parameters of the surface such as canopy cover and structure,soil moisture, water use, levels of phytoplankton in water bodies, benthiccommunity type or suspended sediments concentration. The measurement modelsprovide the scale and physical basis for these transfers from CASI datato the information required by the end user. 2.7 Measurement Model Knowledge Base This area includes a Spectral Library and associated environmental information.The data structure and methodology for the Spectral Data Base has been developedat CSIRO DWR. The Measurement Model Knowledge Base, together with softwarecalled the 'Data Calculator', form base tools for the measurement modelsand applications. In particular, a spectral library is a primary tool fortemplate matching and data modelling. 2.8 GIS Integration The system needs two-way access to GIS data and tools. The image processingcomponent must also have adequate data integration tools to do this. Currently,CASI based Projects interface to ArcInfo and GRASS. This component can,however, be any adequate commercial GIS system. There is benefit in it beingoff-the-shelf. In land operations, this area of the Applications Model mustalso provide the best current DTM system data as well as cadastral information. 2.9 Interpretation Interpretation is the action of merging the information and products ofmodelling and image processing to derive the final products in the termsthe end user needs. It involves skilled and experienced scientists labellingclasses, attaching numerical levels and statistics and generating keys andsummaries. The interpretation depends on the Application and on the typeof models that have been employed. This area is a key component in the Applicationsbased approach and the accumulated experience here will grow as an assetof any commercial implementation of the model. Final results will normallybe included in a developing GIS and build a base of decision support forfuture missions to use. 2.10 Applications Products This area involves Report Generation, product generation and annotationand product delivery and presentation. This area can use existing hardwareand software, the tools in the Image Processing System and the GIS systemas well as new software. In the current CASI based prototype, most of thesefunctions are provided by the microBRIAN image processing system, CorelDrawand standard publication tools such as Microsoft Word, Chartist and MathType. We can itemise the current set of specialised product areas for the Applicationsunder five headings. These are: Coastal zone monitoring and mapping Reef and seagrass mapping and monitoring Water quality mapping and monitoring Forest monitoring and mapping Plant community determination and monitoring. 3. IMPLEMENTATION In projects undertaken at CSIRO DWR, the system described above has beenimplemented by a well equipped and trained team of remote sensing specialists.The cost structures have been analysed as well as processing managementand potential efficiencies identified. There is now a very good processingmanagement and planning model which can be keyed into a commercial businessplan to provide effective commercial planning and management. This establishedteam and its commercial product developers are equipped to work togetherwith other service groups throughout our region. The current systems implementation and structure is under review with thecommercial product developers and has a number of efficiency and throughputgoals which will improve commercial operations. WT03-B26-66IA029-000311-B020-237http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/wshop2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165001 text/html 3679HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:48:01 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:07 GMTContent-length: 3505 Land AVHRR Data Users Group Workshop - Towards Product Standards 2. THE ISSUE OF STANDARDS IN AVHRR DATA USE From the scientific viewpoint, there has been a significant progressionfrom the type of research paper presented in the inaugural ARSC1 in 1979to the present ARSC8 in 1996. The mass centre of such presentations hasmoved from descriptive work through exploratory research to a point whereadvanced measurement based models are being effectively used with remotelysensed data and widely reported. Remote Sensing is truly becoming a measurementbased activity. Among the international scientific community this progressis well in train as you will hear from a number of the scientists speakingtoday. However, at the user end, is there evidence of as much progress? If thereis, then it would be seen in a progression from the research question of"What might AVHRR do for me?" to the operational issueof "What does AVHRR do for me?". This last question involvesthe development of well defined products and standards as well as well establishedmethods for creating products of value to specific end users. This is notso much an issue for research as for specification. Nevertheless, researchers cannot ignore the issue of standards. Standardsare needed if the AVHRR user industry is to leave R&D 'school' and jointhe much more engineering oriented 'workplace'. Engineering based standardsdefine what levels of processed data product are needed and what methodsof value added processing ensure a product with a guaranteed accuracy orutility can be delivered. Such standard specifications are needed to protectdata and product suppliers and users. They are also essential tools withwhich end users can cost the use of remotely sensed data and value addinginto major projects. I claim that the lack of these is the biggest hurdleto acceptance of our efforts at this time and more vital to us than theneed to do more advanced research. Ideally, standard data products, data processing and interpretation methodsshould be: specifiable repeatable consistent testable by well defined measures, and [not data or situation dependent] The last of these is desirable rather than essential. The standard procedures with such characteristics that are needed in ourindustry are also of two basic kinds. The first is for data delivery suchas from an operational receiving station. These are typically set in a 'Levels'framework and for each level there are a set of specifications and measuresof performance. Perhaps these are not as well developed and consistentlydeliverable in Australia as they should be. The second are for value addedproducts. These may need manuals of standard practice which, if followed,provide products of a proven standard. Of course, the standard may seemquite low to many scientists but I believe the current lack of them is causingproblems for researchers and users alike. WT03-B26-67IA029-000311-B020-271http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/avout2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165052 text/html 3242HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:49:07 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:02 GMTContent-length: 3068 Land AVHRR Workshop 2. PRESENTATIONS The presentations were broken down into four main sections. 1. Generic issues of data quality and management. Presentations by Wilson, Turner, Grant and Mitchell addressed this topic. 2. Current operational usages of reflective AVHRR data. Presentations by Smith, Allan and Dudgeon. 3. Linking AVHRR measurements with non-remote sensing environmental models. Presentations by Danaher and McVicar. 4. Introduction of the MODIS system, which will probably replace AVHRR datafor many applications later this decade. Presentation by Strahler. Following and during the formal presentations there were discussions asto what was required and more importantly as to how to progress the requirementsthat were discussed. These are listed below the timetable. Timetable 9:15 - 9:30 Welcome & Introduction by David Jupp, Chair. CSIRO Earth Observation Centre 9:30 - 9:50 Murray Wilson AVHRR Activities at the CSIRO Earth Observation Centre CSIRO Earth Observation Centre 9:50 - 10:10 Peter Turner A Standard Archiving Format for NOAA Full Pass Data CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 10:10 - 10:35 Ian Grant The Australian Continental Integrated Ground-truth Site Network: Aims andApplications CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 10:35-11:00 Ross Mitchell Current Calibration Practice for NOAA AVHRR Channels 1 and 2 CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 11:30 - 12:00 Richard Smith Operational Use of NOAA-AVHRR by W.A. State Government Western Australia Department of Land Administration 12:00 - 12:30 Grant Allan Spatial and Temporal Fire Data for the N.T. derived from NOAA AVHRR SatelliteImages Conservation Commission of Northern Territory 12:30- 1:00 Graham Dudgeon Operational Use of NOAA AVHRR NDVI Data for Agriculture in NSW New South Wales Department of Agriculture 2:00 - 2:30 Tim Danaher and John Carter Tree Density Mapping and Pasture Model Validation Using 1% of Australia'sNOAA AVHRR Data Queensland Department of Primary Industries 2:30 - 3:00 Tim McVicar Linking a Water Balance Model with Thermal AVHRR Data CSIRO Division of Water Resources 3:00 - 3:30 Alan Strahler AVHRR Applications in Support of MODIS Product Development Boston University, Department of Geography WT03-B26-68IA029-000311-B020-302http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/brdf2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165103 text/html 6487HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:49:24 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:08 GMTContent-length: 6313 Image Brightness & BRDF Workshop Issues 1. ATMOSPHERIC & SCENE BRIGHTNESS VARIATIONS Optical, shortwave and thermal image data from airborne and satellite platformshave varying degrees of angle dependent brightness variation which changewith the sun position, atmospheric conditions, land surface type and sensorcharacteristics. If left uncorrected, these broad level variations can makeit difficult to use the data with standard image processing and interpretationmethods. For example, a Daedalus airborne scanner has a scan angle of 38and if flown with the sun at an azimuth away from 'in front' or 'behind'(i.e. away from the Principal Plane) this will result in significant imagebrightness variations created by the atmospheric component phase functionsand any surface angle dependent reflectance effects. The reflectance functiondescribing the surface effects is the Bi-Directional Reflectance DistributionFunction, or BRDF. These atmospheric and surface effects are present inall satellite data as well as aerial photography and video data to a greateror lesser degree depending on the variation in the phase angle between thesun, target and sensor among the pixels in the resulting image. Topographyenters into the equation in a way that depends on scale (or pixel size)leading to quite complex variations in an image being scanned as illustratedin Figure 1 even if the surface type werehomogeneous. The atmosphere contributes to the total effect partly due to the varyingpath length at different parts of the scan and partly to the atmosphericscattering phase variation described by the composite phase function ofthe atmospheric constituents. This describes the way radiation is scatteredout of a volume relative to the direction it enters. In optical remote sensing,air molecules and aerosols account for much of the scattering and the effectsare greatest at shorter wavelengths. Hence, if the aerosol atmospheric turbidityis high, the atmospheric brightening in (say) the blue-green will be visibleand significant in most remotely sensed data. In the thermal bands, theangular variation is almost all due to the changing path length and themajor atmospheric effect is due to water vapour on the path. The land surface contributes to the broad level brightness variations commonto all remotely sensed images. The base 'colour' and brightness is a functionof the spectral properties of the material types making up the scene (e.g.leaf reflectances and transmittances or soil grain mineralogy) plus structuraleffects which give rise to the angular variations. The angular effects canbe ascribed to three main factors - the volume effect, the occlusion (orhotspot) effect and the specular or glint effect: Volume Effect: Because of the changes in path lengths and extinctionin complex surfaces as the relative sun and look angles change, there isa volume BRDF which has some similarity to the atmospheric phase functioninduced variations. It will depend on surface structure and in vegetationit depends on factors like leaf density variations and angle distributionsas well as total leaf area. Occlusion Effect: The occlusion effect is a more specific effectinduced by the fact that the shadows cast by the sun represent parts ofthe surface that are not 'seen' by the sun. The areas that are not 'seen'by the sensor which are also not 'seen' by the sun are the common areasbetween shadow cast by the sun if it were in the two positions. The varyingoverlap induces a brightness variation as when the sun and sensor are aligned,no shadows are 'seen' and the scene seems bright and when the look angleis opposite to the sun many shadows are 'seen' leading to lower brightness. Specular (or Glint) Effect: The specular or glint effect is mostpronounced on water surfaces. It refers to the surface 'mirror' (or Fresnel)reflectance in which the radiation is usually unaltered by the surface materialfrom which it is reflected. On land surfaces it is a composite of reflectionsdiffused from facets of varying angular positions and specularity. In Australia,Eucalypt leaves are especially specularly reflective due to their waxy coating.On water, glint is probably the major component of the BRDF and the hotspoteffect does not occur. The sum of these effects in remotely sensed data is an image brightnessvariation that is a sum of the atmospheric brightness and the scene brightness.The atmospheric and surface effects also interact to provide a compositeeffect that varies with sun, target & sensor geometry. The effects aremore obvious in aerial photography and video images where the central perspectivemeans that at high sun angles the hotspot and specular points are withinthe angular radius of the frame. For airborne scanners and satellite bornescanners it is possible to avoid the brightest hotspot and glint pointsby careful consideration of the scan geometry but since the variations aresignificant for all angles the effects cannot be ignored in any image. The scene and atmospheric brightness variations are all minimised for ascanner if the sensor data are scanned at right angles to the 'principalplane'. The principal plane is the plane formed by the vectors joining theearths centre to the sensor and to the sun. For an airborne scanner, thismeans flying level, with the sun in front or behind the flight line. Ifthe hotspot or specular points need to be avoided at high sun times, thescanning sensor is sometimes tilted forward or back to ensure it. These'avoiding' strategies are not easily used with photography or video images. WT03-B26-69IA029-000311-B020-339http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/brdf3.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165151 text/html 2928HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:49:44 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:08 GMTContent-length: 2754 Image Brightness & BRDF Workshop Issues 2. APPLICATIONS DEMANDING ATTENTION Applications using images which have wide scan angles or are captured whenthe sun and observer positions are such that these angular variations aresignificant must take them into account or correct the images for them insome way. Examples are: Single scenes where classification and other image processing is predicatedon consistent values from similar target land or water types; Mosaics of images which are intended to produce a consistent compositeimage on which spectral (location independent) image processing can be done;and Multiple images, such as time series where the data must be comparedfor change in the surface that must be detectable over changes due to imagebrightness differences within and/or between images. In a sense, the objective is to ensure a spatial and temporal 'stationarity'in which a given target with given unchanging reflectance will be the sameat all locations and in all images over the time series. Obviously, thedegree to which this needs to be accomplished depends on the application,and the value of spending time and effort on image correction depends onthe value put on the final product by the client. From the economic perspective, there will always be 1. project planning and management costs; 2. image and ancillary data acquisition costs; 3. data base processing costs; 4. value adding costs; 5. data integration costs; and 6. product presentation costs. The total cost must reflect the value of the product to the end user. Ifthe emphasis is on low costs the effort justified by correcting for, orusing, effects like image brightness variations may be small. On the otherhand, if the accuracy of the product is crucial and the value of the informationis high then extra effort in correcting for image brightness may be fullyjustified. In the face of this, there are a range of approaches and methodsthat can be used to model or correct the type of brightness variations describedabove. Which among them is 'best' will depend on the application and valueof the data. WT03-B26-70IA029-000311-B020-369http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/brdf4.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165231 text/html 8952HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:50:40 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:08 GMTContent-length: 8778 Image Brightness & BRDF Workshop Issues 3. TYPOLOGY OF APPROACHES The general approach to image brightness is to 'correct' it in some way.Correction means changing a pixel spectrum so that it is what would havebeen measured if the sun and sensor geometry were a fixed standard pairrather than a varying pair of angles over the image extent. As discussedlater, this action may be valid as an average over a spatial area but canbe a difficult concept at the scale of a single tree crown or soil clump. We will outline three main approaches to scene brightness modelling and'correction'. They are the empirical methods, the measurement modellingmethods and the semi-empirical methods. 3.1 Empirical Methods Empirical methods involve fitting the variation in general brightness ascribedto the atmosphere and BRDF effects by a parametric function (using leastsquares or some other criterion) and then normalising by some combinationof additive and multiplicative image transformation. The simplest methodsinvolve fitting polynomials to average variations over scanlines or framesand subtracting or dividing out the general level to 'flatten' the data.These methods are well known and have been used with single frame photographsor scanner runs prior to other image processing operations. For mosaics, brightness normalisation has a strict analogy with geometricmosiacking where images are geometrically matched to the ground by groundcontrol points (ie GCPs) and to other images by tie points. At tie points,in geometric mosaicking, the constraint is that the same feature must belocated at the same point in the geometric frame model. In the same way,in brightness normalisation, there may be targets in some frames of knownreflectance. These are sometimes called 'invariant targets'. When theirreflectance is only assumed from previous work they are sometimes called'pseudo-invariant' targets. These are analogous to GCPs. In the overlapbetween frames, the analogy to tie points are patches or features that areassumed to have the same corrected spectra. For a given functional formof brightness model, the estimation reduces to a linear 'bundle adjustment'. The greatest problems with the simple empirical approach are image varianceand heterogeneity. It is often extremely difficult to determine which componentsof the variation are atmospheric or BRDF brightening and which are differencesin surface type. The high image spatial variance that is most obvious inhigh resolution images also makes fitting functions very difficult. Anotherproblem is to decide which effects are additive and which are multiplicative.As long as the variation is not too great, the additive approximation isnot too bad but when raw uncalibrated data are used, the interaction betweenadditive and multiplicative effects can be a problem. For example, calibration and atmospheric correction are linear effects butthe atmospheric terms are angle dependent and vary with incident () and view () directions. That is, even if the surface werelambertian (with a flat BRDF) the digital data recorded by a scanner inwaveband j () will be related to the reflectance () by: hence: where is the radiance recorded in waveband j; is the sun or 'incident' radiation direction; is the total irradiance at the target; and is the radiation scattered into the sensor from the atmosphere. The brightness variation described here (which has no surface BRDF effectin that is not dependent on sun or view angles) obviously hasboth additive and multiplicative terms which are complex functions of theincident and view angles. When the surface target itself has a strong BRDFeffect the variability will compound. In the face of this, the empirical methods are generally constrained tobe of low order functional forms that still have the structure of the variationbeing fitted. In this way, it is hoped that variance and image heterogeneityare 'orthogonal' to the function being fitted. In addition, the fittingis best done in the physical framework of the brightness variation - thatis in terms of the phase angles between sun and sensor view angle and betweensensor view angle and the specular vector. There have been many functionsof this type developed such as Walthall, Hapke, Roujean and others. Thesewill be addressed below in the section of semi-empirical methods. For the purely empirical approach and for small frames such as occur withaerial photography and video data (or even single scanner runs) the mainproblem is scene heterogeneity. There will be scene variations that occurat spatial scales near to or greater than the image and it is very difficultto separate these effects from atmospheric and broad BRDF effects. To illustratethis you can consider an image to be roughly approximated by: where is the high spatial frequency component, is the low frequencycomponent and is the angular brightness variation. In manyimages, over the extent of a single frame, the low frequency and angularcomponents are not in any way orthogonal. Hence it is near impossible toestimate the angular function from the single frame data. Moving to modelsbased on view geometry and semi-empirical functions can help (Pickup etal., 1995) but essentially some way to bring in the wider spatial contextis needed. Among empirical methods are also 'referencing' methods. In the case of imagedigitising, a reference approach is to scan an image and scan a reference(white lambertian) standard sheet with the same illumination. The imageis then 'normalised' by subtracting or dividing the reference from the imageto remove lighting based view angle effects. In reconnaissance image datathis is not possible unless a large reference target were to exist and sceneBRDF effects would still remain. Hick and Ong (Ong et al., 1995) have used a referencing method to extractbrightness variations from video frames by referencing against the backgroundof a Landsat TM image. It may be possible to fit empirical functions tothe residual between the individual frame and the reference image. In thisway, the problem of heterogeneity and correlated spatial frequencies describedabove could be reduced significantly. It is worth mentioning here that as soon as the empirical methods extendfrom simple functional forms to ones involving image and sun geometry, theprocessing methods start to become more costly. The cost is in extra workregistering images and/or in extra costs associated with collecting attitudeand position (eg INS and GPS) information for the platform. If it is worththis extra cost then it may be worth some extra modelling as discussed below. WT03-B26-71IA029-000311-B021-25http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/brdf5.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165248 text/html 7482HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:51:08 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:09 GMTContent-length: 7308 Image Brightness & BRDF Workshop Issues 3.2 Measurement Model Approach 3.2.1 Atmospheric Correction & ReflectanceNormalisation It would clearly be an advantage to model the atmospheric and BRDF effectsby physical models and estimate the corrected image in terms of a normalisedreflectance factor. The added value would be the link this gives to physicalmodels of the relationship between earth parameters of interest and themeasured reflectance. Obviously, a reflectance is closer to a material propertyand therefore resolves the problem of monitoring. If reference targets in the image have measured reflectances (ie the invariantor pseudo-invariant targets) it is possible to get close to reflectancesfrom the empirical approach. However, it will never be clear how much residualatmosphere and BDRF effect remains. Obviously, most natural targets chosenas 'invariant' will have some BRDF which may not be known and that effectwill be folded into the final image data. Assuming the data are accurately calibrated to radiances, there are differentways to describe the process of correction. One is as follows: An equation relating the recorded radiance sensed at altitude h above thetarget to the target reflectance factor is: where: is the radiance observed by the instrument fromaltitude h, with look (or view) direction and sun directionat wavelength ; is the effective irradiance at the target, or where: is the irradiance at the target for a 'black'earth; s is the sky hemispherical albedo; and * is the background earth albedo. is the beam transmittance through the layer between the surface andaltitude h in direction mv; is the target directional reflectance factor; is the environmental reflectance due to the background albedo or: is the diffuse transmittance for a layer of thickness h and for initialbeam direction mv. is the path radiance of light which did not interact with the surface;and is the glint term that is most significantly present over water coveredtargets and is sometimes present over land targets. If the atmosphere is characterised then it is possible to retrieve the directionalreflectance factor () for each pixel. This term needs careful definitionas there are many different types of 'reflectance' used. The directional reflectance factor () as used here is defined as: in which the irradiance () is the sum of diffuse and directterms and the fraction of diffuse (fd) is included as a parameter. The assumptionthat the irradiance can be characterised in this context by the sun positionand the fraction of diffuse radiation is one that needs evaluation. Thevalue of using this form of reflectance is that it corresponds to what ismeasured in the field using an irradiance radiometer or a reference standard. The physical approach depends on two steps. The first is to determine thisreflectance factor for a surface by atmospheric correction. In atmosphericcorrection, the atmospheric terms are modelled and measured from image andancillary data. The reflectance factor in an image may be obtained iterativelyif the atmospheric turbidity makes the adjacency and other atmosphere/surfaceinteractions significant. The second step is to normalise the reflectancefactor in some way to account for its BRDF variation. In order to go from the reflectance factor to such a corrected value, however,we effectively need to assume that: where is the angular variation function that is assumed tocharacterise the land surface type and be normalised to 1.0 at a referencepair of sun and view angles and standard atmosphere. Then 'corrected' dataare reachable as: The value of getting to this point is that both and can be interfacedwith radiative transfer models to obtain parameters for the earth's surfaceby inversion. The inversion may be simple (such as end member methods) orsophisticated (such as complete nonlinear modelling). This physical approach is obviously highly sophisticated but demands a levelof data quality and time in value adding that sometimes cannot economicallybe committed. However, if the end products are of high information valueand valued by the client it is clearly an approach that could be pursued. WT03-B26-72IA029-000311-B021-42http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/brdf6.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165307 text/html 12710HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:51:28 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 24 May 1996 01:57:42 GMTContent-length: 12535 Image Brightness & BRDF Workshop Issues 3.2.2 Analytic BRDF Models Assuming the atmospheric correction can be done (and the surface interactionneeds to be flagged here as the coupling means the atmospheric correctionand surface BRDF estimation are not independent) the surface BRDF can sometimesbe defined by an analytic model. Among the many models for the volume effect are the Suits and Sail modelsas well as many more sophisticated ones such as the hotspot based modeldescribed (as an example) in Qin and Jupp (1993). The literature is vast(Myneni and Ross, 1990 provides a very good review although it is becomingdated!). The hotspot effect is a geometric or occlusion effect and from among themany papers that exist describing it the following text has been editiedand extracted from Jupp and Walker (1996). "A simple model for the remote sensing of a canopy is the GeometricOptical (GO) model. The simple GO (or hotspot) model for scenes which describeopen forest or woodland areas is based on the one described in Jupp et al.(1986), Strahler and Jupp (1991a&b) and Li and Strahler (1992). In thismodel, there are four kinds of ground cover 'visible' from a given direction.These are referred to as scene components and consist of sunlit canopy (symbolsc), shaded canopy (shc), sunlit background (sb), and shaded background(shb). Each component is assumed to have a characteristic radiance and theradiance of a pixel is modelled as the area weighted combination (or linearmixture) of the characteristic component radiances. That is, the observedradiance of a single pixel (rs) is modelled as: where the subscripts sc, shc, sb, and shb indicate the radiances of thefour components as named above, Rj represents the (mean) radiance of component'j' and k indicates the sensed proportion of each component within the pixelfrom the given view direction. The mean radiance over the scene (Rs), assuming the view and sun directionsare constant, can be written as: where, capital Kj represents the mean or expected value of the varyingproportions kj over the scene for j as the components sc, shc, sb or shb.The mean value (Rs), as a function of sun and observer position, definesthe BRDF of the scene. In order for the scene BRDF model to be computed, a description of the sizeand shapes of the objects, their density and how they are distributed overthe background is needed and the geometrical relationships between the objectsand the expected values of the four components must be established. Juppet al. (1986), Strahler and Jupp (1991a&b) and Li and Strahler (1992)describe such a model for spheroidal crown (not necessarily opaque) volumeswhich is valid for any view or illumination angles using the 'Boolean' modelof Serra (1982). In the Boolean model, the object 'centres' are assumedto be randomly distributed in a 'Poisson' distribution. By defining thegeometry and the distributions, expressions for Kj may be derived. Strahlerand Jupp (1991a&b) use a simple model for spheroids which is adequatefor moderate sun and view zenith angles and Li and Strahler (1992) providesome more general alternative models for resolving the Kj. These basic sceneBRDF models are quite simple and are easily implemented in various formssuch as mathematical packages or spreadsheets. In the woodlands and open forest areas typical of the area of Australiawhere the model studies have been made, the pixel to pixel behaviour ofthe image is conveniently (if not as accurately) described by a simplerform of the model in which the shaded background, sunlit (but still relativelydark) tree and shaded tree components are combined into one so that: where X is a composite component combining sunlit and shaded tree andshaded background and RX. is computed as: The simpler model has the advantage for this discussion that it showsclearly how, in many woodlands, the image pixel to pixel variation is drivenprimarily by the variation in the proportion of sunlit background whichis visible in the pixels and the contrast between this sunlit backgroundand the other components. It also provides a simple estimate for ksb fromimages where Rsb and RX are known for an appropriate image channel, or channelcombination, as: For such a model, the mean radiance (ie BRDF) over all pixels in a patchwith the same basic underlying type of cover and structure is therefore: where Ksb is the mean value of ksb, or the expected proportion of visiblesunlit background for the particular sun and view positions. Figure 2. DATM Hotspot effect and models This simple model has been found to be adequate to describe the dataobtained by a Daedalus scanner over woodlands, Figure 2 shows the data averagedover many scanlines for the aircraft scanning in and across the principalplane. The models shown vary the ratio of tree crown diameter to tree height.As can be seen, the models are very sensitive to this ratio which has beenindependently confirmed at the site by ground measurements. Linear end-member analysis is similar to the estimation of components describedabove. It has been the subject of useful research and application in Australia(Pech et al. 1986, Pickup and Foran 1987) and at regional scales where allpixels are mixtures of land covers of interest (Cross et al., 1991). End-memberanalysis assumes each pixel to be a composition, or mixing, of a few basecomponents or 'end-members'. The pixel signature is assumed to be a linearsum of reflectances from each of n end-members weighted in proportion toits cover (kj) in the pixel: End-member analysis seeks to invert this mixing by deriving the proportions(kj) of each component in the pixel signature. This can feasibly be derivedfrom the remotely sensed data provided that if there are n components (trees,shrubs, grass etc) then there are at least (n-1) channels of data that separatethe end-members spectrally. The key assumptions built into the end-membermethod are that: a) The end-members (pure examples of total cover by trees, shrubs,grass and background) are spectrally consistent between sites and b) Reflectance values for end members (Rj) are available from remotely senseddata or can be accurately derived by other means (such as field spectralmeasurements). There has been considerable work aimed at deriving end-members from thedata (a form of principal components analysis, see Boardman, 1990) and employinghigh spectral resolution data to effect separation of more than a few components(Adams et al., 1989). However, with a lack of available high resolutionspectral data, this linear approach suffers from several significant limitationsto its applicability in Australia: 1. Available broad band signatures of the tree and shrub crownsover much of Australia whilst different, are not markedly spectrally distinct. 2. Even if spectrally distinct crowns did exist for the available bands,their distinction is confounded by the effects of shadowing within crownsand cast shadow on the background (with bigger plants shading smaller plants).This makes the signature of the end-members difficult to estimate as thesignature depends on the proportions of crowns and shadows present and variationsin sun and look angles. 3. Relatively low covers of trees and shrubs, together with shadowing, introducesuch high spectral variance into the data relative to the spectral contrastsbetween end-members that the numerical methods used in the end member analysisbecome highly unstable. Shadow effects obviously depend primarily on the sun angle. Although thecrown cover is the same, lower sun angles clearly decrease image brightness.Differences due to shadowing can be taken into account in end-member analysis,provided the end-member values are recalculated for each temporal imageand one or more components labelled 'shade' are added to the list. However,its successful application still depends on an assumption of linear scalingalong cover gradients due to sun positional and sensor view angle changes.These assumptions in practice are erroneous in structured vegetation (e.g.vegetation with discontinuous cover of trees or shrubs), and this limitsthe application of such methods to general synoptic estimates of changein cover. It is therefore better to model vegetation cover directly as an assemblageof various sizes and shapes of 3-dimensional objects (trees, shrubs, grasstussocks, herbs, etc.) scattered on a background that may be uniform orheterogeneous (Li and Strahler 1985, Jupp et al. 1986). The GO model maythen be used to model the bidirectional reflectance of the canopies. Inthis approach, the effects due to shadowing on the overall reflectance (orinfrared temperature) from a scene become important and useful featuresand the correlated interactions between shaded and sunlit components arebuilt into the analysis - although it now becomes nonlinear. The directionalradiance of the vegetation is then a mixture of four components (sunlitand shaded tree crowns, and sunlit and shaded backgrounds) that is seenfrom a given viewing angle. The areal proportions of these four components,for given illumination and viewing directions (which can be off-nadir),will be a function of the sizes, shapes, orientations and placements ofthe objects (i.e. individual plants) within the scenes. A GO model is most appropriate to woodlands or vegetation in which the vegetativecover is discontinuous, that is, where tree and shadowed background interactionsaccount for a large proportion of the variance in the image. The furtheradvantage of these models is that they are also potentially invertible toprovide structural as well as cover information. The invertibility of GOmodels was demonstrated by Strahler et al. (1988), Franklin and Strahler(1988) and Wu and Strahler (1993) in which tree size and density were estimatedfrom reflectance data. When size, shape and orientation are fixed or characterisedby distributions of known parameters, and the object centres are randomlydistributed, then the proportions of the four components can be estimatedusing the Boolean model of Serra (1982). This GO model is termed the Booleanversion (Strahler and Jupp, 1991a&b; Li and Strahler, 1992). It accountsfor the changes in proportions that occur with random overlapping objectsas the density of objects increases and can easily model scale effects andchanging sun and view directions. The GO aspect of the model implies thatmultiple scattering of radiation in the vegetation layer is neglected. Whilethe evidence of our eyes supports this, there are wavelengths (in particularthe near infrared) where multiple scattering is very significant. This hasbeen recently addressed by Li et al. (1995)." WT03-B26-73IA029-000311-B021-72http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/brdf7.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165329 text/html 3994HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:51:49 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:09 GMTContent-length: 3820 Image Brightness & BRDF Workshop Issues 3.3 Semi-empirical Methods Semi-empirical models have also been developed which are empirical but arebased on physical models and often contain parameters that relate to surfaceparameters. They offer the means of using the mosaic approach and 'empirical'model fitting but also enable surface parameters to be extracted. The methodsare called 'semi-empirical' because they generally assume atmospheric correctioncan be done and also often have forms that involve earth surface parameters.The main class of these models is that of the 'kernel' models. The following text describing the kernel approach was extracted from theMODIS-Land ATBD (Strahler et al., 1995; or at the following web site: http://spso.gsfc.nasa.gov/atbd/modistables.html). 3.3.1 Theoretical Description Kernel-driven models for the bidirectional reflectance distribution functionof vegetated land surfaces attempt to describe the BRDF as a linear superpositionof a set of kernels that describe basic BRDF shapes, with the coefficientsor weights chosen to adapt the sum of the kernels to the given case. Typically,semiempirical kernels are based either on one of several possible approximationsto a radiative transfer scenario of light scattering in a horizontally homogeneousplant canopy (e.g., a crop canopy), or on one of several approximationsfeasible in a geometric-optical model of light scattering from a surfacecovered with vertical projections that cast shadows (e.g., a forest canopy).Deriving a kernel of this nature requires simplifying and manipulating amodel for the BRDF until it reaches the form: in which k is a function only of view and illumination geometry, c1 andc2 are constants containing physical parameters, and R is the modeled valueof the true BRDF, . Semiempirical kernels can be of two types. First, they may contain onlygeometric terms, but no physical parameters. The complete model then islinear, and may be scaled to arbitrary scales even for mixed scenes; neglectingadjacency effects, the weights of the kernels will be linear functions ofthe areal proportions of the subpixel weights. The so-called Ross-kernels,which are approximations to the radiative transfer theory in plant canopiesof Ross (1981) described below, belong to this class, as does the so-calledRoujean geometric-optical kernel (Roujean et al., 1992). In the second case,kernels contain one or very few physical parameters and thus instead ofhaving one kernel, provide a family of kernels depending on these parameters.The geometric-optical Li-kernels (Wanner et al., 1995) belong to this type.In order to reduce them to the form given in (5), the kernel-internal parametersare fixed to a selection of a few values each. The following discussionpresents each of the kernels used in the BRDF/Albedo algorithm. For morecomplete information on the theory and derivation of the kernels, see Wanneret al. (1995). WT03-B26-74IA029-000311-B021-98http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/brdf8.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165343 text/html 7204HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:52:00 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:09 GMTContent-length: 7030 Image Brightness & BRDF Workshop Issues 3.3.2 Kernels The Ross kernels are derived from a formula presented by Ross (1981) forthe directional reflectance above a horizontally homogeneous plant canopycalculated from radiative transfer theory in a single scattering approximation.The Ross-thick kernel was derived and described by Roujean et al. (1992).It is based on an approximation for large LAI values: In the kernel, and are zenith angles forillumination and view, respectively; is the relative azimuthof illumination and view directions; and is the phase angleof scattering, . In the constants, s is leaf reflectance (= leaf transmittance; is the (assumed isotropic) surface reflectance of the soil or understory;LAI is the leaf area index; and B is the average of secantsof possible view and illumination zenith angles. For this formulation, aspherical leaf angle distribution is assumed. The Ross-thin kernel simplifies Ross's equation based on an approximationfor small LAI values: Although this kernel applies primarily to the case of a thin canopy ofscatterers over a uniform background, it can also be appropriate for a verydense, uniform canopy of high leaf area, since in that case the leaf layersbelow the uppermost can act like a uniform background (Strahler et al.,1995). The derivation of the Roujean geometric-optical kernel is presented in theappendix to the paper of Roujean et al. (1992). The kernel may be regardedas accounting for the scattering of a random arrangement of three-dimensionalrectangular solids ("bricks") with isotropic scattering surfaces.Shadows are taken as perfectly black. Mutual shadowing, in which the shadowof one object falls on another object, is not taken into account. The bricksare long with respect to their height h and width b. The kernelis: The Li kernels are derived from the modeling approach of Li and Strahler(1986, 1992). In this approach, the surface is taken as covered by randomly-placedprojections (e.g., tree crowns) that are taken to be spheroidal in shapeand centered randomly within a layer above the surface. The BRDF is modeledas a function of the relative areas of sunlit and shaded, crown and backgroundthat are visible from the viewing position in the hemisphere. For the Li-sparsekernel, it is assumed that shaded crown and shaded background are black,and that sunlit crown and background are equally bright. Under these circumstances,and with some further approximations in the way that view and illuminationshadows overlap, the Li-sparse kernel is: where In these expressions, b is the vertical radius of the spheroid;r is the horizontal radius of the spheroid; and h is the heightof the center of the spheroid. For this model, Here, C is the brightness of sunlit surface, and is the count densityof spheroids (number of spheroids per unit area). The Li-dense kernel differs from the Li-sparse kernel in that it accommodatesmutual shadowing. It assumes a random distribution of crown heights to maximizethe geometric-optical effect in a dense ensemble of canopies. These kernels are not yet linear in that they still contain two parameters,namely the ratios b/r and h/b , describing crown shape andrelative height. The kernels therefore actually represent two families ofkernels, governed by the values of these two internal parameters. For thepresent, we provide two choices for each parameter, thus providing fourkernels within each family. For the b/r ratio, the values 2.5 (prolateshape) and 0.75 (oblate shape) are used; for h/b the ratio, we usevalues of 2.5 (tall) and 1.5 (short). WT03-B26-75IA029-000311-B021-131http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/brdf9.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165428 text/html 6469HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:52:44 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:09 GMTContent-length: 6295 Image Brightness & BRDF Workshop Issues 3.3.3 Kernel-Driven Models A complete kernel-driven semiempirical model is formulated as a linear combinationof kernels. Most suitably it has the form which is derived from adding appropriate choices of geometric-opticalsurface-scattering and radiative-transfer volume-scattering kernels, eachmultiplied by a proportion or that weights thecontribution of each model. These proportions may be regarded as the arealproportions of land cover types exhibiting each type of scattering (neglectingmultiple scattering between the two components), or as mixing proportionsfor land cover types that display both a volume-scattering and a geometric-opticalcontribution to the BRDF. The quantities kgeo and kvol arethe respective kernels; the factors fgeo and fvol are theirrespective weights; and the term fiso is the isotropic contribution.Using the kernels presented above, there will be two choices for kvoland three for kgeo, providing six possible models (disregarding herethe four sets of internal parameters used for the Li kernels). The formulaefor fiso, fgeo, and fvol are shown in Table4. In the inversion and fitting of a semiempirical model to data, estimatesof the weights f are retrieved from bidirectional reflectances andspecification of viewing and illumination positions. Although this objectivesatisfies many of the goals of the BRDF/Albedo product, the existence offormulae for the weights f in terms of physical parameters couldprovide for direct inference of physical parameters from the weight valuesfitted (see Section 3.3.5). This possibilitywill be explored in the postlaunch phase as a research topic. 3.3.4 The Modified Walthall Model Empirical models can be understood as being of the kernel-driven model typeas well, where the kernels are empirical functions. An example is the modifiedWalthall model, derived by Walthall et al. (1985) and improved by Nilsonand Kuusk (1989). It has the form Note that this is the same form as the semiempirical models discussedabove-it is comprised of a weighted superposition of functions of angles,and the weights are the parameters of the model. As a consequence,models like the modified Walthall model can be processed along with linearsemiempirical models by the same linear inversion scheme. 3.3.5 Advantages of Linear Models Linear models have a number of advantages in the context of global dataprocessing. Linearity in BRDF models is comprehensively discussed by Lewis(in preparation) and demonstrated with the modified Walthall model. A firstadvantage is that any linear model can be inverted analytically throughmatrix inversion for the system of equations obtained by setting the derivativeof the error function to zero (see Section3.2.1). This provides direct estimates of the parameters fiso, fgeoand fvol while avoiding numerical inversion problems. Second, both the directional-hemispherical and bihemispherical integralsof the BRDF (black-sky and white-sky albedos) may be precalculated for eachkernel individually. The albedo of a model then is simply the sum of thekernel albedos, weighted by f values. By using a look-up table, numericalintegration of the models can thus be avoided. Third, linear BRDF models scale linearly in space if adjacency effects areassumed to be small. This allows for mixed pixel cases, as indicated bythe areal proportion parameter in the model factors listedabove. This feature also allows scaling BRDF and albedo from one spatialresolution up to a coarser one, e.g., to a particular resolution neededfor a climate model. Finally, since some of the parameters driving the modelsare dependent on wavelength while others are not (e.g., structural parameters),it may be possible to extract all or some of them from multiband analysis,making assumptions about the others. Table 4. Semiempirical weight formulas Ross-thin + Roujean Ross-thick + Roujean Ross-thin + Li-sparse Ross-thick + Li-sparse Ross-thin + Li-dense Ross-thick + Li-sparse WT03-B26-76IA029-000311-B021-168http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/brdf10.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165503 text/html 3350HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:53:20 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:08 GMTContent-length: 3176 Image Brightness & BRDF Workshop Issues 4. THE ISSUE OF SCALE The BRDF models mentioned above and used to develop the kernels are general'average' scene models that apply to spatially averaged data over homogeneoustarget areas. They do not model the image variance (which is also angledependent) nor do they apply to a single object in a scene. The BRDF ofa single tree is different from that of a stand of trees and the BRDF ofa stand of trees is different from that of an open soil area. Scaling affects the basis for image stratification. The tree and gap structureat one scale provides different functions for a stand and bare area delineation.At a broad scale, the composite of tree and gap merges into stands and atanother stands and clearings merge in a 'woodland' category. At each level,th BRDF of the separated components will be different from each other andthe composite land cover. This leads to the consideration of some issues most important in an approachto correcting high resolution images for BRDF effects. The atmospheric effectis very smooth having been 'filtered' by an MTF with a size of about 200metres in most cases. However, the BRDF is highly variable. Consider a photographwith a wide field of view and the solar hotspot near to its centre. A treenear the nadir view and a similar one near the edge will have differentbrightnesses but the difference will not be as great as the overall brighteningdue to volume and hotspot effects. In particular, there will be much moreshadow at the edges reached away from the hotspot direction and path lengthsfor volume scattering will be longer through the canopy than at the geometriccentre of the frame. The 'colour' of shadow near the edges will also beslightly darker than at the nadir but not very different. In this case,applying an overall BRDF correction function will tend to change the colourof shadows and tree crowns at the edge in a way that may be quite wrong- even though the overall area average may be 'balanced'. Obviously, whatworks at one scale may not help at another. Even if an H-resolution (high resolution) approach is taken in which theBRDF of the objects is modelled (trees for example), the fact will stillbe that the image contains different geometric proportions of scene objectsand components in a way that depends on the phase angles between the sun,the target object(s) and the view. Perhaps the only perfect way to resolvethe issue is by 3D stereo modelling. This is unlikely to be cost-effectivewith video or digitised aerial photograph data. WT03-B26-77IA029-000311-B021-195http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/brdf11.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165527 text/html 4572HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:53:46 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:08 GMTContent-length: 4398 Image Brightness & BRDF Workshop Issues 5. SCOPE FOR AN EOC WORKING GROUP A Working Group is defined as described in the following (edited) excerptfrom the EOC Science Plan: "An EOC Working Group is the essential initial step in developing genericTasks from the applications oriented Threads and is the entry point forall approved Tasks. The results of the Working Groups form the basis forpriority setting. Working Groups identify and help rank issues and (followingprioritisation) lead to the selected focus activities of the EOC. Theseare Science Projects and/or Implementation Teams. Science Projects resolvethe scientific issues and publish results. Implementation Teams may takethe results from the Science Project and implement then (for example) assoftware or develop a technology transfer strategy. The outcomes of thescience teams will be formal scientific publications but those of the implementationteams may not be. For example, Implementation Teams may involve commercialsoftware houses working with scientists to provide products that are documented,quality controlled and work correctly. The Working Groups offer an opportunity for scientists in different Divisions,the EOC and from other groups to develop collaboration and locate majorcentres of expertise and interest. The projects selected will seek the bestteams and be subject to approval in competition with other Working Groupoutcomes. The priority setting and approval process for the Science Projectsand Implementation Teams that arise from this activity will be explicitand include specific identification of deliverables and milestones. Whilethe EOC has a central location in Canberra where a critical mass of scientistswill tackle generic science issues and algorithm development, locationsof EOC project and implementation activities can also be decided by infrastructureand core staff locations and be potentially at any location with adequateresearch support among CSIRO sites. The key characteristics of EOC projectsare collocation of scientists, efficient use of resources, inter-Divisionalcollaboration, support for the goals of the EOC and a generic Earth ObservationScience focus that provides support across different applications and/orinvolves a range of tools. Science Projects and Implementation Teams will be formed according to specificguide-lines and will be monitored for progress within the EOC structureand evaluated against criteria defined at the outset of the activity. Theoutcomes of an EOC Task will emphasise quality of product and excellenceof production. A primary role of and criterion for EOC activities includesmaking the findings accessible and useful to areas of CSIRO and industrynot currently exploiting Earth Observation to its fullest extent." A Scene Brightness Working Group needs to consider these as guidelines anddevelop Science Project(s) and/or Implementation Team(s) to resolve issuesidentified. In particular, the WG will need to establish effective datasets to provide objective tests of the methods and allocate cases whereonly empirical models and field measurements are appropriate and those wheremeasurement models are appropriate to the teams. Standard data sets thatare needed to evaluate the alternative models must be carefully consideredas well the end uses and the means to evaluate methods against the valueof the product. The best methods could be implemented in software by an implementation team.During development and testing a standard language such as IDL could beused for easy exchange. Other than such general statements as these, aninitial meeting is needed to plan actions and delineate the scopes of theWorking Group and expected times until when Project objectives are in place. WT03-B26-78IA029-000311-B021-221http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/brdf12.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165550 text/html 6289HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:54:11 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:08 GMTContent-length: 6115 Image Brightness & BRDF Workshop Issues References Adams, J.B., Smith, M.O. and Gillespie, A.R. 1989. Simple models for complexnatural surfaces: a strategy for the hyperspectral era of remote sensing.In Proceedings IGARSS'89, Vancouver, B.C., Canada, 16-21. Barnsley, M., Morris, K. and Reid, A. 1990. Preliminary analysis of a multipleview angle image data set. Proc. NERC 1989 Airborne Remote Sensing CampaignSymposium, Keyworth, England, 18-19 Dec 1990, 49-68. Boardman, J. 1990. Inversion of high spectral resolution data. Proc. SPIE,vol 1298, Imaging Spectroscopy and Terrestrial Environment, Orlando, FL,222-223. Cross, A.M., Settle, J.J. Drake, N.A. and Paivinen, R.T.W. (1991). Subpixelmeasurement of tropical forest cover using AVHRR data. International Journalof Remote Sensing, 12, 1119-1129. Franklin, J., and Strahler, A.H. 1988. Invertible canopy reflectance modelingof vegetation structure in semi-arid woodland. IEEE Trans. Geosci. RemoteSensing, 26, 809-825. Jupp, D.L.B. and Walker, J. (1996). Detecting structural and growth changesin woodlands and forests: the challenge for remote sensing and the roleof geometric optical modelling. In: Gholz, H.L., Nakane, K. and Shimoda,H. (eds). The Use of Remote Sensing in the Modeling of Forest Productivityat Scales from the Stand to the Globe. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht. Jupp, D.L.B. and Strahler, A.H. (1991). A Hotspot Model for Leaf Canopies.Remote Sensing of Environment. 38, 193-210. Jupp, D.L.B., Walker, J., and Penridge, L.K. (1986). Interpretation of vegetationstructure in Landsat MSS imagery: a case study in disturbed semi-arid eucalyptwoodland. Part 2. Model based analysis. J. Environmental Management, 23,35-57. Myneni, R.B., and Ross, J. (1990). Applications in Optical Remote Sensingand Plant Ecology. Heidelberg, FRG: (Springer-Verlag). Li, X., and Strahler, A.H. (1986). Geometric-optical bidirectional reflectancemodeling of a coniferous forest canopy. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sensing,GE24(6), 906-919. Li, X. and A. H. Strahler (1992). Geometric-optical bidirectional reflectancemodeling of the discrete-crown vegetation canopy: Effect of crown shapeand mutual shadowing, IEEE Trans. Geosci. and Remote Sens., 30, 276-292. Li, X., A. H. Strahler, and C. E. Woodcock (1995). A hybrid geometric optical-radiativetransfer approach for modeling albedo and directional reflectance of discontinuouscanopies, IEEE Trans. Geosci. and Remote Sens.,33, 466-480. Nilson, T. and Kuusk, A. (1989). A reflectance model for the homogeneousplant canopy and its inversion. Remote Sens. Environ., 27, 157-167. Ong, C., Hick, P., Craig, M., Warren, P. and Newman, C. (1995). A correlativetechnique for correction of shading effects in digital multispectral videoimagery. Proceedings ISSSR, Melbourne, November 1995. Pech, R.P., Davis, A.W., and Graetz, R.D. (1986). Reflectance modellingand the derivation of vegetation indices for an Australian semi-arid shrubland.Int. J.Remote Sensing, 7, 389-412. Pickup, G., and Foran, B.D. (1987). The use of spectral and spatial variabilityto monitor cover change on inert landscapes. Remote Sensing of Environment23, 351-63. Pickup, G., Chewings, V.H. and Pearce, G. (1995). Procedures for correctinghigh resolution airborne video imagery. International J. Rem. Sens., 16,1647-1662. Qin, W. and Jupp, D.L.B. (1993). An Analytical and Computationally EfficientReflectance Model for Leaf Canopies. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology,66, 31-64. Ross, J.K. (1981). The radiation regime and architecture of plant stands.Dr W Junk, The Hague. Roujean, J.L., Latoy, M. and Deschamps, P.Y. (1992). A bidirectional reflectancemodel of the earth's surface for the correction of remote sensing data.J. Geophys. Res., 97, 20455-20468. Serra, J. (1982). Image Analysis and Mathematical Morphology. Academic Press,London, New York. Strahler, A.H. and Jupp, D.L.B. (1991a). Modeling bidirectional reflectanceof forests and woodlands using boolean models and geometric optics. RemoteSensing of Environment, 34, 153-166. Strahler, A.H and Jupp, D.L.B. (1991b). Geometric-Optical Modeling of Forestsas Scenes Composed of Three-Dimensional Discrete Objects. In Photon-VegetationInteractions: Applications in Optical Remote Sensing and Plant Ecology,(R.B Myneni and J. Ross, Eds), Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, FRG, 415-440. Strahler, A., W. Wanner, Q. Zhu, and X Jin (1995). Bidirectional reflectancemodeling of data from vegetation obtained in the Changchun solar simulationlaboratory, Proc. 15th Int. Geosci. and Remote Sensing Symp., Florence,Italy, July 10-14, 1995, vol. 3. pp. 1965-1967. Strahler, A.H., Barnsley, M.J., d'Entremont, R., Hu, B., Lewis, P., Li,X., Muller, J-P., Barker Schaaf, Wanner, W. and Zhang, B. (1995). MODISBRDF/Albedo Product: Algorithm Theoretical Basis Document Version 3.2. NASAEOS, May 1995. Walthall, C.L., Norman, J.M., Welles, J.M., Campbell, G. and Blad, B.L.(1985). Simple equation to approximate the bidirectional reflectance fromvegetation canopies and bare soil surfaces. Appl. Optics, 24, 383-387. Wanner, W., X. Li, and A. H. Strahler (1995). On the derivation of kernelsfor kernel-driven models of bidirectional reflectance, J. Geophys. Res.,21077-21090. Wu., Y. and Strahler, A.H. (1993). Remote estimation of crown size, standdensity and foliage biomass on the Oregan transect. Ecol. Appl., 4, 299-312. WT03-B26-79IA029-000311-B021-247http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/tasks/task3.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165603 text/html 7621HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:54:21 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Aug 1996 23:40:24 GMTContent-length: 7447 EOC primary Tasks and forward looking Working Groups for 1996/97 3. THREAD COMPONENT TASKS For the initial Tasks defined below as components of the primary initialEOC Thread, the selected data stream will be AVHRR, GMS Pathfinder and LandsatTM. However, the approach set out below and in the flowchart is genericand will not be limited to these examples in the future. 3.1 Instrumentation The EOC will develop an information system pointing to CSIRO capacity infield instrumentation as well as develop a common, well managed instrumentpool (including calibration facilities) Milestones: Central Pool developed calibration data base set up and maintained Standards for field methods documented Instruments & site Information system in place Task Group: Predecessor Task(s): [Existing Base at DWR, DEM, ML andDAR] Successor Task(s): Calibration, Scene Brightness, Validation Missions 3.2 Calibration Current and selected new calibration sites based on land and marine targetsare being developed collaboratively and used to establish base consistencyfor AVHRR, GMS Pathfinder and Landsat TM satellite data in the short termand provide a base for future EnvSat calibration operations. Milestones: Invariant target sites investigated & selected marine site(s) selected (thermal and visible) instrumentation in place best practice campaigns planned and executed Task Group: Predecessor Task(s): Instrumentation Successor Task(s): Algorithms 3.3 Scene Brightness The issue of scene modelling and scene physics impacts on all scales andis being addressed both empirically and from a scene physics base. Usingextensive high resolution data from airborne video and aerial photographyas well as ground based methods, it will be established if there is a consistent'typology' of landcover BRDF in Australia. It will also be established whatis the current most practical approach to BRDF modelling and scene correction. Milestones: Tests of empirical vs kernel approach using existing data (include.airborne video) instrumentation and techniques for field measurement established Landcover BRDF consistency investigated Potential BRDF typology of landscapes established atmospheric and sensor measurement model effects investigated at calibrationand validation sites Task Group: Predecessor Task(s): Instrumentation Successor Task(s): Algorithms & Processing 3.4 Validation Missions Selected missions are being planned that validate selected algorithms, calibrationsand products. Missions will be coordinated to establish protocols and toolsfor the assessment and maintenance of product quality. Milestones: Field sites and instrumentation in place Integrated field and airborne methods established Marine targets established for thermal, visible & radar validation selected Operational validations made comparisons of fixed site and campaign techniques Task Group: Predecessor Task(s): Instrumentation Successor Task(s): Algorithms & Processing 3.5 Data Base of example Data (Includes ALRDC operations with USGS). Base tools in place as well as operationalarchiving for the ALRDC and ML 'Marine DAAC' Archives (eg IDN, IMS). Establishbest tools for archive, browse, storage & retrieval. Issues of receptionand communications can be addressed here but a program will only be establishedin the longer term. Milestones: IMS and IDN installation completed and databases populated Link to AEON established (if link established) Market survey of potential users to establish best selections of features Common tools and formats established at CSIRO reception and research 'DAAC'archives Task Group: Predecessor Task(s): Nil Successor Task(s): Data Management & Communication 3.6 Data management & communication Demonstrations of operational data management and communication will becoordinated with other Tasks. Selected streams provide the means to testand establish best tools for storage and retrieval as well as interfaceto algorithms and product output. Milestones: Interface to algorithms established Product throughput tests of selected data series Product quality control tools established and demonstrated Advanced data communications tools demonstrated Task Group: Predecessor Task(s): Data Base Successor Task(s): Algorithms & Processing 3.7 Algorithms and processing A common set of software tools and best (SoS or State of Science) selectionsof algorithms for processing will be established and promoted among CSIROand collaborating groups. The set selected will be the base sequence inthe product trials and the selections will be documented as an AMTBD (Algorithms& Methods Technical Basis Document(s)). Methods include field techniquesand laboratory practice as well. As a basis, the techniques covered will include choices for: Navigation,[cloud clearing], mosaicking, atmospheric correction, BRDF allowance &balancing, thermal region atmospheric correction, LST and SST algorithmsand some data integration. Milestones: AMTBD documenting SoS algorithms for consistent & standardisedseries Comparative selection and implementation Trials on data series for AVHRR, GMS Pathfinder & Landsat TM Documentation of algorithms & (limited) publication Task Group: Predecessor Task(s): Calibration, Scene Brightness, Validation,Data Management Successor Task(s): Product Presentation, Quality & Standards 3.8 Product presentation, quality & standards For selected data streams of AVHRR, GMS Pathfinder and Landsat TM (in theshort term with other data types into the future) provide demonstrationsof product quality that results from coordinated generic processing Tasksand the collaboration of CSIRO best teams. Milestones: Present example products Establish criteria for accuracy and performance with users Document implications for Standards Document implications for Quality Control Task Group: Predecessor Task(s): Algorithms & Processing Successor Task(s): [End Users], Feedback WT03-B26-80IA029-000311-B021-292http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcata2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165622 text/html 32756HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:54:41 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:36:51 GMTContent-length: 32581 Catalogue Library catalogue A: SPACE, ASTRONAUTICS (continued) (other than communications (C), remote sensing (R), & astronomical aspects(X) [see also Aeronautics, (F)]. Also used for Space in General, or combinationsof above. AC Space Stations, Colonies in Space, Space Platforms in general [SEE (RS)for Polar Platforms] AD Defence aspects ("Star Wars", SDIO, Weapons in Space) AE Space engineering & technology, Astronautical Engineering, SpaceResearch facilities as test labs., specifications for individual items.SEE also Engineering (E) & Aircraft Engineering (FE), Space Industry(AI) AG Microgravity, also Space laboratories [in Space]; microgravity technology;SEE also Space Commercial use AH Space Instrumentation & Equipment; Payloads; Payload Transport Systems& Carriers; Space Instrumentation in general: SEE (CH) for CommunicationsInstruments, (RI) for Remote Sensing, Environmental Research Instruments,(XH) for Astronomical Instruments AI Space Industry, Astronautical, Space Industry R&D etc. [SEE (FE)for Aircraft, Aerospace Industry; (AE) for Space Engineering & Technology;(IN) Industrial R&D in general.] AJ "Junk" in Space; Orbital Debris AK Launch Vehicles, Space Transport Systems, science & technology oflaunch systems, human-operated launches in space; Launch & SatelliteTrajectories [SEE (AR) for Rockets and Rocketry] AL Launch Sites & Facilities (Cape York, etc.); launch schedules AM Manned Spacecraft & Spaceflight. [SEE ALSO Space planes (FS) Unmanned SEE Satellites: (AN);(CS);(RS); Space probes, astronomical satellites (XF) general) special missions (XI, XL, XP, XS.) AN Satellites & Unmanned spacecraft and satellites in general, and multipurpose satellites. [SEE ALSO (CS), (RS) and (XF)] AP Space Science, Space Programs, Space Exploration in General, Space planning activities in general; [SEE also Remote sensing programmes (RZ); (PS), generalscience] [SEE also Astronomy (X) esp. (XA) (XI)(XI),(XL),(XP),(XS), ( XZ)] AR Rocketry & Rockets, esp. sub-orbital or principles of. SEE also AKspecifically for Launch Vehicles AS Space Resources, commercial use, Mining, Manufacture, Industralization AX Films, videos on space. [Exclude Astronomy, see (XX)] AZ General overviews of space, Principles & Practice (General &Collective) @\Attached Shuttle Payloads Project summary of missions, 11 May 1984 \ \ \ \ \GFSC \ \Payload transport systems \Attached Shuttle payload carriers \Space missions \United States \Space \ \1984 \n/a \AH2-12 \Monograph \Includes OSS-2, MLA, SPOC [Hitchhiker], Spartan, GAS, UVX. @\ Spartan- Principal Investigator Workshop March 7-8 1984 \ GSFC \ \ \ \ GSFC \ NASA \ SPARTAN \ Platforms \ Payload Transport Systems \ United States \ Space \ \ 1984 \ 173p \ AH2-12 \ Conference report \ #G P.142 Meeting to discuss technical matters of Spartan platform deploymentfrom Space Shuttle. jk 20.8.91 @\ Hitchhiker-G capabilities \ \ \ \ \GFSC \ \Payload transport systems \Hitchhiker-G \ \Space \United States \ \n.d. \10p. \AH2-12 \Monograph \ @\ Hitchhiker-G customer accomodations and requirements specification, Jan.1985 \HHG-730-1503-01 \ \ \ \GSFC \ \Payload transport systems \Hitchhiker \ \United States \Space \ \1985 \various \AH2-12 \Monograph \ @\Space shuttle payload flight assignments, June 1985, Space TransportationSystem \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Payloads \Space missions \Launch data \United States \Space \ \1985 \55p. \AH2-12 \Serial \Schedules, updated monthly. @\ Prospace catalog, 3rd edition, Vol. 2: On board equipment \ \ \ \ \Prospace \ \Spacecraft instruments \Remote sensing instruments \Trade catalogues \Europe \France \ \n.d. \127p. \AH2-30 \Monograph \After 1967 @\Prospace catalog, 3rd ed. Station equipment and electronics, launch padequipment, test facilities/services \ \ \ \ \Prospace \ \Trade catalogues \Communications instruments \Launch facilities \France \ \ \n.d. \various \AH2-30 \Monograph \After 1967 @\Souriau umbilical connectors \ \ \ \ \Souriau \ \Communications industry \Space instruments \ \France \International \ \n.d. \4p. \AH2-34 \Folder \#G @\ GEO-SPAS, a small reusable platform for dedicated short-term missions \ \ \ \ \MBB \ \Remote sensing applications \Space platforms \SPAS \Space \West Germany \ \n.d. \25p \AH2-38 \Monograph \Before 1983. #G P.330 jk 12.5.92 @\ Attitude control systems in spacecraft [paper presented at] FLUICA '73,Instrumentation and Control - 1973, [from] Proceedings of Instrumentationand Control Segment of the Joint Symposium organized by Institute of Instrumentationand Control- Australia (Vic. Div.) and Fluid Power Society (Melbourne Chapter)(1973, 30 July- 2 Aug.: Melbourne) \ \Kroschel.N \ \ \FLUICA '73 \IICA \Satellite control \Space technology \Spacecraft \Space \Australia \ \1973 \12p. \AH2-80 \Reprint \ @\ Proposal for the design and development of an Australian ApplicationsSpacecraft Platform(AASP) \ \ \ \ \ British Aerospace Australia \British Aerospace Australia \Space industry \Space Platforms \ \Australia \Space \ \1986 (?) \Various \AH2-80 \Monograph \#G P.865 Proposal to DITAC (unsuccessful). Teams was to have included RayStalker, Swedish Space Corporation, VIPAC. 21.6.92 @\ Get Away Special (GAS) small self-contained payloads, experimenter handbook,July 1984 \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Payloads \Handbooks \GAS \Space \United States \ \1984 \93p. \AH3-01 \Monograph \ @\ DSN, Deep Space Network \JPL Fact Sheet \ \ \ \NASA \ \Communications \Space programs \DSN \Space \United States \ \n.d. \7p. \AH3-12 \(paper) \Photocopy @\ Outside users payload model: report to NASA by Battelle, Columbus Div.under contract no. NASw-3595 October 1986 \ \Conlon.R \Day.J \ \Battelle \NASA \Payloads \Space programs \Space technology \United States \ \ \1986 \63p. \AH4-12 \Monograph \Supercedes July 1985. Covers 1986-2001. Contract report. @\Users guide for space station attached payloads (draft) \ \ \ \ \NASA \BDM Corp. \Space stations \Attached payloads \ \International \United States \ \1988 \ca. 200p. \AH15-12 \Monograph \For design activities with OSSA Announcement of Opportunity AO OSSA-1-88only. Corrected jk 9.4.92 @\Proposal for the design and development of an Australian ApplicationsSpacecraft Platform (AASP), Enquiry no. 86-09-263 \ \ \ \ \British Aerospace Australia \ \Satellites \Australian Applications Spacecraft Platform (AASP) \ \ \nd \37p \AH15-80 \Monograph \Proposal to DITAC. With Swedish Space Corp. and others. Date: 1987? Reclassifiedfrom RS15-80, 11.5.92. @\ Australia's CSIRO Space Program, Proceedings of the Sixteenth InternationalSymposium on Space Technology and Science, Sapporo 1988 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Office of Space Science & Applications \ \COSSA \RAF \Industry \Australia \Canberra \Japan \1988 \7p. \AI1-01 \Abstract \#C (ISTS) Corrected jk 9.4.92 @\Transfer of space science and technology: a Third World point of view \ \Gall.R \ \ \Adv. Space Res. \ \Space science \Space technology \ \Mexico \International \Third World \1983 \4p. \AI1-05 \(paper) \#G P.874 Photocopy from Adv.Space Res. Vol.3, no 7, 1983, pp5-8 @\World space industry survey, ten year outlook; 1986 ed., November 1986 \ \Giget.M \Villain.R \Pybaro.F \EUROCONSULT \ \Space industry \Space technology \Space programs \International \ \ \1986 \307p. \AI1-05 \Monograph \#G, P.23, former acc. no. 882 @\World space industry survey, ten year outlook; 1988 ed., April 1988 \ \Villain.R \Bellin.S \Pybaro.F \EUROCONSULT \ \Space industry \Space technology \Space programs \International \ \ \1986 \307p. \AI1-05 \Monograph \#G P.852 @\World space industry survey, ten year outlook; 1989-90 ed. \ \Giget.M \Bellin.S \Daidj.N \EUROCONSULT \ \Space industry \Space technology \Space programs \International \ \ \1989 \397p. \AI1-05 \Monograph \#G, 1990.16 @\World space markets survey, ten year outlook; 1994 ed. \ \Villain.R \Chenard.S \Bellin.S \EUROCONSULT \ \Space industry \Space technology \Space programs \International \ \ \1994 June \437p. \AI1-05 \Monograph \#G, 1995.111 Formerly known as World Space Industry Survey. Copy No. 639.Subject to copyright agreement. mvk 16.9.95 @\Beyond tomorrow \ \ \ \ \Spar Aerospace Ltd, Canada \ \Space technology \Space industry \ \Canada \ \ \na \na \AI1-11 \Brochure \#G 1992.172 mk 20.7.92 @\ Directory of UK space capabilities: a guide to the space-related expertiseof UK manufacturers, agencies and universities and their capabilities \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Space science \Space industry \Directories \Great Britain \ \ \1987 \n/a \AI1-32 \Monograph \#G P.871, P.878 (Copy 2), spiral bound. @\ The British Space Industry, Does disaster loom? Abstract from Space MarketsAutumn 1988 \ \Bulloch.C \ \ \ \ \Future planning \Impact statement \ \United Kingdom \ \ \1988 \57p. \AI1-32 \Abstract \#G P.872 @\ Aerospace Japan, Aerospatiale Japonaise, 1987-1988 [a guide to the industry] \ \ \ \ \JMEA \SJAC \Space industry \Aircraft industry \Space technology \Japan \ \ \1988 \125p. \AI1-63 \Monograph \ #G P.177 Includes industry directory @\ Australian Space Research 1986-1988 \ \ \ \ \Australian National Committee for Solar-Terrestrial and Space Physics \AAS \Space Research \Space industry \Space engineering technology \Australia \ \ \1989 \49p. \AI1-80 \Monograph \#G P.873 Articles from ASO, Bur.Met, CSIRO Divisions of Atmospheric Research,CSIRO Division of Oceanography, University of NSW - ADFA, Australian AntarcticDivision, Department of Administrative Services - IPS, University of Newcastle- Department of Physics, University of Queensland, ANU, CSIRO Division ofRadiophysics, University of Tasmania, University of Sydney @\Getting Into the Space Business: Proceedings of an Australian Space Board- COSSA Industry Opportunities Seminar (1987, 4 Mar.: Canberra) \ \ \ \ \COSSA \Australian Space Board \Space Technology \Space Industry \ \Australia \ \ \March 1987 \107 pages \AI1-80 \Monograph \ #G P.875 ISBN 0 643 03859 0 Anthology of Conference Papers @\Getting into the space business, an industry opportunities seminar (1987,4March: Canberra) [Conference papers] \ \ \ \ \COSSA \Australian Space Board \Space technology \Space industry \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \n/a \AI1-80 \Folder \Looseleaf folder of papers issued at the Seminar @\ Aerospace Industry Working Party report: the aerospace industry, problemsand prospects \ \Davie.R \ \ \IEA \ \Space industry \Aircraft industry \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \47p. \AI1-80 \Monograph \#G P.879 ISBN 0 85825 385 2 @\ Towards an Australian space industry [in] Link vol.3 no 1, Feb. 1985 \ \Astley-Boden.C \ \ \Link \COSSA \Space industry \ \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \3p. \AI1-80 \Journal article \#G P.877 Link, Feb. 1985 issue, pp.2-4 @\ Australian aerospace \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Trade \ \Space industry \Aircraft industry \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \23p. \AI1-80 \Monograph \#G P.880 @\ Australian aerospace agency proposal, a report to the Australian Academyof Technological Sciences Working Party on the National Space Program, Sept.1984 \ \James.M \ \ \Space Association of Australia \ \Space agencies \Space coordination \Space industry \Australia \International \ \1981 \61p. \AI1-80 \Monograph \#G P.876 @\ Beyond Earth's Boundaries, Human Exploration of the Solar System in the21st Century, 1988 Annual Report to the Administrator \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space Exploration \ \ \USA \International \ \1989 \51p. \AI2-12 \Monograph \Supporting papers: NASA Earth Science and Applications Division, Programand Plans for FY 1987-1988-1989 (see P.862, AP15-12) , A Progress Report1988, Exploration Studies Technica Report FY1988 STATUS Volume 1: TechnicalSummary, Volume 11: Study Approach and Results #G P.881 . @\ VICOM Australia Ltd \ \ \ \ \VICOM Australia Pty Ltd \ \Testing \Space industry \Navigation systems \Australia \ \ \1992 \Various \AI2-80 \Brochure \#G 1992.163 Includes information on TRAC systems - GPS timing instrumentsand the Microdyne 1400 series telemetry receivers. mk 16.7.92 @\More than 20 years of space activity \ \ \ \ \Matra \ \Space programs \Space industry \Matra \France \Space \International \n.d. \25p. \AI3-34 \Monograph \ #G P.910 1984? @\ Proceedings of Pacific Basin International Symposium on Advances in SpaceScience Technology and its Applications (PISSTA) (1987, 7-10 June: Beijing,China): [Selected papers, photocopied from Proceedings] \ \ \ \ \CSA \PISSTA \Remote sensing \Satellites \Space technology \Pacific \International \ \1987 \various \AI3-75 \(papers) \ #G P.883 22.6.92 8 papers on remote sensing subjects. @\ National Space Symposium, proceedings of a Symposium held in Sydney 22-23March 1984 \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Science \AUSPACE \Space technology \Space industry \Space science \Australia \ \ \1984 \417 p. \AI3-80 \(Conference pub.) \ #G P.882 ISBN 0 642 86987 1 @\Report on the space industry in South Australia, prepared by M.B.A. students,Elton Mayo School of Management, S.A.I.T., July 1985 \ \Beltchev.M \Brice.R \Cattanar.S \SAIT \ \Space industry \ \ \South Australia \Australia \ \1985 \60p. \AI3-85 \(paper) \#G P.978 @\Canadian Government support for the aerospace industry, Draft \ \Keshishian.P \ \ \Office of International Sector Policy \ \Space industry \Government policy \Economics \Canada \ \ \1983 \23p. \AI4-11 \(paper) \Draft paper. #G P.884 . @\ Aerospace industry: report of the Tripartite Working Group on an ExportDevelopment Strategy \ \Maxwell.R \ \ \AUSTRADE \ \Space industry \Aircraft industry \Export trade \Australia \ \ \n.d. \130p. \AI4-80 \Monograph \TWG was meeting in 1985-1986. Another copy at FI5-80 #G P.885 @\[Draft internal working paper on sources of assistance to the aerospaceindustry; distributed to AAAI members June 1987] \ \ \ \ \AAAI \DITAC \Space industry \Aircraft industry \Financial assistance \Australia \ \ \1987? \67p. \AI4-80 \(paper) \Looseleaf unedited paper . #G P.886 . @\ Canadian Space Business Opportunities Conference [Programme and papersof the Conference] (1985, 24-25 April: Toronto) \ \ \ \ \Canadian Space Business Opportunities Conference \Johnson & Higgins \Space commercial uses \Space industry \Space technology \Canada \Space \ \1985 \n/a \AI5-11 \Conference pub. \ #G P.892, P.893 (Copy 2) @\ Allocation of research and industrial resources to the space sector inCanada: independent analysis commissioned by Spar Aerospace] \ \ \ \ \Woods Gordon \ \Space industry \Space science \Industrial research & development \Canada \ \ \n.d. \24p. \AI5-11 \(paper) \ #G P.894 Photocopy, missing title page. Dated after 1982 @\ Aerospace facts and figures, 1986, 1987 \ \ \ \ \Aerospace Industries Association of America \Aviation Week \Space industry \Aircraft industry \Statistics \United States \ \ \1986 \188p. \AI5-12 \Annual \ #G P.987 Catalogued by HQ Library at 387.70973 Ae AS:HQ. Corrected jk9.4.92 @\ European space industry's potential, presented ... at the Eurospace Conference,Stresa, on 2nd May 1984 \ \Pardoe.G \ \ \GT Systems \ \Space industry \ \ \Europe \ \ \1984 \8p. \AI5-30 \(paper) \ #G P.891 @\France Australia space opportunities with France [symposium?] CanberraMarch 5-7 1987, [co-organized by Australian Space Board, CNES, ACTIM, Ambassadede France a Canberra] [industry summary] \ \ \ \ \ASB \CNES \Space industry \International cooperation \ \Australia \France \ \1987 \n/a \AI5-34 \Folder \Booklet lists with summary the cooperating French firms @\Mitsubishi Electric [folder of phamplets on space oriented plants, products,and services] \ \ \ \ \Mitsubishi \ \Space industry \Remote sensing instruments \Mitsubishi \Japan \ \ \1984 \various \AI5-63 \Folder \ #G P.889 Includes booklets: Microwave antennas and devices; Space activities;Guide to composite materials plant for space equipments, Sagami Works etc. @\ Guide to composite materials plant for space equipments, Sagami Works \ \ \ \ \Mitsubishi \ \Space industry \Space technology \ \Japan \ \ \n.d. \10p. \AI5-63 \Monograph \ #G P.890 1986. In Japanese with English overlay. @\Space Science and Technology Benefit Study, June 1985 \ \ \ \ \Trippett Allan and Associates \COSSA \Space industry \Space technology \Space science \Australia \ \ \1985 \96 pages \AI5-80 \Monograph \ #G P.908 , P.909 (Copy 2) Commissioned Report for COSSA. @\Australian Space Industry Capability stocktake & Industry DevelopmentRecommendations \ \ \ \ \Trippett Shedden \ASO \Space industry \Government policy \ \Australia \ \ \1989 Mar \ \AI5-80 \Monograph \#G P.1185 Prepared under contract for the Austrlian Space Office as partof the "Australian Space Industry Development Strategy". ListsAustralian space companies, research bodies, and their specialities. mvk2.6.93 @\ Strategy report for the Australian aerospace industry, February 1986 \ \ \ \ \Aerospace Industry Council \ \Space industry \Aircraft industry \Marketing \Australia \ \ \1986 \44p. \AI5-80 \Monograph \ #G P.905 @\ Development marketing and export of Australian aerospace technology [papergiven at] Institution of Engineers Second Space Conference 1986 \ \Trippett.J \ \ \Trippett Allan and Associates \ \Space technology \Space industry \Marketing \Australia \ \ \1986 \10p. \AI5-80 \(paper) \ #C (Space Eng. Symp) , P.906, P.907 (Copy 2) @\ Potential for Australian industry involvement in space related productsand services [Seminar, (1984, 22 Oct: Adelaide; 1984, 25 Oct: Sydney; 1984,31 Oct: Melbourne) \DITAC Seminar \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Space industry \Industrial technology \ \Australia \ \ \1984 \91p. \AI5-80 \Monograph \ #G P.991 @\ Stocktake of the Australian aerospace industry, assessment of its performanceand prospects, February 1986 \ \ \ \ \Aerospace Industry Council \ \Space industry \Aircraft industry \ \Australia \ \ \1986 Feb \60p \AI5-80 \Monograph \#G P.990 @\ Australian aerospace industry: structure performance and economic issues \Research report [BIE] \Schmidt.G \Lattimore.R \ \Bureau of Industry Economics \ \Space industry \Aircraft industry \Economics \Australia \ \ \1986 \425p. \AI5-80 \Monograph \No. 20 ISSN 0156 3394 ISBN 0 644 04816 6 P.989 @\ Industrial eyes in the sky, a discussion paper on the Australian remotesensing industry \ \Aubrey.M \ \ \Technical & Field Surveys Ltd \ASO \Remote sensing applications \Space industry \Economics \Australia \ \ \1988 \various \AI5-80 \Monograph \ca. 100p. #G P.903, P.904 (Copy 2) . @\ Sensing oppotunities for Australia; Australian remote sensing industrystrategy and action plan. \ \Aubrey.M \ \ \Technical & Field Surveys Ltd \ASO \Remote sensing applications \Space industry \Economics \Australia \ \ \1989 July \65p \AI5-80 \Monograph \#G P.61 Copy 1 P.108 Copy 2 Report of the Remote Sensing Working Partyto the Australian Space Board @\Australian Space Industry Development Strategy \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ASO \Space industry \ \ \Australia \ \ \1990 \43p \AI5-80 \Monograph \#G 1990.34 ISBN 0 644 12189 0 @\Australian Space Industry Discussion Group Space Briefing, Canberra 29May 1990 \ \Page.J \ \ \Australian Space Industry Discussion Group \ \Space industry \Space technology \ \Australia \ \ \1990 \ 100p (approx) \AI5-80 \Monograph \#G 1990.75 (copy 1), 1990.104 (copy 2) Papers by Richards (remote sensing),Lansdown (Intro.), Farrell ( Communications), Barrett (Ground support),and Smith (Future and summary). @\Remote sensing industry development in Western Australia, a pre-feasibilitystudy, [for the] Government of Western Australia, Executive summary, March1987 \ \ \ \ \Trippett Allan and Associates \ \Space industry \Remote sensing applications \Industrial research & development \Western Australia \Australia \ \1987 \16p. \AI5-86 \Monograph \ #G P.992 @\ Critical look at space technology and the developing world \ \Bluth.B \ \ \Adv. Space Res. \ \Space technology \Developing countries \ \International \ \ \1983 \9p. \AI11-05 \(paper) \ #G P.979 Photocopy of pp.13-22 of Vol.3, no.7, 1983 @\ Impact of space research and technology on small countries [Bulgaria] \ \Serafimov.K \ \ \Adv. Space Res. \ \Space technology \Economic impact \Developing countries \Bulgaria \ \ \1983 \9p. \AI11-33 \(paper) \ #G P.980 Photocopy of pp.85-93 of Vol.3, no.7, 1983. Keyword changed jk9.4.92 @\ Impact of space research and technology on small countries [USSR] \ \Massevitch.A \ \ \Adv. Space Res. \ \Space technology \Economic impact \Developing countries \USSR \International \ \1983 \9p. \AI11-55 \(paper) \ #G P.981 Photocopy of pp.53-61 of Vol.3, no.7, 1983. Keyword changed jk9.4.92 @\New Technology and Employment, statement to the Standing Committee...[withAppendices] \ \McCracken.K \Astley-Boden.C \ \COSSA \Senate Standing Committee on Science Technology and the Environment \Economic impact \Space Technology \Technological Change \Australia \ \ \1986 Jul \45p. \AI11-80 \Monograph \ #G P.982, P.983 (Copy 2) Official Hansard Report. C. Astley-Boden notmentioned on publication. Keyword changed jk 9.4.92 @\ SED Systems [company history] \ \ \ \ \SED Systems \ \Space industry \Space technology \ \Canada \ \ \n.d. \7p. \AI12-11 \(paper) \ #G P.984 @\ Toulouse: la ville de l'espace [English version] \ \ \ \ \CNES \ \Space science \Space industry \Toulouse \France \ \ \1986 \63p. \AI12-34 \Monograph \Prepared for the 26th COSPAR Plenary Meeting. P.985, P.986 (Copy 2). @\ Australian-USSR Space Research Cooperation, Report of the Australiandelegation's visit to the USSR, 25 May-4 June 1988. \ \ \ \ \ASO \Australian Space Board \Overseas visits \International cooperation \ \Australia \USSR \ \1988 \44p \AI14-56 \Monograph \#G, P.8, Pub. by AGPS, ISBN 0 644 08547 9. @\ Future directions for Australian aeronautical technology [lecture, 6Sept. 1988] \R.Ae.S Lecture for Professional Engineers Week in Canberra \Brown.G \ \ \ARL (DSTO) \RAeS \Space technology \Aircraft technology \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \11p. \AI15-80 \Monograph \ #G P.988 @\Report on Orbital Debris \ \ \ \ \US. National Security Council \ \Space junk \Debris \Trajectories \United States \ \ \1989 Feb \53p + \AJ1-12 \Monograph \#G P.1183 Comprehensive report prepared for NSC by the Interagency Group(Space) on orbital debris problems. The Working Group on Orbital Debrisincluded Kenneth Pedersen (NASA), Philip Kunsberg (Undersecretary of Defense)and James Binns (DoD) . Includes bibliography; list of major junk/impacts;monitoring overview; international implications. mvk 11.2.93 @\ Reaching for the skies: the Ariane family story and beyond, an introductionto Europe's successful series of space transportation systems \ESA BR-42 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Launch vehicles \Ariane program \Space programs \Europe \France \French Guiana \1988 \34p. \AK1-30 \Monograph \ #G P.861 @\Trajectories of Pioneers 6-11. Helios A and B and Voyagers 1 and 2, March1986 \NSSDC/WDC-A-R7S 86-03 \Parthasarathy.R \Hills.H \Couzens.D \NSSDC \ \Satellite trajectories \Space probes \ \Space \United States \ \1986 \65p. \AK2-01 \Monograph \ #G P.916 NSSDC and World Data Center A for Rockets and Satellites, 86-03.18.8.92 @\SPAS-01 A Press information, on second launch of the reusable ShuttlePallet Satellite February 1984 \ \ \ \ \MBB \ \Satellites \Space missions manned \SPAS \Space \West Germany \ \1984 \27p. \AK2-01 \(paper) \ Summary of mission - technical details, diagrams, experiments. #G P.922.18.8.92 @\Space transportation current and projected capabilities, 8-20-84 \ \Bekey.I \ \ \NASA \ \Launch vehicles \Space transportation systems \Space shuttle \United States \ \ \1984 \n/a \AK2-12 \Monograph \ #G P.913 Possibly set of overheads. @\ Conestoga II system summary, September 1, 1983 \ \ \ \ \Space Vector Corp \ \Launch vehicles \Conestoga 2 \ \United States \ \ \1983 \74p. \AK2-12 \Monograph \ #G P.919 @\Mission Planner's Manual : PROTON Commercial Launch Vehicle \ \ \ \ \Space Commerce Corporation \ \Launch vehicles \Space industry \Handbooks \Russia \United States \ \1989 June \Various \AK2-55 \Monograph \#G 1992.157 jk 8.7.92 @\Soviet Commercial Launch Vehicles \AIAA \Dula.A \Gubanov.B \Smetanin.Y \ \ \Launch vehicles \ \ \Russia \International \ \1989 July \20p \AK2-56 \Conference paper \#G Reprint from AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE 25th Joint Propulsion Conference, MontereyCA, July 1989. Covers COSMOS, Tsyklon, and Energia. P.936 jk 8.7.92 @\ Long March launch system \ \ \ \ \GWIC \ \Launch vehicles \Rockets \Long March \China \ \ \n.d. \10p. \AK2-61 \Monograph \ #G P.1007 Illustrated booklet on CZ1-CZ3. After 1984. @\ M-3SII launch vehicle and Sakigake [space probe] \ \ \ \ \ISAS \ \Space probes \Launch vehicles \Halleys'Comet \Space \Japan \ \1985 \n/a \AK2-63 \Folder \Paper and photographs (inc. 8X10 colour photo of M-3SII vehicle in tower)filed in folder. #G P.921 Record reconstructed jk 9.4.92 @\Summary of H-II launch vehicle concept, Sept 14 1984 \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Launch vehicles \ \ \Japan \ \ \1984 \16p. \AK2-63 \Monograph \#G P.920 Copy of overheads. Record reconstructed jk 9.4.92 @\Introduction to space: the science of spaceflight \Orbit, a Foundation Series \Damon.Thomas \ \ \ \ \Space science \Education \Spacecraft \United States \International \Space \1995 \264p \AK3-12 \Monograph \#G 1996.9 With Forward by E G Gibson. ISBN 0 89999464 053 4 . Textbookfor general space education. History of spaceflight, science and technologyof propulsion, remote sensing, all from an American perspective. KreigerPublishing, Florida USA. mvk 20.2.96 WT03-B26-81IA029-000311-B021-332http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcata6.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165639 text/html 28540HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:54:54 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:36:53 GMTContent-length: 28365 Catalogue Library catalogue A: SPACE, ASTRONAUTICS (continued) (other than communications (C), remote sensing (R), & astronomical aspects(X) [see also Aeronautics, (F)]. Also used for Space in General, or combinationsof above. AC Space Stations, Colonies in Space, Space Platforms in general [SEE (RS)for Polar Platforms] AD Defence aspects ("Star Wars", SDIO, Weapons in Space) AE Space engineering & technology, Astronautical Engineering, SpaceResearch facilities as test labs., specifications for individual items.SEE also Engineering (E) & Aircraft Engineering (FE), Space Industry(AI) AG Microgravity, also Space laboratories [in Space]; microgravity technology;SEE also Space Commercial use AH Space Instrumentation & Equipment; Payloads; Payload Transport Systems& Carriers; Space Instrumentation in general: SEE (CH) for CommunicationsInstruments, (RI) for Remote Sensing, Environmental Research Instruments,(XH) for Astronomical Instruments AI Space Industry, Astronautical, Space Industry R&D etc. [SEE (FE)for Aircraft, Aerospace Industry; (AE) for Space Engineering & Technology;(IN) Industrial R&D in general.] AJ "Junk" in Space; Orbital Debris AK Launch Vehicles, Space Transport Systems, science & technology oflaunch systems, human-operated launches in space; Launch & SatelliteTrajectories [SEE (AR) for Rockets and Rocketry] AL Launch Sites & Facilities (Cape York, etc.); launch schedules AM Manned Spacecraft & Spaceflight. [SEE ALSO Space planes (FS) Unmanned SEE Satellites: (AN);(CS);(RS); Space probes, astronomical satellites (XF) general) special missions (XI, XL, XP, XS.) AN Satellites & Unmanned spacecraft and satellites in general, and multipurpose satellites. [SEE ALSO (CS), (RS) and (XF)] AP Space Science, Space Programs, Space Exploration in General, Space planning activities in general; [SEE also Remote sensing programmes (RZ); (PS), generalscience] [SEE also Astronomy (X) esp. (XA) (XI)(XI),(XL),(XP),(XS), ( XZ)] AR Rocketry & Rockets, esp. sub-orbital or principles of. SEE also AKspecifically for Launch Vehicles AS Space Resources, commercial use, Mining, Manufacture, Industralization AX Films, videos on space. [Exclude Astronomy, see (XX)] AZ General overviews of space, Principles & Practice (General &Collective) @\SERC Space Plan, February 1986 \ \Cook.A \Martin.B \Iddon.C \SERC \ \Space programs \Space technology \Space science \Great Britain \ \ \1986 \55p. \AP15-32 \Monograph \#G P.1109 Record reconstructed jk 9.4.92 @\ Proposal for a national medium-term space program for 1979-1983, Rome,Feb. 1979 [following a request by the Minister] \ \ \ \ \Italy. Ministry for Scientific & Technological Research \CIAS \Space programs \Future planning \PSN/CNR \Italy \ \ \1979 \45p. \AP15-35 \(paper) \#G P.1108 Basis of establishment of national space plan, Piano spazialenazionale. @\ Space Explorers' Earthly Concerns \ \Dunayev.A \ \ \Glavkosmos \ \International cooperation \Space cooperation \International relations \USSR \Space \Multinational \1989 \5p. \AP15-55 \Paper \#G P.1075 Translation from article by author . @\Toward creation of space age in the new century \ \ \ \ \Space Activities Commission of Japan \ \Space programs \Space science \ \Japan \ \ \1994 \84p. \AP15-63 \monograph \#G 1995.49. mvk 22.4.95 @\Australia's Participation in the Space Sector of Earth Observation Systems \Technical Committee Report No. 1 \McCracken.K \ \ \ASO \ \Remote sensing satellites \Future planning \ \Australia \ \ \1992 \14p \AP15-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.282 mvk 3.1.93 @\Australian Space Board Agenda Papers \Australian Space Board Papers \ \ \ \Australian Space Office \Australian Space Board \Space programs \Space industry \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD August 1992; \ \AP15-80 \Looseleaf binders \#G 8/92 Meeting is 1994.114. Includes discussion on Cape York Space Station,Department of Communication Licence Fees for ground stations. Prepared forCSIRO observer (Graham Harris) and annotated by COSSA prior to meetings.CONFIDENTIAL NOT FOR LOAN OUTSIDE CSIRO. Following series (from end 1992)was Australian Space Council Agenda Papers. mvk 27.7.94 @\Australian Space Council Agenda Papers \Australian Space Council Papers \ \ \ \Australian Space Office \Australian Space Council \Space programs \Space industry \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD October 1993; \ \AP15-80 \Looseleaf binders \#G 10/93 Meeting is 1994.113. Includes ASO Organisation chart. Papers preparedfor Dr Roy Green (CSIRO Representative) and annotated by COSSA prior tomeetings. CONFIDENTIAL NOT FOR LOAN OUTSIDE CSIRO. Preceding series (toend 1992) was Australian Space Board Agenda Papers. mvk 27.7.94 @National Space Program Five Year Plan \National Space Program Five Year Plan \ \ \ \Australian Space Council \ \Space programs \Space industry \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1994; \ \AP15-80 \Series \#G 1994.117. Separate Executive Summary as 1994.117.2 . ASC first met late1992, Australian Space Council Act enabled early 1994. Ambitious but vagueand unfunded proposals including re-opening Woomera for Low Earth Orbitcommunication launches; "private security" market in communications.mvk 5.8.94 Preceding series (to end 1992) was Australian Space Board Papers. @National Space Program Five Year Plan: Working Group Reports \National Space Program Five Year Plan \ \ \ \Australian Space Council \ \Space programs \Space industry \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1994; \59p \AP15-80 \Series \#G 1996.35 ISBN 0 644 428 228 Accompanies 1994.117 ASC first met late 1992,Australian Space Council Act enabled early 1994. Ambitious but vague andunfunded proposals including re-opening Woomera for Low Earth Orbit communicationlaunches; "private security" market in communications. mvk 5.4.96 @\3rd Australian Space Development Conference, 8-10 September 1994, Sydney \ \ \ \ \ \ \Space industry \Space programs \Space technology \Australia \ \ \1994 Sept \ \AP15-80 \Conference papers in binder \#C (ASDC) 1994.189 Conference Program and papers. Conference, approximatelybi-annual, sponsored by Australian Space Office, GIO Reinsurance, AustralianSpace Industry Chamber of Commerce, Telstra, and National Space Societyof Australia. Dr Don Watts and Malcolm Farrow presented the first Five YearPlan of the Australian Space Board, to a rather small (~60) and unanimatedaudience. mvk 26.12.94 @\Civilian Launch Vehicles and Spaceports : A World Perspective, presentedat a COSSA Seminar 6 April 1987 \ \Pike.G \ \ \AUSSAT Ltd \COSSA \Rockets \Launch sites \Launch Vehicles \ \ \ \April 1987 \46 pages \AR1-05 \Monograph \#G P.178 COSSA Seminar . See also copy at AL1-05, P.1010. @\ Low-thrust rocket trajectories, Jan. 1986 \LA-10625-MS \Keaton.P \ \ \Los Alamos National Laboratory \ \Rockets \Trajectories \Launch vehicles \Space \United States \ \1986 \20p \AR2-01 \Monograph \ #G P.1003 Reconstructed 10.4.92 jk @\ TITLE: Titan Space Launch Vehicles \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 Martin Marietta Denver Aerospace \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Launch vehicles \ KEYWORD.2 Rockets \ KEYWORD.3 Titan \ REGION.1 United States \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1986 \ PAGINATION 7p \ CLASSC'N AR2-12 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G P.1001 Record reconstructed jk 10.4.92 @\ TITLE: Atlas/Centaur family, a heritage of proven performance \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 General Dynamics \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Rockets \ KEYWORD.2 Launch vehicles \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 Space \ REGION.2 United States \ REGION.3 \ DATE nd \ PAGINATION 5p \ CLASSC'N AR2-12 \ FORMAT Folder \ OTHER.DATA #G P.1006 Record reconstructed jk 10.4.92 @\Ariane 4 \ \ \ \ESA \CNES \Space programs \Ariane program \Rockets \Europe \France \ \n.d. \ca 16p \AR2-30 \Monograph \ #G P.1000; P.1008 (Copy 2) On Pub : PR - P88-1 (1988?). Record reconstructedjk 10.4.92 @\ Ariane 5, a new generation of heavy-lift vehicle \ \ \ \ \CNES \ \Launch vehicles \Rockets \ \France \ \ \1985 \3p. \AR2-34 \Folder \ #G P.1004 20.8.92 @\ H-II Rocket \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Rockets \Launch vehicles \H-2 Rocket \Japan \ \ \1986 \13p. \AR2-63 \Monograph \ #G P.1005 ; P.1009 (Copy 2) @\ H-II Rocket - one step upward for space development \ \Yamano.M \ \ \NASDA \ \Rockets \Launch vehicles \H-2 Rocket \Japan \ \ \1991 , Dec \35p. \AR2-63 \Monograph \#G 1992.72 Full technical overview of rocket, trajectories, launch conditions. @\ Winnin rapid launch all weather offboard decoy \ \ \ \ \Winnin Development Group \ \Defence equipment \Winnin decoy \Rockets \Australia \ \ \n.d. \4p. \AR2-80 \Folder \ #G P.1002 After 1982 @\Pioneering the space frontier, the report of the National Commission onSpace \ \Paine.T \ \ \US. National Commission on Space \ \Space programs \Space commercial use \Future planning \Space \United States \ \1986 \211p. \AR15-01 \Monograph \ #G P.998, P.999 (Copy 2) On cover:"an exciting vision of our nextfifty years in space." @\Overview of the industrialization of space [paper presented at The RoyalSociety Meeting on the Industrialization of Space (1983, 7-8 Dec.) \ \Pardoe.G \ \ \Royal Society \ \Space commercial uses \Space industry \ \Space \Great Britain \ \1984 \10p. \AS1-01 \Reprint \#G P.1102 30.11.92 Reprint of pp. 65-76 of Earth-Orient. applic. SpaceTechnol. Vol.4, no.2, 1984 @\Exploitation of space, policy trends in the military and commercial usesof outer space, special edition of the Journal: Futures [chapters from] \ \Schwarz.M \Stares.P \ \Futures \ \Space commercial use \Economic impact \ \Space \ \ \n.d. \ \AS1-01 \(papers) \#G P.1103 Copied Aug. 1986; pp.56-63: Evolution of civilian space exploration;pp.143-149:Space for whom? & possibly Ch.5, pp.64-76, Ray A. Williamson:Industrialization of space: prospects and barriers [indexed separately] @\Industrialization of space: prospects and barriers [Chapter 5 of ?] \ \Williamson.R \ \ \ \ \Space commercial use \Economic impact \ \Space \ \ \n.d. \13p. \AS1-01 \(paper) \#G P.1104 Catalogued 30.11.92 Chapter 5, pp.64-76, Possibly from: Exploitationof Space, Special edition of journal: Futures, ed. by M.Schwarz and P. Stares,ca. 1986 @\ Space commerce, an industry assessment, May 1988 \ \Kraselsky.B \ \ \US. Dept. of Commerce \ \Space industry \Space commercial use \Economic impact \United States \Space \International \1988 \136p. \AS1-12 \Monograph \#G P.136 Reflects President Reagan's "National Space Policy and CommercialSpace Initiative" approach of 1988, ie, encouragement of commercialELVs, re-manifesting of STS to remove "commercial" launches, andtalking up the potential of space-based materials processing. Covers Transportation,communications, remote sensing, space-based industrial facilities, materialsprocessing, insurance and finance. jk 6.8.91. Keyword changed jk 10.4.92 @\ A Current perspective on space commercialization, removing barriers toopportunity, April 1985 \ \Webb.D \ \ \Aerospace Research Center \Aerospace Industries Association of America \Space commercial use \Space technology \ \Space \United States \International \1985 \51p. \AS1-12 \Monograph \#G P.1101 @\Space commercialization: how soon the payoffs? \Futures dossier \Logsdon.J \ \ \Futures \ \Space commercial uses \Economic impact \ \International \United States \ \1984 \ca 8p. \AS4-05 \(paper) \#G P.1098 See also P.11102, P.1104. Photocopy from Futures, Feb. 1984,pp.71-78. Keyword added jk 10.4.92 @\Entrepreneurs in space \ \Wellborn.S \ \ \ \ \Space commercial uses \Economic impact \ \International \ \ \1985 \4p. \AS4-05 \(paper) \#G P.1097 Photocopy pp.70-73 unnamed journal; originally pub. U.S. News& World Report, March 4, 1985, under title: Profit motive fuels thenew era of space flight. Keyword added jk 10.4.92 @\Materials processing in space, plenty of prophets but what about profits? \ \Bulloch.C \ \ \Interavia \ \Materials technology \Space commercial use \Microgravity \Space \United States \ \1984 \5p. \AS5-01 \(paper) \#G P.1093 Photocopy of pp.679-683 of Interavia 7, 1984. Keyword changedjk 10.4.92 @\ Space Commerce '86, International Conference and Exhibition on the Commercialand Industrial Uses of Outer Space, Montreux, Switzerland, 1986: Conferenceproceedings \ \ \ \ \ Interavia \ Space Commerce 86 \ Space commercial use \ Space industry \ Economic impact \ International \ Europe \ \ 1986 \ 478p. \ AS5-05 \ Monograph \ #C ("Space Commerce") P.1095 @\ Space research, prospects of commercial use for German industry, lectureon the occasion of the Meeting of the BDI "Committee for Research andScience Policy, 19th October 1984, Bonn Science Center \ \Jordan.H \ \ \DFVLR \ \Space commercial use \Space industry \Economic impact \West Germany \Space \ \1984 \16p. \AS5-38 \Monograph \ #G P.1091 Keyword added jk 10.4.92 @\ Space commercialization, lessons from history \ \Hazelrigg.G \Hymowitz.M \ \Space Policy \ \Space commercial uses \Economic impact \ \International \ \ \1985 \15p. \AS12-05 \(paper) \#G P.1099 Photocopy from Space Policy, May 1985, pp.187-201. Keyword addedjk 10.4.92 @\Commercial opportunities in space, Beyond exploration: the space age getsdown to business \Business Intelligence Program Research Report \Welheim.J \Richardson.R \ \SRI International \ \Space industry \Space technology \Space commercial uses \Space \International \ \1983 \45p. \AS15-01 \Monograph \# G P.1092 (Copy 1), P.1096 (Copy 2, in buff cover) SRI International ResearchReport No.690, Fall 1983. Photocopy. @\Commercial opportunities in space: communications, materials, research;Market Research Studies to Prepare Today's Business Executive for Tomorrow'sEvents \Business Opportunity Report GB-075 \Hamil.R \ \ \Business Communications Co \ \Space commercial use \Space industry \Economic impact \International \United States \ \1984 \177p. \AS15-05 \Monograph \#G P.1094 Confidential report, not for loan. Includes glossary pp.137-156.Keyword change jk 10.4.92 @\Space, America's new competitive frontier, [report of the Space Task Force]April 1986 \ \Haught.R \ \ \Business-Higher Education Forum \ \Space commercial use \Economic impact \ \Space \United States \ \1986 \64p. \AS15-12 \(paper) \# G P.1100 Copy. Keyword added jk 10.4.92 @\ The mysterious Planet \ \ \ \ \ ESA \ \ ERS-1 \ Global change \ \ Europe \ International \ \ 1991 (?) \ \ AX1-30 \ Video \ #G 1991.47 . Copy 2 1992.176 11.8.92. 16 min. PAL video on ERS-1 esp.its role in climate change data gathering. jk 11/7/91 @\Philosophical Transactions of The Royal Society of London. A. Mathematicaland Physical Sciences, Vol.312. Pages 1-140, No.1519. 26 July 1984 \Philosophical Transactions of The Royal Society \Pardoe.G \ \ \Royal Society \ \Space \Communication Satellites \Earth Observation Satellites \Space \International \U.K. \1984 \140p. \AZ1-01 \Papers \#G P.1129 ISSN 0080 4614 Collection of Papers on Space Technology @\Information systems on space science and technology: report by the Secretariat,[COPUOS], 11 Dec. 1987 \ \ \ \ \COPUOS \ \Space science \Information systems \Space technology \International \ \ \1987 \38p. \AZ1-05 \Monograph \A/A.105-397 #G P.1084 mk 19.10.92 @\ Space activities of the United Nations and International Organizations:a review of the activities and resources... \ \ \ \ \UN \ \Space programs \Space science \Space technology \International \ \ \1986 \271p. \AZ1-05 \Monograph \A/AC.105-358 #G P.1085 (Copy 1), P.1127 (Copy 2) mk 19.10.92 @\ Crisis in space and earth science, a time for a new commitment: a reportby the Space and Earth Science Advisory Committee, NASA Advisory Council \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space science \Earth sciences \ \United States \International \ \1986 \84p. \AZ1-12 \Monograph \ #G P.1083 mk 19.10.92 @\ List of DFVLR-Forschungsberichte and DFVLR-Mitteilungen published in1984 \ \Wilke.W \ \ \DFVLR \ \Space science \Bibliographies \Space technology \West Germany \ \ \1984 \36p. \AZ1-38 \Serial \#G P.1140 ISSN 0171 6239 English abstracts of papers. @\ Proceedings of the 1979 Australian Astronautics Convention (1979, 20-25Aug.: Perth) Vol. 1 & 2 \ \Davies.G \ \ \Australian Astronautics Convention \Astronautical Society of Western Australia \ \Satellites \Space programs \Australia \International \ \1981 \Vol.1, 171p.; vol.2, 164p. \AZ2-80 \(Conference pub.) \ #C (Australian Astronautics Convention) P.1081, P.1082, ISBN 0 95967265 6 mk 19.10.92 @\ Promotion of space research in developing countries: proceedings of Workshop5, COSPAR 25th Plenary Meeting (1984, 25 June-7 July: Graz, Austria) \ \ \ \ \COSPAR \UN \Space science \Developing countries \International relations \International \ \ \1984 \118p. \AZ3-05 \(Conf. pub.) \ #C (COSPAR) P.1079 (Copy 1), P.1080 mk 19.10.92 @\ Space and Humanity. 39th International Astronautical Congress of theIAF, Bangalore, India. 8-15 October 1988 \ \ \ \ \IAC \ \Astronomy \Astronomical instruments \ \Space \ \ \1988 \Varies \AZ3-05 \Abstracts \ #C (IAF) P.1128 30.11.92 jk @\ Space: new opportunities for all people, Abstracts of papers [of] 37thInternational Astronautical Congress, Innsbruck, Austria, Oct.4-11, 1986 \ \ \ \ \IAF \IAF Congress \Space science \Space technology \ \International \ \ \1986 \ca 500p. \AZ3-05 \#C (IAF) P.1126 [IAF 86 01 ](conference pub) \ @\ The next 40 years in space \ IAF Proceedings \ \ \ \ IAF \ \ Space science \ Space technology \ \ International \ Spain \ \ 1990 \ 61p \ AZ3-05 \ Conference proceedings \ #C 1990.54 Proc. 40th IAF, Torremolinos Spain 7-13 October 1989 @\From health resort to space research centre [Sao Jose dos Campos, Brazil] \ \ \ \ \ \Brazil Trade and Industry \Space science \Space programs \Sao Jose dos Campos \Brazil \ \ \1985 \4p. \AZ3-22 \Journal article \#G P.1141 Overview of San Jose dos Campos near Sao Paulo. INPE HQ. March1985 issue of Brazil Trade and Industry, pp9-13 @\ CSIRO Space Science Seminar, Division of Atmospheric Research: Abstracts(1985, 27-28 Feb.:Aspendale,Vic.) \ \ \ \ \COSSA \ \Space science \Remote sensing applications \CSIRO \Australia \ \ \1985 \33p. \AZ3-80 \Monograph \ #G P.1077 (Copy 1), P.1078 (Copy 2) mk 19.10.92 @\ Space policy for Australia: a report prepared by the Space Science andTechnology Working Party for the Minister of Science \ \Madigan .R \ \ \Australian Academy of Technological Sciences \ \Space science \Government policy \Industrial research & development \Australia \ \ \1985 \194p. \AZ7-80 \Monograph \#G P.1064 Copy 1 , P.1142 Copy 2 . ISBN 0 908029 45 4 Still the definitivestudy of Australian Space science and technology development requirements.Report prepared at request of Barry Jones, Minister for Science, but substantiallynot acted upon. @\Space, new opportunities for all people: theme session [of the InternationalAstronautical Congress (37th: 1986, Oct.: Innsbruck) \ASSA Information Service; Special issue \ \ \ \International Astronautical Congress \ASSA \Space science \Social factors \ \Space \Europe \ \1986 \44p. \AZ11-05 \Monograph \#C (IAF) P.1143 International Astronautical Federation co-sponsor of Congress.Opening session lectures. @\[Papers from] 22nd Session of the Scientific and Technical Sub-committeeof COPUOS (1987, 18 Feb.: New York) \ \ \ \ \COPUOS \ \Space science \Space technology \International relations \International \ \ \1987 \n/a \AZ14-05 \(papers) \#G P.1130 @\Seminars of the United Nations Programme on Space Applications. Selectedpapers on remote sensing, satellite communications and space science. \ \ \ \ \United Nations \ \Remote sensing applications \Space technology \Developing countries \International \ \ \ HOLD 1992; 1993 \Various \AZ14-05 \Serial \#G 1992.314 See also RE14-05 [1992.85] for 1990 Seminar on Remote sensingonly. mvk 26.1.93. 1993 papers are 1993.91, A/AC.105/532, mvk 19.7.93 @\ Developing the final frontier: international cooperation in the peacefuluses of outer space, briefing book \Multilateral project \Florini.A \ \ \UNA-USA \ \Space technology \International co-operation \Space Law \International \Space \ \1985 \79p. \AZ14-05 \Monograph \#G P.1131 ISBN 934654 646 Includes text of Outer Space Treaty, 1967. Keywordchange jk 10.4.92 @\ The next giant leap in space:an agenda for International Cooperation,final report \Multilateral project \ \ \ \UNA-USA \ \Space \International cooperation \International relations \International \Space \ \1986 \70p. \AZ14-05 \Monograph \#G P.1132 ISBN 0 934654 654 @\ Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Verbatim record of the...Meeting (1988: New York), chairman Jankowitsch \ \ \ \ \COPUOS \ \Space science \Peaceful use \Space technology \International \ \ \1988 \various \AZ14-05 \(papers) \#G P.1144 Set of papers of meetings of COPUOS in June 1988 @\ Briefing: UNCOPOUS(sic) February 1988 [for the Australian Delegation]to the 24th session of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee [UN.Committeeon Peaceful Use of Outer Space] \ \ \ \ \ASO \ \Space science \Briefing papers \COPUOS \Australia \ \ \1988? \varies \AZ14-80 \(papers) \ #G P.1133 Keyword change jk 10.4.92 @\ Proposal to set up a New Zealand space co-ordination group \ \Ellis.P \ \ \NZ.DSIR \ \Space coordination \ \ \New Zealand \ \ \1987 \7p. \AZ15-78 \Monograph \#G P.1134 Draft by DSIR. Division of Information Technology @\ Tracking flares \DSTO Salisbury Bicentennial History Series \Thompson.I \ \ \DSTO \ \Rockets \Tracking \Tracking flares \Australia \ \ \1988 \12p. \AZ15-80 \Monograph \ #G P.1136 One of 5. ISBN 0 642 13583 5 @\ Development of over-the-horizon radar in Australia \DSTO Salisbury Bicentennial History Series \Sinnott.D \ \ \DSTO \ \Radar \Jindalee \History \Australia \ \ \1988 \39p. \AZ15-80 \Monograph \#G P.1135 .One of 5 in series. ISBN 0 642 13561 4 Relates to Jindalee.Corrected jk 10.4.92; keyword change 30.11.92 @\ Metal vaporisers \DSTO Salisbury Bicentennial History Series \Johnston.I \ \ \DSTO \ \Remote sensing instruments \Atmospheric research \Metal vaporisers \Australia \ \ \1988 \12p. \AZ15-80 \Monograph \#G P.1137 ISBN 0 642 13584 3 One of 5 in series. @\ Upper atmosphere research \DSTO Salisbury Bicentennial Series \Lloyd.K \ \ \DSTO \ \Atmospheric research \Rockets \History \Australia \ \ \1988 \27p. \AZ15-80 \Monograph \#G P.1138 One of 5 in series. ISBN 0 642 13582 7 @\ Scientific investigations of the Space Research Group [of American ProjectsDivision, DSTO, 1964-1974] \DSTO Salisbury Bicentennial History Series \Gubbay.J \Lynn.K \ \DSTO \ \Space science \Astronomy \History \Australia \Space \ \1988 \43p. \AZ15-80 \Monograph \#G P.1139 One of 5 in series. ISBN 0 642 13252 6 . Mention of role of RonEkers(then at JPL) in quasar & early VLBI work (late 60s-early 70s). WT03-B26-82IA029-000311-B021-376http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatc2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165706 text/html 35969HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:55:19 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:36:56 GMTContent-length: 35794 Catalogue Library catalogue C: COMMUNICATIONS & INFORMATION & ASSOCIATED TECHNOLOGIES (continued) CB Radio communications, Broadcasting, Electronic media - radio &television, radio frequencies. See CZ for Radio science CC Computers & Computing; Databases(technical side) Computer hardware,chips etc., & software unless Remote sensing, SEE (RR). Includes technicalside of information networks such as CSIRONET, ESA IRS etc.[SEE ALSO Information science & systems CL] [See also Artificial Intelligence(ER), Remote sensing information processing (RR) CH Communications instrumentation & equipment [SEE ALSO (RI) remotesensing instruments] CI Communications Industry, Electronic & computer industry,Technology,R&D, Information technology; etc CJ Price lists (of Data, information) CL Library/Information, Science/Information systems, Data collection systems,Data management. For Remote sensing information facilities, specifically,USE (RR) CM Transport industry, road & rail communications etc. SEEALSO (E) & (F) CN Navigation, Tracking, Search & Rescue & Recovery; Ground receiver& transmission stations; Antennas, [but antennas for astronomy SEE X];Reception [radar & radio]; Distress systems (eg COSPAS); Interference.[SEE ALSO (CH) for Instruments themselves] [SEE ALSO (RD) Surveillance] CO Optical communications, Optoelectronics etc.; Optical fibres CP Publishing & Publishers; Media, public relations, advertising. CR Remote area communications, telecommunications & radio etc CS Communications Satellites (Aussat, Echo, Telstar, etc.) [SEE ALSO Satellites, (AN)] CT Telecommunications (Telephone, Telex, etc.)& telecommunications networks CZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective); Radio science;general overviews @\ Japanese telecommunication and tracking \ \Nishimura.T \ \ \ISAS \ \Tracking \Telecommunications \Satellites \Japan \ \ \n.d. \23p. \CN2-63 \(paper) \Ca 1986 @\Equipment specification: tracking antenna and receiver system for theNOAA satellite HRPT service \ \ \ \ \NASIS \ \HRPT systems \Ground receiver equipment \NOAA satellites \Australia \ \ \1986 \20p. \CN2-80 \Monograph \Equipment Spec. @\NAVSTAR GPS Symposium (1986, 20-22 Oct.: Canberra) \ \ \ \ \NAVSTAR GPS Symposium \Royal Australian Air Force \Navigation systems \Satellites \GPS \United States \Australia \ \1986 \varies \CN2-80 \(Conference papers) \Covers conference, defence trial, presentations by companies (RockwellInternational, Texas Instruments, et al) etc. @\ Sat-Trac, pointing to the future: NOAA satellite HRPT image receivingand processing systems \ \ \ \ \PCM Electronics \NOAA \Remote sensing instruments \HRPT systems \Communications instruments \Australia \ \ \n.d. \ca.8p. \CN2-80 \(data sheets) \ @\Tracking antenna and receiver system for the NOAA satellite HRPT service,[proposal in accordance with] Equipment specification A2591, Departmentof Science, Bureau of Metorology: [vol].: Equipment specification A2591;[with folder] Drawings for Equipment Specification A2591 \ \ \ \ \PCM Electronics \ \Antennas \Ground communications equipment \Tenders \Australia \ \ \1985 \various \CN2-80 \Vol & folder \Document Copy no. 7 Vol. 62p, folder : 4 drawings. #G Record reconstructedjk 10.4.92 @\Reception of Remote Sensing Satellites in Australian Antarctic Territory- a Technical Feasibility Study; Final Report, January 1987 \Jeremy.R \ \ \Hawker de Havilland \COSSA \Remote Sensing Satellites \Reception \ \Australian Antarctic Territory \ \ \January 1987 \58 pages \CN2-96 \Monograph \Commissioned Report (by COSSA), final report. Record reconstructed jk 10.4.92 @\ Science program for an imaging radar receiving station in Alaska, reportof the Science Working Group, December 1, 1983 \ \Weller.G \Carsey.F \Holt.B \NASA \ \Ground communications stations \Glaciology \ERS-1 \Alaska \Polar regions \ \1983 \45p. \CN3-13 \Monograph \#G P.115 @\Australian LANDSAT Station at X-Band \ \Cooper.D \Parsons.B \Moorey.G \CSIRO \ \Ground communications stations \Remote sensing \LANDSAT \Australia \ \ \1987 \9p. \CN3-80 \(paper) \Prepared for publication in Journal of Electrical an Electronic EngineeringAustralia @\ Savings in search costs of the COSPAS-SARSAT Maritime Distress System \Reference paper \Douglas.L \ \ \Bureau of Transport Economics \ \Distress systems \Satellites \COSPAS-SARSAT \Australia \ \ \1987 \35p. \CN4-80 \Monograph \Limited distribution. @\ Carnarvon gateway to Europe, notes & a report to ...Minister forthe North West, December 1982 \ \ \ \ \Brian J. O'Brien & Assoc. \Western Australia. Minister for the North West \Ground communications stations \Economics \Carnarvon OTC facility \Western Australia \Australia \ \1982 \18p. \CN4-86 \Monograph \ @\ Australian Satellite Operations Industry Feasibility Study \ \ \ \ \ McLennan Magasanik Associates \ \ Ground communications stations \ Reception \ Communications industry \ Australia \ \ \ 1989 \ 118p \ CN5-80 \ Monograph \ #G, P.86, Report to Australian Space Office @\Proposal for an ERS-1 satellite receiving station in Hobart [..to establisha high bit rate ERS-1 satellite receiving station ...TERSS ..] Feb. 1987 \ \ \ \ \University of Tasmania \CSIRO \Ground communications stations \Economic impact \TERSS project \Tasmania \Australia \ \1987 \36p. \CN5-84 \Monograph \To seek funding for Australian industry to develop facility. @\ [Australian ship reporting system, AUSREP: papers, Marine Notices, newslattersetc.] \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Transport \ \Search & rescue \Distress systems \EPIRBS \Australia \ \ \1982? \various \CN6-80 \(papers) \Collection of papers. @\The Global Positioning System: assessing national policies \ \Pace.Scott \Frost.Gerald \Irving.Lachow \Rand Corporation \ \GPS \Navigation systems \Government policy \Space \United States \ \1995 \368p \CN7-01 \Monograph \#G 1996.6 ISBN 0 8330 2349 7 Prepared for US Office of Science and TechnologyPolicy by Rand Critical Technologies Institute. Examines foreign and domestic(national security, economic) policies in relation to operation and potentialfuture sale of US GPS miltary/dual use navigation system. mvk 15.2.96 @\COSPAS-SARSAT demonstration and evaluation [ and other papers on COSPAS-SARSATand CAL Local User Terminals] \ \ \ \ \Hawker Pacific \ \Distress systems \COSPAS-SARSAT \Search & rescue \International \North America \ \1984? \Various \CN10-05 \(papers) \Papers from officers of US Coast Guard, USAF, IMO, INMARSAT, Canadian Astronautics,DFVLR, SARSAT [Canada] @\ SARSAT search and rescue satellite-aided tracking, space-age technologyfor rescue with minimal search \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Search and rescue \Distress systems \COSPAR-SARSAT \International \United States \ \n.d. \20p. \CN10-05 \Monograph \Dated between 1980-1983. @\ COSPAS-SARSAT technical seminar [given by Canadian Astronautics: papers] \ \ \ \ \Canadian Astronautics \ \Distress systems \COSPAS-SARSAT \ \International \Canada \ \n.d. \various \CN10-11 \(conference papers) \Information: 1985 @\SARSAT, COSPAS & ELT, life saving letters \ \Thiel.R \ \ \ \ \COSPAS-SARSAT \Search & rescue \ELT \International \United States \ \n.d. \5p. \CN10-12 \(paper) \Dated 1984. Photocopy of pp.25-29 of unidentified journal. @\ Symposium on Global Maritime Distress and Safety System [GMDSS], September1988: [ Papers] \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Transport & Communications \ \Distress systems \GMDSS \COSPAS-SARSAT \Australia \International \ \1988 \Varies \CN10-80 \Folder \Folder contains booklets & papers for conference @\ GPS in the year 2000, presented at the Special DOD Symposium on the GlobalPositioning System, Arlington, Va. April 22, 1983 \ \Stansell.T \ \ \Magnavox \ \Navigation systems \GPS \ \International \United States \ \1983 \n/a \CN15-12 \Monograph \ @\Silicon age... optoelectronics [issue of Systems Technology, May 1984,no.38.] \ \ \ \ \Systems Technology \ \Optical communication \Fibre optics \High technology \Great Britain \ \ \1984 \56p. \CO3-32 \Serial issue \One of a series of special issues on silicon technology. @\ Optical communications and fibre optics [ a report]: Australian capabilitiesand opportunities Vol. 1. Executive summary and principal findings and Vol.2. Appendix 8, R & D projects \Australian Capabilities and Opportunities \Cawthron.E \Felsinger.J \ \Australia. DITAC \ \Fibre optics \Optical communications \Industrial research and development \Australia \ \ \1985 \V.1. 75p; V.2. ca 30p. \CO5-80 \Monograph \Photocopy. @\ A Handbook of Public Speaking for scientisits & engineers \ \Kenny.Peter \ \ \ \ \Public relations \Media \Communications \International \ \ \1982 \181p \CP1-05 \Monograph \#G 1993.141 DA Books $26.75 , Pub. by Institute of Physics Publishing,Bristol. ISBN 0 85274 553 2 . Reprinted 1992. mvk 227.9.93 @\ Communication science: policy, strategy, action, Report on workshop convenedby the Information and Social Impact Standing Committee (ISIC) of the CSIROAdvisory Council \ \Brown.V \ \ \CSIRO \ \Public relations \Scientific research \CSIRO \Australia \ \ \1986 \14p. \CP1-80 \Monograph \ @\ Massaging the the message: the public relations and media campaign forthe 51st ANZAAS Congress \ \Palthe.A \Parkes.T \ \CSIRO \ANZAAS \Public relations \ \ \Australia \ \ \1981 \various \CP2-80 \Monograph \ @\ The Challenger accident and public opinion: attitudes towards the spaceprogramme in the USA \ \Miller.J \ \ \ \ \Public relations \Space programs \Challenger \United States \ \ \1987 \[18p.] \CP11-12 \[paper] \Reprint from Space Policy, May 1987, pp.122-140. @\Bringing Telecom service way out to the Outback [ a 2 part article] \ \Balderston.M \Coates.F \ \Telephony \ \Telecommunications \Remote area communications \RTSS \Australia \ \ \1983 \8p. \CR2-80 \(paper) \Copy of Telephony pp 40-45 & 49, 26 Sept & pp 82-88 & 124 ,24 Oct 1983. Record reconstructed jk 10.4.92 @\ Satellite communications: mobile and fixed services \The Kluwer International Series in Engineering and Computer Science \Miller.Michael \Vucetic.Branka \Berry.Les \ \ \Communications satellites \Communications industry \Communications technology \Space \Australia \International \1993 \410p \CS1-01 \Monograph \#G 1994.09 Published by Kluwer Academic, Boston. Edited by Miller (Universityof South Australia), Vucetic (University of Sydney), and Berry (Royal MelbourneInstitute of Technology). ISBN 0 7923 9333 3 . Includes discussion on LEOvs GEO vs optic fibre, as well as Bit Error Rates (BER), radio propagation,mobile satellite systems, digital modems, & speech coding. Authors Berry,Bose, Cowley, Hart, Markovic, Miller, Perkis, Thibault & Vucetic. Longterm loan from HQ library, 3 9009 00299515 3 . AS:HQ 621.3825, $171.50,from DA Information Services Mitcham Vic. mvk 16.2.94 @\ The Communications Satellite \ \Williamson.Mark \ \ \ \Communications satellites \Communications industry \Communications technology \Space \ \International \1990 \420p \CS1-01 \Monograph \#G 1994.10 Published by Adam Hilger/IOP Publishing Ltd, Bristol. Forwardby Roy Gibson. Emphasis on satellite itself rather than communications,especially design, structure, telemetry, control. Also information on launchtechnology, insurance, trends, DBS. ISBN 0 85274 192 8 . Long term loanfrom HQ library, AS:HQ 621.3825 Wi . 3 9009 00299180 6 , from DA InformationServices Mitcham $95.25 mvk 16.2.94 @\Future directions in space communications \ \Gregory.D \ \Information technology & Public Policy \ \Communications satellites \Space technology \British Aerospace \Europe \ \ \1985 \5p. \CS1-30 \(paper) \Photocopy of pp.12-16 of Vol.4, no.1, September 1985. Record reconstructedjk 10.4.92 @\AUSSAT, Australia's national satellite system: general information \ \ \ \ \AUSSAT Ltd \ \AUSSAT \Satellites \ \Australia \ \ \n.d. \32p. \CS1-80 \Monograph \Date ca 1984 @\AUSSAT, Australia's national satellite system \ \ \ \ \AUSSAT Ltd \ \Communications \Communications satellites \AUSSAT \Australia \ \ \1984 \n/a \CS1-80 \Folder \Folder of papers on AUSSAT and ATUG (Australian Telecommunications UsersGroup) @\Report of the Meeting of Experts on International Satellite Based MobileCNS Systems (Bangalore: 1987: 14-16 Dec.) \ \ \ \ \UN. Meeting of Experts \Indian Space Research Organization. \Mobile CNS systems \Radio communications \Satellites \International \India \Photocopy \1987 \17p. \CS2-05 \Monograph \One copy with [Papers presented at the Meeting],loose copies of papers. @\ Switching satellites [paper presented at the International Conferenceon Fibre Optic Communication, FIBRESAT 86 (Vancouver: 1986: 9-12 Sept.) \ \Lovell.R \Cuccia.C \ \FIBRESAT \ \Switching satellites \Communications \Communications satellites \International \ \ \1986 \14p. \CS2-05 \Monograph \Photocopy @\ Communications satellites in the fiber optics era , preprint of paperpresented to 37th Congress of the IAF, Space- new opportunities for allpeople (Innsbruck: 1986: 4-11 Oct.) \ \Lovell.R \Campanella,J \Cuccia.C \IAF \International Astronautic"                                       < >             - - " " ' '  X   < > f f  , "              "   " al Congress \Communications satellites \Communications \Fibre optics \International \ \ \1986 \8p. \CS2-05 \Preprint. Record reconstructed jk 10.4.92 @\ System aspects of future ship earth stations, proposed revision of Report921-1 [and other papers from] CCIR IWP 8-7, 7th meeting, 13-20 May 1987 \INMARSAT 8-7-9- 8-7-12 \ \ \ \INMARSAT \CCIR \Ground communications stations \Communications satellites \INMARSAT \International \ \ \1987 \various \CS2-05 \(papers) \Papers dated April 1987 @\ Switches lasers & electronically-hopped beam antennas in space: NASA'sAdvanced Communications Technology Satellite \ \Lovell.R \Cuccia.C \ \SPACE TECH '86 \NASA \Antennas \Telecommunications \ACTS \United States \Space \ \1986 \[11p.] \CS2-12 \[paper] \Photocopy of paper presented at SPACE TECH '86 @\ SBS F6 Prime, executive summary \ \ \ \ \Hughes Aircraft Co \ \Communications technology \Communications satellites \SBS F6 Prime \United States \ \ \1985 \14p. \CS2-12 \Monograph \A Hughes model HS 376 satellite @\ HS 376 Communications satellite \ \ \ \ \Hughes Aircraft Co. \ \Space industry \Communications satellites \ \United States \ \ \n.d. \15p. \CS2-12 \Monograph \ @\Communications satellites, from the earth to synchronous orbit \ \ \ \ \RCA Astro-Electronics \ \Communications satellites \ \ \International \United States \ \n.d. \n/a \CS2-12 \Monograph \Dated after 1985 @\ Spacebus [a full range of multipurpose spacecraft for communications] \ \ \ \ \Aerospatiale \MBB \Communications satellites \Radio communications \Telecommunications \Europe \ \ \n.d. \6p. \CS2-30 \Monograph \ @\ Eurostar \ \ \ \ \Satcom International \ \Satellites \Eurostar \ \Europe \ \ \n.d. \5p. \CS2-30 \Folder \ @\ Olympus class [communications satellites] \ \ \ \ \British Aerospace \ \Communications satellites \Olympus \ \Great Britain \International \ \n.d. \5p. \CS2-32 \Folder \1983? @\ Telecom 1: French national satellite communications system \ \ \ \ \CNES \ \Telecom 1 \Telecommunications \Communications satellites \France \ \ \1985 \16p. \CS2-34 \Monograph \ @\ Matra Espace Telecom 1, French communications satellite \ \ \ \ \Matra \ \Communications satellites \Telecom 1 \ \France \ \ \n.d. \4p. \CS2-34 \Folder \ @\ Italy's involvement in space telecommunication development, presentedat IAF/COSPAR Symposium on Space Communications for Development (U.N.,NewYork: 1987: 17-18 Feb.) \Quaglione.G \ \ \Italy. I.N.P.T. \ \Space programs \Telecommunications \Communications satellites \Italy \ \ \1987 \ca 30p. \CS2-35 \Monograph \ @\ INSAT-1 \ \ \ \ \Ford Aerospace \ \Communications satellites \ \ \India \ \ \n.d. \5p. \CS2-53 \Folder \ @\ INSAT-II Communication payloads \ \ \ \ \ISRO \ \Payloads \Communications satellites \INSAT \India \ \ \n.d. \3+7p. \CS2-53 \(paper) \After 1985 @\Australian National Satellite System: Basic concepts and influence ontiming. June 1972 \Task Group Paper \Craig.E \ \ \Australian Post OFfice \ \Radio communications \Radio frequencies \Communications satellites \Australia \ \ \1972 \6p. \CS2-80 \Monograph \Satellite Task Group Report no. STG 72-02 @\ Australian National Satellite System: Technological developments in satellitecommunications systems. June 1972 \Task Group Paper \Balderston.M \ \ \Australian Post Office \ \Communications \Communications satellites \Communications technology \Australia \ \ \1972 \18p. \CS2-80 \Monograph \Satellite Task Group Paaper no. STG 72-05 @\ Australian National Satellite System: Other potential applications ofgeostationary satellites. June 1972 \Task Group Paper \Flavin.R \ \ \Australian Post Office \ \Communications \Satellites \Remote sensing applications \Australia \ \ \1972 \9p. \CS2-80 \Monograph \Satellite Task Group Paper STC 72-0 @\ AUSSAT network designer's guide, 2nd ed., February 1986 \ \ \ \ \AUSSAT Ltd \ \Communications satellites \Telecommunications \AUSSAT \Australia \ \ \1986 \60p. \CS2-80 \Monograph \ @\ Instructions to tenderers, Addendum [only] to Section 6.3, page 18 \ \ \ \ \AUSSAT Ltd \ \Communications satellites \Tenders \AUSSAT \Australia \ \ \n.d. \1p. \CS2-80 \(paper) \ @\ Request for Tender, Second generation space segment \ \ \ \ \ AUSSAT Ltd \ \ AUSSAT \ Tenders \ Communications satellites \ Australia \ \ \ 1987 Aug \ \ CS2-80 \ Monograph \ #G P.26 @\Report on the Meeting of Space Communications Experts (Columbia U., N.Y.:1987:16 Feb.) \ \ \ \ \COPUOS \UN. Meeting of Experts \Communications \Space technology \Communications satellites \International \Indonesia \China \1987 \varies \CS3-05 \[conference papers] \ @\NUSAT 1, Northern Utah Satellite \ \ \ \ \Weber State College \ \Communciations satellites \Communications \NUSAT \United States \ \ \1985 \various \CS3-12 \(paper) \Leaflet with photocopy from Aviation Week, April 15 1985 @\ Economic potential of research and development in satellite communicationsby S.Ahmed Meer [from Proceedings of International Colloquium on EconomicEffects of Space etc., Sept. 1980] \ \Meer.S \ \ \International Colloquium on Economics Effects of Space and Other AdvancedTechnologies \ESA \Communications satellites \Economic impact \Industrial research & development \International \ \ \1980 \11p. \CS4-05 \(paper) \Copy of pp.117-127 of ESA SP-151, 1980. Keyword changed jk 10.4.92 @\ TITLE: Pan-European Business Services by satellite - a study of the potentialfuture demand \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 Backland.L \ AUTHOR.2 Bergstrom.A \ AUTHOR.3 Hansson.L \ CORP.AUTHR.1 Swedish Space Corp. \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Communications satellites \ KEYWORD.2 Space industry \ KEYWORD.3 Economics \ REGION.1 Europe \ REGION.2 Sweden \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1986 Sept \ PAGINATION \ CLASSC'N CS4-30 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G P.175 Contract report 6704/86/NL/DG for ESA ESTEC. Basedon Tele-X spacecraft concept. @\Draft request for tender for AUSSAT's second generation space segment,9 Feb. 1987 \ \ \ \ \AUSSAT Ltd \ \Tenders \AUSSAT \Satellites \Australia \ \ \1987 \varies \CS4-80 \Monograph \Draft for comment @\ AUSSAT second generation space segment, request for tender, Aug. 1987 \ \ \ \ \AUSSAT Ltd \ \Tenders \Satellites \AUSSAT \Australia \ \ \1987 \varies \CS4-80 \Monograph \Tender document @\Industrial impact of communications satellites activities [paper givenat the Australian communications satellite conference held in Perth, Universityof Western Australia, December 1979] \ \Molozzi.A \ \ \University of Western Australia \ \Communication satellites \Economic impact \Space industry \Australia \ \ \1979 \15p. \CS5-80 \(paper) \Conference title also given as: Australian Satellite Communications Conference @\Mirrabooka Project, First Draft \ \ McCracken.K \ \ \ CSIRO Space Science and Technology Study Group \ COSSA \ Spartan \ AussatD.2 \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1984 (?) \ 12p \ CS5-80 \ Monograph \ #G. P.663 Copy 1, Bound Copy 2 at P.664 . NB Not the astronomy Mirrabooka,c 1986: see P.651 - 62. @\ Briefing for industry, AUSSAT's Second Generation Space Segment, SydneyAustralia 9 February 1987 \ \ \ \ \AUSSAT Ltd \ \Communications satellites \Space industry \AUSSAT \Australia \ \ \1987 \111p. \CS5-80 \Monograph \Includes Addenda sheets @\ AUSSAT, its impact on Australia's telecommunications infrastructure andIndustry [speech given at:] Australia's National Satellite System SecondGeneration Replacement Satellite Program Briefing for Industry, Sydney 9Feb. 1987 \ \Gosewinckel.W \ \ \AUSSAT Ltd \ \Telecommunications industry \Economic impact \AUSSAT \Australia \ \ \1987 \11p. \CS5-80 \(paper) \ @\ Report on Australian involvement in the production of terminals and systemsfor L-Band satellite communications. Analysis and findings \ \ BIS-Shrapnell \ BIS-Mackintosh \ \ \ \ AUSSAT \ Communications industry \ Space industry \ Australia \International \ \ 1989 \ 68p \ CS5-80 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.97 ISBN 0644112441 This study, for the Australian Space Office,of the industrial opportunities presented by AUSSAT'S proposed L-Band satellite-basedmobile communications system, (MOBILESAT ), concludes there is a real opportunityfor Australian involvement if the government provides a co-ordinating role. @\ Application of Geostar Corporation for authority to construct and launchthe Geostar Satellite System, [submission] before the Federal CommunicationsCommission, Washington D.C. \ \ \ \ \Geostar Corp. \ \Communications satellites \Legal affairs \Geostar \United States \ \ \1983 \various \CS6-12 \Monograph \Legal document re communications satellites @\Access to orbit: after the 1985 ITU space WARK, new developments in assuringequitable access to satellite services, a follow-up report \ \Demac.D \Codding.G \Hudson.H \International Institute of Communications \ \ITU Space WARK \Communications \Communications satellites \International \ \ \1986 \21p. \CS14-05 \Monograph \ @\ AUSSAT, future system development, [paper from] COSSA Seminar, Canberra,3 March 1986 \ \Nowland.W \ \ \COSSA Seminar \ \Communications \Communications satellites \AUSSAT \Australia \ \ \1986 \8p. \CS15-80 \(paper) \Includes timetable for Second Generation Planning @\ International training course on specialised applications of satellitecommunications (7-26 February, 1983) \LE \Narayanan.K \Venugopal.D \ \ISRO \ \Communications satellites \Training \Communications \India \International \ \1983 \various \CS16-53 \Monograph \Vol. 2 held. @\ World of ALCATEL [products around the world] \ \ \ \ \ALCATEL \ \Telecommunications \ \ \France \International \ \n.d. \n/a \CT1-05 \Monograph \In folder. @\Australian telecommunications services: a new framework, Summary \ \Evans.G \ \ \Australia. Government \ \Telecommunications \Government policy \Future planning \Australia \ \ \1988 \21p. \CT1-80 \Monograph \Summary of statement by the Minister for Transport and Communications 25May 1988 @\The AIA Rural Satellite Program: an overview \Telecommunications and rural development \Tietjen.K \ \ \AID \Academy for Educational Development \AID Rural Satellite Program \Communications satellites \Telecommunications \Indonesia \West Indies \Peru \1987 \116p. \CT2-66 \Monograph \ @\ Design and installation of rural telecommunications networks: lessonsfrom three projects \Telecommunications and rural development/ The AID Rural Satellite Program \Goldschmidt.D \Tietjen.K \Shaw.W \AID \Academy for Educational Development \Telecommunications \Design & installation \Social factors \Indonesia \West Indies \Peru \1987 \51p. \CT2-66 \Monograph \ @\AUSSAT, the wide area networking solution [paper from] AUSSAT New HorizonsConference, Sydney 1986 [AUSSAT'86] \ \Troath.D \Farr.P \ \Coopers & Lybrand \W.D.Scott & Co \Telecommunications \Communications satellites \Industry \Australia \ \ \1986 \n/a \CT2-80 \(conference paper) \Reprint. @\ Report of the Twenty-Eighth International Telecommunication Union onTelecommunication and the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space \ \ \ \ \COPUOS \ \Telecommunication \Communications satellites \ \Space \ \ \1989 \Varies \CT3-01 \Report \Includes Verbatim record of the Three Hundred and Twenty-Third Meeting,the Three Hundred and Twenty-Sixth Meeting and Legal Sub-Committee, Twenty-eighthSession (Summary record of the 509th and 518th meeting) @\Review of activities, Research Laboratories \ \ \ \ \Telecom \ \Telecommunications \Scientific research \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1986-1987 \n/a \CT3-80 \Serial \Annual @\ Review of activities 19- \ \ \ \ \Telecom Australia \ \Telecommunications \Scientific research \Telecom Australia \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1985-86; \varies \CT3-80 \Serial \Annual @\Information technology and telecommunications. Looking to the year 2000. \ \Clark, G. \ \ \ \Prime Minister's Science Council \Australia. Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet \Information technology \Telecommunications \ \Australia \ \ \1992 \42p. \CT5-80 \monograph \#G 1995.29 ISBN 0644246286 mvk 23.4.95 @\Worldnet : Satellite broadcast coverage \ \ \ \ \USA United States Information Agency \ \Satellite broadcasting \Television \ \United States \International \ \na \na \CT11-12 \Folder \#G 1992.169 Since 1983 Worldnet has operated as a global satellite televisionnetwork using Intelsat & regional communications satellites to broadcastthe public policy program "Dialogue" from studios in WashingtonDC. Topics include government, medicine, technology & environment. mk20.7.92 @\Report by the International Telecommunication Union on telecommunicationand the peaceful uses of outer space, 27th [1988] \ITU booklet \ \ \ \ITU \ \Space programs \Telecommunications \International relations \International \ \ \1988 \66p. \CT14-05 \Serial \Annual. Booklet no.36. @\ Communications: path to the future, [being] First Choice Canada, Vol.4no 1, March 1985 \ \ \ \ \First Choice Canada \ \Communications \Satellites \Computers & digital standards \Canada \ \ \1985 \114p. \CZ1-11 \Journal issue \Cover title @\Communications information: a new age, internationalization of the newmedia] [in Japanese, with 5 articles in English] \ \Kondo.T \ \ \ \ \Communications \ \ \Japan \ \ \n.d. \262p. \CZ1-63 \Monograph \Translations of title page & contents attached inside cover. Probablypublished by Liberal Democratic Party's Political Affairs Research Committee @\ DOC roles in Australia's communications \ \ \ \ \Australia. DOC \ \Communications \ \ \Australia \ \ \n.d. \n/a \CZ1-80 \Folder \ @\ Directory of radio science activities in Australia 1983-1986, preparedfor the Australian Academy of Science \ \ \ \ \National Committee of Radio Science \AAS \Radio science \Remote sensing \Directories \Australia \ \ \1987 \ca 100p. \CZ3-80 \Monograph \ @\IPS User training manual \UTM v2.0 \ \ \ \IPS \Australia. Dept. of Science \Ionosphere \Communications \Radio interference \Australia \ \ \1985 \ca 130p. \CZ3-80 \Monograph \Covers the ionosphere, oblique propogation & IPS predictions, the sunand solar disturbances, and glossary. To acompany Basic User Training Course. @\ Reshaping the transport and communications Government business enterprises,Statement by the Minister for Transport and Communications, 25 May 1988 \ \Evans.G \ \ \Australia. Minister for Transport & Communications \ \Communications industry \Transport industry \Government policy \Australia \ \ \1988 \39p. \CZ7-80 \Monograph \ WT03-B26-83IA029-000311-B022-25http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcath.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165737 text/html 945HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:55:52 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:03 GMTContent-length: 772 Catalogue Library catalogue H: HUMANITIES HA Arts HC Craft HF Film HL Literature HM Music HS Sport HT Theatre & Opera HZ General overviews, culture. (General & Collective) Note: There are no items in this category in the COSSA library. Donationsaccepted. WT03-B26-84IA029-000311-B022-69http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcato2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165806 text/html 44441HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:56:23 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:11 GMTContent-length: 44266 Catalogue Library catalogue O: ORGANISATIONS (continued) (about, annual reports, activities, personnel, products & services,etc) [SEE ALSO ( I) Industry & (subject) industry] OA Space & Aerospace (Astronomy, Astronautical/Aeronautical) Firms &Agencies: (NASA, COSSA, etc., public or private). Includes Communications firms & agencies involved in space [SEE ALSO Space, Astronautics (A) Flight, Aeronautics (F)] OB Bureaucratic (Public/Civil Sector) Depts, Agencies & Bodies (notAeronautical or Astronautical in nature) (CSIRO, DITAC, their Advisory Committees etc)OC Corporate (Industry, Companies, Business, etc) Sector, other than Space/Aeronautical; Communications bodies usually in (OA) Space [see also (AI), (CI), (FI), & (I)] OG Government & Opposition (Political Sector) [see also Politics (SP)for theory] OH Hobby/Amateur (Groups, Associations, Clubs, etc OM Museum OP Professional & Post Tertiary Institutes, Associations, Academic,etc Bodies OS Secondary Educational [see also Education (SE)] OT Tertiary Educational [see also Education (SE)] OZ General & Collective, Organizations in general. [SEE ALSO (Z) fordirectories etc.] @\Astronomy II Committee Annual Report to the Science and EngineeringResearch Council \ \ \ \ \SERC \ \Scientific research \ \ \Great Britain \ \ \HOLD 1983-85 \Various \OB1-32 \#O 1983-85 is P.853 ISSN 0141 1349 Reclassified from XZ3-32 jk 18.6.92 @\ Department of Atomic Energy Annual Report \ \ \ \ \India. Dept. of Atomic Energy \ \ \HOLD 1983-84 \various \OB1-53 \Serial \#O P.250 @\ TITLE: China Science and Technology Exchange Center - brief introduction \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 China Science and Technology Exchange Center \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Developing countries \ KEYWORD.2 Development assistance \ KEYWORD.3 Technology transfer \ REGION.1 China \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1990 \ PAGINATION 6p \ CLASSC'N OB1-61 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #O 1992.61(Copy 1) Copy 2 1994.104 . Brochure in English andChinese. Staff of Center, led by Feng Changjun, visited COSSA 18.5.92. jk19.5.92 @\ TITLE: Science and Technology Information Center \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 Science and Technology Information Center \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Developing countries \ KEYWORD.2 Development assistance \ KEYWORD.3 Technology transfer \ REGION.1 China \ REGION.2 Taiwan \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1992 \ PAGINATION 16p \ CLASSC'N OB1-61 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #O 1992.103 . Located in Taipei. Brochure in English. Introductionby Tao-Hsing Ma, Director. mvk 10.7.94 @\ Science and Technology Agency (STA). Its Roles and Activities \ \ \ \ \STA \ \Research and Development \Science and Technology \ \Japan \ \ \HOLD 1987, 1993 \32p., 38p. \OB1-63 \Serial \#O Reclassified from OC1-63 jk 29.4.92. 1993 copy is 1994.177 mvk 22.11.94 @\ National Centre for Scientific Research of Vietnam \ \ \ \ \ NCSR \ \ Developing countries \ Directories \ Scientific research \ Vietnam \ North east Asia \ \ 1990 \ 47p \ OB1-70 \ Monograph \ #O 1991.1 Held JK . President of NCSR (equivalent to CSIRO CEO) Van Hieuvisited CSIRO HQ, CSIRO OSSA 28.2.91. See SpIN 39, GS23/001. Document detailsNCSR laoratory staff numbers, research interests, equipment. @\ Guide to DSIR \ \ Ellis.A \ \ \ NZ. DSIR\New Zealand Dept. of Scientific and Industrial Research \ \ Scientific research \ Industrial research and development \ \ New Zealand \ \ \ n.d. \ n.a. \ OB1-78 \ monograph \ #O 1992.1 [1991?] This gives a description of the organisation and managementstructures and the work of the main divisions of this organisation. @\ DITAC Annual report 19- \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Industrial technology \Commerce \DITAC \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1984-85, 1987-88 \varies \OB1-80 \Serial \ #O 1987-88 Copy 1 is P.165 ISSN 0816-3073 @\ Corporate plan \ \ \ \ \DITAC \ \Management \DITAC \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1986-87 ; 1990-91. \32p. \OB1-80 \Serial \#O For year 1986-87. 1990-91 is 1990.129. ISSN 1032 0385 @\ ACIAR, Partners in Research for Development \ \ \ \ \ACIAR \ \Scientific research \Agricultural research \ \Australia \International \ \1988 \28p \OB1-80 \Serial ISSN 1031 1009 @\ Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Annual Report1987-88 \ \ \ \ \ACIAR \ \Agricultural research \Land use \Primary industry \Australia \International \ \1988 \69p \OB1-80 \Report \O# @\ Australian Surveying and Land Information Group (AUSLIG) \ \ \ \ \Department of Administrative Services \ \Remote Sensing \Photogrammetry \Geographic Information Systems \Australia \ \ \1989 \Varies \OB1-80 \Folders of brochures \ @\Civil Aviation Authority Australia Annual Report \ \ \ \ \Civil Aviation Authority Australia \ \Aircraft industry \Flight \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1992-93; 1993-94; \ \OB1-80 \Serial \#O 1995.70 (1992-93); 1995.7 (1993-94) mvk 7.6.95, 2.1.94 @\ CSIRO Australia, a guide; research advancing Australia \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Scientific research \CSIRO \ \Australia \ \ \1990 May \23p. \OB1-80 \Monograph \#O ISBN 0 643 02934 6 @\ Review of Corporate Publications \ \ \ \ \ CSIRO \ \ Communications \ Industrial research and development \ Public relations \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 \ 11p \ OB1-80 \ monograph \ #O 1992.11 By Communication Working Group @\ CSIRO Australis, an on-line information retrieval service from CSIRO. \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Data bases \Scientific & Technical Research \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \Loose leaves \OB1-80 \Folder of pages \Each loose page describes a separate database @\ CSIRO Personnel Statistics 199_. \ \ \ \ \ Research Data Office Corporate Finance Unit, CSIRO \ \ Management \ Personnel \ \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1991; 1992 \ Various. \ OB1-80 \ \ #O 1991.105 ; 1992.264 mvk 2.1.93, 1993.37 (Copy 2 of 1992) 1.6.93 @\CSIRO Program performance statements 1993-94 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Scientific research \Planning \Management \Australia \ \ \1994 \66p. \OB1-80 \monograph \#O1995.39 mvk 23.4.95 @\Review of the CSIRO Division of Fisheries ; review report and Director'sresponse. \ \Bowen.B \ \ \CSIRO INRE \ \Marine resources \Fisheries \ \Australia \ \ \1990 Oct \30p \OB1-80 \Monograph \#O 1992.181 mk 25.8.92 @\Review of Management Information Systems in CSIRO \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Corporate Services Department \CSIRO \Information technology \Information systems \ \Australia \ \ \1992 May \51p \OB1-80 \Monograph \#O 1992.274 Recommendations about use of commercial software, libraries,maintenance, contracting. mvk 3.1.93 @\ Bureau of Meteorology Annual report \ \ Zillman.J \ \ \ Bureau of Meteorology \ \ Meteorology \ Future planning \ \ Australia \ \ \ Hold 1990-91; 1991-92; 1992-93; 1993-94 \ various \ OB1-80 \ serial \ #O 1992.16 (1990-91); 1993.8 (1991-92), 1994.126 (1992-93), copy 2 1994.149;1995.3 (1993-94) ISBN 0 644 25742 3 ISSN 1037 3608 mvk 18.2.93, 4.9.94,1.1.95 @\The Bureau of Meteorology: a guide for CSIRO personnel \ \Garratt.John \ \ \CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research \ \ Meteorology \ Guidebooks \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1994 May \30p \OB1-80 \Monograph \ #O 1992.110 Names senior BoM staff; gives overview of program structureand results of reviews pertinent to CSIRO (Tucker & Moran 1967; Gibbs,Priestley 1967; Howson & Farrands1977; Review of Commonwealth Functions1981; Priestley 1982; ...). mvk 23.7.94 @\Australia New Zealand Land Information Council Annual Report \ \ \ \ \Australia New Zealand Land Information Council \ \Geographic Information Systems \Mapping \Data policy \Australia \New Zealand \Oceania \HOLD 1991-92 (pub1992) \20p \OB1-80 \Serial \#O 1992.227 ISSN 1039 2742 . Pub by AGPS Canberra. ANZLIC is the peak councilof land information management in the two countries, includes State Ministers. mvk 24.12.92 @\ Focus on New South Wales Government, A Directions in Government SpecialReport \ \ \ \ \NSW Government \ \Policy \ \ \New South Wales \ \ \1988 \12p. \OB1-82 \Paper sponsored by Wang Australia \ @\ NSW Science and Technology Council Folder including Annual Report 1985-1986 \ \ \ \ \NSW Science and Technology Council \ \ \ \ \NSW \ \ \1987 \Various \OB1-82 \Folder of information on NSW Science and Technology Council \ @\ Victoria. Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs Annual Report 19-. \ Annual Report \ \ \ \ Victoria. Department of Agriculture and Rural Affairs \ Victoria. Parliament. \ Primary Industry \ Agricultural research \ Land use \ Victoria \ \ \ HOLD 1988-89, 1989-90 \Various \ OB1-83 \ serial \ #O P.39 (88-89), 1990.43 (89-90). ISSN 816 864 For 1990 and after- seebelow. @\ Victoria. Department of Agriculture Annual Report . \ Annual Report \ \ \ \ Victoria. Department of Agriculture \ Victoria. Parliament. \ Primary Industry \ Agricultural research \ Land use \ Victoria \ \ \ 1991; 1991-92 \ Various \ OB1-83 \ serial \ #O 1992.26 (1990-91) ISSN 1036-4919 1991-92 is 1993.7 mvk 18.2.93. @\Tasmania Department of Agriculture Annual Report \ \ \ \Tasmania. Department of Agriculture \ \Primary Industry \Agriculture \Meat Industry \Tasmania \ \ \1987 \50p. \OB1-84 \Monograph \#O @\ South Australian Centre for Remote Sensing \ \ \ \ \South Australian Centre for Remote Sensing \ \Remote Sensing \Research \ \South Australia \Space \ \1988 \Varies \OB1-85 \Folder \#O P.193 Copy 1 Folder of Information on the Centre jk 29.4.92 @\ Technology Park Adelaide \ \ \ \ \Technology Park Adelaide Corporation \ \Remote Sensing \Research \ \South Australia \nd \ \OB1-85 \Folder \#O Folder of brochures @\ Annual Report Department of Agriculture, South Australia \ \ \ \ \Department of Agriculture, South Australia \ \Agricultural research \Primary industry \ \South Australia \ \ \Hold 1986-87, 1987-88, 1988-89 \Various \OB1-85 \Monograph \ #O 1988-89 is P.98 @\ Annual Report of the Department of Environment and Planning for the Yearended 30 June 1987 \Annual Report \ \ \ \Department of Environment and Planning \ \Conservation \Environmental \48p \OB1-85 \Monograph \ #O @\ Western Australian Department of Agriculture Annual Report 1987 \Annual Report \ \ \ \Western Australian Department of Agriculture \ \Primary Industry \Agricultural research \Land use \Western Australia \ \ \1987 \124p. \OB1-86 \Monograph \ @\ Annual Report 1986/87, Department of Industries & Development, NorthernTerritory, Australia \ \ \ \ \Northern Territory Department of Industries & Development \ \Research and Development \ \ \Northern Territory \ \ \1987 \Varies \OB1-87 \Monograph \ @\ Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, Annual Report 1987-88 \ \ \ \ \GBRMPA \ \Marine Biology \Tropical Marine Science \ \Queensland \Pacific \ \1988 \98p. \OB1-88 \Monograph \ #O ISSN 0155 8072 jk 29.4.92 @\ Department of Primary Industries, Queensland Government, Annual Report1986-87 \ \ \ \ \Queensland Government \ \Primary Industry \Agriculture \Land management \Queensland \ \ \1987 \51p \OB1-88 \Monograph \#O ISSN 0480 9696 jk 29.4.92 @\Rutherford Appleton Laboratory \SERC \ \ \ \Rutherford Appleton Lab. \ \Scientific research \Tech - ! " # $ % & ' ( ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; < => ? @ A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z [ \ ] ^ _ `a b c e "f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z { | } ~  nology \Space research \Great Britain \ \ \HOLD 1983, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1991. 1992 \various \OB2-32 \Serial \#O 1983 is P.246, 1988 is P.38, 1989 version is 1990.85: contains reporton ATSR and separate reports from Astronomy and Planetary Science Boardand from Engineering and Nuclear Physics Boards. 1983 formerly Database353. JK 2/4/91. 1990 version is 1991.12 (Jones.B , Banford.J editors). 1991is 1992.203; 1993 is 1993.96. The RAL is the largest of the 4 scientificestablishments funded by SERC. Series is ISSN 0263 8355 jk 10/5/91, 29.4.92,2.12.92 , mvk 20.7.93 @\ Astronomy, space & radio research at Rutherford Appleton Laboratory \ \ \ \ \Rutherford Appleton Lab. \SERC \Astronomy \Space science \Radio science \Great Britain \ \ \1983 \n/a \OB2-32 \Reprint from Rutherford Appleton Laboratory 1983 @\ Astronomy, space & radio Board at Rutherford Appleton Laboratory \ \ \ \ \Rutherford Appleton Lab. \SERC \Astronomy \Space science \Radio science \Great Britain \ \ \1983 \n/a \OB2-32 \Reprint from Rutherford Appleton Laboratory 1983 @\ Space Research Rutherford Appleton Laboratory \ \ \ \ \Rutherford Appleton Lab. \SERC \Astronomy \Space science \Radio science \Great Britain \ \ \nd (c 1985) \19p \OB2-32 \#O jk 29.4.92 P.209 @\ NATMAP activities 1 July 30 - 30 June \ \ \ \ \NATMAP \ \Mapping \ \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1984-85; 1985-86 \varies \OB2-80 \Serial \Also called: Statement of activities. Cover title. #O ISSN 0811 9600 .Only 1985-86 seen jk 29.4.92 @\ NATMAP Division of National Mapping \ \ \ \ \NATMAP \ \Mapping \ \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \16p. \OB2-80 \Monograph \ #O Former dbase no. 446 @\Meteorology Policy Committee Annual Report \Meteorology Policy Committee Annual Report \ \ \ \Bureau of Meteorology \Australia. Dept. of Administrative Services \Government policy \Strategies \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1988 \34p \OB2-80 \Serial \#O ISSN 0817 3354 P.935 @\ JAMSTEC: Japan Marine Science and Technology Centre \ \ \ \ \JAMSTEC \ \Marine science \JAMSTEC \ \Japan \ \ \1987 \30p. \OB3-63 \Monograph \ @\Profile of the Division of Applied Physics National Measurement Laboratory \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \CSIRO Division of Applied Physics \ \ \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \ \OB3-80 \Monograph \#O P.44 Names of program leaders, brief description of programs. mvk 22.2.94 @\Australia Telescope National Facility \Annual Report \ \ \ \CSIRO Australia Telescope National Facility \ \Astronomy \Observatories \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1993 \ \OB3-80 \ \#O 1995.87 ISSN 1038 9954 mvk 13.8.95 @\ Division of chemicals and polymers. Research report . \ \ Spurling.T \ \ \ CSIRO \ \ Industrial research and development \ Chemistry \ \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1988-89 (1990), 1990-91 (1992) \ Various \ OB3-80 \ Serial \ #O P.55 Copy 1 P.158 Copy 2.(both pub. 1990). Explains the Division's4 programs: Bioactive chemicals; Industrial Chemicals; Polymers; Water andWastewater treatments. 1992.193, pub. 1992. ISSN 1038 4308. mk 16.10.92 @\ Division of Minerals & Process Engineering. Research report . \ \ \ \ \ CSIRO Division of Mineral & Process Engineering \ \ Industrial research and development \ Earth resources \ Engineering \ Australia \ \ HOLD 1993 \ Various \ OB3-80 \ Serial \ #O 1993.166 ISSN 1033 3908 This report covers the years 1991 and 1992.mvk 7.11.93 @\Division of Information Technology . Research report \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Information Technology \ \Information systems \Information technology \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1990-91 \Various \OB3-80 \Serial \#O 1992.247 Overview of Division's programs, commercial achievements. mvk29.12.92 @\Division of Building, Construction and Engineering R&D Resources andOutput \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Building, Construction and Engineering \CSIRO \Building research \ \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1990-92 \Various \OB3-80 \Serial \#O 1993.39 ISBN 0 643 05447 2 Pub. 1992. Includes publicationsl list. mvk1.6.93 @\Division of Building, Construction and Engineering R&D Achievementsand Challenges \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Building, Construction and Engineering \CSIRO \Building research \ \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1990-92 \Various \OB3-80 \Serial \#O 1993.40 (see also 1993.39) ISBN 0 643 05446 4 Pub. 1992. mvk 1.6.93 @\National Facility Steering Committee Oceanographic Research Vessel Annualreport \ \ \ \ \National Facility Steering Committee Oceanographic Research Vessel \ \Marine science \Research grants \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1988-89, 1989-90, 1990-91; 1991-92 \Various \OB3-80 \Serial \#O ISSN 0816 7680 19.6.92, 1988-89 is P.48 ; 1991-92 (including ATSR validation)is 1993.42. mvk 10.2.93; 2.6.93 @\Australia's growing future \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \CSIRO Division of Plant Industry \Agricultural research \Primary industry \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1992; 1995 \27p; 35p \OB3-80 \Serial \#O !994.19 (copy 1), 1994.20 (copy 2). ISSN 1039 5091 . Features grains,oilseeds, legumes, cotton, biotechnology, tribute to Kenneth and YasukoMyer. Also 1996.48 mvk 22.2.94, 5.4.96 @\Biometrics Units Report \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Statistics \Scientific research \ \Australia \ \ \1991 (?) \30p \OB3-80 \Monograph \#O ISSN 1037 0102 1992.131, 1992.132 (Copy 2). 19.6.92 @\Division of Soils Annual Report \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Soils \ \Environmental research \Agricultural research \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1990, 1991; 1992 \Various \OB3-80 \Serial \#O 1992.103 (1990), 1992.139 (1991) ISSN 1032 5441 2.6.92, 23.6.92 ; 1993.11(1992) mvk 18.2.93 @\CSIRO Division of Tropical Animal Production Annual Report \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Tropical Animal Production \ \Agricultural research \Primary industry \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1989 \Various \OB3-80 \Monograph \#O P.1057 (1989) ISSN 1033 9248 The Division of Tropical Animal Productioncarries out research aimed at increasing the efficiency of production ofgrazing livestock, especially beef cattle, in tropical Australia. mk 19.10.92 @\CSIRO Geomechanics Report 19__ \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Geomechanics \ \Geology & geophysics \ \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1991 \Various \OB3-80 \Series \#O 1992.273 mvk 3.1.93 @\ Division of Mathematics & Statistics Biennial Report \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Mathematics & Statistics \CSIRO \Scientific research \Quality control \Industrial research & development \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1991-92 \ \OB3-80 \Serial \#O 1993.81, (32p, pub. 1992[?] by CSIRO Information Services, ed. by JeffPrentice.) ISSN 0729 3526 mvk 14.7.93 @\Information Services Branch \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \Information Services Branch \Information networks \Information systems \Australis \Australia \ \ \1992 \Various \OB3-80 \Folder \#O 1992.140 Contains brochures, overviews, description of services. 23.6.92 @\A strategy for CSIRO 1985-1990: shaping the future \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Future Planning \Scientific research \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \11p. \OB3-80 \Monograph \ @\ CSIRO Division of Materials Science and Technology. Report . \ \Murray,M. \ \ \Institute of Industrial Technologies \Division of Materials Science and Technology \Industrial research and developement \Industrial technology \Materials technology \Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1991; 1990-92 (1992) \Various \OB3-80 \Serial \#O 1991.102.ISSN 1035-7599.The objective of the Division is to assist Australianindustry in developing and using new and improved materials, as well asrelevant proceses and instruments. Research is organised into four majorareas, Alloys Research, Ceramics, Solid State Science, and Advanced MaterialsSynthesis, and the aims and achievements of the individual Programs areoutlined in this Report. Includes the National Advanced Materials AnalyticalCentre (NAMAC). 1990-92 period is 1993.12 . mvk 18.2.93. @\Directory of CSIRO research programs [by Divisions] \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Scientific research \ \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1986; 1988-89 \ \OB3-80 \Serial \Annual #O 1988-89 is 1992.210 @\ Directory of CSIRO research programs [by subject] \Directory of CSIRO Research Programs \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Scientific research \ \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1985,1986,1987 \ \OB3-80 \Serial \Annual, #O @\ CSIRO in brief \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Personnel \Scientific research \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1985 \ \OB3-80 \Serial \ @\ CSIRO Division of Radiophysics Annual Report \ CSIRO Division of Radiophysics Annual Report \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Radiophysics \ \Communications \Radio science \Space science \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1989 \Various \OB3-80 \Serial \#O, P.1 @\ CSIRO Division of Radiophysics Activities \ CSIRO Division of Radiophysics Activities \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Radiophysics \ \Communications \Radio science \Space science \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1989-1990 \56p \OB3-80 \Serial \#O 1991.87 ISSN 1035-8277 @\ Australia Telescope National Facility \ Annual report \ \ \ \ ATNF \ CSIRO \ Space research Facilities \ Space science \ Australia Telescope \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1990; 1991; 1992; 1993 \ Various \OB3-80 \Report \#O ISSN 1038 9954 Copy 1 1991.67 Copy 2 #O 1991.68 ; 1992.217 is 1991.1992 copy is 1995.109, 1993 copy is 1995.108 mvk 2.12.92, 16.9.95 @\ Biennial Report \CSIRO Division of Wildlife and Ecology Biennial Report \ \ \ \ CSIRO Division of Wildlife and Ecology \ \ Environmental research \ Land use \ \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1989; 1993 \ 67p; 45p \ OB3-80 \ Serial \ #O, ISSN 1033 27311, P.94 (1989); 1994.92 (1993) mvk 8.7.94 @\ Oceanography in CSIRO: report of the Review Committee and Statement ofDecisions, September 1987 \ \Swan.J \ \ \CSIRO \Review Committee [Oceanography] \Oceanography \CSIRO \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \90p. \OB3-80 \Monograph \ @\ Division of Atmospheric Research Report of Review Committee on ResearchDirections \ \Scaife.P \Gauntlett.D \Browne-Cooper.P \CSIRO \ INRE \Atmospheric research \ \ \Australia \ \ \1992 Nov \68p \OB3-80 \Monograph \ #O 1993.17 Recommendations of research review, 1992. Other members ofreview committee included A Inglis and G Farquhar . mvk 22.2.93 @\CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research: research report \ \Holper.P \ \ \CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research \INRE \Atmospheric research \ \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1990-92, 1992-94 \ \OB3-80 \Serial \#O 1993.77 (1990-92) 1996.30 (1992-94) Biannual. ISSN 0817 0576 . Includespublication lists, research summaries, staffing lists. mvk 30.6.93, 16.3.96 @\CSIRO Division of Oceanography: research report \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Oceanograpgy \INRE \Oceanography \Global change \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1989-91; 1992-93 \ \OB3-80 \Serial \#O 1994.24 (1989-91) Biannual. (?) .1995.72 Includes publication lists,research summaries, staffing lists. mvk 4.3.94 @\CSIRO Division of Fisheries Divisional Report \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Fisheries \CSIRO \Marine biology \Marine resources \ \Australia \Oceania \ \HOLD 1991-92 \Various \OB3-80 \Serial \#O 1994.80 Offices in Marmion (WA), Hobart, Cleveland (QLD) mvk 25.6.94 @\ Review of CSIRO's external communication activities, Report of the ReviewCommittee and Statement of executive decisions, August 1985 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Information dissemination \Scientific research \CSIRO \Australia \ \ \1985 \varies \OB3-80 \Monograph \ @\ Division of Water Resources Report of Review Committee on Research Directions:Seeking Solutions \ \Cox.W \Blackmore.D \Chapman.T \CSIRO \INRE \Water resources research \Hydrology \ \Australia \ \ \1992 Nov \98p \OB3-80 \Monograph \#O 1993.38 Recommendations of research review, 1992. Other members of reviewcommittee included Ray Frost & Nancy Mills. mvk 1.6.93 @\ Strategic plan 1988-92 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Future planning \Scientific research \CSIRO \Australia \ \ \n.d. \16p. \OB3-80 \Monograph \ @\ Profile of the CSIRO Division of Manufacturing Technology, October 1988 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Industrial technology \Industrial research & development \CSIRO Division of Manufacturing Technology \Australia \ \ \1988 \various \OB3-80 \Folder \ @\ Biennial Report CSIRO Division of Water Resources \ \ \ \ \ CSIRO Division of Water Resources \ \ Water resources research \ Hydrology \ Earth resources \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1990; 1992 \ Various \ OB3-80 \ Serial \ #O 1990.60 ; 1992 is 1992.218 @\Australian Marine Science and Technologies Advisory Committee Annual Report \ \ \ \ \AMSTAC \ \Marine science \AMSTAC \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1985-86 \ca 30p. \OB3-80 \Serial \ @\Review of Activities, Telecom Research Laboratories \ \ \ \ \Telecom Australia \ \Communications \Radio Transmission \Communications industry \Australia \International \ \1988;1989 \various \OB3-80 \Monograph \1989 Review is #O 1991.85 ISSN 0314-1357 @\ Australian Special Rural Research Council Annual Report \ Australian Special Rural Research Council Annual Report \ \ \ \ ASRRC \ DOPIE \ Research grants \ Primary industry \ \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1988-1989; \ Various \ OB3-80 \ Serial \ #O 1988-89 Copy 1 is 1991.86 ISSN 0818-5719 Copy 2 is 1990.50 @\Murray-Darling Freshwater Research Centre Triennial Report \ \ \ \ \Murray-Darling Freshwater Research Centre \ \Water resources research \Environmental research \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1990, 1993 \Various \OB3-80 \Monograph \#O 1992.188 (1990 issue), 1995.16 (1993 issue) ISSN 1032 8882. 1990 reportincludes recommendations of review panel. mk 19.10.92, 16.2.95 @\Report on Australia's Antarctic science program \ \ \ \ \Antarctic Science Advisory Committee \Antarctic Div. \Scientific research \Antarctic studies \Remote sensing \Antarctica \ \ \1987 \140p. \OB3-95 \Monograph \ #O @\CSIRO Bureau of Information & Public Communication \ \Financial reports \Information science \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1985-86 \ \OB4-80 \Serial \ @\CSIRO Annual Report \CSIRO Annual Report \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Scientific research \Organizations \ \Australia \ \ \1983- \various \OB4-80 \Serial \#O, ISSN 1030 4215 HOLD 1983-84, 1984-84, 1985-86, 1986-87 (2 vols), 1987-88(2 copies), 1989-90 (1990.84) ,1990-1991 (1992.22); 1991-92 (1993.9, 1993.10);1992-93 (1994.107), 1994-95 (1995.144) mvk 19.7.94, 12.12.95 @\ AIDC...financing the future today [Australian Industry Development Corporation,April 1985] \ \ \ \ \AIDC \ \Financial assistance \Industrial research & development \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \22p. \OB4-80 \Monograph \ @\Government-to-government sales from Canada: the role and services of CanadianCommercial Corporation (CCC) \ \ \ \ \CCC \ \Development assistance \Export Trade \CCC \Canada \ \ \n.d. \11p. \OB5-11 \Monograph \ @\ TITLE: CSIRO Promotional Communication Plan \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 CSIRO \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Public relations \ KEYWORD.2 Marketing \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1989 \ PAGINATION \ CLASSC'N OB5-80 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #O P.51 Prepared by Communication Working Group @\ TITLE: Report on internal communication in CSIRO: the challenge to change \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 Bright.Stephen \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 CSIRO \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Public relations \ KEYWORD.2 Marketing \ KEYWORD.3 Management \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1995 \ PAGINATION 64+ \ CLASSC'N OB5-80 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #O Known as the "Bright Report" 1995.137 mvk 10.12.95 @\ TITLE: COSSA Corporate Audit \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 Turner.Michael \ AUTHOR.2 Davis.Colin \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 CSIRO \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Management \ KEYWORD.2 Quality control \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1993 Apr \ PAGINATION 14p \ CLASSC'N OB5-80 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #O 1995.21 Includes recommendations about authority of Headfor financial resources (space funds, MDP, ); communications function; needfor higher corporate profile; secretariat support for senior staff. mvk19.2.95 @\ TITLE: Purchasing Corporate Audit \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 Bicknell.A \ AUTHOR.2 Tan.S \ AUTHOR.3 Turner.M \ CORP.AUTHR.1 CSIRO \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Management \ KEYWORD.2 Quality control \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1992 \ PAGINATION 21p \ CLASSC'N OB5-80 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #O 1993.33 Includes discussion of "value for money"purchasing practice. mvk 1.6.93 @\ Five year research and development plan 1989-94 \ \ \ \ \ Grain Legumes Research Council \ DOPIE \ Agricultural research \ Primary industry \ Research grants \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 \ 15p \ OB5-80 \ Monograph \ #O ISBN 0 9555071 1 6 1990.26 @\ Industry Research and Development Board Annual Report \ Annual Report \ \ \ \ DITAC \ \ Industrial research and development \ Innovations \ Technology transfer \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1990-1991; 1991-92; 1993-94 \ Various \ OB5-80 \ Monograph \ #O 1991.89 (1990-91); 1992.232 (1991-92).1994.214 (1993-94) ISSN 10303316 AGPS, 91/21642 Cat. No. 91 1301 5. Covers mission, membership, achievementsand decisions (including grant details) of the Board and its Committees(Discretionary grants; biotechnology; new materials; information technology;communications; waste and environmental management; national procurementdevelopment). jk 1.11.91 #O 1991.91 is copy 2. mvk 29.12.94 @\Research, Technology and Enterprise \Biennial report of CSIRO Institute of Minerals, Energy and Construction \ \ \ \ CSIRO IMEC \CSIRO \Industrial research & development \Technology transfer \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1988-90 \Various \OB5-80 \Serial \#O 1992.133 ISSN 1035 7076 21.6.92 @\ New South Wales Science and Technology Council Annual Report \ \ \ \ \NSW Science and Technology Council \ \Statutory authority \Advisory services \Industrial manpower \NSW \ \ \HOLD 1986-87, 1987-88 \Various \OB5-82 \#O @\Commonwealth Spatial Data Committee Annual Report \ \ \ \ \CSDC/Commonwealth Spatial Data Committee \ \ Geographic Information Systems \Data Sets \Data policy \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1992-93, 1993-94 \Various \OB7-80 \Serial \ #O ISSN 1320 1743 1992-93 copy is 1993.154. 1993-94 copy is 1995.80 (copy2 is 1996.16). Forward by Harvey Jacka, Chairman. The CSDC was formed inMay 1992 with approval of Minister for Administrative Services. The Committeereplaced CLIF (Commonwealth Land Information Forum) in addressing spatialdata issues affecting Commonwealth and States. First meeting June 1992.DITARD/DITAC portfolio represented by COSSA. Became premier policy forumfor environmental data exchange betweeen all levels of government, and privatesector. mvk 10.10.93, 26.6.95 @\Developments in Science and Technology Policy in Australia \ \Hurst.N \ \ \DITAC \ \Industial research and development \Government policy \Financial assistance \Australia \ \ \1988 \17p. \OB7-80 \ Monograph \#O @\Defence Science and Technology Organisation \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Defence \DSTO \Defence industry \DSTO \Scientific research \Australia \ \ \1983 \28p \OB8-80 \Monograph \#O @\Annual progress report Surveying and mapping for the period 1 July 1985- 30 June 1986 \ \ \ \ \Royal Australian Survey Corps \ \Mapping \ \ \1986 \Various \OB8-80 \Serial \#O P.593 Restricted. Includes Annex: Australian map and chart productionmap index, 1986. @\ Department of Conservation and Land Management Strategic Plan 1989-1993 \ \ \ \ \ CALM \ \ Environmental protection \ Earth resources \ Land use \ Western Australia \ Australia \ \ 1988 December \ 43p \ OB9-86 \ Monograph \ #O P.90 CALM 0692 0289 1M @\ Strategies for conservation and recreation on CALM lands in Western Australia \ \ \ \ \ CALM \ \ Environmental protection \ Conservation \ Land use \ Western Australia \ Australia \ \1987 December \ 53p \ OB9-86 \ Monograph \ #O P.91 @\ Timber production in Western Australia \ \ \ \ \ CALM \ \ Earth resources \ Forest research \ Primary industry \ Western Australia \ Australia \ \ 1987 December \ 83p \ OB9-86 \ Monograph \ #O P.92 @\ National Safety Council of Australia, Victorian Division: Annual report \ \ \ \ \NSCA. Vic. Div. \ \Safety \Search & rescue \ \Victoria \ \ \HOLD 1984 \n/a \OB10-84 \Serial \Annual @\ CSIRO Industrial Participation Plan 1989 \ \ \ \ \ CSIRO \ Human Resources Branch \ Industrial relations \ Personnel \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1989 \ 27p \ OB11-80 \ Monograph \ #O 1991.78 (copy 1 ) #O 1991.98 (copy 2 ) @\ CSIRO Human Resource Statistics \ \ \ \ \ CSIRO \ Human Resources Branch \ Industrial relations \ Personnel \ Statistics \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1993, 1994 \ \ OB11-80 \ Series \ #O 1994.195 ; 1995.82 mvk 21.12.94, 26.6.95 @\ Industrial Participation in CSIRO \ \ \ \ \ CSIRO \ Human Resources Branch \ Industrial relations \ Personnel \ \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1992 June \ Various \ OB11-80 \ Serial \ #O 1993.99 Prepared by Industrial Participation Working Party, Human ResourcesPolicy Sub Committee, & CSIRO Consultative Council. mvk 21.7.93 @\Human Resources Plan \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \Human Resources Branch \Industrial relations \Personnel \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1991 \Various \OB11-80 \Serial \#O 1992.65 @\Major achievements and activities 1990/91 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \Human Resources Branch \Industrial relations \Personnel \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1991 \Various \OB11-80 \Serial \#O 1992.268 Annual report on human resources issues in CSIRO. @\ Equal Employment Opportunity Annual report - 1990-91 \ \ Macpherson.C \ \ \ CSIRO Human Resources Branch \ \ Personnel \ Industrial management \ Industrial relations \ Australia \ \ \ 1991 \ 21p. \ OB11-80 \ serial \ #O 1992.19 This report reviews the impact of EEO policies and practicesthroughout the 1990-91 financial year and outlines priorities for the next. @\CSIRO External Salary Comparison \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \CSIRO Human Resources Branch \Industrial relations \Personnel \ \Australia \ \ \1993 June; 1994 March \ \OB11-80 \Monograph \#O 1994.02 (1993); 1994.65 (1994). Produced by Recruitment Group HRB andanalyses trends and comparisons between CSIRO and APS, privater sector employment.mvk 1.2.94, 1.6.94 @\ A picture history of CSIRO Radiophysics 1939 - 1984 \ \Deane.J \ \ \CSIRO \ \CSIRO Division of Radiophysics \History \Astronomy \Australia \ \ \1985 \62p. \OB12-80 \Monograph \#O Copy 1 P.59 Copy 2 P.258 ISBN 0 643 038175 @\ Annual report on international activities of the Commonwealth Scientificand Industrial Research Organization, Australia. \ CSIRO International Activities \ Filshie.B \ \ \ CIRC \ CSIRO \ International \ Development assistance \ Developing countries \ Australia \ International \ \ HOLD 1985 (?) \ various \ OB14-80 \ Series \ #O 1994.106 ISSN 0810 3089 , 1983-84 . Features formation of ACIAR. mvk19.7.94 @\ CSIRO International Activities. \ CSIRO International Activities \ Filshie.B \ \ \ CIRC \ CSIRO \ International \ Development assistance \ Developing countries \ Australia \ International \ \ HOLD 1989, 1991 \ various \ OB14-80 \ Series \ #O 1991.79 1986-1988 Mentions COSSA'S role in international space activitiesp.34-36 ISSN 1033-0771 #O 1991.10 (Copy 1) 1991.11 (Copy 2) ISSN 1033-0771.Contains detailed report (p51-52) on CSIRO International Space activitiesin OSSA. jk 29/4/91 @\ CSIRO Operational Plan \CSIRO Operational Plan \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Corporate Goals \Strategies \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1988-89, 1989-90, 1990-91, 1991-92; 1992-93; 1993-94; 1995-96 \various \OB15-80 \Serial \#O, P.62 (1989-90), 1990.27-29 (3 copies), 1991-92 (1992.21 and 1992.67).;1992-93 (1993.13) ; 1993-94 is 1993.120 (Copy 1), 1993.121 (Copy 2) mvk18.2.93, 31.8.93, 12.12.95 [ O continues next page] WT03-B26-85IA029-000311-B022-131http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcato3.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165912 text/html 42091HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:57:04 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:13 GMTContent-length: 41916 Catalogue Library catalogue O: ORGANISATIONS (continued) (about, annual reports, activities, personnel, products & services,etc) [SEE ALSO ( I) Industry & (subject) industry] OA Space & Aerospace (Astronomy, Astronautical/Aeronautical) Firms &Agencies: (NASA, COSSA, etc., public or private). Includes Communications firms & agencies involved in space [SEE ALSO Space, Astronautics (A) Flight, Aeronautics (F)] OB Bureaucratic (Public/Civil Sector) Depts, Agencies & Bodies (notAeronautical or Astronautical in nature) (CSIRO, DITAC, their Advisory Committees etc)OC Corporate (Industry, Companies, Business, etc) Sector, other than Space/Aeronautical; Communications bodies usually in (OA) Space [see also (AI), (CI), (FI), & (I)] OG Government & Opposition (Political Sector) [see also Politics (SP)for theory] OH Hobby/Amateur (Groups, Associations, Clubs, etc OM Museum OP Professional & Post Tertiary Institutes, Associations, Academic,etc Bodies OS Secondary Educational [see also Education (SE)] OT Tertiary Educational [see also Education (SE)] OZ General & Collective, Organizations in general. [SEE ALSO (Z) fordirectories etc.] @\ CSIRO Corporate Services Department Operational Plan \CSIRO Operational Plan \ \ \ \CSIRO \CSIRO Corporate Services Department \Corporate Goals \Strategies \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1990-91; 1991-92 \various \OB15-80 \Serial \#O, 1992.307( 1990-91); 1992.308 (1991-92) , Sub Titled " SupportingScience in the Nineties" mvk 24.1.93 @\ CSIRO Corporate Services Department Five Year Plan \CSIRO Five Year Plan \ \ \ \CSIRO \CSIRO Corporate Services Department \Corporate Goals \Strategies \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1993; 1994; 1995 \various \OB15-80 \Serial \#O 1994.121 ISBN 0 643 05576 2; 1996.15 ISBN 0 643 05717 X Sub Titled "Supporting Science in the Nineties" mvk 7.8.94, 17.3.96, 8.4.96 @\ CSIRO Strategic Plan \CSIRO Strategic Plan \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Corporate Goals \Strategies \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1988-92; 1991-96 \various \OB15-80 \Serial \#O, P.52-53 (2 copies) ; 1992.151;Copy 2 1992.263 @\CSIRO Corporate Information Technology Strategic Plan \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \CSIRO Information Technology Services Branch \Management \Communication technology \Future planning \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1994 (?) \74p \OB15-80 \Serial (?) \#O 1995.22 Relevant to CSIRO Earth Observation Data Management mvk 19.2.95 @\Report on the user documentation survey \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Information Technology Services Branch \ \Information systems \Training \Information technology Australia \ \ \July 1994 \12p. \OB15-80 \monograph \#O 1995.42 mvk 233.4.95 @\ Corporate Planning in CSIRO \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Corporate Goals \Strategies \ \Australia \ \ \1990 February \7p \OB15-80 \Monograph \#O, 1990.32, 1990.36 (2 copies) @\ CSIRO Evaluation Plan \ CSIRO Evaluation Plan \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Management \Planning \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1990; 1991 \Various \OB15-80 \Serial \#O, 1990.31, 1990.35 (2 copies); 1992.66 (1991) @\ Performance measurement and evaluation in CSIRO \ \ MacRae.D \ \ \ CSIRO \ \ Planning \ Management \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 \ 18p. \ OB15-80 \ Monograph \ #O 1992.6. Revised version of a paper prepared by the CSIRO CorporatePlanning Office for the Dept. of Finance. Outlines the 3 major types ofevaluation practised in CSIRO as prospective, process and retrospective. @\ Outlook for CSIRO: a preliminary analysis \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Management \Planning \ \Australia \ \ \1989 January \20p \OB15-80 \Monograph \#O, P.54 (Copy 1), 1990.30 (copy 2) @\ Management Information Systems Operational Plan \Management Information Systems Operational Plan \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Corporate Goals \Strategies \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1990-91 \various \OB15-80 \Serial \#O, 1990.38 @\ Management Information Systems Communication Strategic Plan \Information booklet1-1993 \ \ Batchelor.G \ \ \ CSIRO \ \ Management \ Future planning \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1991 \ 22p. \ OB15-80 \ serial \ #O 1992.15. The plan sets out the direction telecommunications will takeover this period and the new strategy that MIS (Management Information Systems)will employ to use the new technologies to the best advantage of CSIRO. @\ CSIRO Priority determination 1990 role statements \ \ \ \ \ CSIRO Corporate Planning Office \ \ Scientific research \ Management \ Planning \ Australia \ \ \ 1991 March \ 17p \ OB15-80 \ Monograph \ #O 1991.54 Contains decisions for CSIRO R&D stategy following analysisof national research priorities based on assessment of feasibility and attractivenessof effort in research areas classified using Australian Bureau of StatisticsInterim Australian Standard Research Classification by socio-economic objectives.jk 25/7/91 @\ CSIRO Priority determination 1990 methodology & results overview \ \ \ \ \ CSIRO Corporate Planning Office \ \ Scientific research \ Management \ Planning \ Australia \ \ \ 1991 January \ 17p \ OB15-80 \ Monograph \ #O 1991.55 Contains overview of methods used in analysis of national researchpriorities based on assessment of feasibility and attractiveness of effortin research areas classified using Australian Bureau of Statistics InterimAustralian Standard Research Classification by socio-economic objectives.jk 25/7/91 @\ CSIRO Research Priorities Data Compendium: triennial review of researchpriorities \ \ \ \ \ CSIRO Corporate Planning Office \ \ Scientific research \ Management \ Planning \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1993 July \ Various \ OB15-80 \ Serial in binder \ #O 1994.83 Contains overview of Australian economic trends and R&Dindicators. Research areas classified using Australian Bureau of StatisticsInterim Australian Standard Research Classification by socio-economic objectives.mvk 7.7.94 @\CSIRO Research Priorities 1994-95 to 1996-97: a progress report \ \ MacRae.Don \ \ \ CSIRO Corporate Planning Office \ \ Scientific research \ Management \ Planning \ Australia \ \ \ 1993 Aug \ 15p \ OB15-80 \ Monograph \ #O 1994.176 mvk 22.11.94 @CSIRO Human Resources Branch Operational Plan 1991-1992 \ \Macpherson.C \ \ \Human Resources Branch \ \Industrial relations \Management \Personnel \ \ \ \1991 \46p. \OB15-80 \ \#O 1991.101 An outline of the corporate human resource management programfor 1991/1992 and the strategic outlook for the future. @\CSIRO Division of Fisheries Operational Plan \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Fisheries \CSIRO \Marine biology \Marine resources \Future planning \Australia \Oceania \ \HOLD 1992-93; 1993-1994; 1994-95 \Various \OB15-80 \Serial \#O 1993.97 (1992-93); 1994.79 ("Operational Report 1992-1993 and Plan1993-1994") . 1995.56 ("Operational Report 1993-1994 and Plan1994-1995"). Offices in Marmion (WA), Hobart, Cleveland (QLD) mvk 21.7.93,25.6.94, 13.5.95 @\CSIRO Division of Fisheries Communications and Publications \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Fisheries \CSIRO \Marine biology \Marine resources \ \Australia \Oceania \ \HOLD 1991-92 \Various \OB15-80 \Serial \#O 1994.81 mvk 25.6.94 @\CSIRO Division of Fisheries Strategic Plan \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Fisheries \CSIRO \Marine biology \Marine resources \Future planning \Australia \Oceania \ \HOLD 1992-95 \Various \OB15-80 \Serial \#O 1993.98 (Pub 1993) Offices in Marmion (WA), Hobart, Cleveland (QLD)mvk 21.7.93 @\Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade Corporate Plan 19__ - 19__ \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. Foreign Affairs \ \Government Policy \International Relations \ \Australia \International \ \1990 \23p \OB15-80 \Serial \#O ISBN 0 644 12840 2 1990.139 mvk 31.12.92 @\Australia New Zealand Land Information Council Strategic Plan \ \ \ \ \Australia New Zealand Land Information Council \ \Geographic Information Systems \Mapping \Data policy \Australia \New Zealand \Oceania \HOLD 1994-97 (pub1994) \ \OB15-80 \Serial \#O 1995.81 ISBN 0 644 35198 5 . Pub by AGPS Canberra. ANZLIC is the peakcouncil of land information management in the two countries, includes StateMinisters . mvk 26.6.95 @\Bureau of Resource Sciences Corporate Plan \ \ \ \ \BRS Bureau of Resource Sciences \DPIE Australia. Dept of Primary Industries and Energy \Primary industry \Environmental protection \Government policy \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1994 \ \OB15-80 \Series \#O 1996.20 covers 1994-97 The role of BRS is to "provide the scientificand technical input which will enable sound policy advice to be developed..."mvk 16.3.96 @\A Window on Antarctica - an introduction to the Corporate Plan of theAustralian Antarctic Division \ \ \ \ \Antarctic Div. \Australia. dept. of the Arts etc. \Antarctica \Strategies \Antarctic studies \Scientific research \Antarctica \Australian Antarctic Territory \ \1991 \27p \OB15-95 \Monograph \#O ISBN 0 642 16132 1992.107 jk 8.7.92 @\CSIRO Training and development Directory \ \Marshall.B \ \ \CSIRO Human Resources Branch \ \Management \Training \Courses \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1991-92, 1992-93 \Various \OB16-80 \Serial \#O 1992.165 mk 16.7.92; 1992.299 @\ Company objectives, background and activities, General Technology SystemsLtd \ \ \ \ \GT Systems \ \Technology consultants industry \GT Systems \ \Great Britain \ \ \n.d. \13p. \OC1-32 \Monograph \#O @\Annual report 1984 \ \ \ \ \Nissho Iwai \ \Industry \Nissho Iwai \ \Japan \ \ \1984 \56p. \OC1-63 \Serial \#O Former dbase no. 799. Annual report of Multi-commodity co. expandinginto space @\Metal Mining Agency of Japan \ \ \ \ \Metal Mining Agency of Japan \ \Mineral & Mining \Geology & Geophysics \Marine science \Japan \Pacific \ \1988 \23p. \OC1-63 \Brochure \#O @\ Mining Activities of Japan \ \ \ \ \Metal Mining Agency of Japan \ \Minerals & Mining \Geology & geophysics \ \Japan \International \ \1988 \28p. \OC1-63 \Brochure \#O @\ITOCHU Corporation. Annual report \ \ \ \ \ITOCHU Corporation \ \Commerce \Economics \Manufacturing industry \Japan \ \ \1993 \51p. \OC1-63 \monograph \#O 1995.51 Hold 1993 mvk 23.4.95 @\ITOCHU Corporation. Company brochure \ \ \ \ \ITOCHU Corporation \Commerce \Economics \Manufacturing industry \Japan \ \ \1993 \48p. \OC1-63 \brochure \#O 1995.52 mvk 23.4.95 @\Logica [company profile] \ \ \ \ \Logica \ \Information & computer industry \ \ \Australia \ \ \n.d. \n/a \OC1-80 \Folder \#O Former dbase no. 895 Folder of booklets with Logic newsletter August1986 @\The Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy Annual Report \ \ \ \ \The Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy \ \Geology & geophysics \Minerals & mining \Minerals & mining industries \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1991 \Various \OC1-80 \Series \#O 1991 report is 1993.5 , 31p. mvk 11.2.93 @\ STC an Australia Company of ITT \ \ \ \ \STC \ \Communications industry \ \ \Australia \ \ \n.d. \64p. \OC1-80 \Monograph \Ca 1985. #O Former dbase no. 900 @\Developing the Entrepreneurial Organisation \ \ \ \ \Egon Zehnder International \ \Management \Human relations \Recruitment \Australia \ \ \1988 \20p \OC1-80 \Monograph \ @\Trippett Shedden Corporate Introduction 1992 \ \ \ \ \Trippett Shedden \ \Industrial management \Innovations \Reliability engineering \Australia \International \ \ HOLD 1992, 1994 \ \OC1-80 \Monograph \#O 1992.317 Overview, company capability statement. mvk 27.1.93 1994 versionis 1994.57. Includes description of Earth Observation Resources Ltd andlist of "typical projects". mvk 9.4.94 @\Technology working for Australia \ \ \ \ \PCM Electronics \ \High technology industry \Communications technology \ \nd \Various \OC1-80 \Folder \#O Former dbase no. 200. Folder with comapnay profile and product informationsheets. jk 30.4.92 @\ Australian Wheat Board Annual Report \ \ \ \ \ Australian Wheat Board \ \ Primary industry \ Agricultural research \ Research grants \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1992-93 \ Various \ OC1-80 \ Serial \ #O 1995.113 mvk 16.9.95 @\ Anutech Pty Ltd, Review \ \ \ \ \Anutech Pty Ltd \ \Solar Energy \Research and Development \ \NSW \ \ \1988 \12p. \OC1-82 \Monograph \ @\Clough Engineering Group Annual Report \ \Clough.W \ \ \Clough Engineering \ \Minerals and mining \ \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1988 \Various \OC1-80 \Series \#O P.1058 (1988) Clough is a large, WA-based construction and project managementgroup. mk 19.10.92 @\ Folder of information on Technology Park Corporation, incorporating AdelaideInnovation Centre, Adelaide Microelectronics Centre \ \ \ \ \Technology Park Adelaide Corporation \ \Technological Resources \High technology industry \ \South Australia \Australia \ \1988 \varies \OC1-85 \Folder \#O Former dbase no. 881 @\ Silicon Graphics Inc. Annual report \ \ McCracken.E \ Clark.J \ \Silicon Graphics Computer Systems \ \ Computer graphics \ \ \ North America \ \ \ HOLD 1989; 1990 \ Various \ OC3-10 \ monograph \ #O P.152 (1989) Emphasis on the development of 3D computing to a varietyof applications . Also 1992.30 (1990). @\Invetech Group \ \ \ \ \Invetech \ \Industrial research & development \High technology \Industrial design \Australia \ \ \n.d. \6p. \OC3-80 \Monograph \Report of current activities, 1988? @\ AMIRA ..annual report 19-; APIRA the Petroleum Division \ \ \ \ \AMIRA \APIRA \Minerals & mining industries \Scientific research \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1985-86 \varies \OC3-80 \Serial \#O @\ITOCHU Corporation \ \ \ \ \ \ \Industrial research and development \ \ \Japan \International \ \1993 \48p \OC4-63 \Brochure \#O 1996.57 ITOCHU part of Japanese consortium which operates JCSAT. Aimsto operate a "globally integrated corporation" mvk 8.4.96 @\ Annual report \ \ \ \ \Sirotech Ltd. \ \Financial reports \Industrial research and development \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1985, 1987, 1989, 1990, 1991 \ \OC4-80 \Serial \#O P.41 (1989), 1990.78, #O 1992.18 (1991) @\ Hawker de Havilland Limited Annual Report \ \ \ \ \ Hawker de Havilland \ \ Financial reports \ Defence industry \ Aircraft industry \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1990 \ \ OC4-80 \ Serial \ #O 1990 is 1991.40 . Contains no information on R&D or space. jk 14/6/91 @\ Aerodata Holdings Limited Annual Report \ \Young.R \ \ \Aerodata \ \Aerospace \Remote sensing \ \Wetern Australia \ \ \HOLD 1991 \ \OC4-86 \Folder \#O 1992.104 . Copy 2 at 1992.105 Folder inc. brochures /reports from WorldGeoscience; Western Electric; BGM Airborne Surveys; Crown Technical Services;Moniteq; Questar Surveys etc. 2.6.92 @\ SAGEM Annual Report \Annual Report 19.. \ \ \ \SAGEM\ Societe d'applications generales d'electricite et de mecanique \ \High technology \Industrial technology \Communications technology \France \ \ \1989 \32p \OC5-34 \Serial \#O 1992.183 SAGEM group total sales of order $AUS 1.2b. , inc. navigation,gudance, electro-optics, communications. mk 25.8.92 @\OTC Research and Development Annual Report \Research and Development Annual Report \ \ \ \OTC \ \Communications industry \OTC \Industrial research & development \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1988, 1990 \Various \OC5-80 \Serial \#O, 1988 is P.225; 1990 is 1990.2 jk 28.4.92 @\ OTC Annual Report \ Annual Report \ \ \ \ OTC \ \ Communications industry \ Space industry \ Financial reports \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1989, 1990, 1991 \ Various \ OC5-80 \ Series \ #O P.101, 1990.25, 1991.60 (smaller format and somewhat briefer), 1991.72(Copy 2) @\Australian Manufacturing Council Annual Report \ \ \ \ \Australian Manufacturing Council \ \Manufacturing industry \Industrial technology \Engineering \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1988; 1989 \Various \OC5-80 \Serial \ #O 1989 is P.37. ISSN 0816 6714 @\AWA Defence Industries Pty Ltd \ \ \ \ \AWA Defence Industries Pty Ltd \ \High technology \Defence industry \Industrial research & development \Australia \Oceania \International \1993 May \78 \OC5-80 \Monograph \#O 1994.56 Company profile, contacts list. Proprietary information commercialin confidence not to be copied to third parties without AWA approval. mvk27.3.94 @\ADI \ \ \ \ \Australian Defence Industries Ltd. \ \Defence Industry \Industria; research & development \High technology \Australia \ \ \1993 \ \OC5-80 \Folder \#O 1994.71 Includes 1993 Annual Report and senior officer profile. mvk19.6.94 @\Strategic Research Foundation Annual Report \ \ \ \ \Strategic Research Foundation \ \Industrial Research & Development \Information technology \Technological transfer \Victoria \Australia \ \HOLD 1991 (1990-91); 1992 (1991-92) \40p \OC3-83 \Monograph \#O 1992.214 (1990-91); 1992.215 (1992). SRF: a not for profit company limitedby Guarantee, comprising CSIRO, AATSE, and the Victorian Government, anddesigned to bring R&D results into industry. Reports cover establishementof 2 CRCs associated with SRF: CRC for Intelligent Decision Systems &CRC for Cellular Growth Factors. John Stocker a member of SRF Board; ZenaBaddeley (ex COSSA) on its Secretariat. mvk 22.12.92 @\Public Works Research Institute, Ministry of Construction \ \ \ \ \ \ \Building research \ \ \Japan \ \ \1992 \47p. \OG1-63 \monograph \#O 1996.19 ISSN 0 386 5908 based inTsukuba, Japan. mvk 17.3.96. @\Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Annual Report \Annual Report Series \ \ \ \Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission \UNESCO \Oceanography \Climatology \Global Change \International \ \ \HOLD 1994 \ \OG3-05 \Serial (annual) \#O 1995.71 mvk 7.6.95 @\ Science and Technology Budget Statement 1989-90 \ Budget Related Paper \ Jones.B \ \ \ \ \ Budget \ Policy \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1989 \ 74p \ OG4-80 \ Monograph \ #O P.645 Budget Paper No. 10 ISBN 0 644 10433 3 @\ Science and Technology Budget Statement 1990-91 \ Budget Related Paper \ Crean.S \ \ \ \ \ Budget \ Policy \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 \ 89p \ OG4-80 \ Monograph \ #O 1990.6 ISBN 0 644 13002 4 @\ Science and Technology Budget Statement \ Budget Related Paper \ Schacht.C \ \ \ \ \ Budget \ Policy \ Government policy \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1993 \ Various \ OG4-80 \ Monograph \ #O 1993.119 Copy 2, 1993.141, held B Embleton . Published by AGPS, 9 780644324373. Passing mention of Australian Space Council and re-organisationof Marine Agencies. mvk 30.8.93, 27.9.93 @\ Science and Technology Budget Statement \ Budget Related Paper \ Cook.Peter \ \ \ DIST \ \ Budget \ Policy \ Government policy \ Australia \ \ \ HOLD 1994 \ 167p \ OG4-80 \ Monograph \ #O 1994.91 . Published by AGPS, ISBN 0 644 33468 1 . First budget forSenator the Hon Peter Cook (became Minister for Industry, Science &Technology mid 1994), with renaming of DITAC to DIST. Gives National SpaceProgram expenditure estimate for 1994-95 as $AUS 9.3 m cf around 5.5 m forprevious 5 years. mvk 8.7.94 @\ Science and Technology Budget Statement \ Budget Related Paper \ Cook.Peter \ \ \ DIST \ \ Budget \ Policy \ Government policy \ Australia \ \ \ 1995 \ \ OG4-80 \ Monograph \ #O 1995.59 . Copy 2 1995.64 Published by AGPS, ISBN 0 644 43237 3. Noindex. Second budget for Senator the Hon Peter Cook (became Minister forIndustry, Science & Technology mid 1994). Gives National Space Programvery little prominence (p2.12, 2.15, 5.17, 5.70). Very short reference toAustralia Prize in Remote Sensing (2.13). Gives expenditure for 1995-96as $AUS 7.6m cf estimate last year of $9.3 m. Estimate for 1995-96 is $6.1m.mvk 31.5.95 @\ United Kingdom space policy. Vol.1. Report \(HL Paper 41-I) \ \ \ \ U.K. Select Committee on Science and Technology \ \Government policy \Space programs \Space science \Great Britain \ \ \1987 \76p. \OG7-32 \Monograph \House of Lords. Session 1987-88, 2nd report. @\Australian Space Research Institute (ASRI) \ \ \ \ \Australian Space Research Institute \ \Rockets \Space research facilities \Ausroc \Australia \ \ \1993 (?) \ \OH1-80 \Brochure \#O 1995.27 Overview of Institute, formed by merger of Australian SpaceEngineering Research Association and the AUSROC Projects Group. ASRI isbuilding a series of small "Ausroc" rockets, leading to the launchof a small Australian satellite by the late 1990s. mvk 26.2.95 @\Power House, a museum for us all \ \ \ \ \Power House Museum \ \Museums \Technology \ \New South Wales \ \ \1985 \32p. \OM1-82 \Monograph \#O 3 copies @\ Museum of Victoria \ \ \ \ \Council of the Museum of Victoria \ \Museum \Collections \ \Victoria \ \ \1988 \Varies \OM1-83 \Folder of information \ @\The International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing: Organizationand Programs 1988-1992. \ \Murai.S \ \ \ISPRS \ \Photogrammetry \Remote sensing \ \International \ \ \1992 \99p \OP1-05 \Serial \#O 1992.245 Lists of contacts for the various Commissions and sub-sectionsof ISPRS. mvk 29.12.92 @\Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research Handbook \ \ \ \ \SCOR \ICSU \Oceanography \Scientific research \Directories \International \ \ \HOLD 1991 May \ \OP1-05 \Serial \#O 1992.256 Lists of contacts for various SCOR activities including JGOFSISSN 1013 2430 mvk 2.1.93 @\ SCOR Annual Report to ICSU \ \ \ \ \SCOR \ICSU \Oceanography \Global change \Climatology \International \ \ \HOLD 1992 \ \OP1-05 \#O 1993.83. Written by Elizabeth Gross, Executive Director. Brief summariesof meetings and Working Group Activities. See also MW3-05, 1992.266. Prioritiesand issues in ocean studies under the Committee on Climate Changes and theOcean (of UNESCO, ICSU). mvk 16.7.93 @\ Discovery and Responsibility, A Symposium held at the 1988 Annual GeneralMeeting of the Australian Academy of Science, April 1988 \ \ \ \ \AAS \ \Scientific Research \ \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \54p. \OP1-80 \Monograph \ @\ Institution of Engineers, Australia, Annual Report 1990 \ \ Sargent,M. \ \ \ Institution of Engineers, Australia (IEA) \ \ Engineering \ \ \ Australia \ \ \HOLD 1990 \32p \OP1-80 \Monograph \#O 1991.99 Includes organisation chart, staff list. @\Focus on the Institution of Engineers, Australia \ \ \ \ \IEA\Institution of Engineers, Australia \ \IEA \ \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \ \OP1-80 \Brochure \#O P.1059 mk 19.10.92 @\Australian Information Industry Association Annual Report \ \ \ \ \AIIA \ \Information and computer industry \ \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1991 \Various \OP1-80 \ \#O 1992.171 mk 20.7.92 @\Centre for Environmental Applied Hydrology Annual Report \ \McMahon.T \ \ \ \ \Environmental Research \Water resources \ \Victoria \Australia \ \HOLD 1988-89 \Various \OP1-83 \Serial \#O 1990.136 The Centre is an interdisciplinary research centre in fieldsof engineering hydrology, aquatic ecology hydraulics, fluvial geomorphologyand biogeography. It is a joint venture of Department of Civil and AgriculturalEngineering and the Department of Geography of the University of Melbourne.mk 20.7.92 @\International Union of Radio Science \ \ \ \ \ICSU \International Union of Radio Science \Radio science \Radio frequencies \ \International \ \ \1992 \12p \OP3-05 \Brochure \#O 1992.123 19.6.92 @\International Academy of Astronautics : 25 years (1960-1985) \ACTA Astronautica \Ordway III.F Guest Editor \ \ \IAA \ \Space \Space exploration \ \Space \ \ \1987 Oct \805p.* * Continuation of Journal of the International Academy of Astronautics \OP3-05 \Journal Special Issue \#G P.860 ISSN 0094 5765 IAA (International Academy of Astronautics) 19.6.92 @\ Annual report \ \ \ \ \Tata Intitute of Fundamental Research \ \Scientific research \Tata Institute of Fundamental Research \ \India \ \ \HOLD 1982-83 \varies \OP3-53 \Serial \ @\ Anglo-Australian Observatory \ Annual report \ \ \ \ Anglo-Australian Telescope Board \ \ Astronomy \ Observatories \ \ Australia \ Great Britain \ \ HOLD 1988-89, 1989-90, 1990-91 \ Various \ OP3-80 \ Serial \ #O 1988-89 is 1990.5; 1989-90 is 1991.5; 1990-91 is 1992.73 . ISSN 078-6554,Pub. by AGPS Canberra. @\ Prospectus 1986 \ \ \ \ \Asian Institute of Technology \ \Education \Asian Institute of Technology \ \Thailand \ \ \1984 \52p. \OP16-68 \Serial \Biennial? #O Former dbase no. 193 @\ISTS: Institute for Space and Terrestrial Science \ \ \ \ \Institute for Space and Terrestrial Science \ \Space research facilities \Space science \ \Canada \ \ \1993 (?) \ \OT1-11 \Folder \#O 1994.196 Background material inc. Annual Report 1991-92, 1992-93, Centresof Excellence Research Directory 1993-94. ISTS is an academic/business consortiumsupported by the Province of Ontario Technology Fund. It was established1987 and comprises York, Toronto, Western Ontario, Waterloo Universitiesand the Humber College, as well as Spar Aerospace, CAL Corporation, ComDev, INTERA, ITRES, MacDonald Dettwiler, & MPB Technologies. mvk 21.12.94 @\Centre for Geophysics Exploration Research [of] Macquarie University \ \ \ \ \Macquarie University \ \Centre for Geophysical Exploration Research \Geology & geophysics \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \34p. \OT1-80 \Monograph \Includes list of publications 1978-1986, of its members pp.20-34. @\Climatic Impacts Centre Annual Report [of] Macquarie University \ \ \ \ \Macquarie University \ \Climatology \Environmental research \Global change \Australia \NSW \ \HOLD 1992, 1993, 1994 \Various \OT1-80 \Monograph \#O ISSN 1038 9938 1993.1 . 1993 edition is 1995.69; 1994 edition is 1995.15Includes list of publications . mvk 10.2.93, 16.2.95; 7.6.95 @\University of New South Wales Annual Report \ \ \ \ \University of NSW \ \Research and development \Education \Postgraduate courses \NSW \ \ \HOLD 1987 \152p. \OT1-82 \Monograph \ISSN 0726 8459 @\ Annual Report 1986, The Centre for Technology and Social Change, Universityof Wollongong \ \ \ \ \University of Wollongong \ \Research and Development \ \ \NSW \ \ \1986 \19p. \OT1-82 \Monograph \ @\ School of Surveying, University of NSW Annual Report \ \ \ \ \University of NSW \ \Research and Development \ \ \NSW \ \ \HOLD 1987, 1988, 1990, 1991; 1992, 1993 \Varies \OT1-82 \Monograph \ #O 1990 edition is 1991.126 . 1991 Ed. at 1992.90. Ed. by Chris Rizos;1992 ed at 1993.153, also Ed. Chris Rizos; 1993 at 1995.14 mvk 10.10.93,16.2.95 @\ Annual Report 1986 Report to the Visiting Committee, The University ofNew South Wales Centre for Remote Sensing, and Annual Report 1985 \ \ \ \ \University of NSW \Centre for Remote Sensing \ \ \ \NSW \ \ \1986 \37p. \OT1-82 \Monograph \ @\ University of New South Wales, Centre for Remote Sensing Annual Report \ \ \ \ \University of NSW Centre for Remote Sensing \ \Remote Sensing \Training \Education \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1983, 1984, 1985, 1987, 1988, 1990 \Various \OT1-82 \Monograph \#O 1983 Former dbase no. 195; 1984 676; 1987 is 1992.8 (copy 2); 1988 isP.644; 1990 is 1991.106. @\Centre for Stream Ecology Annual Report \ \Hart.T \ \ |Centre for Sream Ecology \ \Water Resources Research \Environmental protection \ \Victoria \ \ \HOLD 1989 \ \OT1-83 \Serial \#O 1990.106 Centre is affiliated to Chisolm Institute, Monash University& Museum of Victoria. 2.6.92 @\Cooperative Research Centre for Australian Mineral Exploration TechnologiesAnnual Report \ \Green.Andy \ \ \Cooperative Research Centre for Australian Mineral Exploration Technologies \ \Minerals and mining \Remote sensing applications \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1994 \40p \OT2-80 \Serial \#O 1996.25 ISSN 1320 8233 CRC at Maquarie University, set up to"developcore technologies, particularly airborne methods, for the discovery of oredeposits concealed by the Australian regolith". Director is Andy Green,former Remote Sensing head at CSIRO Mineral Physics. mvk 16.3.96 @\Cooperative Research Centre for Advanced Computational Systems (ACSys)Annual Report \ \ \ \ \Cooperative Research Centre for Advanced Computational System \ \Information and computer industry \High technology \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD 1994 \41p \OT2-80 \Serial \#O 1996.31 CRC at Australian National University, including CSIRO Divisionof Information Technology, Sun, Fujitsu. Does research in visualisation,transfer of digital information. mvk 16.3.96 @\ The Warren Centre for Advanced Engineering \ Annual Report \ \ \ \ University of Sydney \ \ Education \ Engineering \ Industrial technology \ New South Wales \ Australia \ \ HOLD 1988 \ Various \ OT2-82 \ Serial \ #O, P.74 (1988) @\Australian National University Supercomputer Facility Annual Report \ \Erskine.R \Gingold.R \ \ANU \ \Data management \Computer hardware \Information networks \ACT \Australia \ \HOLD 1992, 1993, 1994 \Various \OT2-81 \Serial \#O 1994.78 (1993); 1994.146 (1992); 1995.95 (1994) ISSN 1032 3090 Listsresearch projects, equipment, as well as staff. Include research into handlinglarge data sets and data networking. mvk 25.6.94, 14.11.94 , 14.8.95 @\Cooperative Research Centre for the Antarctic and Southern Ocean AnnualReport \ \ \ \ \Cooperative Research Centre for the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Environment \ \Polar regions \Antarctic studies \Oceanography \Tasmania \Oceania \Polar regions \HOLD 1991-92; 1993-94 \Various \OT2-84 \Serial \#O 1993.102 Inaugural report. 1993-94 Report is 1994.190 mvk 21.7.93, 22.12.94 @\ Research and Development Report, School of Physics and Geosciences, WesternAustralian Institute of Technology \ \ \ \ \WAIT \School of Physics and Geosciences \Research and Development \ \ \Western Australia \ \ \HOLD 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990 \Various \OT2-86 \Monograph \#O 1988 Copy 1 is P.75; Copy 2 is P.77; 1989 Copy 1 is 1990.71, 1989 Copy2 is 1990.71; 1990 is 1991.125. Note that from 1991, corporate author isCurtin University of Technology. @\Research and Development Report, School of Physical Sciences \ \ \ \ \Curtin University of Technology \ \Research and Development \ \ \Western Australia \ \ \HOLD 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994 \Various \OT2-86 \Series \#O 1992.198 (Copy 1), 1992.199 (Copy 2), 1994.183. 1996.68 (Copy 1, 1994),1996.78 (Copy 2). Curtin University of Technology, Perth, was formerly theWestern Australian Institute of Technology (WAIT). See pre-1991 annual reportsof WAIT School of Physics and Geosciences.1993.143 mvk 30.11.92, 27.9.93,20.12.94 , 10.6.96, 10.7.96 @\School of Applied Geology Annual Report \ \ \ \ \Curtin University of Technology \ \Research and Development \ \ \Western Australia \ \ \HOLD 1991 \Various \OT2-86 \Series \#O 1993.34. Compiled R Bruce, P Collins, and S Wilde. Curtin Universityof Technology, Perth, was formerly the Western Australian Institute of Technology(WAIT). See pre-1991 annual reports of WAIT School of Physics and Geosciences.mvk 1.6.93 @\School of Surveying and Land Information Annual Report \ \ \ \ \Curtin University of Technology \ \Research and Development \Surveying \Mapping \Western Australia \ \ \HOLD 1992, 1993,1994 \Various \OT2-86 \Series \#O 1993.84. 1993 edition is 1994.105 Edited by Kylie Gare. 1994 reportis 1996.12 . Curtin University of Technology, Perth, was formerly the WesternAustralian Institute of Technology (WAIT). mvk 16.7.93, 19.7.94, 20.2.96 @\ Marine Studies Centre Research Report 1987-1989 \ \ Anderson.D \ Jones.C \ \ Marine Studies Centre \ University of Sydney \ Marine Science \ Oceanography \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 \ 70p \ OT3-80 \ \ #O 1991.104. ISSN 1034-6090 @\ Centre for Industrial Control Science. Annual Report 1990. \ \Goodwin. G \Evans .R \ \ University of Newcastle, NSW. \ Centre for Industrial Control Science \Education \ \ \ Australia \ \ \ 1991 \28p. \ OT3-80 \ \#O 1991.103 The aim of the centre is to translate basic research ito practicaloutcomes relevant to industry.This report focuses on the work of individualresearchers. On the theoretical side this includes robust control, designconstraints, adaptive control, nonlinear systems identification for control,and new techniques. @\ Research and Consultancy Report \ \ \ \ \ Queensland University of Technology \ \ Industrial research & development \ Technology transfer \ Marketing \ Queensland \ Australia \ \ 1988 \ 144p \ OT5-88 \ Monograph \ #O P.31 ISSN 0817 0592 @\QUT Space Centre for Satellite Navigation Space Industry Development CentreProject Report \ \ \ \ \Queensland University of Technology \ \Industrial Research and development \Technology transfer \Space Industry \Queensland \Australia \ \1995 May \9p \OT2-88 \Serial \#O 1996.21 SIDC funded by Australian National Space Program See also underOT15-88 mvk 16.3.96 @\ Tokai University \ \ \ \ \Tokai University \ \Scientific research \Education \ \Japan \ \ \1987 \n/a \OT12-63 \Monograph \Book mainly photographs @\QUT Space Centre for Satellite Navigation Space Industry Development CentreBusiness Plan \ \ \ \ \Queensland University of Technology \ \Industrial Research and development \Technology transfer \Space Industry \Queensland \Australia \ \1995 ? \15p \OT15-88 \Monograph \#O 1996.23 SIDC funded by Australian National Space Program. See also underOT2-88. 1996.21 mvk 16.3.96 @\QUT Space Centre for Satellite Navigation Space Industry Development CentreWork Program \ \ \ \ \Queensland University of Technology \ \Industrial Research and development \Technology transfer \Space Industry \Queensland \Australia \ \1995 \8p \OT15-88 \Serial \#O 1996.22 SIDC funded by Australian National Space Program See also underOT2-88 mvk 16.3.96 @\ITC Annual Report 1989 \ITC Annual Report \ \ \ \ITC \ \Aerospace \Earth Science \Surveying \Holland \ \ \1990 \65p \OT16-34 \Serial \#O, 1990.3 WT03-B26-86IA029-000311-B022-169http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatr2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114165950 text/html 46377HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:57:51 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:21 GMTContent-length: 46202 Catalogue Library catalogue R: REMOTE SENSING. [SEE ALSO (FR) Research aircraft] RA Agricultural/Forestry Applications; Drought; Agricultural land use; [not Land Use in general (RE); not Land use mapping aspect, (RC) nor Soil science(RT)] RC Cartographic (Mapping) Applications; Mapping aspect of Land Use & Vegetation, Surveying applications. [SEE ALSO (RT)] RD Defence/Surveillance, Arms Treaty Verification Applications [SEE ALSO(CN) Distress systems of Search & rescue; AD for Space Weapons] RE Environmental Applications; Land use in general; earth resources, geographical applications (land + people); regional & town planning applications,vegetation index; Fire detection; mixed applications RF Fisheries Applications (salt or freshwater) RH Hydrological Applications; fresh water resources applications apart from fisheries RI Instrumentation & equipment, instrument systems, emphasis on measurement technology [SEE RS for satellites, mission descriptions] RK Airborne research, aircraft carried remote sensing missions [SEE ALSO(FR) research aircraft, emphasis on aircraft] RM Marine/Oceanographic Applications, includes Coastal zones, [BUT SEE (RD) Surveillance, (CN) Distress systems] RR Remote sensing information & image processing, computer programs,facilities including Remote Sensing Groundstations [but SEE CN for navigation, communication ground facilities], Geographic Information Systems [SEE ALSO (RI) instruments, (CC) computers , (CL) Information systems, (CN) navigation, reception etc.] RS Remote sensing satellites (SPOT, Landsat, ERS-1, Polar Platform, MOS-1etc.); Earth observation satellites [multipurpose satellites SEE AN; Astronomical satellites SEE (XF) etc.] RT Terrestrial, Geological Applications; minerals & mining; Magneticsapplications; Glaciology applications; Topographical applications other than mapping;[SEE ALSO (TC- TZ)] ; Land Surveying etc., Topographic mapping SEE (RC) RW Weather (Forecasting) & Meteorological Applications, Atmospheric,Climate, Rainfall applications [if not (RH)] . Prefer (W) Weather if emphasis on discipline rather than remote sensing methods RX Films & videos on remote sensing RZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective); General remotesensing; overviews, scientific methods, calibration and validation where not specificto discipline; training, tenders for RS items. [ SEE ALSO Science & Environment side (TR), (PS)] @\Canadian activities in Terrestrial Imaging Spectrometry: Annual Report \ \Staenz.Karl \ \ \CCRS \ \Remote sensing instruments \Spectrometer \Imagers & Imaging \Canada \ \ \HOLD 1994 \ \RI2-11 \Serial \#G 1995.150 Contains useful list of imaging spectrometers, airborne andspaceborne. mvk 20.12.95 @\Series-X test results \ \Crow.R \Bletzacker.F \Najarian.R \NASA \ \Remote sensing instruments \GPS \Series-X \United States \ \ \n.d. \8p. \RI2-12 \(paper) \ #G Tests of GPS receivers Work:1982, paper 1983? 6 pa @\ Series-X Final engineering report, August 1984 \JPL D-1476 \Crow.R \Bletzacker.F \Najarian.R \NASA \ \Remote sensing instruments \GPS \Series-X \International \United States \ \1984 \various \RI2-12 \Monograph \ #G Former dbase no. 283 @\Report on SIR-B workshop at JPL May 1985 \ \Nilsson.C \ \ \CSIRO \NASA \SIR instruments \Remote sensing instruments \SIR-B Workshop \United States \ \ \1985 \various \RI2-12 \(conference papers) \Includes Workshop papers. @\SAR synthetic aperture radar \ \ \ \ \Aero Service \ \Remote sensing instruments \SAR \ \United States \ \ \1982 \13p. \RI2-12 \Monograph \#G @\ GOES-Next image and sounder, Jan. 1986 \ \Koenig.E \ \ \ITT \ \Remote sensing instruments \Imagers & imaging \GOES \Space \United States \ \1986 \11p. \RI2-12 \Monograph \#G Former dbase no. 789 @\Nonlinearity corrections for the thermal infrared channels of the AdvancedVery High Resolution Radiometer: Assessment and Recommendations \NOAA Technical Report NESDIS 69 \Rao.C.R.Nagaraja \Sullivan.J \Walton.C \NOAA \US. Dept. of Commerce \AVHRR \Radiometers \Space science \United States \ \ \1993 June \31p \RI2-12 \Monograph \#G 1993.136 Ed. by Rao (Office of Research & Applications, SatelliteResearch Laboratory). Other authors Brown.J, Evans.R, (University of Miami).Draws on work of AVHRR Pathfinder Calibration Working Group. mvk 26.9.93 @\Degradation of the visible and near-infrared channels of the AdvancedVery High Resolution Radiometer on the NOAA-9 spacecraft: Assessment andRecommendations for corrections \NOAA Technical Report NESDIS 70 \Rao.C.R.Nagaraja \Chen.Jianhua \Staylor.F \NOAA \US. Dept. of Commerce \AVHRR \Radiometers \Space science \United States \ \ \1993 June \25p \RI2-12 \Monograph \#G 1993.137 Ed. by Rao (Office of Research & Applications, SatelliteResearch Laboratory). Other authors Abel.P, Kaufman.Y, Vermote.E, Rossow.Wand Brest.C. Draws on work of AVHRR Pathfinder Calibration Working Group.mvk 26.9.93 @\SAR Ocean feature catalogue \ESA SP-1174 \Johannessen.J \Digranes.G \Espedal.H \ESA \ \Remote sensing instruments \SAR \Training \Europe \International \ \1994 Oct \106p \RI2-30 \Monograph \#G 1996.42 ISBN 92 9092 1331 1 mvk 8.4.96 @\Instrumentation and Ground Segment for remote sensing applications \ \ \ \ \MBB \ \Remote sensing instruments \Ground communications equipment \ \West Germany \ \ \n.d. \5p. \RI2-38 \Folder \1982? #G @\ MEOSS : Monocular Electro Optical Stereo Scanner : Announcement of Opportunityto propose. \ \ \ \ \ DFVLR German Aerospace Research Establishment \ \ MEOSS \ Remote sensing instruments \ \ Germany \ India \ \ 1986 \ 12p \ RI2-38 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.113 (Copy 1) P.338 (Copy 2, with letter from U R Rao of ISRO toKGM). See also 1991.114, RR2-53. Formerly dbase document 647. 22.12.91 @\ MEOSS ; Monocular Electro Optical Stereo Scanner Space Experiment \ \ Lanzl.F \ \ \ DFVLR German Aerospace Research Establishment \ \ MEOSS \ Remote sensing instruments \ \ Germany \ \ \ 1986 \ 17p \ RI2-38 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.114 See also 1991.113, RR2-53. Formerly dbase document 648. 22.12.91 @\Ericsson SLAR side looking airborne radar [Operators handbook] \LZT 110 130 \ \ \ \Ericsson \ \Remote sensing instruments \SLAR \ \Sweden \Space \ \n.d. \47p. \RI2-39 \Monograph \1985? Marked Y/PX 5014 A 85-03 jk 5.5.92 @\ Multispectral pushbroom infrared imager for earth resources remote sensing:a proposal for Australian-Indian collaboration, August 1986 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO. Division of Mineral Physics & Mineralogy \COSSA \Remote sensing instruments \Pushbroom imaging instrument \International relations \India \Australia \ \1986 \varies \RI2-53 \Monograph \1 copy unbound, with Attachments A,B,&C. @\MELCO's activities on remote sensing, July 1984, prepared for Bureau ofMeteorology [by] Mitsubishi Electric Corporation \ \ \ \ \Mitsubishi \ \Remote sensing information processing \Remote sensing instruments \Mitsubishi \Japan \ \ \1984 \n/a \RI2-63 \Monograph \Includes Image Processing System for MOS-1 and technical information onMOS-1 Microwave Scanning Radiometer. jk 6.5.92 @\Manual for SIROTEM Field Procedures and Data Interpretation \ \Buselli.G \McCracken.K \ \CSIRO Division of Mineral Physics & Mineralogy \ \Minerals & mining \Remote sensing instruments \Geology \Australia \ \ \1983 \ \RI2-80 \Monograph \#G P.269 Produced as part of AMIRA project "Advanced EM and IP Techniques"No. 80/P136. Marked "Confidential". jk 7.5.92 @\Technical assessment of the joint CSIRO/Bureau of Meteorology proposalfor a Geostationary Imager/Sounder over the Australian Region \CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research Technical Paper No. 15 \O'Brien.D \Mitchell.R \ \CSIRO \ \Remote sensing instruments \Meteorology \Environmental research \Australia \ \ \1987 \53p. \RI2-80 \Monograph \ #G P.159 (second copy) ISBN 0 643 04285 7 @\AVHRR Workshop Papers: Melbourne Australia 28 February 1994 \ \Prata.A \ \ \CSIRO \ \AVHRR \Radiometers \Remote sensing instruments \Australia \International \ \1994 \99p \RI2-80 \Conference papers \#G 1994.30 ISBN 0 643 05255 0 Printed by CSIRO Division of AtmosphericResearch, Workshop convened by CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research andCOSSA. Speakers included Kingwell (Global 1 km Land Data Project), Teillet(atmospheric correction); Steyn-Ross (infrared calibration); Mitchell (shortwave cal ibration); Simpson (cloud detection); sea surface temperature (Barton)and Prata (land surface temperature). Workshop funded by COSSA for the MDP19(Multi-Divisional Programme on Data Acquisition & Utilisation). mvk6.3.94 @\Measurement Report on one Light Table \Measurement Report M23736 \Gordon.J \ \ \CSIRO \CSIRO National Measurement Laboratory \Daedalus \Research aircraft \Remote sensing instruments \Australia \ \ \1994 \12 \RI2-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.85 Calibration measurements and calibration on Daedalus performedunder contract to COSSA. NML Ref. RS23736, File KB21/COS-1/15 Dated 18 February1994. mvk 13.8.95 @\LAWS Laser Atmospheric Sounder and Altimeter Instrument Panel Report \NASA Instrument Panel Reports \Curran.R \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing instruments \LASA \Eos \International \United States \ \1987 \89p. \RI3-05 \Monograph \#G Vol.2g of 11 vol. @\ Earth Observing System reports Vol.2e: HMMR, High-Resolution MultifrequencyMicrowave Radiometer \NASA Instrument Panel Report \Murphy.R \ \ \ NASA \ \ Remote sensing instruments \ HMMR \ Eos \ International \ United States \ \ 1987 \ 59p. \ RI3-05 \ Monograph \#G @\ System concept for wide-field-of-view observations of ocean phenomenafrom space: report of the Joint EOSAT/NASA SeaWiFS Working Group \ \Baker.J \ \ \EOSAT \NASA \Remote sensing instruments \SeaWiFS \Oceanography \United States \International \ \1987 \92p. \RI3-05 \Monograph \#G @\ Earth observing system reports Vol.1: Science and Mission RequirementsWorking Group Report; and Vol.1 (Appendix) \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Remote Sensing instruments \Eos \Environmental research \International \United States \ \1984 \51p. \RI3-05 \Monograph \Vol.1 & Vol.1(Appendix) of 11 vols. P.135, NASA TM-86129 jk 14/6/91.Volume 1 (Apprendix) is P.135. @\ Earth observing system reports Vol.2: From pattern to process: the strategyof the Earth Observing System, Eos Science Steering Committee report \ \Butler.D \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing instruments \Eos \Environmental research \International \United States \ \1985? \140p. \RI3-05 \Monograph \Vol. 2 of 11 vol. @\ Earth Observing System Reports Vol.2a: Data and information system, reportof the Eos Data Panel \NASA Technical Memorandum \Arvidson.R \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing instruments \Eos \Information systems \International \United States \ \1986 \ 49p. \RI3-05 \Monograph \#G Vol. 2a of 11 vol. Technical Memorandum no. 87777 @\ Earth Observation System reports Vol. 2b: MODIS, Moderate -ResolutionImaging Spectrometer, Instrumant Panel report \NASA Instrument Panel Report \Esaias.W \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing instruments \MODIS \Eos \International \United States \ \1986 \59p. \RI3-05 \Monograph \Vol. 2b of 11 vol. #G jk 6.5.92 @\ Earth Observation System reports Vol.2c: HIRIS, High-Resolution ImagingSpectrometer: science opportunities for the 1990s; Instrument Panel report \NASA Instrument Panel Report \Goetz.A \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing instruments \HIRIS \Eos \International \United States \ \1987 \74p. \RI3-05 \Monograph \Vol.2c of 11 vol.#G jk 6.5.92 @\ Earth Observing System reports Vol.2d : LASA, Lidar Atmospheric Sounderand Altimeter \NASA Instrument Panel Report \Curran.R \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing instruments \LASA \Eos \International \United States \ \1987 \74p. \RI3-05 \Monograph \Vol.2d of 11 vol. #G jk 6.5.92 See also LAWS. @\ Earth Observing System Vol.2f: SAR, Synthetic Apeture Radar InstrumentPanel Report \ NASA Instrument Panel Report \Carver.K \ \ \ NASA \ \ Remote sensing instruments \ SAR \ Eos \ International \ United States \ \ 1987? \ 233p. \ RI3-05 \ Monograph \ #G Vol.2f of 11 vol. @\ Earth Observing System reports Vol.2h: Altimetric System Panel report \ NASA Instrument Panel Report \Bindschadler.R \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing instruments \Altimetry \Eos \International \United States \ \1987 \61p. \RI3-05 \Monograph \Vol.2h of 11 vol. #G @\ Earth Observing System Announcement of Opportunity 19 Jan.1988 \ OSSA-1-88 \ \ \ NASA \ \ Remote sensing instruments \ Eos \ Environmental research \ International \ United Ststes \ \ 1988 \ 42p. \ RI3-05 \ Monograph \ #G AO OSSA 1-88 @\ Earth Observing System Background Information Package , Announcementof Opportunity 19 Jan. 1988 Part 1: Guidelines for proposal preparationapplicable to all investigations \OSSA-1-88 \ \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing instruments \Eos \Environmental research \International \United States \ \ 1988 \varies \RI3-05 \Monograph \#G @\CNES-NASDA Research Announcement "Polder on ADEOS" \ \ \ \ \CNES \NASDA \Remote sensing instruments \Announcements of Opportunity \ADEOS \International \France \Japan \1994 \78p \RI3-05 \Monograph \#G 1994.61 Labelled "ATC 33.61.20.05.87". Details of Polarizationand Directionality of Earth Reflectances sensor developed by CNES for flighton the NASDA Advanced Earth Observation satellite. POLDER is a wide field,moderate resolution multi spectral imaging radiometer/polarimeter for repetitiveobservation of solar radiation reflected by the earth. Applications includeocean colour, vegetation indices, and multi-spectral properties of cloudsand aerosols. Products should include Bidirectional Reflectance DistributionFunction and Bidirectional Polarization Distribution Function. mvk 30.4.94 @\ Eos S&MRWG Recommendations \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing instruments \ \Eos \International \United States \ \nd \various \RI3-05 \Monograph (set of viewgraphs) \ #G P.341 jk 12.5.92 @\ AVHRR Data Users Meeting (3rd: 1987, 16-18 Dec.:Rutherford Appleton Lab.,U.K.):Abstracts; including conclusions and recommendations from the previous Meetingin 1985 \ \ \ \ \AVHRR Data Users Meeting \ \Remote sensing applications \AVHRR \Environmental research \Great Britain \International \ \1987 \64p. \RI3-05 \(conference pub.) \ #G @\Proceedings of the International Symposium on Spectral Sensing Research,15-20 November 1992, Maui, Hawaii \ISSSR \ \ \ \ISSSR \ \Imagers & imaging \Spectrometers \Defence technology \International \United States \ \1992 \1364 \RI3-05 \Conference Proceedings \#C (ISSSR) In 2 volumes Vol 1 is 1994.26, Vol 2 is 1994.27. An InternationalSpace Year activity sponsored mainly by US Army Corps of Engineers, alsosupported by Asian Conference on Remote Sensing and CCRS. Attended by ChrisGraham of COSSA. Includes papers covering defence aspects of imaging spectrometers,overviews of EOS, AVHRR 1 km Land Project, AVIRIS, MODIS etc. mvk 6.3.94 @\Moniteq, monitoring environmental quality \ \ \ \ \Moniteq \ \Remote sensing instruments \Thermal infrared observations \ \Canada \International \ \n.d. \n/a \RI3-11 \Folder \Folder contains papers onremote sensing instruments, including Monograph:Analysis of Test and Flight Data from the Florescence Line Imager (FLI)by Borstad [et al], Canadian Special Pub. of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences83 [1985] #G @\ Analysis of test and flight data from the fluorescence line imager \ \Borstad.G \Edel.H \Gower.J \Canada. Dept. of Fisheries and Customs \ \Imagers & imaging \Fluorescence line imager \ \Canada \ \ \1985 \38p. \RI3-11 \In Folder \Monograph in Moniteq folder (RI3-11) @\High spectral resolution remote sensing of the land \ \Goetz.A \ \ \Proceedings of SPIE \ \Remote sensing instruments \High-resolution satellite data \Imagers & imaging \United States \International \ \1984 \13p. \RI3-12 \Reprint \Reprint of pp.56-68 of Proceedings of SPIE, vol.475 Remote Sensing @\ Shuttle Imaging Radar-C science plan, Sept. 1, 1986 \JPL pub. 86-29 \ \ \ \NASA \ \SAR \SIR instruments \Environmental research \United States \International \ \1986 \various \RI3-12 \Monograph \#G Describes conclusions of SIR-C Science Working Group (Craver.K and Elachi.C,chair ; Evans.D Executive Secretary). P.261 jk 7.5.92 @\ Shuttle Imaging Radar-C (SIR-C) experiment, research announcement, 30June 1987 [soliciting proposals for basic and applied research in the useof Radar Remote Sensing] \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing applications \SIR instruments \ \United States \International \ \1987 \ca. 21p. \RI3-12 \Monograph \NRA 87-OSSA-5. #G P.261 jk 7.5.92 @\NASA Research Announcement, Correlative Measurement Program in Supportof the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) Mission \NRA-89-OSSA-9 \ \ \ \NASA \ \Instrumentation and equipment \Instrument systems \Remote Sensing \Space \ \United States \1989 \Varies \RI3-12 \Monograph \Call for research proposals. Not seen 7.5.92 jk @\GEOSAT Altimeter geophysical data record users handbook, July 1987 \NOAA Technical Memorandum \Cheney.R \Douglas.B \Agreen.R \NOAA \ \Remote sensing instruments \Altimetry \Oceanography \United States \ \ \1987 \29p. \RI3-12 \Monograph \Photocopy. NOAA Technical Memorandum NOS NGS-46. #G P.262 jk 7.5.92 @\ Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS), a descriptionof the sensor, ground data processing facility, laboratory calibration andfirst results, Nov. 15, 1987 \JPL Publication \Vane.G \ \ \NASA \ \Spectrometers \Remote sensing instruments \AVIRIS \United States \ \ \1987 \97p. \RI3-12 \Monograph \JPL Pub. No. 87-38.#G P.263 jk 7.5.92 @\ Daedalus scanner applications ... worldwide, [annual] compendium \ \ \ \ \Daedalus Enterprises \ \Remote sensing instruments \Imagers & imaging \Daedalus \International \United States \ \HOLD 1979; 1980; 1981; 1982; 1983; 1984; 1985; 1986 \n/a \RI3-12 \Serial \Annual. !979 - 1986 are P.270 - P.277. Usually with D d V. @\Surface emittance, temperature, and thermal inertia derived from ThermalInfrared Scanner (TIMS) data for Death Valley, California \ \Kahle.A \ \ \Geophysics \ \Remote sensing instruments \ \ \United States \ \ \1987 \18p \RI3-12 \Reprint \#G P.264 Reprint from Geophysics Vol. 53, P858-874, with 13 B&W Figs.TIMS NASA's Thermal Infrared Multispectral Scanner. jk 7.5.92 @\ JPL Jet Propulsion Laboratory IS Program \ \ \ \ \JPL \ \Remote sensing instruments \Imagers & imaging \IS program \United States \International \ \n.d. \n/a \RI3-12 \Reprint \1983? Copy of OHPs / Overheads, first is "IS Program, goal: developthe capability to image in many contiguous spectral bands simultaneouslyin order to exploit the full spectural signature of surface materials ...for identification purposes". Also overview of JPL. #G P.265 jk 7.5.92Chris Graham has. @\ Proceedings of the Second Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer(AVIRIS) Workshop, June 4 and 5, 1990 \JPL Publication 90-54 \Green.R \ \ \NASA \JPL \Spectrometers \Remote sensing instruments \AVIRIS \United States \ \ \1990 Nov \280p \RI3-12 \Conference papers \#C (AVIRIS/TIMS), 1992.142 23.6.92 @\ Proceedings of the Third Airborne Visible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer(AVIRIS) Workshop, May 20 and 21, 1991 \JPL Publication 91-28 \Green.R \ \ \NASA \JPL \Spectrometers \Remote sensing instruments \AVIRIS \United States \ \ \1991 Aug \326p \RI3-12 \Conference papers kit \#C (AVIRIS/TIMS), 1992.143 , 1992.144 (Copy 2) Includes 27 35mm slidesin pouch in back. 23.6.92 @\ Proceedings of the Third Thermal Infrared Multispectral Scanner (TIMS)Workshop, May 22, 1991 \JPL Publication 91-29 \Abbott.E \ \ \NASA \JPL \TIMS \Remote sensing instruments \ \United States \ \ \1991 Aug \97p \RI3-12 \Conference papers kit \#C (AVIRIS/TIMS), 1992.145,Includes 12 35mm slides in pouch in back. 23.6.92 @\Proceedings of the Third Airborne Synthetic Aperture Radar (AIRSAR) Workshop,23-24 May 1991 \JPL Publication 91-30 \Van Zyl.J \ \ \NASA \JPL \Remote sensing instruments \SAR \ \United States \International \ \1991 Aug \236p \RI3-12 \Conference papers \#C (AVIRIS) 1992.147 Includes 27 35mm slides in pouch in back. @\ Second generation Meteosat definition studies on microwave & infraredvertical sounders \ESA STR-219 \Chedin.A \Pick.D \Rizzi.R \ESA \ \Remote sensing instruments \Sounding \ \Europe \ \ \1986 \103p. \RI3-30 \Monograph \#G @\Investigators preliminary report, September 1983: proceedings of the SAR-580Investigators Workshop (1983, April: JRC. Ispra) [The European SAR-580 experiment] \ \Trevett.J \ \ \ESA \SAR-580 Investigators Workshop \Remote sensing instruments \SAR \Environmental research \Europe \ \ \1983 \201p. \RI3-30 \Monograph \ @\ Investigators final report, Vol.1 , Proceedings of the SAR-580 InvestigatorsWorkshop (1984, May: JRC Ispra) [The European SAR-580 experiment] \ \Trevett.J \ \ \ESA \SAR-580 Investigators Workshop \Remote sensing instruments \SAR \Environmental research \Europe \ \ \1984 \168p. \RI3-30 \Monograph \ @\ Investigators final report, Vol.2, Proceedings of the European SAR-580Investigators Workshop \ \Trevett.J \ \ \ESA \SAR-580 Investigators Workshop \Remote sensing instruments \Land use mapping \Imaging and Imaging \Europe \International \ \1984 \765p. \RI3-30 \Monograph \#G P.266 Possibly should be in #C. Results of experiments using airborneSAR for mapping, ice & snow cover, marine studies etc. jk 7.5.92 @\MOMS-01, Modular Optoelectronic Multispectral Scanner for earth observation,first results of STS-7 mission, \Satellite Application \Meissner.D \Laucht.H \Bodechtel.J \MBB \ \Remote sensing instruments \MOMS-01 \ \West Germany \ \ \1985? \16p. \RI3-38 \Monograph \Data in booklet 1984; on title page: "presented at 1983 Joint [IGAARS'8]and National Radio Science-Commission F Meeting, San Francisco, Aug.31-Sept.2,1983." At printing data "3.85-1822". #G P.267 jk 7.5.92 @\Australian AVHRR Conference (1st:1986,22-24 Oct.:Perth): Abstracts \ \ \ \ \Australian AVHRR Conference \CSIRO \Remote sensing applications \AVHRR \Environmental research \Australia \ \ \1986 \35p. \RI3-80 \(conference pub.) \#C @\ Australian AVHRR Conference (1986, 22-24 Oct.:Perth), Proceedings \ \Prata.F \ \ \Australian AVHRR Conference \CSIRO \Remote sensing applications \AVHRR \Environmental research \Australia \ \ \1986 \322p. \RI3-80 \(conference pub.) \ #C @\ Australian Multi-experimental Assessment of SIR-B (AMAS) Final report,25th March 1987 \ \Richards.J \Forster.B \Milne.A \University of NSW. Centre for Remote Sensing \ \Remote sensing applications \AMAS project \SIR instruments \Australia \ \ \1987 \various \RI3-80 \Monograph \#G P.268 jk 7.5.92 @\ Acquisition and analysis of ground-based reflectance data \ \Marjoram.A \Vickery.P \McKenzie.D \International Journal of Remote Sensing \CSIRO \Remote sensing applications \Reflectance \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \8p. \RI3-80 \(paper) \Reprint of Int. J. Remote Sensing, pp.187-194 of V.6, 1985. #G @\Side Looking Airborne Radar \ \ \ \ \COSSA \Ericsson \SLAR \Remote sensing instruments \Radar \Australia \Sweden \ \1989 (?) \ \RI3-80 \Folder \#G 1995.101 Contains instrument details, brochures and technical informationabout use of Ericsson X-band SLAR of COSSA CSIRO F-27 for fisheries andother research. mvk 19.8.95 @\ Ocean-cryosphere topography advanced radar altimeter (OCTARA) proposalfor RADARSAT, an ocean/ice topography experiment, April 1983, Issue 1. \ \ \ \ \NERC \SERC \Remote sensing instruments \Glaciology \OCTARA \Great Britain \Polar regions \ \1983 \58p. \RI3-90 \Monograph \ @\Low-cost remote sensing utilisation, ground truth collection and cartographicequipment from India [Technical note] by P. Sudarsan [with collection ofpapers & brochures] \ \Sudarsan.P \ \ \ISRO \ \Remote sensing applications \Remote sensing instruments \Mapping \India \ \ \1986 \various \RI5-53 \(papers) \Include: Technical note; report "Remote sensing activities in India,past present & future" by Y.Rajan; "ISRO & NRSA Know-howfor Remote Sensing Utilisation Equipment [Interest Exploration Notes]"and product brochures. #G Reclassified from RI3-53 jk 7.5.92 @\NRSA Know-How for Remote Sensing Utilisation Equipments, Interest ExplorationNotes \ \ \ \ \NRSA \ \Remote sensing instruments \ \ \India \ \ \n/a \various \RI5-53 \Serial \BOUND with "Low cost remote sensing utilisation, by P. Sudarsan [withcollection of papers & brochures] RI5-53 #G Reclassified from RI3-53jk 7.5.92 @\Remote Sensing Survey \ \Embleton.Brian \Schaetzel.Stanley \ \CSIRO Division of Exploration Geoscience \Hawker de Havilland \Aerospace \Remote Sensing Instruments \Spectrometers \New South Wales \Australia \ \1989 (?) \ \RI5-82 \Folder \#G P.69 Survey to establish market for data from "Advanced TechnologyAirborne Imaging System for Earth Resources Remote Sensing" to be jointlydeveloped by CSIRO and Hawker de Havilland. Did not proceed beyond surveyin this incarnation (see also Mirrabooka proposals: later initiatives betweenCOSSA & BHP; COSSA and Trippett Shedden, etc). mvk 5.11.93 @\ Planning for future operational sensors and other priorities, [Report]June 1987 \NOAA Technical Report NESDIS \Fischer.J \ \ \NOAA \NESDIS \Remote sensing instruments \Future planning \ \United States \ \ \1987 \46p. \RI15-12 \Monograph \ NOAA Technical Report NESDIS 30. #G @\X-SAR Science plan \DFVLR-Mitt. 85-17 \Ottl.H \Valdoni.F \ \DFVLR \ \Space programs \Remote sensing instruments \X-SAR \Space \West Germany \ \1985 \160p. \RI15-38 \Monograph \#G Former dbase no. 590. jk 7.5.92 DFVLR-Mitt.85-17 ISSN 0176 7739 @\Daedalus Special Compendium: airborne Multispectral Applications Worldwide \ \ \ \ \Daedalus Enterprises \ \Daedalus \Remote sensing instruments \Remote sensing applications \International \United States \ \1994(?) \32p \RK1-05 \Monograph \#G 1994.156 Examples of uses of airborne Daedalus multispectral scanner.Includes COSSA/Air Target Services Lear jet, uses for bush fire spottingand algal bloom detection, by Donald de Vries of COSSA. mvk 19.11.94 @\ER-2 Flight summary report 4 October 1990 \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing applications \Research aircraft \ \United States \ \ \1990 \ \RK2-12 \Monograph \#G 1994.157 Report of Flight 91-002 over Colorado, Arizona, California,of NASA Ames ER-2 , carrying AVIRIS, TIMS, TMS and Wild-Heerbrug RC-10.Includes maps. mvk 19.11.94 @\Airborne Synthetic Aperture Radar With Four-Polarization \ \ \ \ \IEAS \ \SAR \Research aircraft \Remote sensing instruments \China \ \ \1990 \ \RK2-61 \monograph \#G 1990.138 (From Chinese research party 19.2.90: Professor Tony Qingxi). @\ Airborne Antarctic ozone experiment, Project Office MS245-5., NASA AmesResearch Centre \ \ \ \ \NASA \Ames \Atmospheric research \Global Change \Research aircraft \Antarctica \ \ \1987 \49p \RK2-95 \#G P.278 Planning document July 1987. @\International Airborne Remote Sensing Conference and Exhibition \ \ \ \ \ERIM \ \Research aircraft \Remote sensing applications \Data collection systems \International \ \ \HOLD 1994 \ \RK3-05 \Conference proceedings \#C 1995.13 Proceedings of First Conference, 12-15 September 1994, Strasbourg,France, in 3 vols: 1995.13.1, 1995.13.2, 1995.13.3 ISSN 1076 7924 Conferenceattended by Don de Vries of COSSA. mvk 15.2.95 @\ NASA/JPL aircraft SAR operations for 1984 and 1985, November 1, 1986 \JPL Publication 86-20 \Thompson.T \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing applications \Research aircraft \SAR \United States \ \ \1986 \various \RK3-12 \Monograph \ @\ Relations between warm springs and geology delineated by Side-LookingAirborne Radar Imagery in eastern West Virginia \ USGS Water-Resources Investigation Reports, No. 88-4096 \ Lessing.P \ Hobba.W \ Dean.S \ USGS \ \ Geology & Geophysics \ SLAR \ Water resources research \USA \ \ \ 1991 \ 44p \ RK3-12 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.62 Report on analysis of 1982 X-band SAR , H-H polarised data,from which lineament information was extracted and related to occurrenceof natural warm springs. Chemical analysis of spring water was performedto define geological and structural controls applying. jk 14.10.91 @\Volcanic Ash Flight 11.7.93 \ \Kingwell.Jeff \ \ \COSSA \CSIRO \Volcanoes \Remote sensing instruments \AHADS \Japan \Australia \ \1993 \ \RK3-63 \Video \#AV AV.43 Video of Prime Television News interview and segment on airbornetest of CSIRO's Airborne Hazards Detection System (AHADS) over Mount Sakurajima,Kagoshima Japan, July 1993. mvk 26.11.94 @\Volcanic Ash Flight 11.7.93 \ \Kingwell.Jeff \Barton.Ian \Prata.Fred \COSSA \CSIRO \Volcanoes \Remote sensing instruments \AHADS \Japan \Australia \ \1993 \ \RK3-63 \Video \#AV AV.44 Video taken by Kingwell of airborne tests (by Barton, Prata,Kingwell, and Showa Aviation of Nagoya) of CSIRO's Airborne Hazards DetectionSystem (AHADS) over Mount Sakurajima, Kagoshima Japan, July 1993. mvk 26.11.94 @\ TITLE Remote sensing for marine studies : report of the seminar on remotesensing applications for Oceanography and Fishery Environemtn Analysis. \ SERIES.TITLE RAS/86/141 \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 ESCAP/UNDP \ CORP.AUTHR.2 State Science and Technology Commission of China \ KEYWORD.1 Marine Science \ KEYWORD.2 Marine Resources \ KEYWORD.3 ESCAP \ REGION.1 North Asia \ REGION.2 East Asia \ REGION.3 Pacific \ DATE 1990 (?) \ PAGINATION 331p \ CLASSC'N RM1-60 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.39 Also labelled ST/ESCAP/897. About 40 papers includingthose oncoastal zone, estuary & island management; sea ice and temperaturemonitoring; fisheries productivity forecasting; data acquisition & processing.Includes reference to use of aircraft & airships as well as satellite. @\Satellite remote Sensing of the Oceanic Environment \PORSEC \Jones.Ian.S.F \Sugimori.Y \Stewart.R.W \ \ \Remote sensing applications \Oceanography \Tropical Marine Science \Oceania \Pacific Ocean \ \1993 \528p \RM2-75 \Monograph \#G 1996.1 ISBN 4 915342 10 7 With Index. Published Seibutsu Kenkyusha.Based in part on papers originally presented at Pacific Ocean Remote SensingConference (PORSEC). mvk 4.1.96 @\ Development and Application of Aerosol Remote Sensing with AVHRR Datafrom the NOAA Satellites \ \Rao.N \Stowe.L \McClain.P \NOAA \Science Systems and Applications, Inc. \Atmospheric research \Remote Sensing \Radiometer \International \ \ \After 1987 \10p. \RM3-05 \Abstract \Fourth author: Sapper.J, Science Systems and Applications, Inc. USA @\Remote Sensing of Aerosols over the Oceans using AVHRR Data: Theory, Practiceand Applications \Rao.N \Stowe,L \McClain \NOAA \ \Atmospheric Research \Remote Sensing \Radiometer \International \ \ \1988 \12p. \RM3-05 \Brochure \ @\ Aerosol Radiative Corrections to the Retrieval of Sea Surface Temperaturesfrom Radiances measured from Satellites \ \Rao.N \ \ \NOAA \ \Atmospheric research \Radiometer \ \International \United States \1986 \19p. \RM3-05 \Monograph \ @\ Altimetry research in ocean circulation, NASA announcement opportunity,NASA TOPEX-POSEIDON CNES Oceanography from space \ OSSA-2-86 \ \ \ \NASA \ \Oceanography \Remote sensing instruments \TOPEX-POSEIDON \Interational \United States \France \1986 \22p. \RM3-05 \Monograph \Written on cover: Appendix V. (SSIV COSPAR) @\Mission to Planet Earth: TOPEX-POSEIDON , a United States/France Mission.Oceanography from space: the Oceans and Climate. \ \ \ \ \NASA \CNES \TOPEX-POSEIDON \Oceanography \Global change \France \United States \International \1992 \21p \RM3-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.185 Coloured brochure overview. mk 16.10.92 @\ Nonlinear Multichannel Algorithms for Estimating Sea Surface Temperaturewith AVHRR Satellite Data \Journal of Applied Meteorology \Walton.C \ \ \NOAA \ \Marine Technology \Remote Sensing \Oceanography \Space \ \ \1988 \10p. \RM3-05 \Abstract \Journal of Applied Meteorology, Vol.27, No.2, February 1988 @\The Marine Resources Experiment Program (MAREX) Report of the Ocean Color Science Working Party \ \ \ \ \Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Atmospheric Research \Remote Sensing \NOAA \International \ \ \1982 \9p. \RM3-05 \Abstract \ @\Multi-channel improvements to satellite-derived global sea surface temperatures \ \McClain.E \Pichel.W \Waltom.C \NOAA \ \Remote sensing \Marine technology \AVHRR \International \ \ \1982 \11p \RM3-05 \Paper \#G Preprint from COSPAR 24, Ottawa 22-29 May 1982. @\ Remote sensing of atmosphere and oceans: abstracts [of papers presentedat the joint conference of] International Society of Acoustic Remote SensingSymposium (4th:Canberra: 1988: 16-24 Feb.) and Australasian Conference onthe Physics of Remote Sensing of Atmosphere and Ocean (2nd:Canberra: 1988:16-24 Feb.) \ \ \ \ \ISARS \Australasian Conference on the Physics of Remote Sensing of Amosphere andOcean \Remote sensing \Atmospheric research \Oceanography \International \Australia \ \1988 \92p. \RM3-05 \Monograph \Abstracts include bibliographies @\Remote sensing of atmosphere and oceans: proceedings Vol.1 of joint conferenceof 4th Symposium of the International Scoiety of Acoustic Remote Sensingand 2nd Australasian Conference on the Physics of Remote Sensing of Atmosphereand Ocean (1988, 16-24 Feb.: Canberra) \ \ \ \ \ISARS \Australasian Conference on the Physics of Remote Sensing of Atmosphereand Ocean \Remote sensing \Atmospheric research \Oceanography \International \Australia \ \1988 \varies \RM3-05 \(Conf. pub.) \Vol.1 contains papers 1-39 @\ Remote sensing - the global perspective. \ \Konecny.G \ \ \ \ \Remote Sensing \Marine Science \Environmental research \International \Australia \ \1988 \Varies \RM3-05 \#G. Keynote address, International Remote Sensing Symposium, Gold Coast. @\NASA Oceanic Processes Program, biennial report- fiscal years 1986 and1987, February 1988 \NASA Technical Memorandum \Greaves.J \ \ \NASA \ \Oceanography \Remote sensing applications \Oceanic Processes Program \United States \International \ \1988 \192p. \RM3-05 \Monograph \#G No. 4025 @\Altimetry research in ocean circulation, CNES announcement of opportunity,NASA TOPEX-POSEIDON CNES, oceanography from space [in French and English]July 15, 1986 \ \ \ \ \CNES \ \Oceanography \Remote sensing instruments \TOPEX-POSEIDON \International \France \United States \1986 \19p \RM3-05 \Monograph \#G @\Altimetry research in ocean circulation, NASA Announcement of Opportunity,NASA TOPEX-POSEIDON CNES Oceanography from space \OSSA-2-86 \ \ \ \NASA \ \Oceanography \Remote sensing instruments \TOPEX-POSEIDON \International \United States \France \1986 \22p. \RM3-05 \Monograph \Written on cover: Appendix V. @\ Remote sensing of the oceans, the potential benefit of satellite systemsto marine science and applications \ \ \ \ \Institute of Oceanographic Sciences \CERC \Remote sensing applications \Oceanography \ \Great Britain \International \ \n.d. \10p. \RM3-05 \Monograph \After June 1983. @\Radar altimetry over sea ice \ \Powell.R \Birks.A \Wrench.C \ESA \ \Remote sensing applications \Altimetry \Glaciology \International \Great Britain \ \1984 \5p. \RM3-05 \(paper) \#G P.440 Reprint of pp.129-133 of Proceedings of a Workshop on ERS-1 RadarAltimeter Data Products, Frascati, Italy, 8-11 May 1984,(ESA SP-221, Aug.1984) @\ Science opportunities from the TOPEX-POSEIDON Mission, July 15, 1986 \JPL Publication 86-18 \Stewart.R \Fu.L \Lefebvre.M \NASA \ \Scientific research \TOPEX-POSEIDON \Future planning \Space \International \United States \1986 \58p. \RM3-05 \Monograph \#G P.147 (Copy 1), 1991.73 (Copy 2) @\Radar probing of the ocean and its applications \Japan/Australia S&T Workshop Report \Coleman.R \Kawamura.H \ \ Ocean Research Institute, University of Sydney \University of Tokyo \Remote sensing applications \Ocean dynamics monitoring \JERS-1 \International \Australia \Japan \1991 \36p \RM3-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.110 Workshop held in Tokyo, 3-4 April 1991, under Australia/JapanScience and Technology Agreement. 12.6.92 @\The Oceanic satellite challenge \ \Sherman.J \McElroy.J \ \NOAA \ \Oceanography \Satellites \Remote sensing applications \United States \International \ \1985 \8p. \RM3-05 \(paper) \#G P.45 Copy 1, P.46 Copy 2. Summaries of DMSP, Geosat, N-ROSS, ERS-1,Topex-Poseidon. mvk 6.3.94 @\Remote sensing and geographical information systems: their past, presentand future use in global marine fisheries \ \Simpson.James \ \ \ \ \Remote sensing information processing \Oceanography \Fisheries \United States \International \ \1992 \42p \RM3-12 \Preprint \#G 1994.34 From Fish. Oceanogr. 1:3, 238-280, 1992. Describes design elementsof GIS for fisheries use. Simpson is from the Scripps Satellite OceanographyCenter. mvk 6.3.94. @\Recurrent patterns in surface thermal fronts associated with cold filamentsalong the West Coast of North America \ \Randerson.James.T \Simpson.James.J \ \ \ \Remote sensing information processing \Ocean dynamics monitoring \AVHRR \United States \International \Oceania \1993 \18p \RM3-12 \Rreprint \#G 1994.120 From Remote Sens. Environ. 46, 146-63, 1993. Uses AVHRR imageryto study narrow filament jets within California Current. Simpson is fromthe Scripps Satellite Oceanography Center, University of California in SanDiego, and was a consultant to COSSA 1994. mvk 6.3. @\ Status and prospects of the JRC work on the application of ocean colourmonitoring from space \Remote sensing from space \Sturm.B \Bekkering.A \Fraysse.G \Commission of the European Communities. JRC. Ispra \ \Remote sensing applications \Oceanography \Ocean colour monitoring \Europe \Mediterranian Sea \ \1986 \19p+ App. \RM3-30 \Monograph \#G P.279 10.5.92 [ R continues next page ] WT03-B26-87IA029-000311-B022-206http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatr6.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170027 text/html 59479HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:58:37 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:31 GMTContent-length: 59304 Catalogue Library catalogue R: REMOTE SENSING. [SEE ALSO (FR) Research aircraft] RA Agricultural/Forestry Applications; Drought; Agricultural land use; [not Land Use in general (RE); not Land use mapping aspect, (RC) nor Soil science(RT)] RC Cartographic (Mapping) Applications; Mapping aspect of Land Use & Vegetation, Surveying applications. [SEE ALSO (RT)] RD Defence/Surveillance, Arms Treaty Verification Applications [SEE ALSO(CN) Distress systems of Search & rescue; AD for Space Weapons] RE Environmental Applications; Land use in general; earth resources, geographical applications (land + people); regional & town planning applications,vegetation index; Fire detection; mixed applications RF Fisheries Applications (salt or freshwater) RH Hydrological Applications; fresh water resources applications apart from fisheries RI Instrumentation & equipment, instrument systems, emphasis on measurement technology [SEE RS for satellites, mission descriptions] RK Airborne research, aircraft carried remote sensing missions [SEE ALSO(FR) research aircraft, emphasis on aircraft] RM Marine/Oceanographic Applications, includes Coastal zones, [BUT SEE (RD) Surveillance, (CN) Distress systems] RR Remote sensing information & image processing, computer programs,facilities including Remote Sensing Groundstations [but SEE CN for navigation, communication ground facilities], Geographic Information Systems [SEE ALSO (RI) instruments, (CC) computers , (CL) Information systems, (CN) navigation, reception etc.] RS Remote sensing satellites (SPOT, Landsat, ERS-1, Polar Platform, MOS-1etc.); Earth observation satellites [multipurpose satellites SEE AN; Astronomical satellites SEE (XF) etc.] RT Terrestrial, Geological Applications; minerals & mining; Magneticsapplications; Glaciology applications; Topographical applications other than mapping;[SEE ALSO (TC- TZ)] ; Land Surveying etc., Topographic mapping SEE (RC) RW Weather (Forecasting) & Meteorological Applications, Atmospheric,Climate, Rainfall applications [if not (RH)] . Prefer (W) Weather if emphasis on discipline rather than remote sensing methods RX Films & videos on remote sensing RZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective); General remotesensing; overviews, scientific methods, calibration and validation where not specificto discipline; training, tenders for RS items. [ SEE ALSO Science & Environment side (TR), (PS)] @\ Proceedings of the 13th Asian Conference on Remote Sensing \ \ \ \ \ ACRS \ \ Remote Sensing Applications \ Information Systems \ \ Mongolia \ Asia \ \ 1992 \ \ RZ1-61 \ Conference Proceedings and papers \ #C ("Asian Conference on Remote Sensing") 1992.204 From ACRS13, 7-11 October 1992, Ulaan Baatar, Mongolia. Attended by COSSA's JeffKingwell. Also Program, brochures & associated conf. papers. 2/12/92 @\ Proceedings of the 14th Asian Conference on Remote Sensing \ \ \ \ \ ACRS \ \ Remote Sensing Applications \ Information Systems \ \ Iran \ Asia \ \ 1993 \ \ RZ1-61 \ Conference Proceedings and papers \ #C ("Asian Conference on Remote Sensing") 1994.140 From ACRS14, 12-17 October 1993, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Attended by Timof DWR for COSSA mvk 30/10/94 @\Remote sensing in China \ \Doornkamp.J \ \ \Int. J Remote Sensing \ \Remote sensing \ \ \China \ \ \1985 \9p. \RZ1-61 \(paper) \#G P.523 Copy of pp.807-814 of Int. J Remote Sensing, vol.6, no.5, 1985.China visit of 1984 @\ Report on the 7th Remote Sensing Conference, Seoul, Korea, 23rd-28thOct.1986 [with his paper: Remote sensing in Australia, a report on Australianactivities] \ \Aubrey.M \ \ \Technical & Field Surveys Ltd \Asian Association of Remote Sensing \Remote sensing \Overseas visits \ \Korea \ \ \1986 \n/a \RZ1-62 \(paper) \#C (Asian Conference on Remote Sensing), P.487. CO-sponsored by COSSA andNSW Govt. @\Remote sensing activities in Republic of Korea, by Dr. Pil Chong Kang \ \Kang.P \ \ \Korea Institute of Energy & Resources \ \Remote sensing \ \ \Korea \ \ \1986 \6p. \RZ1-62 \(paper) \#G P.488 Presented at the Japan Seminar on Space, 1986 . @\Proceedings International Symposium on Remote Sensing, Satellite DataApplication to Industry and International Cooperation, Tokyo, 8-9 September1994 \ \ \ \ \ERSDAC \ \Remote sensing applications \Overseas visits \International cooperation \Japan \International \ \1994 \290p \RZ1-63 \Conference proceedings, bound \#G 1994.216 (Copy 1), 1994.217 (Copy 2). In Japanese and English. Includesinvited paper presented by Dr Brian Embleton, Head of COSSA. mvk 29.12.94 @\Remote sensing Working Party : Report of visit to Indonesia, Malaysiaand the Philippines, 18-30 July 1986 \ \Tripppett.J \McEwan.D \Richards.J \SISC \Australia.Dept. of Science \Overseas visits \International cooperation \South East Asia \Indonesia \Philippines \1986 \55p. \RZ1-65 \Monograph \#G P.489 @\ Space development and remote sensing activities in Indonesia, [presented]at the Japan Seminar on Space Applications (1986, March 24-28: Tokyo, Japan) \ \Irsyam.M \Soejoeti.Z \ \LAPAN \ \Remote sensing \Space technology \ \Indonesia \ \ \1986 \4p. \RZ1-66 \(paper) \#G P.490 Mentions Indonesian rocket testing. @\Remote sensing activities in Singapore [by] Chong Yean Joo \ \Joo.C \ \ \National University of Singapore \ \Remote sensing \ \ \Singapore \ \ \1986 \5p. \RZ1-67 \(paper) \#G P.491 Presented at the Japan Seminar on Space Applications (1986 March23-28: Tokyo, Japan) @\Space development and remote sensing activities in Thailand \ \ \ \ \TRSC \ \Remote sensing \Space technology \ \Thailand \ \ \1986 \6p. \RZ1-68 \(paper) \#G P.492 Presented at the Japan Seminar on Space Applications, March 23-28,1986,Tokyo, Japan. @\Remote sensing activities in the Philippines [paper] presented at theJapan Seminar on Space Applications (1986, 23-28 March: Tokyo, Japan \ \De Jesus.B \ \ \Philippines. NRMC. Remote Sensing Div. \ \Remote sensing \Space technology \ \Philippines \ \ \1986 \7p. \RZ1-72 \#G P.493 (paper) @\Request for tender for supply and installation of upgrade to the AustralianLANDSAT Station for the Division of National Mapping, closing date: Tuesday3 June 1986 \ \ \ \ \Australia. Dept. of Local Govt. \ \Tenders \Australian Landsat Station \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \141p. \RZ1-80 \Monograph \#G P.499 Req. No. 57/39485C. Unsuccessfully sought by CSIRO (Exp. Geos.) @\Remote sensing in Australia \ \Walker.R \ \ \AUSTRADE \ \Remote sensing \ \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \24p. \RZ1-80 \Monograph \#G P.494 Prepared with assistance from COSSA. ISBN 0 644 00763 @\ Satellite sensing Australia \ \Myers.D \ \ \WASTAC \ \Remote sensing \Satellites \ \Australia \ \ \1987 \31p. \RZ1-80 \Monograph \#G P.495 Copy 1 P.503 Copy 2. @\ Remote sensing and the future of the Australian Landsat Station [Report]Revision 1, 4 Sept. 1984 \ \Gray.D \ \ \NATMAP \ \Remote sensing \Ground communications stations \Australian Landsat Station \Australia \ \ \1984 \53p. \RZ1-80 \Monograph \#G P.496 Copy 1 P.497 Copy 2 . See also P.369, P.122 at RS2-80 @\ Remote sensing and the future of the Australian Landsat Station [Report,recommendations only] \ \Gray.D \ \ \NATMAP \ \Remote sensing \ \Australian Landsat Station \Australia \ \ \1984 \xp. \RZ1-80 \Monograph \#G P.498 See also P.496, P.497. @\Remote sensing by satellite- applications in Australia, Attachment A [andAustralian interest papers] \ \ \ \ \ \ \Remote sensing \Satellites \ \International \Australia \ \n.d. \ca.26p. \RZ1-80 \(paper) \#G P.500 Confidential. Information: 1981. Written on paper: COPUOS. Consistsof briefing papers, inc. ADAB and Foreign Affairs. Reflects conservativeapproach to export and use of Australian remote sensing capabilities. @\ Australian Liaison Committee on Remote Sensing by Satellite ActivitiesReport 1979-1990 \ \ \ \ \ ALCORSS \ DAS \ Remote sensing \ Satellites \ Space industry \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 \ 39p + 17 \ RZ1-80 \ Monograph \ #G ISBN 0 642 15712 X 1990.53 (Copy 1) 1990.58 (Copy 2) @\ Remote sensing in Queensland [1984 activities report] \ \ \ \ \Queensland Remote Sensing Committee \ \Remote sensing \ \ \Queensland \Australia \ \1984 \47p. \RZ1-88 \Monograph? \#G P.501 @\ Application of remote sensing techniques \Programme progress report July-Dec. 1985 \Fraysse.G \ \ \Commission of the European Communities. JRC. Ispra \ \Remote sensing applications \Scientific research \ \Europe \ \ \1985 \33p. \RZ2-30 \Monograph \#G P.502 @\ Inventory of Remote Sensing Facilities and Activities in the ESCAP region \ \ \ \ \ ESCAP/UNDP Regional Remote Sensing Programme \ \ Remote sensing \ Directories \ \ International \ Asia \ Pacific \ 1990 \ 270 p \ RZ2-60 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.100 Supplement to Regional Remote Sensing Inventory of May 1989.UNDP-RAS 86/141. mk 3.12.91 @\Remote sensing note \ \Murai.S \ \ \Japanese Association on Remote Sensing \ \JARS \Training \Remote sensing \Japan \International \Asia \1993 \284p \RZ2-63 \Monograph \#G 1996.39 Published for International Space Year. Earlier (1975) versionwas a textbook. This version expanded and revised. mvk 8.4.96 @\ TRSC LANDSAT data catalog, LANDSAT 3 (Mar 82-Jan 83) \ \ \ \ \TRSC \Thailand. Ministry of Science & Technology \Data \LANDSAT \Remote sensing applications \Thailand \International \ \1983 \171p. \RZ2-68 \Monograph \ #G P.524 @\The utilization of remote sensing in the South Pacific \ACIAR Technical Reports 19 \van R Claasen.Dan \ \ \ACIAR \ \Training \Remote Sensing Applications \Development Assistance \Pacific Islands \Pacific \ \1992 \59 \RZ2-77 \Monograph \#G 1995.136 ISBN 1 86320 059 2 mvk 10.12.95 @\ Remote sensing, today' s solutions for tomorrow's information needs:proceedings of IGARSS'86 Symposium (1986, 8-11 Sept.: Zurich). Vol. 1; Vol.2;of 3 Vols. \ESA SP-254 \Guyenne.T \Hunt.J \ \ESA \IGARSS \Remote sensing \Information science \Environmental research \International \ \ \1986 \Vol.1 + Vol.2 1212p. \RZ3-05 \(Conf. Pub.) \# C (IGARSS) Vol 1 P.511, Vol 2 P.512. Missing Vol. 3 [p. 1215+] @\Surface and Atmospheric Remote sensing; technologies, data analysis andinterpretation: proceedings of IGARSS'94 Symposium (1994, 8-12 Aug.: Pasadena,California). Final Program. \ \ \ \ \IEEE \IGARSS \Remote sensing \Information science \Environmental research \International \ \ \1994 \656p. \RZ3-05 \(Conf. Pub.) \# C (IGARSS) Includes abstracts of papers. Paper by Graetz, Wilson, Prata,Barton & Mitchell on CIGSN, no abstract. mvk 12.12.95 @\ Proceedings of the Fifth UN/FAO/WMO/ESA Training Course on the Use ofRemote Sensing in Hydrological and Agrometeorological Applications, CanberraMay-June 1989. \ \ de Vries.D \ \ \ COSSA CSIRO Office of Space Science and Applications \ \ Hydrology \ Technology transfer \ Agriculture \ International \ East Asia \ Australia \ 1991 \ 236p \ RZ3-05 \ Conference proceedings \ #G 1991.109 (Copy 1), 1991.110 (Cpoy 2). Conference organised by COSSAon behalf of AIDAB. Designed to provide participants from developing countriesin the ESCAP region with practical knowledge of remote sensing in relationto agriculture and hydrology. ISBN 0 643 05210 0 ISSN 0818 4291 COSSA PublicationNo. 026 of April 1991. 22.12.91 @\ Remote sensing of the earth from space: a program in crisis \ \Bernstein.R \ \ \NRC \ \Remote sensing applications \Space programs \ \United States \International \ \1985 \98p. \RZ3-12 \Monograph \#G P.513 Contract report by Space Applications Board of National ResearchCouncil to NASA and NOAA @\NASA Earth science program of the future \ \Arnold.R \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing applications \ \ \United States \Australia \ \1987 \15p \RZ3-12 \Conference paper \#C (Austr. Conf Remote Sensing). Paper presented at 4th Australasian RemoteSensing Conference, Adelaide, Sept. 1987. @\Programme, applications of remote sensing: publications 1980-1985 \ \ \ \ \ \ \Remote sensing applications \Bibliographies \ \Europe \ \ \1985 \12p. \RZ3-30 \Monograph \Scope: European authors,inc. Comm. of the European Comunities JRC. Isprastaff. #G P.514 @\ Evaluation of the Swedish remote sensing research programme, February1985, report to the Swedish Board for Space Activities \Dnr 11-83 1985-02-04 \Begni.G \Saint.G \Cazenave.M \SBSA \ \Remote sensing \Scientific research \Space programs \Sweden \ \ \1985 \47p. \RZ3-39 \Monograph \#G P.521 @\ Research and development activities in remote sensing applications (1970-85)a compendium, January 1986, Status Report (Compendium) [by] Remote SensingApplications Group, Space Applications Centre \ SAC/RSA-RSAG/SR/01-86 \Sahai.B \Tamilarasan.V \Ghosh.R \ISRO \ \Remote sensing applications \Environmental research \Space programs \India \ \ \1986 \ca 190p. \RZ3-53 \Monograph \#G P.522 @\ LANDSAT 79, Proceedings of the 1st Australasian Remote Sensing Conference(1979, 22-25 May: Sydney) \ \Green.A \Huntington.J \Cook.R \LANDSAT Organising Committee \Australasian Remote Sensing Conference \Remote sensing \Environmental research \LANDSAT \Australia \New Zealand \ \1979 \667p. \RZ3-80 \(Conference pub.) \#C P.518 (Australasian Remote Sensing Conference). ISSN 0725 0088 @\ LANDSAT 84, Proceedings of the 3rd Australasian Remote Sensing Conference(1984, 21-25 May, Gold Coast) \ \Walker.E \ \ \LANDSAT Organising Committee \Australasian Remote Sensing Conference \Remote sensing \Environmental research \LANDSAT \Australia \New Zealand \ \1984 \774p \RZ3-80 \(Conference pub.) \#C P.519 (Australasian Remote Sensing Conference). ISSN 0725 0088 @\ Australasian Remote Sensing Conference (4th: 1987, 14-18 Sept.: Adelaide):Proceedings, Operational remote sensing and the aerospace industry. 2 vols. \ \Bruce.D \ \ \Australasian Remote Sensing Conference \Remote Sensing Association of Australia \Remote sensing \Space industry \Environmental research \Australia \ \ \1987 \842p. \RZ3-80 \(Conf. pub.) \#C. In 2 vol. P.525 Copy 1 Vol 1 P.526 Copy 1 Vol 2. P.527, P.528 Copy2. @\Australasian Remote Sensing Conference (5th: 1990, 8-12 Oct.: Perth):Proceedings, Operational remote sensing for developing and managing Earthresources. 2 vols. \ \Houghton.H \Campbell.N \ \Australasian Remote Sensing Conference \Remote Sensing Association of Australia \Remote sensing \Space industry \Environmental research \Australia \Western Australia \ \1990 \647p, 648-1299p. \RZ3-80 \(Conf. pub.) \#C. In 2 vol.: 1990.55, 1990.56. See also loose papers 1990.57. ISBN 07309 3929 4. \Australasian Remote Sensing Conference (5th: 1990, 8-12 Oct.: Perth): Proceedings,Operational remote sensing for developing and managing Earth resources.Folder of papers. \ \ \ \ \Australasian Remote Sensing Conference \Remote Sensing Association of Australia \Remote sensing \Space industry \Environmental research \Australia \Western Australia \ \1990 \ \RZ3-80 \Folder \#C. Loose papers 1990.57, inc. Trade Exhibition listing. See also 2 vol.Proc: 1990.55, 1990.56, ISBN 0 7309 3929 4. @\Australasian Remote Sensing Conference (6th: 1992, 2-6 Nov., WellingtonNew Zealand) : Proceedings, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information - thefunctions, the payback, the future. 3 vols. \ \Bellis.S \Ching.N \McNeill.S \Australasian Remote Sensing Conference \Remote Sensing Association of Australia \Remote sensing \Space industry \Environmental research \New Zealand \Australia \ \1992 \ \RZ3-80 \(Conf. pub.) \#C. In 3 vol.: 1993.18.1, 1993.18.2, 1993.18.3 ISBN 0 473 01676 1 mvk 22.2.93 @\Australasian Remote Sensing Conference (7th: 1994, 1-4 March, Melbourne):Proceedings, Mapping resources, monitoring the environment, and managingthe future. 2 vols. \ \Woodgate.P \Turner.P \ \Australasian Remote Sensing Conference \Remote Sensing and Photogrammetry Association Australia Ltd \Remote sensing \Space industry \Environmental research \ \Australia \ \1994 \ \RZ3-80 \(Conf. pub.) \#C. In 2 vol.: 1995.116.1, 1995.116.2 ISSN 0725 0088 , ISBN 0 643 052542 mvk 17.9.95 @\Australian utilization and research into remote sensing \ \McCracken.K \ \ \ISTS \ \Remote sensing applications \Environmental research \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \6p \RZ3-80 \Conference paper \#C P.88, loose as P.530 In Proc. 15th International Symposium on SpaceTechnology and Science, Tokyo 1986 1587-92. @\ Proceedings, Remote Sensing of Atmosphere and Oceans, a joint conferenceof 4th Symposium of the International Society of Acoustic Remote Sensingand 2nd Australasian Conference on the Physics of Remote Sensing of Atmosphereand Ocean, Australian Defence Force Academy, Canberra 16-24 February 1988. \ \ Bourne.I \ Platt.C \ \ ADFA \ \ Remote sensing \ Atmospheric research \ Marine science \ Australia \ New Zealand \ \ 1988 \ \ RZ3-80 \ Conference papers \ #C In 2 Vols P.28. Contains, Book 1. @\ Selling remote sensing \ \Walklet.D \ \ \Satellite Communications \ \Remote sensing \Marketing \ \International \United States \ \1985 \3p. \RZ4-05 \(paper) \From Satellite Communications, July 1985, pp32-34. #G P.529 @\The commercialisation of remote sensing - report of Working Group Meeeting \ESCAP/UNDP Regional Remote Sensing Programme RAS/86/141 \ \ \ \Ministry of Science, Technology and the Environment, Malaysia \ESCAP \Data policy \Data management \International cooperation \Southeast Asia \Oceania \International \1990 \72p \RZ5-65 \Monograph \#C (ESCAP) 1990.74 Contains comments by representatives from Australia,China, Japan, ESA, developing SE Asian countries, regarding data pricingand policies. Report of Workshop held in Kuala Lumpur, 22-25 November 1989. @\ Regional collaboration and development in remote sensing [paper presentedat ] Institution of Engineers Australia Second National Space EngineeringSymposium, March 1986 \ \Trippett.J \ \ \Trippett Allan and Associates \ \Remote sensing \Internatonal cooperation \Marketing \Australia \East Asia \Pacific \1986 \9p. \RZ5-80 \(paper) \#C P.531 @\Industrial eyes in the sky - a discussion paper on the Australian remotesensing industry \ \Aubrey.M \ \ \ ASO \ \Space industry \Remote sensing \Commerce \Australia \ \ \1989 (?) \various \RZ5-80 \Monograph \#G 1990.109 One of many reports commissioned by ASO. @\International policy aspects of space applications programs in the 1970s: the case of earth resources surveys \ \Hanessian.J \Logsdon.J \ \ \International relations \Data policy \Space law \International \ \ \1970 (?) \Various \ RZ7-05 \Reprint \#G P.787 Photocopy of paper from unknown conference or publication. Authorsfrom International Studies Group, George Washington University, WashingtonUSA. 12.6.92 @\ Towards a Canadian policy on remote sensing from space, a special reportto the Canadian Advisory Committee on Remote Sensing by the Working Groupon Data Handling and Satellite Technology \ \Taylor.J \ \ \CCRS \ \Remote sensing \Government policy \ \Canada \ \ \1974 \14p. \RZ7-11 \Monograph \#G P.517 @\Images of the Earth from space : innovative applications, advanced technologies,and new markets. \ \Roe.R \ \ \US. Congress \ \ Earth observation \Space law \Landsat \United States \ \ \1990 Feb \160p \RZ7-12 \Monograph \#G 1991.132 Hearing before the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, US House of Representatives, 15 Feb 1990. @\ Education and Training in Remote Sensing for the ESCAP Region \ UNDP/ESCAP \ \ \ \ ESCAP \ State Science and Technology Commission of China \ International cooperation \ Education \ \ South east Asia \ Pacific \ \ 1988 \ 95pp \ RZ14-65 \ Monograph \ #C ("ESCAP"), P.84, RAS/86/141 @\ Report of the Working Group Meeting of the National Contact Points ofthe Regional Information Service on Remote Sensing, Bangkok 15-26 November1988 \ UNDP/ESCAP \ \ \ \ ESCAP \ \ International cooperation \ \ \ Southeast Asia \ Pacific \ \ 1988 \ 31p \ RZ14-65 \ Monograph \ #C ("ESCAP), P.83, RAS/86/141 @\Report of Indonesian Remote Sensing Working party visit to Australia,26 February - 7 March 1986 \ \ \ \ \SISC \ \Remote sensing \Overseas visits \International cooperation \Indonesia \Australia \ \1986 \various \RZ14-66 \Monograph \#G P.504 Annexes include Memorandums of understanding on various projects,etc. @\ Linking remote-sensing technology and global needs: a strategic vision:a report to NASA by the Applications Working Group \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing applications \Information systems \Environmental research \International \ \ \1987 \82p \RZ15-05 \Monograph \#G P.505 Copy 1; P.646 28p Executive Summary. @\CEOS Consolidated report 1991 \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1991 \38p \RZ15-05 \Monograph \#C (CEOS), 1991.133 (draft), 1991.134 (final). @\CEOS Consolidated report 1992 \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1992 \ \RZ15-05 \Monograph \#C (CEOS), 1993.86 (draft), Edited Betty Howard, NOAA. mvk 16.7.93 @\CEOS Consolidated report \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \HOLD 1991, 1992, 1993, 1995 \ \RZ15-05 \Monograph \#G 1994.173 (1993) 1992 is 1993.86 (draft), Edited Betty Howard, NOAA.1995 version is 1996.2 mvk 16.7.93, 21.11.94, 4.1.96 @\CEOS Summary Proceedings for WGD \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \HOLD 1993 (WGD13) \ \RZ15-05 \Papers \#C (CEOS), 1993.87 Working Group on Data harmonises earth observation satellitedata management practice amongst the CEOS members. Report includes summaryof Global Land AVHRR Dataset. mvk 16.7.93 @\CEOS Working Group on Data \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \HOLD 1993 (WGD13) \ \RZ15-05 \Papers \#C (CEOS), 1993.87 Summary proceedings; 1993.113 Collection of papers includingFormat Subgroup Minutes; Participants List for same; CEOS/LTWG StandardFamily Format Record Construction Rules; Report on 4th Meeting on AuxiliaryData Sets; EOS Glossary and list of Acronyms/Abbreviations; Technology Newsfrom DLR; CEOS WGD Data Management Guidelines; EOSDIS (May 1992) booklet.WGD 13 was held at ACRS, Canberra, October 1992. Working Group on Data harmonisesearth observation satellitedata management practice amongst the CEOS members.Report includes summary of Global Land AVHRR Dataset. mvk 16.7.93, 29.7.93. @\CEOS Working Group on Data, Meeting 12, 7-9 April , Darmstadt, 1992 \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Data products \Remote sensing \ \International \ \ \1992 (WGD12) \Various \RZ15-05 \Papers \#C (CEOS) 1992.100.1 (notes by Erik Elmar, ACRES), 1992.100.2, meetingdraft proceedings. 1992.247 Draft Summary Proceedings (revised) @\CEOS Working Group on Data, minutes of the 11th Meeting, Toulouse, 5-7November 1991 \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Data products \Remote sensing \ \International \ \ \1991 (WGD11) \Various \RZ15-05 \Papers \#C (CEOS) 1992.125 (notes from Erik Elmar, ACRES) 19.6.92 @\CEOS Working Group on Data, Meeting 16, Sao Jose dos Campos, May 1994 \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1994 (WGD16) \ \RZ15-05 \Papers \#C (CEOS), Meeting held in Sao Jose dos Campos Brazil, attended by J Kingwellof COSSA. Report is 1994.67 includes attendance list, with Appendices 1.Agenda and Action Items; 2. DLR correspondence on Auxiliary Data Subgroup;3. Working Group on Data Long Term Plan; 4 . Report on WGD Catalogue sub-groupmeeting, Ottawa, Jan/Feb. 1994; 5. Upcoming WDG meetings; 6. Draft (Feb1994) of Strategic Plan of Working Group on Cal Val.;7. Country report:Norway; 8. Agency report: USGS; 9. VEGETATION on SPOT Image Ground Segmentdescription; 10. Draft IEOS Implementation Plan, April 1994; 11. CEOS IDNBrochure;12. INPE SCD-1 (first data collaction satellite) brochure;13. GOESI-M Mission summary sheet;14. GOES Mission overview brochure; 15. DIF andPurge plan status; 16. NOAA Satellite Active Archive (SAA) brochure; 17.Report on Network sub group sixth meeting, Ottawa, Feb 1994;18. ESA Reporton Status of the CEOS ad hoc Working Group on Networks, from EDEN WG, 4May 1994; 19. Report of CEOS WG Cal Val Meeting 8, Feb 1994; 20. AgencyReport: Australia; 21. Agency Report: NOAA; 22. Space Radar Laboratory (NASA/ASI/DARA)Brochure; 23. IEOS Implementation plan presentation, May 1994; 24. CGMSpresentation; 25. ESA Earth Observation Guide and Directory Service; 26.DLR Technology News report; 27. Country report: Germany; 28. EUMETSAT meteorologicalarchive and retreival facility and the approach of formats for future dataarchives (with marginal annotations, origin unknown); 29. Order form forKramer, H J, Observation of the Earth and its environment: survey of missionsand sensors, 2nd Edition.; 30. 1994 Earth observation data in HierarchicalData Format (HDF) for MS-Windows [CD-ROM from DLR]; 31. Interim progressreport of the CEOS ad hoc Working Group on Networks, May 1994.; 32. Reportof Format sub group meeting March 1994; 33. Report on sub group on AuxiliaryData Sets 7th Meeting, 28 Feb - 2 March 1994, Annapolis.; 34. Draft of LongTerm Plan of Working Group on Data as at end of WGD16 meeting.35. FinalMinutes. 36. Summary of meeting by J Kingwell. The Working Group on Dataharmonises earth observation satellitedata management practice amongst theCEOS members. Report includes summary of Global Land AVHRR Dataset. Seealso previous entries for WGD13. mvk 3.6.94 @\CEOS Working Group on Data Meeting 18, and Interim Working Group on InternationalNetworks and Services, 22-26 May 1995, Baltimore. \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1995 (WGD18 & WGINS3) \ \RZ15-05 \Papers \#C (CEOS), 1995.58 Meeting held in Baltimore Maryland, and hosted by NASA.Joint meetings of WGD and WGINS recommended formation of WGISS (WorkingGroup on Information Systems & Services). Includes report by J Kingwellof COSSA, photographs. Refer CSIRO Space Industry News, June 1995, and COSSAfile 93/233. Documents: (all prefixed 1995.58) 1. ESA Report to WGD18. 2. European Commission report to WGD18. P Churchill & G Schreier. 3. Report on pre-feasibility study for Earth Space Information Network inAsia and the Pacific (NASDA) 4. Introduction to Peoples Republic of China National Satellite MeteorologicalCentre 5. NASA and NOAA concept for consolidated Working Groups. 6. NOAA Internet Information Servers 7. Revised Archive Guidelines (WGD18) 8. Action Item List for WGD17 9. NOAA Archive Guidelines 10. RPA Planeta Roshydromet Archive Guidelines 11. IOC Archive Guidelines response 12. Report on Joint WGD Sub group Meetings, Frascati, April 1995. 13. Network sub group comments on WGISS proposal 14. US Geological Survey Report to WGD18 15. Auxiliary Data Sets sub group report to WGD18 16. DARA Report to WGD18 17. MOMS-02, 1994 brochure. 18. Norway: report to WGD18. 19. USGS archive guidelines. 20. China Meteorological Agency/SMC archive guidelines 21. Format sub group report to WGD18. 22. Germany/DARA report to WGD18 (same as item 16). 23. New Views of Earth: scientific achievements of ERS-1. ESA, SP-1176/1,1995. 24. Network sub group report to WGD18. 25. Auxiliary Data sub group Survey of Current Auxiliary Data Usage 26. Auxiliary Data sub group Questionnaire 27. CEOS InfoSys - present status. L Fusco & A Rognes, 1995. 28. Global Change Assisted Search for Knowledge (GC-ASK) Executive Summary 29. CSIRO report to WGD18 30. Declassified Intelligence Satellite Photographs USGS 31. WGD18 Preliminary Attendance List 32. Catalog sub group report to WGD18 33. Draft Terms of Reference for Working Group on Info. Systems and Services. 34. Functions of WGISS co-ordinating group. 35. CEOS InfoSys: templates for Members' EO Data Center home pages. 36. CBERS: China/Brazil Earth Resources Satellite INPE/CAST 37. Centre for Earth Observation, including Briefing Paper, European Commission1995. 38. Global Land 1 Km AVHRR Data Set Project, USGS. 39. EROS Data Centre's Bulletin Board addresses 40. Ocean Color presentation/OHPs, M Maiden, 1995 41. G7 Environment and Natural Resources Management Project Progress ReportJune 1995, Enamoto/NOAA. 42. DARA study on space information systems for developing countries 43. Integrated Australian approach to CEOS, Kingwell. CSIRO 1995. 44. The Goddard DAAC: a source for Global Earth Science Data. 45. Third WGINS Agenda. See also previous entries for WGD11, 12, 13, 16., and COSSA Files 93/233,95/59 mvk 31.5.95 @\CEOS Working Group on Information Systems and Services, 13-16 November1995, Moscow. \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1995 (WGISS 1) \ \RZ15-05 \Papers \#C (CEOS), 1995.155 in 44 sequentially numbered parts. First meeting ofWGISS (replacing WGD Working Group on Data, and interim WGINS, Working Groupon International Networks and Services). Attended by J Kingwell for CSIRO.First major CEOS meeting during CSIRO Plenary year. 1. Agenda 2. Map and Information 3. Auxiliary Data Sets subgroup 10th Meeting 4. Auxiliary Data Sets subgroup report 5. Catalog subgroup report on meeting CS15, 9/95 6. Format subgroup report 7. Report on International Archive Workshop/CCSDS Meeting, Oxford, 10/95 8. Meeting paper, "Areas of agreement/concern", on V0.2 of 5 yearplan 9. Meeting paper, "Group discussion conclusions" 10. WGISS V0.2 5 year plan outline 11. Purge Alert pro forma 12. Auxiliary Data Set Reference guidelines 13. Future CEOS strategy 14. DARA Feasibility Study on CEOS Information Locator Service (ILS) insupport of developing countries, Part 1 15. As above, Part 2, Annex 16. DRA final report on ERS-1 Reference Data Sets Part 1 Executive Summary 17. As above, Part 2 18. Worldwide Directory of on-line services for Earth Observation data users("CEOS Yellow Pages") 19. IGBP-DIS START Summer School on Electronic Networking and Data and InformationSystems for Global Change Research: development of WWW Data systems 20. as above, additional materials 21. Report on IOC Workshop on Ocean Colour Data Requirements and Utilisation 22. The European Wide Service Exchange 23. WGISS 1 Report: Germany 24. EC 25. Global 1 km Data Project 26. Japan 27. CNES 28. European Commission report (see also 24) 29. Global Observation Information Network (GOIN) report to WGISS 30. GOIN Joint Program WG report 11/95 31. All World Data Center Conference, M Maiden, 32. Vegetation Monitoring System brochure 33. IKI RAN Information System 34a Paper print, GOMS N1 satellite,, 30.10.95 b As above, NW quadrant c Resource satellite, Arabian Sea 35. IDN GEODIS brochure (CNES) 36. EOC-IS brochure 37. National Space Agency of Ukraine, the Sich Earth Observation Space System1 Stage, booklet 38. CSIRO Discussion Paper (J Kingwell) on 10th Plenary Earth ObservationNetwork Demonstrator 39. CSIRO Paper (J Kingwell), CEOS CD-ROM for Developing Countries 40. CSIRO Paper (J Kingwell), CEOS Issues and Events, 1995/96 41. as above, OHPs 42. CSIRO Paper , J Kingwell, Overseas Visit Report 43. DARA report on ILS 44. Miscellaneous meeting papers. mvk 31.12.95 @\Papers and resolutions from CEOS 5th Plenary, December 9-10 1991, VirginiaUSA. \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1991 \Various \RZ15-05 \Papers \#C (CEOS) 1992.320 . Collection of meeting papers, including copies (handamended by Dr G P Harris, Australian Representative), including resolutionson support for GCOS and GOOS. mvk 27.1.93 @\Papers and resolutions from Sixth CEOS Plenary, 9-11 December 1992, LondonUK. \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1993 \17p \RZ15-05 \Papers \#C (CEOS) 1994.130 Draft minutes.Attended by Dr G P Harris, AustralianRepresentative) mvk 4.9.94 @\Papers from Seventh CEOS Plenary, November 16-18, 1993, Tsukuba, Japan. \ \ \ \ \CEOS (NB Name changed from Committee on Earth Observations Satellites toCommittee on Earth Observation Satellites) \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1993 \Various \RZ15-05 \Papers \#C (CEOS) Attended by B Embleton and J Kingwell for CSIRO. 1994.123.1 Minutes;1994.123.2 Consolidated Report 1993 ; 1994.123.3 Minutes of Sixth CEOS Plenary; 1994.123.4 Report of the CEOS Working Group on Data; 1994.123.5 Reportof the Working Group on Cal Val (OHPs); 1994.123.6 Agenda and Participantslist; 1994.123.7 Report of the Working Group on Cal Val (text); 1994.123.8.1Pre-meeting papers from STA inc. membership requests Malaysia, Ukraine:8.2, logistical information; 1994.123.9 Secretariat Report (OHPs); 1994.123.10Paper by L Shaffer, Relationship with Developing Countries; 1994.123.11Earth S&T Projects from ISY; 1994.123.12 summary of membership applications& membership requirements, and Secretariat's discussion paper; 1994.123.13Secretariat Report (text); 1994.123.14 Draft, Future CEOS Direction; 1994.123.15Proposed changes to CEOS Terms of Reference; 1994.123.16 Summary of CEOSUser requirements Workshop (corrected); 1994.123.17 Pilot Cal/Val Dossier,Smith System; 1994.123.18 Summary of CEOS Ad Hoc Data Policy Meeting; 1994.123.19CEOS Affiliates Meeting 23.3.93, summary; 1994.123.20 ASI Status reporton spreading benfits of MTPE to developing countries; 1994.123.21 DraftUNEP Resolution (not adopted); 1994.123.22 Draft background paper on adhoc data policy mtg; 1994.123.23 correspondence from ASI Bizzarri to HinsmanWMO; 1994.123.24 Proposal for Earth Observation Pilot Projects; 1994.123.25Papers on contentious issue of GSOIN/ new CEOS Working Group on Networks;1994.123.26 WMO Paper on strategy for education & training on satellitematters; 1994.123.27 CGMS Paper on XXI Plenary; 1994.123.28 ADEOS Data;1994.123.29 Japan report; 1994.123.30 JAROS Japan Resources ObservationSystem Organization News 1993.3 ; 1994.123.31 "Improved plan of groundsystem.....long term scenario.." [with global coverage diagrams formost satellites] 1994.123.33 SCenario for Observation of Planet Earth; 1994.123.34JERS-1 Newsletter No. 1; 1994.123.35 NASDA EOIS ; 1994.123.36 Hussey, NOAAOperational Satellite Program Status; 1994.123.37 Belgion Science PolicyOffice report; 1994.123.38 DARA report; 1994.123.39 CEC report; 1994.123.40draft CEC pub., "Use of satellite data for environmental purposes..."1994.123.41 CNES report; 1994.123.42 Eumetsat report; 1994.123.43 ESA reporton ERS-1 Symposium, 11-14 October 1993; 1994.123.44 CSIRO Australia report;1994.123.45 Swedish National Space Board report; 1994.123.46 CAST Chinareport; 1994.123.47 CCRS Canada report; 1994.123.48 Sweden in Space, Oct.1993, inc. insert on small astronomy/atmospheric research satellite ODIN;1994.123.49 COSSA briefing papers & reports; 1994.123.50 Disk 205988from Smith: 1993 CEOS Dossier Vol. A, Microsoft Word 5.1 for Apple Mac.Attended by B Embleton & J Kingwell for Australia. Includes offer byCSIRO to support CEOS Pilot Data Exchange Project and to host 1996 Plenary.mvk 7.8.84, 13.8.94 @\Papers from Eighth CEOS Plenary, 26-28 September 1994, Berlin, Germany. \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1994 \Various \RZ15-05 \Papers \#C (CEOS) 1994.136 (Report by Kingwell) with 36 attachments. Attended byB Embleton and J Kingwell for CSIRO. Attachments: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3 Attendance List, 2. Agenda 3. Developing Countries: report of ESCAP Meeting in Beijiing (Embleton/LinQuan) 4. OMPTE (sic) Flight System Status (M R Luther) 5. Swedish National Space Board Report [note: Swedish Space Budget ~ $US80m] 6. Eumetsat Status and Plans 7. Report by WGD (Lauritsen) 8. Report from Co-ordination Group for Meteorological Satellites (JeromeLafeuille) 9. CEOS/IGBP-DIS Pilot Project on High Resolution Data Exchange (S I Rasool) 10. Summary of Workshop on Developing Country Activities (V W Kirchhoff) 11. Report of DARA 12. Norwegian National Report 13. ad hoc Working Group on Networks Report 14. CEOS Consolidated Report 1994 15. Demonstrations at CEOS Plenary (International Directory Network; IntelligentSatellite Information System; CEOS Inventory Interoperability Experiment;CEOS Information System; 16. The German Remote Sensing Data Center (DLR) 17. Destination Earth: from ERS-1 to ERS-2. ESA, 35pp, 18. CEOS InfoSys: Concept Development and Status (ESA/ESRIN) 19. Japan's New Long Term Vision: Towards Creation of Space Age in the NewCentury. 20. Australian/CSIRO Significant Events Report (Kingwell). 21. Russian Space Agency/RosHydromet Report. 22. NOAA Brochure 23. NOAA Retrospective satellite data price list, satellite products list,and ordering procedures. 24. Modular Optoelectronic Multispectral Stereo Scanner (MOMS-02-D2) DataCatalogue 25. MOMS-02-D2 Quicklook and Sample Data CD-ROM 26. Report and Proposal on Support Developing Countries (sic); and Reportto the Plenary, Chinese Academy of Space Technologies. 27. IRS-1C Mission (ISRO) 28. Education & Research - prerequisites for Space Technology Applications.(A A Abiodun). 29. Global Climate Observing System 30. Membership issues: DARA. 31. Report on Outcomes of CEOS ad hoc Data Policy Meeting, 18-19 April 1994,Washington (G Withee, NOAA, and L Shaffer, NASA) 32. Seeing the Earth in a new way: Space radar laboratory. Brochure on SIR-C/X-SARby NASA, ASI, DARA. 33. Advanced Land Observing Satellite (ALOS). Brochure by NASDA/RESTEC. 34. Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM). Brochure by NASDA 35. Correspondence, DARA/Association of Commercial Remote Sensing users. 36. Advanced TIROS-N (ATN) NOAA-J. 25p Booklet by NASA/NOAA. Also Final Minutes, produced by DARA, 1995: 1995.25 in separate binder.mvk 5.10.94, 26.2.95 @\Papers from Ninth CEOS Plenary, 11-13 October 1995, Montreal, Quebec,Canada. \CEOS Plenary Papers and Resolutions \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1995 \Various \RZ15-05 \Papers \#C (CEOS) 1995.124 Consists of 40 documents including meeting report byKingwell (1995.124.39). Attended by B Embleton, C Graham and J Kingwellfor CSIRO. CSIRO (B Embleton) became chair of CEOS at conclusion of meeting. 1995.124.1a: Agenda, 1995.124.1b. Participants list 1995.124.2 General information for participants. 1995.124.3 Backgrounder on Canadian Space Agency. 1995.124.4 Secretariat Report. 1995.124.5a Report of Task Force on CEOS Planning and Analysis (main report). 1995.124.5b Summary by B. Bizzarri. 1995.124.6 Future Development of CEOS Dossier. 1995.124.7 Draft resolution on Ocean Colour (IOC). 1995.124.8a Augmentation of user requirements - recommendations from Workshop,8-9 May 1996. 1995.124.8b Summary of User requirements Workshop. 1995.124.9 Report of working Group on Cal/Val. Chair to Plenary. 1995.124.10a Special Report on successful application of EO satellite data(STA/NASDA overheads). 1995.124.10b CEOS Special Report on Successful Applications of EO SatelliteData (ISBN 0 9526152 1 5, Smith System Engineering, 101p) Copy 2. 1996.72 1995.124.11 MTPE/EOS Program Status (NASA). 1995.124.12 Re-look at CEOS Strategy (CSA). 1995.124.13a Minutes of Working Group in Data 18th Meeting, 23-26 May 1995. 1995.124.13b Report of Working Group on data Chair to Plenary. 1995.124.14a CEOS Information Locator Service (DARA/Geoscan report). 1995.124.14b Space Information System in support of development (sic) countries. 1995.124.15 Plan for Global Climate Observing System Version 1.0. 1995.124.16 Requirements and conceptual design study for Canadian EarthObservation Network. 1995.124.17a 1995 CEOS Yearbook: Co-ordination for the next decade. (SmithSystem Engineering, 133p, ISBN 0 9526152 0 7) 1995.124.17b ESA Presentation. 1995.124.18 Radio Frequency issues for Earth Observation Systems. 1995.124.19 Report on Interim Working Group on International Network Services(WGINS) to 1995 Plenary. 1995.124.20 Co-ordination Group for Meteorological Satellites (CGMS) XXIIImeeting report (May 1995, Darmstadt). 1995.124.21 CD-ROM Project (CSIRO). Overheads of presentation by J Kingwell. 1995.124.22 Space Frequency Co-ordination Group (NASA/SFCG). 1995.124.23 Eumetsat support to developing countries. 1995.124.24 Report on interaction with GEO. 1995.124.25 ERS-2 commissioning phase status review. 1995.124.26 List of GCOS publications. 1995.124.27 IGBP Pilot Project on High Resolution Data. 1995.124.28 Report on CEOS open forums. 1995.124.29 G7 Environment and Natural Resources Management 'Global InformationSociety Pilot project'. 1995.124.30 Interaction with Space Agency Forum. Country Reports: 1995.124.31 Canada 1995.124.32 Australia 1995.124.33 Germany 1995.124.34 Japan 1995.124.35 Eumetsat 1995.124.36 Russia 1995.124.37 Sweden 1995.124.38 USA (NOAA): NESDIS Fiscal Year 1994 Report. Plenary report to Australian Agencies 1995.124.39 9th General (Plenary) Meeting of Committee on Earth ObservationSatellites (CEOS), 26.10.95, J Kingwell , 93/284, 95/123. 1995.124.40 Minutes of the 9th Plenary , produced by CSA. In folder. mvk 29.10.95, 10.7.96 @\CEOS Working Group on Calibration and Validation \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Validation \International \ \ \HOLD 1994 (WGCV8) \ \RZ15-05 \Papers \#C (CEOS) 1994.127 8th WGCV was in Seattle, USA. Inc. report by Ian Barton(CSIRO DAR), Chair of sub-group on Infrared and Visible Optical Sensors(IVOS). mvk 4.9.94 @\CEOS Working Group on Calibration and Validation: Pilot Cal/Val Dossier \ \ \ \ \CEOS \Smith System Engineering Ltd \Planning \International co-operation \Validation \International \ \ \1993 Oct \89p \RZ15-05 \Bound papers \#G 1994.207 (Copy 1), 1994.208 (Copy 2). See also 1994.123.17 Overviewof cal/val; definitions of terms; contact lists; pro forma for campaigns,facilities. mvk 26.12.94 @\CEOS Dossier of satellite missions and environmental programmes \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1992 \Various \RZ15-05 \Monograph \#C (CEOS), . Prepared for meeting (pre-UNCED) in London, 29 April 1992,on "Initiative on improving the use of earth observation satellitesfor environmental purposes" 1992.113 (draft) ......... (final). @\CEOS: Minutes of the User Requirements Workshop, 27 May 1993, Tokyo, Japan \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1993 \19p \RZ15-05 \Monograph \#C (CEOS), 1994.129 Meeting Chaired by NASDA and provided forum for Affiliatesinc. GCOS, IGBP, IOC, WCRP, WMO, FAO, UNEP to state data needs. Attendedby Graham Harris, Director of COSSA....... (final). mvk 4.9.94 @\CEOS: Minutes of the Second User Requirements Workshop, 30-31 May 1994,Bonn, Germany \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1994 \25p \RZ15-05 \Monograph \#C (CEOS), 1994.128 Meeting Chaired by DARA and provided forum for Affiliatesinc. GCOS, IGBP, IOC, WCRP, WMO, FAO, UNEP to state data needs. .......(final). mvk 4.9.94 @\CEOS: Minutes of the User Requirements Workshop, 8-9 May 1995, Washington \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1995 \ \RZ15-05 \Monograph \#C (CEOS), 1995.73 Meeting Chaired by CSA and provided forum for Affiliatesinc. GCOS, IGBP, IOC, WCRP, WMO, FAO, UNEP to state data needs. .......Attended by Dr B Embleton for COSSA. 1. Report by Embleton mvk 11.6.95 @\CEOS Workshop on Developing Country Activities, 16-18 May 1994, Sao Josedos Campos, Brazil \ \ \ \ \CEOS \INPE \International co-operation \Remote sensing \Data policy \International \Brazil \ \1994, May \ \RZ15-05 \Papers \#C (CEOS) 1994.209 Various meeting papers, Appendix 1 Agenda: 2. Paperby INPE; 3. NRSCC paper by Cao Xuejun; 4. CSIRO paper by Jeff Kingwell;5. EC paper; 6. ESA; 7. WMO; 8. CAST paper by Professor Yang Weiyuan; 9.CNES; 10. ODA UK, J B Williams; 11. IOC; 12. GRNS; 13. NASDA; 14.1 NOAApaper, 14.2 NOAA OHPs; 15. NASA; 16. IGBP/START; 17. EUMETSAT; 18. Canada;19. New Zealand; 20. SAF Focus Group; 21. Recommendations of the CEOS WGD16; 22. Mosaiced image of JERS-1/SAR; 23. US Department of Commerce Mediarelease on GOES-I launch, 13.4.94; 24. US Presidential Decision Directive/NSTC-3,Landsat Remote Sensing Strategy; 25. 1 GRID, Bridging the Gap; 25.2 ExecutiveSummary on Agenda 21, GEMS and GRID; 26. Mission to Planet Earth: a programto understand Global Environmental Change. mvk 24.12.94 @\The relevance of satellite missions to the study of the global environment. \ \ \ \ \CEOS \BNSC \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1992 \111p \RZ15-05 \Monograph \ #G 1992.242 , 1992.243 (Copy 2) . Prepared for meeting, United NationsConference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro, 1992,Prepared for BNSC by Smith System Engineering, Surrey. See also "Initiativeon improving the use of earth observation satellites for environmental purposes"1992.113 (draft) ......... (final). mvk 29.12.92 ., #G 1996.55 (Copy 3)mvk 10.6.96. @\ 1993 CEOS Dossier: Volume C, The relevance of satellite missions to thestudy of the global environment. \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ESA \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1993 Sept \ \RZ15-05 \Monograph in binder \ #G 1994.60 . 1994.90 (Copy 2) Prepared under contract to ESA. An editedversion of the document prepared for United Nations Conference on Environmentand Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro, 1992. See also "Initiativeon improving the use of earth observation satellites for environmental purposes"1992.113 (draft) ......... (final). mvk 11.4.94; 8.7.94 @\ 1994 CEOS Dossier: Volume A, Satellite Missions, and Update to VolumeC, The relevance of satellite missions to the study of the global environment. \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ESA \Planning \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1994 \ \RZ15-05 \Monograph in binder \ #G 1994.60 . 1994.90 (Copy 2) Prepared under contract to ESA. An editedversion of the document prepared for United Nations Conference on Environmentand Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro, 1992. See also "Initiativeon improving the use of earth observation satellites for environmental purposes"1992.113 (draft) ......... (final). mvk 11.4.94; 8.7.94 @\CEOS Committee on Earth Observations Satellites. 1992 yearbook. Draft. \ \ \ \ \CEOS \ \Environmental research \International cooperation \Remote sensing instruments \International \ \ \1992 \various \RZ 15-05 \monograph \#C (CEOS) 1992.196 Contains two volumes. Volume 1 : A statement of satellitemissions of CEOS members. Volume 2 : The relevance of satellite missionsto global environmental programmes. mk 24.10.92 @\ CEOS Working Group on Data Meeting on AVHRR 1 km Global Data Coverage,17-18 September 1991, Frascati Italy. \ \ \ \ \ ESA \ \ NOAA Satellite \ Environmental Research \ Global Change \ Italy \ International \ \ 1991 September \ Various \ RZ15-05 \ Conference papers \ #C (CEOS) 1991.59 Collection of 17 documents from meeting, covering datacollection plan for International Space Year collection of NOAA data coveringentire land area of earth on daily basis March 1992 to March 1993. Meetingattended by ESA, NASA, NOAA, USGS, CEC JRC, CSIRO, DFVLR at Earthnet inFrascati. Contains information on TREES project and ESA Information RetrievalService (IRS) data sheets on LEDA, MOS-1 and AVHRR catalogues. jk 13/10/91. @\ 3rd Meeting of AVHRR HRPT Ground Station Operators / Global Land 1 kmAVHRR Data Set Project, Maspalomas, Canary Islands, Spain, 28-29 April 1993 \ \ \ \ \ ESA \ NASA \ NOAA Satellite \ Environmental Research \ Global Change \ Spain \ International \ \ 1993 April \ Various \ RZ15-05 \ Conference papers \ #C 1994.109 Collection of documents, maps and NOAA-11 satellite images(1994.109.5-1994.109.09) from meeting co-hosted by ESA/ESRIN and INSA (Ingineriay Servicios Aerospatiales), covering data collection plan for InternationalSpace Year collection of NOAA data covering entire land area of earth ondaily basis April 1992 to September 1992 (extended at this meeting to 1993). Meeting attended by ESA, NASA, NOAA, USGS, CEC JRC, CSIRO, DFVLR and otheragencies at Maspalomas ERS/Landsat/NOAA station in Maspalomas. Organisationof Mongolian Ministry for Nature and Environment (including National RemoteSensing Centre) [1994.109.2]; Vegetation Index maps from Kenya MeteorologicalService [1994.109.1]; description of NOAA-I (the failed NOAA-13) [1994.109.10];paper for CSIRO Remote Sensing Steering Committee [1994.109.3]; invitation1994.109.4; ERS-1 500 days in orbit [1994.109.11] ; Introduction to theNational Satellite Meteorological Centre of China [1994.109.12]; geog. distr.of participants 194.109.13; NOAA Polar Orbiter Data [TIROS-N, NOAA-6, NOAA-7,NOAA-8, NOAA-9, NOAA-10, NOAA-11 & NOAA-12 Users Guide] [1994.109.14];presentation by Albani 1994.109.15; USGS NOAA station sheets for Dhahran,Jeddah, Prince Albert, Buenos Aires, Cachoeira Paulista Brazil [1994.109.16]; notes and presentation by Kingwell [1994.109.17]; Visit report by Kingwell1994.109.18; Agenda and Participants list [1994.109.19]; overview of satellitemeteorological center of SMA, China [1994.109.20]; USGS Data acquisition,archiving & management report 1.4.92 - 22.4.93 [1994.109.21] ; paperby Clift, Rathbone, Parslow and Allen on the CSIRO Marine Laboratories AVHRRNavigation and Remapping System [1994.109.22] ; mvk 21/7/94. @\ Development and Applications of remote sensing for planning, managementand decision-making; seminar Proceedings, 15-24 April 1985, Beijing \ESCAP/UNDP Regional Remote Sensing Programme \ \ \ \ESCAP/UNDP Regional Remote Sensing Programme \State Science and Technology Commission \Remote sensing \Planning \Management \Asia \Pacific \ \1985 \235p. \RZ15-60 \Monograph \ESCAP/UNDP Regional Remote Sensing Programme. #C (ESCAP) P.509 @\Observing Australia: the role of remote sensing in a balanced NationalSpace Program \ \ \ \ \Australian Space Office \Australian Space Board \Remote sensing applications \Space industry \ \Australia \ \ \1992 \72p \RZ15-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.138 23.6.92 @\Review of CSIRO Multi-Divisional Program on Satellite Data Acquisitionand Utilistation (MDP19)/Analysis of CSIRO Earth Observation Needs \COSSA Publication No. 034 \Simpson.J \Barton.Ian \Kingwell.Jeff \COSSA \CSIRO \Remote sensing applications \Data management \Planning \Australia \ \ \1995 May \44p \RZ15-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.78 ISBN 0 643 04769 7 ISSN 0818 4291 . "Simpson Report"following visits to abooout 20 remote sensing laboratories in October 1994.Other authors Neal.Bruce and Wallace.Jeremy . Recommended unification ofCSIRO Earth Observation management, with an Earth Observation Centre basedat several sites. mvk 17.6.95 @\ Remote sensing training for Asia's needs \ \ \ \ \Asian Institute of Technology \ \Training \Remote sensing \ARRSTC \Thailand \Asia \ \n.d. \6p. \RZ16-60 \Monograph \1985? #G P.510 @\ 1989 Survey of remote sensing teaching in the tertiary education sector \ \ Richards.J \ \ \ ALCORSS \ \ Education \ Courses \ Training \ Australia \ \ \ 1990 September \ \ RZ16-80 \ Monograph \ #G 1990.59 WT03-B26-88IA029-000311-B022-234http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatx2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170044 text/html 34541HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:59:00 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:42 GMTContent-length: 34366 Catalogue Library catalogue X: EXTRATERRESTRIAL, ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES. (continued) [SEE ALSO (A) Space, Astronautics; (AN) Satellites, unmanned spacecraft, general purpose] XA Astronomy, general surveys, planning & research, overviews, astronomical space science, humans & the stars etc [social/philosophical side] [SEE(XZ) principles & practice, astrophysics, [mathematics, science side] XC Cosmology, about the cosmos XE Exobiology; Extraterrestrial Biology, intelligence, SETI/CETI [see alsoBiology (LB)] XF Astronomical satellites, & Satellite observatories, Space probes,general purpose, mixed (stars & planets etc.); [SEE ALSO (XI) Star probes; (XL)Lunar probes; (XP) Planetary probes, (XS) Sun probes; (XT) Observatories & telescopes on the ground.] XG Galactic Astronomy XH Instrumentation & equipment, antennas for Radio telescopes [BUT NOT Telescopes - see (XT)] XI Interstellar & Stellar Astronomy, Programs & Probes [see also(XF) general Astronomical satellites; Astronautical Programs (AP)] XL Lunar Astronomy, Programs & Probes [see also Astronautical Programs(AP), general Astronomical satellites (XF)] XM Misc. Frequencies Astronomy (UV, IR, X-Ray, etc Astronomy); Cosmic rays, electromagnetic spectrum research etc, Radiation XO Optical Astronomy, science etc. [SEE ALSO (XT) Telescopes & observatories, (XF) astronomical satellites] XP Solar System & its Planetary Astronomy, Programs & Probes (inc.asteroids, meteors, comets, etc) Solar system in general, Solar terrestrial physics.[see also Space Programs (AP), general Astronomical satellites (XF), Astrophysics(XZ)] XR Radio Astronomy and VLBI XS Solar Astronomy, Programs & Probes [see also Space Programs (AP),general Astronomical satellites (XF), Solar terrestrial physics (XP)] XT Telescopes; Observatories. [SEE ALSO Satellite observatories (XF); Astronomical instruments, hardware (XH)] XX Films & videos on astronomical subjects XZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective); astrophysics, astronomicalscience, mathematics, research results & technical reports, etc. [SEE ALSO (XA)for general surveys, overviews of astronomical science, research planning & funding etc.] @\ Future Lunar Base. Special Issue ACTA Astronautica. Papers presentedat the 37th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation, Innsbruck,Austria, 4-11 October 1986 \ACTA Astronautica \Koelle.H Guest Editor \ \ \IAA \ \Moon \Space exploration \Lunar Laboratory \Space \ \ \1988 Jul \750p.* * Continuation of Journal of the International Academy of Astronautics \XL3-01 \Journal Special Issue \#G P.691 ISSN 0094 5765 IAA (International Academy of Astronautics) @\ Lunar Bases and Space Activities of the 21st Century \ \Mendell.W (Ed.) \ \ \NASA \Lunar and Planetary Institute, Houston \Moon \Lunar laboratories \Space laboratories \Moon \ \ \1985 \865p \XL3-01 \Papers in Monograph form \#G P.692 ISBN 0 942862 023 . Inc. index. Number of authors inc. Duke.M,Logsdon.J. @\ Experimental Limit on Low Energy Antiprotons in the Cosmic Radiation \ \Streitmatter.R \Stochaj.J \Ormes.J \NASA \ \Astrophysics \Astronomical instruments \Spectrometer \Space \ \ \1989 \12p \XM2-01 \Monograph \#G P.693 NASA GSFC 89-006 @\ Multipoint Measurements of Energetic Particles in the Magnetosphere \ \Baker.D \ \ \NASA \ \Magnetosphere \Upper Atmosphere \Atmospheric Research \Space \ \ \1988 \12p. \XM3-01 \Paper \#G P.694 Published in Adv. Space Res. Vol.8, No.9-10 @\ Contributions to the 20th International Conference on Cosmic Rays (Moscow:1987):preprints and abstracts [by staff at] Enrico Fermi Institute, U. of Chicago \EFI preprint no. 87-23 \ \ \ \Enrico Fermi Institute \International Conference on Cosmic Rays \Cosmic rays \Astronomy \ \Space \ \ \1987 \ca.50p. \XM3-01 \Monograph \#G P.696 EFI Preprint 87-23 @\ Contributions to the 19th International Cosmic Ray Conference, La Jolla,Calif., Aug. 11-23, 1985 [by the staff of ] the Space Radiation Laboratory,California Institute of Technology \SLR 85 05-15 \ \ \ \California Institute of Technology \International Conference on Cosmic Rays \Cosmic rays \Astronomy \Remote sensing \Space \United States \ \1985 \ca. 50p. \XM3-01 \Monograph \#G P.697 @\ Cosmic Ray NM-64 Neutron Monitor Data - XLV ; XLVIII \ \Wilson.M \Bercovitch \ \National Research Council Canada \ \Tables \ \ \Canada \ \ \1988 ; 1990 \Varies \XM3-11 \Monograph \#G P.699 Data from 4 ground sites in Canada for 1986 ; 1992.152, data fromDeep River, Goose Bay & Inuvik, Jan-Dec 1989. @\Sulphur Mountain cosmic ray intensity records \ \Venkatesan.D \Mathews.T \ \Sulphur Mountain Cosmic Ray Laboratory \ \Cosmic rays \Sulphur Mountain Cosmic Ray Laboratory \ \Canada \ \ \1985 \various \XM3-11 \Monograph \#G P.700 ISBN 0 919813 09 7 Laboratory operated 1956-1978. @\Norton's 2000.0 Star Atlas & Reference Handbook \Norton's Star Atlas Eighteenth Edition \Ridpath.Ian \ \ \ \ \Guides \Astronomy \Guide Books \Space \ \ \1991 \179 \XO1-01 \Monograph \#G 1995.134 $US47.95 CLIS CSIRO HQ Library 3 9009 00372966 8 Longman Scientific& Technical ISBN 0 470 2146 0 First published 1989, reprinted 1990,1991. mvk 10.12.95 @\ Planetary Geosciences - 1988 \ NASA SP \ Zuber.M \ James.O \ MacPherson.G \ NASA \ \ Geology & Geophysics \ Planets \ Geodynamics \ Space \ \ \ 1989 \ 108p \ XP1-01 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.43 Scientific findings and projects of NASA Planetary GeosciencesPrograms. NASA SP-498. On loan term loan from HO Library (AS:HQ 559.9 Pl)jk 9/7/91 @\ The Geology of the Terrestrial Planets \ NASA SP-469 \ Carr.M \ \ \ NASA \ \ Geology & Geophysics \ Planets \ Geodynamics \ Space \ \ \ 1984 \ 317p \ XP1-01 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.44 Long loan, HQ Library, 599.9. NASA SP-469 jk 9/7/91 @\ Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby Mission a search for our beginnings \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space probes \Comets \Origin of life \Space \ \ \1987 \79p. \XP1-01 \Monograph \#G P.710 @\Encounter '86: an international rendezvous with Halley's comet \ \Longdon.N \ \ \ESA \Inter-Agency Consultative Group \Halley's comet \Space probes \ \Space \ \ \1986 \Various \XP1-01 \Monograph \#G P.705 ISSN 0250 1589 @\ The Halley armada \ \ \ \ \Inter-Agency Consultative Group \NASA \Halley's comet \Space probes \Satellites \Space \ \ \1985 \12p. \XP1-01 \Monograph \#G P.706 @\Effects of the solar-terrestrial environment on satellite operations [paper] submitted to Proceedings of Solar-Terrestrial Prediction Workshop in Meudon,France 18-19 June, 1984 \ \Baker.D \ \ \Los Alamos National Laboratory \ \Satellites \Radiation effects \Magnetosphere \Space \ \ \1984 \ca. 16p. \XP2-01 \(paper) \#G P.698 Preprint LA-UR-84-3325 @\ Giotto, ESA's mission to Halley's Comet \ \ \ \ \ESA \Arianespace \Launch programs \Giotto \Ariane program \Europe \Space \France \1985 \76p. \XP2-01 \Monograph \#G P.702 @\Japanese Halley missions with Sakigake and Suisei \ \Oya.H \ \ \EOS Transactions \ \Halley's Comet \Space probes \Sakigake \Japan \Space \ \1986 \2p. \XP2-01 \(paper) \#G P.703 Photocopy of pp.? & 66, EOS Transactions, Vol.67, no6, 11Feb. 1986. Includes Susei spacecraft. @\Atlas of Neptune \ \Hunt.Garry \Moore.Patrick \ \ \ \Neptune \Planets \Voyager \Space \ \ \1994 \84p \XP2-01 \Monograph \#G 1994.77 ISBN 0 521 37478 2 Hardback . Long term loan from HO Library,AS:HQ 523.481 Hu CLIS/477 3 9009 00304021 5 . $36 from Cambridge UniversityPress. Mentions important role of Tibdinbilla and Parkes in 1989 Voyagerencounter. Many illustrations, also history of discovery and observationof Neptune. mvk 25.6.94 @\ AGORA, asteroid gravity optical and radar analysis [project], assessmentstudy, Septermber 1983 \ESA SCI(83)5 \Langevin.Y \ \ \ESA \ \Astronomy \Asteroids \AGORA \Space \Europe \ \1983 \65p. \XP2-30 \Monograph \#G P.704 Mission proposal for asteroid space probes. @\ Linear prediction filter analysis of relativistic electron propertiesof 6.6 RE \ \ Baker.D \ McPherron.R \ Cayton.T \ NASA \ GSFC/Goddard Space Flight Centre \ Magnetosphere \ Solar terrestrial physics \ \ Space \ \ \ 1990 \ 20p \ XP3-01 \ Monograph \ #G P.157 Includes 3 related articles by these authors (with Klebesadel.R) @\ The CDAW-8 Substorm Event on 28 January 1983: A detailed global study. \ \Baker.D \Craven..J \Elphic.R \NASA \ \Magnetosphere \Atmospheric Research \Solar terrestrial physics \Space \ \ \1988 \6p. \XP3-01 \Paper \#G P.695 Published in Adv. Space Res. Vol.8, No.8, 1988 @\ Plasma electrons as tracers of distant Magnetotail structure : ISEE-3 \ \Baker.D \Bame.S \Gosling.J \NASA \ \Magnetosphere \Upper Atmosphere \Atmospheric Research \Space \ \ \1988 \4p. \XP3-01 \Paper \#G P.701 - Published in Adv. Space Res. Vol.8, No.8 @\ Voyager 2 at Uranus \JPL Fact Sheet \ \ \ \NASA \ \Uranus \Space probes \Voyager \Space \United States \ \1985 \6p. \XP3-01 \(paper) \#G P.707 Photocopy. See also special issue of J Geop. Res. with same title,P.713 . @\ Exploring the inner planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars) \About space and aeronautics \Siegel.V \ \ \NASA \ \Planets \Astronomy \Space probes \Space \ \ \1979 \8p. \XP3-01 \(paper) \#G P.708 ASA 79-9 @\ Giotto and the journey to Halley's Comet \ \Jenkins.R \Simpson.J \ \New Scientist \ \Halley's Comet \Space probes \Giotto \Space \ \ \1985 \4p. \XP3-01 \(paper) \#G P.709 Photocopy from New Scientist,27-6-85 pp.50-53 @\ Mission to Jupiter/Saturn, Voyager project \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Voyager \Space probes \Planets \Space \United States \ \1979 \11p. \XP3-01 \(paper) \#G P.687 Educational publication of Jet Propulsion Lab. @\ Voyager at Neptune and Triton: 1989 \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space probes \Neptune \Voyager \Space \ \ \n.d. \n/a \XP3-01 \Monograph \#G P.711 1984? @\Cosmic-ray picture of the heliosphere \ \Venkatesan.D \ \ \Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest \ \Astronomy \Solar system \Cosmic rays \Space \ \ \n.d. \16p. \XP3-01 \Reprint \#G P.712 Reprint of pp.4-19 of Johns Hopkins APL Technical Digest Vol.6,no.1. @\Role of plasmas in solar-terrestrial relations: a fragmentary overview[part of a document,pp.21-36] \ \ \ \ \ \ \Astronomy \Solar terrestrial physics \Plasmas \Space \ \ \n.d. \16p. \XP3-01 \(paper) \#GH P.714 Photocopy of part of a document, mentions ISEE results,[pub.ca.1985] & ISTP programme of ESA & NASA.[planned ca 1983+] @\Extreme energetic particle decreases near geostationary orbit: a manifestationof current diversion within a plasma sheet \ \Baker.D \McPherron.R \ \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Atmospheric research \Solar terrestrial physics \ \Space \United States \ \1989 Dec \22p \XP3-01 \Reprint \#G 1990.124 Preprint of Joun. Geophys. Res., Dec 1989. 16.6.92 @\Understanding the Sun-Earth Environment: Multiple Mission Campaign Coordinationthrough the Inter-Agency Consultative Group for Space Science \ \ \ \ \IACG \ESA \Solar terrestrial physics \Solar terrestrail interaction \Space science \Space \International \ \1992 \16p \XP3-01 \Monograph \#G 1992.259, 1992.260 (copy 2) mvk 2.1.93 . @\Voyagers to the Outer Planets \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Data sets \Space probes \Planets \Space \ \ \1991 (?) \ \XP3-01 \CD-ROM Set \#CD-ROM . Set comprising Description, 1993.95.1 (by Randy Travis, 1991June): pamphlet on IMDISP Image Display Software for IBM, 1993.95.2 (M Martin,F Evans, D Nakamura, 1989); software in 3.5 & 5.25 floppy disks (1993.95.3,1993.95.4); and 12 volumes of CD-ROM disks of compressed images from Voyagervisits to Uranus, Neptune, Saturn , Jupiter (Vol 1 Uranus, 1993.95.5, CD-ROMNo. 19, US..NASA..PDS..VG..0001; Vol 2 Uranus, 1993.95.6, CD-ROM No. 20,US..NASA..PDS..VG..0002; Vol 3 Uranus, 1993.95.7, CD-ROM No. 21, US..NASA..PDS.VG.0003;Vol 4, Saturn, 1993.95.8, CD-ROM No. 22, US..NASA..PDS.. VG..0004; Vol 5,Saturn, 1993.95.9, CD-ROM No. 23, US..NASA..PDS..VG..0005; Vol 6, Jupiter,1993.95.10, CD-ROM No..... 24, US..NASA..PDS..VG..0006; Vol 7, Jupiter,1993.95.11, CD-ROM No. 25, US..NASA..PDS..VG..0007; Vol 8, Jupiter, 1993.95.12,CD-ROM No. 26, US..NASA..PDS..VG..0008; Vol 9, Neptune, 1993.95.13, CD-ROMNo. 27; US..NASA..PDS..VG..0009; Vol 10, Neptune, 1993.95.14, CD-ROM No.28, US..NASA..PDS..VG..0010; Vol 11, Neptune, 1993.95.15, CD-ROM No. 29,US..NASA..PDS..VG..0011; Vol 12, Neptune, 1993.95.16, CD-ROM No. 30, US..NASA..PDS..VG..0012.Developed by NASA, Planetary Data System (PDS), JPL, and University of Colorado.mvk 20.7.93 @\Comet and atsteroid impacts : does earth need protection? \Current Issues Brief No.15,1994 \Brown, Gary \James, Matthew \ \Parliamentary Research Services \ \Disasters \Asteroids \Comets \Space \Australia \ \August,1994 \14 p. \XP3-01 \monograph \#g 1996.36 ISBN 132111560 @\AMPTE, active magnetospheric particle tracer explorers \ \Haerendel.G \Scholer.M \ \MPE \ \Solar terrestrial physics \AMPTE \Space probes \Space \International \ \n.d. \21p. \XP3-05 \Monograph \#G P.717 1985? @\ The Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Explorers (AMPTE) Program \ \Krimigis.S \Haerendel.G \McEntire.R \ \ \Solar terrestrial physics \Space probes \AMPTE \Space \International \ \1982 \6p. \XP3-05 \Reprint \#G P.721 Reprint of pp.843-850 of EOS, Vol. 63, no.45. Nov. 9.1982 @\Solar-terrestrial energy program 1990-1995 : initial research projects \ \ \ \ \ICSU \SCOSTEP \Planning \Solar terrestrial physics \STEP \International \Space \ \1990 \26p \XP3-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.117 18.6.92 @\ Project Galileo \JPL Fact Sheet \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space probes \Galileo mission \ \United States \Space \ \1984? \7p. \XP3-12 \(paper) \#G P.718 Photocopy. On pub. 8-2?/84DB. @\ CLUSTER, study in three dimensions of plasma turbulence and small scalestructure, assesment study Sept. 1983 \ \Haerendel.G \ \ \ESA \ \Astronomy \Space probes \CLUSTER \Space \Europe \ \1983 \58p. \XP3-30 \Monograph \#G P.719 SCI(83)4 @\ Solar System Committee annual report \ \ \ \ \SERC \ \Astronomy \Solar system \Space science \Space \Great Britain \ \HOLD 1983-1984; 1984-85; \varies \XP3-32 \Serial \1983-4 is P.715; 84-85 is P.716 . @\ Proposal for a UK sub-satellite on AMPTE, June 1981 \ \ \ \ \Rutherford Appleton Lab. \ \Space probes \Astronomy \AMPTE \Space \Great Britain \ \1981 \69p. \XP3-32 \Monograph \#G P.720 @\Project Phobos \ \ \ \ \Soviet Space Program \ \Phobos project \Space probes \Mars \Space \USSR \ \1986 \54p \XP15-01 \Monograph \#G P.728 Planning booklet. @\ Report of the Long Range Planning Committee to the Scientific Committeeon Solar-Terrestrial Physics (SCOSTEP), Sept. 1984 \ \ \ \ \SCOSTEP \ \Solar terrestrial physics \Space science \ \International \ \1984 \Various \XP15-05 \Monograph \#G P.725 @\International solar-terrestrial physics program ; a plan for the corespaceflight missions \ \ \ \ \NASA \ESA \Solar system \Solar terrestrial physics \ISTP \International \ \ \ \21p \XP15-05 \Monograph \#G P.722 1983 ? Prepared for NASA, ESA, ISAS. @\ Solar-system space physics in the 1980's: a research strategy [by] Committeeon Solar and Space Physics, Space Science Board, Assembly of Mathematicaland Physical Sciences, National Research Council \ \ \ \ \NRC \ \Solar system \Astronomy \Space science \Space \United States \ \1980 \82p. \XP15-12 \Monograph \#G P.723 @\ Planetary exploration through year 2000, a Core program, part 1 of areport by the Solar System Exploration Committee of the NASA Advisory Council,Executive summary \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Astronomy \Space programs \Solar system \Space \United States \ \1983 \29p. \XP15-12 \Monograph \#G P.724 @\Priorities in solar-system space physics: an implementation plan, Draft3, August 1984 [by] Space Science Board Committee on Solar and Space Physics \ \ \ \ \Space Science Board \ \Solar terrestrial physics \Astronomy \ \United States \ \ \1984 \ca. 150p. \XP15-12 \(paper) \#G P.726 Photocopy. Probably NASA document. Marked "Limited use, donot quote or cite". @\Galileo to Jupiter, probing the planet and mapping its moons \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space probes \Galileo mission \Jupiter \United States \ \ \1979 \20p \XP15-12 \Monograph \#G P.727 Inc. colour pictures. @\Propagation effects in Space VLBI ; Proceedings of a Workshopp held atthe Special Astrophysical Observatory, Leningrad, USSR, 28-30 May, 1990. \ \Gurvits.L \ \ \ \ \Radioastron \VLBI \VSOP \Russia \Space \International \1993 \104p \XR3-05 \Conference proceedings \#G 1993.53 Edited by Gurvits, sponsored by P N Lebedev Physical Institute,Moscow; National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center, New York; and SpecialAstrophysical Observatory, Zelenchukskaya. Received 4.6.93 . mvk 22.6.93 @\ Radio astronomy \CSIRO Research for Australia \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Astronomy \Telescopes \ \Australia \ \ \1985 \63p. \XR3-80 \Monograph \#G P.729 CSIRO Research for Australia No. 5, ISBN 0 643 03790 X @\ Ulysses, a voyage to the sun \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Ulysses project \Space probes \Sun \Space \ \ \1986 \26p. \XS1-01 \Monograph \#G P.730 @\ Selected bibliography on helioseismology \Global Oscillation Network Group Report \Leibacher.J \ \ \National Solar Observatory \ \Astronomy \Bibliography \Helioseismology \Space \United States \ \1985 \224p. \XS1-01 \Monograph \#G P.731 Report no. 2. @\ Space science & applications notice, Solar Maximum Mission GuestInvestigator Program \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Guidelines \Astronomy \SMM \Space \United States \ \1985 \7p. \XS2-12 \Monograph \#G P.733 Guidelines for applications @\SOHO Solar and Heliosperic Observatory [project], assessment study \ESA SCI(83)3 \Malinovsky.M \ \ \ESA \ \Satellite observatories \Sun \SOHO \Space \Europe \ \1983 \61p. \XS2-30 \Monograph \#G P.734 @\ 10 years HELIOS: publication celebrating the 10th anniversary of thelaunch of HELIOS on Dec. 10th 1974 \ \Porsche.H \ \ \DFVLR-GSOC \ \HELIOS project \Space probes \Space science \Space \ \ \1984 \200p. \XS3-01 \Monograph \#G P.735 ISBN 3 88135 156 6 In German and English @\ Canada-France-Hawaii telescope [Maunea Kea, Hawaii] \ \ \ \ \Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope Corp. \National Research Council Canada \Telescopes \Observatories \Canada-France-Hawaii Telescope \Hawaii \Canada \ \1979 \15p. \XT1-14 \Monograph \#G P.736 @\ Space VLBI Week, 22-26 April 1991. \ \ \ \ \ ATNF \ CSIRO Division of Radiophysics \ Satellite observatories \ Radioastron \ VSOP \ International \ Space \ Australia \ 1991 Apr \ Various \ XT2-05 \ Conference papers \ # C "Space VLBI Week". 1991.8 Collection of meeting reports,agendas and opening speech (by Dr J Stoker, CSIRO CEO, 22/4) for numberof international meetings held at ATNF/Division of Radophysics, Epping,April 1991. These included VSOP Review meeting, 12th Biannual RadioastronReview, Inter- Agency Consultative Group (IACG) on Space VLBI. jk 26/4/91 @\ The 14th semi-annual Radioastron review meeting and Russian and JPL visitsreport \ \ Jauncey.D \ \ \ ATNF \ \ Satellite observatories \ Radioastron \ VSOP \ International \ Space \ Australia \ 1992 May \ \ XT2-05 \ Report \ # C "Radioastron/VLBI. 1993.24 Report to DITAC on meeting held atUniversity of Calgary, Alberta, Canada, 6-14 May 1992. mvk 9.3.93 @\ Technical Report No.35, A Computer-controlled Triple-Fabry-Perot UniversalFilter for Solar Research, Lest Foundation \ \Bray..R \ \ \Lest Foundation \CSIRO Division of Applied Physics \Solar Research \Astrophysics \Instrumentation \International \ \ \1988 \25p \XT2-05 \Monograph \#G P.746 @\ Mauna Kea: a guide to the upper slopes and Observatories \ \Cruikshank.D \ \ \University of Hawaii. Institute for Astronomy \ \Mt. Mauna Kea \Observatories \Guidebooks \Hawaii \ \ \1986 \58p. \XT2-12 \Monograph \#G P.738 @\Australia telescope compact array at Culgoora \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Telescopes \Astronomy \Australia Telescope \Australia \New South Wales \ \1983? \n/a \XT2-80 \Folder \#G P.740 Folded sheet brochure @\ Fifth Annual Report of the Australia Telescope Project \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \Australia Telescope \Observatories \Astronomy \ \Space \ \ \December 1988 \62p. \XT2-80 \Monograph \#G P.741 @\ An Australian Ground Station for the Infrared Space Observatory \ \Tuohy.I \ \ \ANU. Observatories \ \Radio astronomy \ISO \Telescopes \Australia \Canberra \ \July 1988 \5p. \XT3-01 \Abstract \#G P.742 ANU Observatories for Mt Stromlo and Siding Spring Observatories @\ European Consortium for Very Long Baseline Interferometry, an advancedscience and technology network \ \Setti.G \ \ \European Consortium for VLBI \ \Astronomy \VLBI \Telescopes \Europe \ \ \n.d. \21p. \XT3-30 \Monograph \#G P.745 1985? @\ Very long baseline radio interferometry using a geostationary satellite,study of the ground segment, August 1981 \ ESA SCI(81)5 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Astronomy \VLBI \Remote sensing information processing \Europe \ \ \1981 \69p. \XT3-30 \Monograph \#G P.744 @\ Arcetri Astrophysical Observatory Annual Report 1991 \ \ \ \ \Arcetri Astrophysical Observatory \Osservatorio Astrofisico di Arcetri \Astronomy \VLBI \Observatories \Italy \ \ \1991 \34p \XT3-35 \Serial \#G 1994.06 Forward by Franco Pacini, Director. Covers role of observatoryin astronomical technology including VLBI, TIRGO, Solar Physics and Columbus.A ddress is Largo E. Fermi 5, 50125 Florence Italy, ph 55 27521, telex 572268ARCETR I fax 55 220039 e-mail @astrfi.astro.it mvk 2.2.94 @\ The CSIRO 210-foot Radio Telescope \ \ \ \ \ Australian Telescope Radio Astronomy Observatory \ \ Space science \ Astronomy \ \ Australia \ \ \ Unknown, probably early 70s \ 17p \ XT3-80 \ Monograph \ #G P.82 @\ LEST, Large Earth based Solar Telescope, an overview \ LEST Foundation Technical Reports \ Wyller.A \ \ \ LEST Foundation \ \Telescopes \ Observatories \ \ International \ Scandinavia \ \ 1986 \ 32p \ XT15-05 \ Monograph \ #G 2 copies P.17 P.18 @\ New telescopes for Australian astronomy in the 1990s, a report to thePrime Minister, May 1982 \ \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \Telescopes \Astronomy \ \Australia \ \ \1982 \12p \XT15-80 \Monograph \#G P.747 ISBN 0 644 01858 5 @\Yohkoh Soft X-Ray telescope NASA X-Ray corona of the Sun 1991.11.11-27 \ \ \ \ \ISAS \ \X-ray astronomy \Space science \Space probes \Japan \Space \ \1991 \ \XX3-63 \Video \#G 1993.76 Presented to COSSA by Australian Academy of Science , honoringvisit by Professor Minoru Oda, May 1993. mvk 30.6.93 @\Hidden Visions : the story of CSIRO's Australia Telescope \ \ \ \ \ATNF \CSIRO \Astronomy \Telescopes \Observatories \Australia \ \ \1992 \ \XX12-80 \Video \#G 1993.52 18 min., VHS format, produced by Provision, Annandale. mvk 16.6.93 @\Proposal for the production of an OMNIMAX/IMAX film "Halley'sComet over Australia", producer Wayne Young, director Michael Glasheen \ \Glasheen.M \ \ \Tetravision Productions \IMAX Systems Corp. \Halley's Comet \Motion pictures \IMAX 70mm film \Australia \ \ \1985 \n/a \XX15-80 \Monograph \#G P.748 Lists space theatres & planetariums using the IMAX/OMNIMAXlarge format film & its associated projection systems. @\Quasars, pulsars, black holes ... and HEAO's \ \Doolitle.R \Moritz.K \Whilden.R \TRW Systems \ \Space science \HEAO \ \Space \ \ \1974? \22p. \XZ1-01 \Monograph \#G P.749 Publicity booklet. @\ Databases and on-line data in astronomy \ Astrophysics and space science library. Vol. 171. Instrumentation \ Albrecht.D (ed) \ Egret.D (ed) \ \ \ \ Astronomy \ Information systems \ \ International \ \ \ 1991 \ 273p. \ XZ1-05 \ monograph \ #G 1992.20 This work includes a series of clear and up-to date descriptionsof available data systems world-wide. First part describes astronomicalarchives (space missions and large ground-based observatories ) and databases(SIMBAD, NED). Second part describes informattion systems currently underdevelopment, (ESIS in Europe and ADS in the US ) and on-line services. Lastpart deals with related issues : bibliographical services, astronomicaldirectories, science networks, user interfaces in astronomy and a briefdescription of the FITS format of common use in many systems. @\ The Cambridge Atlas of Astronomy \ \ Audouze.Jean \ Guy.IsraLGuy.Israel \ \ Cambridge University Press \ Encyclopaedia Universalis \ Space science \ Astronomy \ \ Space \ International \ \ 1994 \ 470p \ XZ3-01 \ Monograph \ #G 1995.77 Purchased HQ Library, CLIS/586, $120, 8.6.95. Third Edition;originally published as "Le Grand Atlas de l'Astronomie, 1983. Prolificillustrations from space missions Voyager, Galileo, Hubble etc ISBN 0 52143438 6 mvk 13.6.95 @\Astronomy: practical benefits, our goals, ...... \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Astronomy \Satellite observatories \Space research \Space \United States \ \n.d. \6p. \XZ3-01 \(paper) \#G P.750 By Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA, before 1977, after 1974. @\Photon-photon absorption and the uniqueness of the spectra of active galacticnuclei \NASA Technical Memorandum 86117 \Kazanas.D \ \ \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Astronomy \Space science \ \Space \United States \ \1984 May \16p \XZ3-01 \Monograph \#G 1990.122 16.6.92 @\X-ray spectra of clusters of galaxies \NASA Technical Memorandum 86115 \Mushotzky.R \ \ \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Astronomy \Space science \ \Space \United States \ \1984 May \10p \XZ3-01 \Monograph \#G 1990.121 16.6.92 @\LHEA contributions to the future of ultraviolet astronomy based on sixyears of IUE Research \NASA Technical Memorandum 86098 \Mushotzky.R \Urry.R \ \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Astronomy \Space science \ \Space \United States \ \1984 Apr \13p \XZ3-01 \Monograph \#G 1990.120 16.6.92 @\An X-ray survey of variable bright Quasars \NASA Technical Memorandum 86094 \Henriksen.M \Marshall.F \Mushotzky.R \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Astronomy \Space science \ \Space \United States \ \1984 Apr \26p \XZ3-01 \Monograph \#G 1990.119 16.6.92 @\X-ray spectra and time variability of active galactic nuclei \NASA Technical Memorandum 86071 \Mushotzky.R \ \ \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Astronomy \Space science \ \Space \United States \ \1984 Feb \25p \XZ3-01 \Monograph \#G 1990.116 16.6.92 @|Thermal detectors as X-ray spectrometers \NASA Technical Memorandum 86092 \Moseley.S \Mather.J \McCammon.D \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Astronomy \Space science \ \Space \United States \ \1984 Apr \25p \XZ3-01 \Monograph \#G 1990.117 16.6.92 @\ Experimental tests of a single-photon calorimeter for X-ray spectroscopy \NASA Technical Memorandum 86093 \McCammon.D \Moseley.S \Mather.J \NASA Goddard Space Flight Center \ \Astronomy \Space science \Instrumentation \Space \United States \ \1984 Apr \16p \XZ3-01 \Monograph \#G 1990.118 16.6.92 @\ Essays in space science: proceedings of a symposium, NASA Goddard SpaceFlight Centre (Greenbelt,Md.: 1985: April 23) \NASA Conference pub. \Ramarty.R \ \ \NASA \ \ \Astronomy \Space science \ \Space \United States \1987 \423p. \XZ3-12 \Monograph \#G P.751 A tribute to Frank B. McDonald. @\Major directions for space science, 1995-2015 \ \Giacconi.R \Pinkau.K \ \Task Group on Astronomy and Astrophysics \ \Space science \Future planning \ \International \United States \ \ \ \XZ15-05 \Photocopy \#G P.752 WT03-B26-89IA029-000311-B022-265http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/691.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170103 text/html 1390HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:59:24 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:58 GMTContent-length: 1216 CEOS assesses Global Observing Strategy CEOS assesses Global Observing Strategy Participants at Seattle meeting on global observing strategy. Seated(L&shyp;R): Dr Tillmann Mohr, Director, EUMETSAT; Mr Karuo Mamiya, DeputyDirector-General, Research and Development Bureau, Science and TechnologyAgency of Japan; Dr Brian Embleton, CSIRO, Chair of CEOS; Dr Michel Jarraud,Deputy Secretary General, World Meteorological Organization; Dr CharlesKennel, Associate Administrator, Office of Mission to Planet Earth, NASA;and Mr Robert Winokur, Assistant Administrator for Satellite and InformationServices, NOAA. Amongst other items, the meeting paid special attention to how user requirementsmight be specified and incorporated into the Earth observation activitiesof CEOS members; the potential role of CEOS in a future Integrated GlobalObserving Strategy; and the interdependencies of satellite operators; serviceusers; and space-based and local measurement. WT03-B26-90IA029-000311-B022-281http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/693.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170120 text/html 606HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 16:59:35 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:01 GMTContent-length: 433 Collaboration in Global Change data studies Dr Brian Embleton (centre) introduces concepts of integrated global spaceand local measurements for studying Earth phenomena, at the CEOS meetingin Seattle, 27-29 March. WT03-B26-91IA029-000311-B022-317http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/694.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170154 text/html 777HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:00:03 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:02 GMTContent-length: 604 NASDA and CSIRO renew agreement CSIRO and NASDA delegates sign research agreement on Marine ObservationSatellite Data. Seated (L&shyp;R): Dr Brian Embleton, CSIRO and Mr Tad Inada,External Relations Department, NASDA; standing: Ms Yuko Nagano, Scienceand Technology Agency (STA); Mr Kaoru Mamiya, STA; Mr Jeff Kingwell, CSIRO;Mr Yukio Haruyama, NASDA/STA. WT03-B26-92IA029-000311-B022-351http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/692.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170243 text/html 544HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:00:52 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:59 GMTContent-length: 371 Collaboration in Global Change data studies Part of the NASDA Earth Observation Centre, Hatoyama, the meetingplace for the Third GRNS. WT03-B26-93IA029-000311-B022-376http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/692a.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170259 text/html 510HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:01:18 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:59 GMTContent-length: 337 Collaboration in Global Change data studies A 'working lunch' during the GRNS meeting. WT03-B26-94IA029-000311-B023-22http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/692b.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170322 text/html 725HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:01:30 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:00 GMTContent-length: 552 Collaboration in Global Change data studies CSIRO's Dr John Parslow (right), Division of Fisheries, with GRNS colleaguesexamining omnidirectional antenna for a prototype NASDA ground station forlow-resolution ocean colour data from the OCTS instrument on the ADEOS spacecraftdue for launch in August. WT03-B26-95IA029-000311-B023-55http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/696.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170421 text/html 393HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:02:23 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:03 GMTContent-length: 220 SPOT turns 10 WT03-B26-96IA028-000298-B033-480http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/box3.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170452 text/html 3286HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:02:54 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:09 GMTContent-length: 3112 SPOT Images SPOT Images Both HRVs can work in either panchromatic or multispectral imaging modes,singly or together. The panchromatic mode uses a single spectral band, 0.51&shyp;0.73 micron(visible light without blue), to produce black and white images resolvingfine geographic detail. The multispectral mode uses three bands (green, 0.50&shyp;0.59 micron; red,0.61&shyp;0.68 micron; and near infrared, 0.79 to 0.89 micron), each withits own reflectance properties, to create coloured images. Numerous landscapefeatures can be interpreted from the composite images. Images are split at the telescope's focal plane. Part of the image is sentto a line of 6000 photodetectors which emit electrical charges when struckby light. These build the panchromatic image. Each detector correspondsto 10 m pixels, giving images 60 km wide. Images are constructed line byline as the satellite moves. The rest of the image goes to a dichroic beam splitter. This glass devicedirects each band to another detector strip. But these detectors receiveinsufficient light to fire, so Charged Coupled Devices generate a signalfrom two adjacent detectors, hence multispectral mode's 20 m colour resolution. SPOT encodes the images for transmission to Earth. The satellite may downloadthe image to a Direct Receiving Station in real time if within range, otherwisethe image is recorded and downloaded later. SPOT can observe the same zone from different angles over a number of orbits. Images of large areas may be built up over several passes. Captured images must be preprocessed: corrected for perspective and atmosphericdistortion. Images at various levels of preprocessing are available forpurchase. Higher levels provide precise geometric alignment with groundcheckpoints and existing maps, in addition to the corrections for viewingangle, reflectance characteristics and detector sensitivity offered at lowerlevels. SPOT''s sideways viewing allows capture of images of the same site takenfrom different angles, using parallax to create stereopairs. These are usedfor stereoplotting, topographic mapping, and automatic stereocorrelation,from which Digital Elevation Models (3D computer landscape images) can bederived. Processed images, typically 30&shyp;100 Mb, are available on CD ROM, magnetictape or printed form. These diagrams show the types of observation possible using SPOT's two HighResolution Visual (HRV) scanners. WT03-B26-97IA028-000298-B034-28http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/box1.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170541 text/html 1065HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:03:31 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:09 GMTContent-length: 892 Some SPOT applications Some SPOT applications Mapping, at scales 1:100,000 to 1:25,000; urban mapping. Landcover monitoring. Agricultural yield estimates. Supplementing census data. Fisheries monitoring. Forestry operations. Landuse Geographic Information Systems. Construction planning, highlighting the best road routes, avoiding areastoo steep, too exposed, environmentally sensitive, etc. Environmental impact studies. Insurance payout estimates, following natural disasters. Geo-mineral exploration. Well placement. Tectonic monitoring and prediction. Topographic 3D images, used for: catchment management; geological interpretation;flight simulation; radiotransmitter siting; etc. WT03-B26-98IA028-000298-B034-57http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/698.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170556 text/html 1132HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:04:17 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:05 GMTContent-length: 959 SPOT turns 10 SPOT image of an area along the New South Wales&shyp;Queensland border nearthe town of Goondiwindi, taken on 26 January 1996 during flooding of theBarwon River. This is an agricultural region in which cotton is a majorcrop. The smaller image on the next page shows the same area captured bySPOT during normal flow of the river in October 1994. SPOT image supplied courtesy of the Australian Centre for Remote Sensing,Australian Surveying and Land Information Group, Department of AdministrativeServices.  CNES SPOT image supplied courtesy of the Australian Centre for Remote Sensing,Australian Surveying and Land Information Group, Department of AdministrativeServices.  CNES . WT03-B26-99IA028-000298-B034-86http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/699.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170626 text/html 655HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:04:31 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:08 GMTContent-length: 482 CEOS Working Group on Information Systems and Services SPOT image supplied courtesy of the Australian Centre for Remote Sensing,Australian Surveying and Land Information Group, Department of AdministrativeServices.  CNES WT03-B26-100IA028-000298-B034-109http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/box2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170649 text/html 1992HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:05:10 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:09 GMTContent-length: 1818 SPOT Satellites SPOT Satellites Total mass (start of life): 1907 kg Dimensions: 2 x 2 x 4.5 m Solar panel: 1 kW, 8.14 m span Altitude: 822 km (at equator) Orbital period: 101.4 min Revolutions per day: 14 + 5/26 Westward drift each orbit: 2823 km Cycle duration: 26 days Orbits per cycle: 369 Recording capacity: 22 minutes Design lifetime: 3 years Payload: 2 High Resolution Visible imaging instruments; 2 data tape recorders; payload telemetry package. SPOT satellites orbit in a polar, sun-synchronous circle; they maintainthe same angle to the sun above any given ground point. Passing overheadat the same local time each day, SPOT satellites always see ground sitesin the same conditions of light and shade, allowing comparison of subsequentimages. SPOT overflies every point on the Earth's surface at least every 26 days,but can resample locations more often, utilising the telescopes' sidewaysviewing ability (SPOT Images). Resample frequencyvaries with latitude: at the equator, a given area can be imaged 7 timesduring the 26 day cycle; sites at latitude 45 can be imaged 11 times. All SPOT satellites are in the same orbit, though in different phases, sothey can be tracked and monitored in sequence by the same network of groundstations. SPOT carries two identical HRV (High Resolution Visible) instruments, eachattached to telescopes capable of 770,000x magnification. Mirrors at themouths of each telescope swivel according to programmed ground instructions,giving viewing angles of 27 from the vertical, and a 950 km viewing windoweach orbit. WT03-B26-101IA028-000298-B034-142http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin69/box4.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170712 text/html 1255HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:05:31 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:10:09 GMTContent-length: 1081 Web SPOT Web SPOT In January 1996, SPOT opened business on the World Wide Web: the newestand most popular part of the Internet. Clicking homepage link icons calls text and graphics about SPOT subjectsof interest. For technical details or history, click SPOT System. Also try:Products & Services, Commercial Network, SPOT News, or Examples of Use.To contribute suggestions or ask for help, click Contact Us. SPOT's Web page includes a demonstration of the DALI catalogue. The maincatalogue opens with annual payment of around Aus$125, or Aus$630 for permanentaccess. Users can request information about the availability of scenes ofinterest (specifying latitude and longitude), or view thumbnail sketchesof the scenes, which also give technical data. It will soon be possibleto specify regions of interest by clicking on index maps. SPOT Homepage: http://www.spotimage.fr/ WT03-B26-102IA028-000298-B034-165http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin70/spin703.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170723 text/html 742HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:05:43 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 18 Jul 1996 07:23:01 GMTContent-length: 569 SpIN no.70 WT03-B26-103IA028-000298-B034-190http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin71/7103.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170740 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:05:58 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:32 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-104IA028-000298-B034-223http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/dest.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114170758 text/html 671HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:06:15 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:25:36 GMTContent-length: 498 Biodiversity UnitEnvironmental Strategies DirectorateDepartment of the Environment, Sport and Territories.Commonwealth of Australia.Post GPO Box 787, Canberra, ACT, 2601.Fax   (06) 274 1123Phone (06) 274 1111 WT03-B26-105IA028-000298-B035-59http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/geoimage.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114171127 text/html 734HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:09:42 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 26 Feb 1996 04:12:58 GMTContent-length: 561 GEOIMAGE Pty Ltd13/180 Moggill Road,Taringa, Qld, 4068,Australia.Post PO Box 789, Indooroopilly, QLD, 4068, AustraliaPhone (07) 3871-0088Fax   (07) 3871-0042 The full resolution Australian MSS Mosaic is available in either digital or photographic formats from Geoimage.WT03-B26-106IA028-000298-B035-93http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/nodata.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114171140 text/html 457HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:10:00 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:25:36 GMTContent-length: 284 Please choose Map Sheets within Australia.WT03-B26-107IA028-000298-B041-233http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap1b.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114174834 text/html 4614HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:46:48 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 05:20:32 GMTContent-length: 4440 A View Of Biodiversity Biodiversity is a relatively modern word; eg Biodiversity Unit (1993).Within the research community, it can assume one or more meaningsdepending on the spatial scale involved. However, for the general public, biodiversity has come to assumea focus, a banner, for political action. Biodiversity is replacingthe older watchwords of conservation, preservation, environment,and natural heritage that gave meaning to widespread concern overthe consequences of our way of life. The cumulative consequences of our national economic activitiesand value systems have resulted in widespread decline in the abundanceand range of many organisms, with the extinction of a smallerbut appreciable number of species that were present two centuriesago; eg Saunders et al (in preparation), Short and Smith (1994). Biodiversity is valued by Australian society for many reasons.The three reasons most often cited are that biodiversity providesa sense of unique national identity, place and responsibility;it offers significant potential economic benefits if exploitedin a sustainable way; and, irrespective of its value to society,it has an intrinsic right to exist; eg Biodiversity Unit (1993). We offer no judgement on any of these three viewpoints other thanto summarise that for contemporary Australian society, biodiversityis perceived to be a significant component of the individual andcollective quality of life. Biodiversity matters to us; eg Cocks (1992). As public and scientific interest in biodiversity has grown, soalso have the number of definitions and descriptions. We do notintend to add to these but rather to link two emphases that characterisethe perspective of biodiversity that underpinned this project. The first emphasis was that biodiversity includes all species:plants and animals, both common and rare. This emphasis was anecessary alternative to the more restricted and unfortunatelycommon view that biodiversity is only about rare animals, andthat plants are just habitat for fauna. Every organism captured in this image is a component of Australia'sbiodiversity - not just the bird in centre frame. The second emphasis was on the direction and rate of change inthe size of the species pool. This was the operational theme andprincipal focus of this project; not on inventory and not on determiningthe biodiversity complement. Furthermore, it is the consensusview that the predominant direction of that change, however poorlyquantified, is negative. That is, we currently preside over asituation of general loss of biodiversity, with the rates of lossranging from very slight to rapid depending on circumstance; egMoritz and Kikkawa (1994), Saunders, Hopkins, and How (1990).This situation is not unique to Australia; eg Hannah et al (1994, 1995). To stress the emphasis on rate of change of biodiversity awayfrom biodiversity itself, we use the terms biotic impoverishmentor biotic erosion to capture the process of species diminutionand extinction. Biotic erosion is evocative as both a metaphor and an analoguebecause species extinction was often unspectacular and delayedin time but nonetheless relentless and irreversible; eg Bridgewater (1994), Recher (1994), Recher and Lim (1992).An emphasis on biotic erosion was operational because it is nowpublic policy to manage the loss of biodiversity by detectingit, and where possible, preventing, slowing or and reversing thatdecline. WT03-B26-108IA028-000298-B041-269http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap1c.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114174857 text/html 8605HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:47:16 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 05:22:34 GMTContent-length: 8431 A View Of Landcover Landcover is a convenient term for the combination of vegetation(or snow or water) and soils within a topographic context. Itis a way of thinking about vegetation and soils on very broadlandscape scales. The use of the term landcover implies the spatial scales of landscapesand regions, ie areas of tens to hundreds of square kilometres.It is very different from the human-scaled experience of vegetationpatches that can be measured in tens to hundreds of square metres.The domain of this project was the entire continent, 7, 692, 000km2. Therefore, equivalently large sample sizes were used to characteriselandcover and its disturbance status. Most figures quoted in thisreport are in thousands of square kilometres: we focus on theoverall view. Using the above definition, landcover plus fauna represents thetotal biodiversity complement, or the terrestrial component ofthe global biosphere. Because vegetation is the largest and mostobvious (above ground) component of the biodiversity complementof any landscape, it is far easier to detect, quantify and interpretchanges in vegetation than it is for fauna. Therefore, given robust relationships between vegetation, soiland fauna, changes in vegetation were used to infer changes inthe other two. The remainder of this section pursues the consequencesof this proposition: what are the relationships between landcoverand fauna, and how can landcover be used to stratify the continent? A landscape view of three possible landcover changes. The undisturbedlandscape (background) is progressively modified by vegetationchange (midground), and then by soil change (foreground). The concepts of habitat and ecosystem are central to modern ecologicaltheory and conservation management practice. However, they areconcepts, and thus abstractions. An ecosystem can be all the rainforestsof North Queensland or just a single decaying leaf. The term ecosystembecomes tangible only when it is spatially defined. For example,it is equally legitimate to define and discuss the spinifex ecosystemof Central Australia that extends over millions of square kilometresas it is to focus on just the mangroves of Moreton Bay. Ecosystemshave no implicit spatial scales; they are explicitly and externallydefined. Habitat is a similarly ill-defined and ill-used word, especiallybetween scientific disciplines. To animal ecologists, plants arehabitat. Conversely plant ecologists routinely ignore animalsas part of a plant's habitat; eg Bell et al (1991).In this project, habitat was simply taken to be a particular landcovertype with the co-location and implied interaction of plants andanimals over landscape scales; ie over areas of size 10-100 km2. Thus, we have made habitat and ecosystems tangible by equatingthem to landcover at landscape scales. At the level of generalisationused in this study, a particular landcover type and its associatedfauna was equated to an ecosystem. Similarly, the type and conditionof one particular landcover was equated to a habitat. We recognisethat this equivalence requires quantitative biological understandingover landscape scales that is currently absent; eg Pressey and Logan (1994).Therefore, we have continued with qualitative relations alone. An agricultural landcover type captured at landscape scale.This is a widespread (eco)system in southern Australia and containsthe habitats of a diverse range of native and exotic species.The total area visible in this scene represents but a few samplepoints in a continental survey. How then to progress with a continental overview? We proceed on the basis of this qualitative argument. Given that we have made the abstraction of biodiversity tangibleand operational by focusing on its loss, biotic erosion, ratherthan the absolute, and made habitat tangible by equating it tolandcover types at landscape scales, it follows then that disturbedlandcover represents a change in habitat structure, compositionand function, and thus in habitat suitability. Detrimental change in habitat suitability, ie a deleterious changein structure, composition and functioning, will result, over time,in the decline of species abundance and richness, or ultimatelyin local or global extinction; eg Recher (1994). Three qualifications to this argument are necessary. The firstis that disturbance as used here is restricted to that which isanthropogenic; ie that imposed on the natural or background disturbanceof climate (wet or dry periods) or weather events (wildfire, storm)and is traceable to human action collectively called landuse.Landcover can be disturbed by landuse to result in one or moreof three conditions: fragmentation, replacement, and by invasionby feral plants and animals. These are the only disturbance consequencesconsidered in this project. The second qualification is the presumption that all disturbancewill result in a decline in species abundance and distribution.We assert that generally this was the result but note that thereare examples where landcover disturbance has resulted in a localincrease in population size of a few species; eg the increasein abundance of the red kangaroo with the establishment of pastoralismin the arid areas of the continent. The last qualification is an important reiteration: the relationshipbetween landcover disturbance and biotic erosion is completelyqualitative. It must remain so because the quantitative alternative- how much disturbance results in how much loss of biodiversity- is currently lacking. Robust relationships that have any generalityare likely to take decades to establish and to wait for this is,in our opinion, both hazardous and unnecessary. It is hazardous because what is already known about the extentand rate of biotic erosion is far from encouraging; eg Noble et al (in preparation), Saunders et al (in preparation).It is unnecessary because advances to our understanding can bemade based on what is known, now. We hold that a substantial improvement in the national assessmentof the extent and severity of biotic erosion can be achieved immediatelyby an assessment of landcover disturbance combined with an integrationand modelling of existing datasets. This was the pragmatic visionthat motivated the establishment and conduct of this project. The ecology of this one species, the red kangaroo, the mostabundant large mammal in the world, has been the subject of asubstantial research effort spanning some thirty years. The resultsof that effort now underpin the conservative management of thisspecies across the continent even though there is a great dealwe do not yet know about its population ecology. Compared withthe red kangaroo, understanding of the remaining biodiversitycomplement is essentially non-existent. Nevertheless, this shouldnot be a paralysing realisation. Perfect understanding is a desirableprerequisite for management; not necessarily a critical one. Wecan learn as much by doing as we can by studying. Management ofthe problem of biotic erosion is required now. Attempts must bemade now. WT03-B26-109IA028-000298-B041-306http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap1d.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114174913 text/html 2338HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:47:31 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 05:23:26 GMTContent-length: 2164 The View From Space To generate a national assessment of landcover disturbance requireda dataset that was contemporary (1990s), a census sample (100%),of workable spatial resolution, geocoded, digital, and usablewithin the resource constraints of time, personnel and funding.Such requirements dictated the use of space data: specifically,digital image data from the multispectral scanner (MSS) instrumentcarried by the Landsat satellite series. Besides satisfying these requirements, the view from space wasthe only view to satisfy the above constraints. It has significantadditional appeal because it is a view that can be readily shared.Satellite data in image format is an attractive and engaging methodof communication. Images were used where possible within thisdocument. Significantly, the view from space is a powerful view. It is powerfulbecause it is both synoptic and fine grained. The original sourcedataset resolved the entire continental landcover to the levelof 0.001 x 0.001, approximately 100 x 100 m or one hectarein area. Unfortunately, with that resolution the data volume becameintractable so a coarser, defocused view, twenty-five times largerin area (0.005 x 0.005, 500 x 500 m), was used for mostof the analyses. This, and most other details of the methods used in digitallyprocessing the Landsat MSS are critical to the interpretationand credibility of the results reported here. The nature and sizeof errors detected during data processing and their influenceson the results are discussed next. WT03-B26-110IA028-000298-B041-374http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap2a.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114174949 text/html 22320HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:48:09 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 05:18:46 GMTContent-length: 22145 Dividing Up The Continent A moment's reflection on the nature and distribution of landcoverand its potential disturbance across the continent will resultin the simple conclusion that not all disturbance factors areeverywhere equally important. The most intensive landuses arelocated in the south of the continent: those in the centre andnorth of the continent are extensive rather than intensive. Therefore, to achieve the greatest sensitivity in assessment,it was necessary to stratify the continent into regions basedon the importance of one or more disturbance factors. Then, basedon this stratification, the quantification stage using satelliteimage data can be customised to maximise the detection of thelandcover disturbance characteristic of that particular landusetype. Landuse Zones - Intensive And Extensive The most severe and extensive disturbance to landcover has been,and remains that provided by landuse: the direct result of humanactivities. By comparison, the perturbations generated by climate and weatherare either so gradual to be imperceptible even over centuries(climate), or rapid but very localised in occurrence (weather- storms, etc.). In contrast, the agents of ancient and modernlanduse, fire and mechanical or chemical clearing, are far moreinfluential. There seems little doubt that Aboriginal Australians significantlydisturbed the landcover (and the fauna) of the continent throughtheir use of fire throughout the millennia of their occupationof this continent. They shaped the face of much of Australia ina way that was separable from the very large climatic changesof the last 30, 000 years; see Pyne (1991). The landcover consequences of an early Dry Season burn in anorthern Australian savanna. Fire is a landuse tool with poorlyunderstood long-term consequences for biodiversity; millenniaof its application by Aboriginal Australians notwithstanding. There is no doubt that in the last two centuries European Australianshave also changed the landcover of the continent, both extensivelyand substantially through agricultural and pastoral landuse. Therefore,we primarily stratified the continent by landuse. Because we wereinterested only in the landcover consequences of landuse, we useda simple two-level stratification. The first and most important decision was which landcover consequenceof landuse is the most significant disturbance for biotic erosion?That we took to be habitat destruction by the clearing of naturalvegetation and its replacement by crops and pastures; eg see reviewsby Caughley (1994), Noble et al (in preparation), Saunders et al (in preparation). As a consequence, the principal stratification of the continentwas based on the location of clearing; where clearing of nativevegetation for replacement with (exotic) crops, pasture and forestvegetation has been and remains the principal disturbance. Withinthis area of the continent, the impact of landuse on landcoveris principally one of replacement. The consequences for the biodiversitythat was originally characteristic of the native vegetation areobvious and severe. Much, but certainly not all, of the biotic erosion of the lasttwo centuries was concentrated in the areas of replacement landuse.It follows then that the continued expansion of this landuse offersthe largest threat of accelerating biotic erosion; eg Saunders et al (1994); Hobbs and Saunders (1994). Urbanisation and mining, like agriculture, are also replacementlanduse types. On a continental scale, the direct landuse consequencesof mining are trivial and not considered in this study. Whileurbanisation is perhaps a hundred-fold more extensive than mining,its direct landcover consequences are also not significant ona continental scale. However, the indirect influence of urbanisationon landcover change is substantial. Urban populations are growingand need to be fed and clothed. Urban political values concerningthe conservation of biodiversity are also changing. The dividing lines between the areas of the continent where landcoverclearing was the most significant disturbance factor were drawnafter searching the satellite image data by eye. Expert interpretation,rather than machine decision, was used because in the detectionof the irregular and diffuse boundaries of clearing, the formercannot yet be matched by the latter. The boundary was finalised by allowing a generous geographic marginbeyond the edge of the clearing, approximately 100 km, and aligningit with the national grid of the 1:250,000 scale topographic mapsheet series. Using this criterion, the continent was dividedroughly into one third and two thirds as in Table 1. Stratification of the continent by the landcover consequenceof landuse. The outermost region (red) encompasses those areaswhere the principal landcover disturbance threat was clearingfor crops, pastures and forests. However, not all of this areawas cleared. In the innermost region (green), the principal landcoverdisturbance results from grazing and burning. Table 1: The absolute and relativesizes of the two principal strata, the ILZ and the ELZ, used todivide the continent.                                   km2                       %_____________________________________________________________Intensive Landuse Zone          2983908                    39Extensive Landuse Zone          4708092                    61_____________________________________________________________Total                           7692000                   100 We emphasise that this division was not based on the area actuallycleared for agriculture. Rather it was based on the threat ofclearing, both actual and potential. Therefore, we have not usedthe obvious names of cleared and uncleared for fear of generatingmisunderstanding. Rather, we have coined the names Extensive Landuse Zone (ELZ)for the central core of the continent and Intensive Landuse Zone(ILZ) for the remaining coastal strips. As defined and illustratedabove, the Intensive Landuse Zone is approximately 39% (2, 984,000 km2) of the continent and contains perhaps more than 90% ofthe national population. In contrast, the Extensive Landuse Zoneis almost twice as large, 4, 708, 000 km2 in size (61%) but carriesas little as 5% of the national population. Not all the ELZ is used on a permanent basis. Within this areaof the continent, the most common landuse is extensive pastoralismthat in terms of landcover consequences is a harvesting landuse.Like forestry based on native forests and woodlands, it is notionallysustainable where the offtake is small and irregularly patternedin time and space. Nonetheless, most surveys of the impact ofextensive pastoralism, past and present, show that considerablelandcover change has occurred and because of it, or at least insynergy with the arrival of domestic stock and establishment offeral animals initially released in the ILZ, substantial bioticerosion has occurred also; James et al (In Press), Newsome (1994), Pickard (1994). Besides extensive pastoralism, there are two other landuses withinthe Extensive Landuse Zone; Traditional Use and Unused. These are Aboriginal Australians on Aboriginal land. They areTraditional Owners but this is not Traditional Landuse. Unused land, or unallocated crown land, most of it in WesternAustralia, is not completely without the impact of human activitybut here it is patchy and episodic. For the landuses of Traditional and Unused, it was difficult,for understandable reasons, to assess the level of landcover disturbanceusing satellite data. The partitioning and distribution of finerdivisions of landuse within the Intensive and Extensive LanduseZones is discussed in Adding What Is Known. Landcover Type A second and independent stratification of the continent was neededby which to aggregate the detected landcover disturbance. The type of stratification chosen was largely determined by thepurpose and scale of the analysis. Possible choices for the basicarea unit (strata) could be the (relatively) small area of a farmor a local government area (LGA), or the much larger area of astate, if the purpose of the analysis was landcover managementresponsibility. However, in this study the principal focus isbiodiversity. Therefore, an ecologically relevant stratification has been used.As argued earlier, with a continental perspective, issues of scaleand ecological understanding decide that the most relevant stratificationwas by landcover types; ie a typology based on vegetation andsoil attributes. The task of deriving a tractable set of consistently defined,landcover types was difficult. Considerable effort was made toevaluate a wide range of alternatives. The final choice was basedon two simple and pragmatic reasons. Because the objective ofthe project was to quantify landcover disturbance, the basic stratificationshould be on landcover attributes; ie vegetation and soil variables. Continental datasets of vegetation structural type exist, eg AUSLIG (1990),as does one for soils, Northcote et al (1975).Because attempts to reconcile and integrate these two datasetswere unsuccessful, the dataset of Natural Vegetation, AUSLIG (1990),became the source typology for landcover. It was assumed that considerable climate, soil and topographicinformation was implicit in this continentally consistent mappingof vegetation at landscape scales. Use of this dataset was notwithout difficulty and error. Nonetheless, the dataset NaturalVegetation, the vegetation as of 1788, was taken to be the basicecological divisions of the continent. Two conditions on the use of the Natural Vegetation dataset werenoted. The first was that it was taken to be the truth: the boundariesand descriptions of its 230 categories were not disputed eventhough they occasionally appeared to be doubtful. The second wasthat the large number of primary categories of Natural Vegetationwas reduced to a smaller set (34) by concentrating on overstoreystructural and floristic attributes (height, cover, genus), andignoring the understorey. Pragmatic reasons required that alloverstorey genera other than Eucalyptus and Acacia be pooled,and within these three genera, the tall (T), medium (M), and low(L) height categories also be pooled; Table 2. The nomenclaturewas derived from that used in AUSLIG (1990). Table 2: A summary description ofthe 34 landcover types derived from the original 230 categoriesof the Natural Vegetation dataset of AUSLIG (1990). The figurein brackets under the Code symbol is the percentage projectedfoliage cover (pfc). Number    Code                             Name            _________________________________________________________________________   1      xTML4   Tall, medium and low closed forest: dominant                   (70-100)  overstorey genus is other than Eucalyptus or Acacia       2      eTML3   Tall, medium and low forest: dominant overstorey                (30-70)  genus is Eucalyptus                                       3      wTML3   Tall, medium and low forest: dominant overstorey                (30-70)  genus is Acacia                                           4      xTML3   Tall, medium and low forest: dominant overstorey                (30-70)  genus is other than Eucalyptus or Acacia                  5       eM2    Medium open forest: dominant overstorey genus is                (10-30)  Eucalyptus                                                6       wM2    Medium open forest: dominant overstorey genus is                (10-30)  Acacia                                                    7       xM2    Medium open forest: dominant overstorey genus is                (10-30)  other than Eucalyptus or Acacia                           8       eL2    Low open forest: dominant overstorey genus is                   (10-30)  Eucalyptus                                                9       wL2    Low open forest: dominant overstorey genus is Acacia            (10-30)                                                           10       xL2    Low open forest: dominant overstorey genus is other             (10-30)  than Eucalyptus or Acacia                                11       eM1    Medium sparse forest: dominant overstorey genus is              (0-10)   Eucalyptus                                               12       eL1    Low sparse forest: dominant overstorey genus is                 (0-10)   Eucalyptus                                               13       wL1    Low sparse forest: dominant overstorey genus is                 (0-10)   Acacia                                                   14       xL1    Low sparse forest: dominant overstorey genus is other           (0-10)   than Eucalyptus or Acacia                                15       eS3    Tall shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is                    (30-70)  Eucalyptus                                               16       wS3    Tall shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is Acacia             (30-70)                                                           17       xS3    Tall shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is other              (30-70)  than Eucalyptus or Acacia                                18       eS2    Tall open shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is               (10-30)  Eucalyptus                                               19       wS2    Tall open shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is               (10-30)  Acacia                                                   20       xS2    Tall open shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is               (10-30)  other than Eucalyptus or Acacia                          21       eS1    Tall sparse shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is             (0-10)   Eucalyptus                                               22       wS1    Tall sparse shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is             (0-10)   Acacia                                                   23       xS1    Tall sparse shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is             (0-10)   other than Eucalyptus or Acacia                          24       xZ3    Low shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is other               (30-70)  than Eucalyptus or Acacia                                25       xZ2    Low open shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is                (10-30)  other than Eucalyptus or Acacia                          26       wZ1    Low sparse shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is              (0-10)   Acacia                                                   27       xH2    Hummock grassland: dominant genus is variable                   (10-30)                                                           28       xG4    Closed grassland: dominant genus is variable                   (70-100)                                                           29       xG3    Grassland: dominant genus is variable                           (30-70)                                                           30       xG2    Open grassland: dominant genus is variable                      (10-30)                                                           31    Littoral  Littoral complex of variable canopy structure and                        composition                                              32      Lakes   Permanent and ephemeral                                  33       xG1    Sparse open grassland: dominant genus is variable               (0-10)                                                            34       xF1    Sparse open grassland: dominant genus is variable               (0-10)         The areal extent of any one landcover type varies greatly as doesits distribution between the ILZ and ELZ; see the next imageand Table 3. The relative size and distribution of the 34 landcover typesover the Australian continent and within and between the Intensiveand Extensive Landuse Zones. Within the ILZ, the most extensive landcover type was eM2; theopen, medium height (10-30 m) eucalypt forests (or woodlands)which range from tropical to temperate climates. Within the ELZand the continent as a whole, by far the most extensive landcovertype was wS1; the tall, sparse Acacia shrublands that cover muchof the arid sandplains; see again the last image. Table 3: A statistical summary of the 34 landcover typesthat were the basic ecological strata for this study. The natureand severity of disturbance are determined for each strata withinthe Intensive and Extensive Landuse Zones. The areas are in km2.             ILZ                        ELZ                    Continent         Code    Area      %       Rank  Area      %       Rank  Area       %       Rank _____|________________________| ______________________| _______________________|xTML4   44031     1.5     14    1696      0.0     31    45727      0.6     22   eTML3   440494    14.8    2     52799     1.1     16    493293     6.4     5    wTML3   107962    3.6     10    14050     0.3     22    122012     1.6     17   xTML3   19355     0.7     22    2874      0.1     29    22229      0.3     28   eM2     773927    26.0    1     199421    4.2     7     973347     12.7    2    wM2     1021      0.0     30    0         0.0     33    1021       0.0     34   xM2     13971     0.5     23    978       0.0     32    14949      0.2     30   eL2     158227    5.3     5     62251     1.3     13    220478     2.9     10   wL2     147730    5.0     8     58549     1.2     14    206280     2.7     11   xL2     119002    4.0     9     20087     0.4     20    139090     1.8     15   eM1     171560    5.8     4     2473      0.1     30    174033     2.3     12   eL1     149512    5.0     6     768347    16.4    3     917859     12.0    3    wL1     42470     1.4     15    129632    2.8     8     172102     2.2     13   xL1     68333     2.3     12    311320    6.6     4     379654     4.9     6    eS3     19893     0.7     20    0         0.0     33    19893      0.3     29   wS3     34543     1.2     16    8933      0.2     24    43476      0.6     24   xS3     19429     0.7     21    8555      0.2     25    27984      0.4     25   eS2     238537    8.0     3     43146     0.9     18    281683     3.7     9    wS2     26586     0.9     18    778391    16.6    2     804977     10.5    4    xS2     44717     1.5     13    6195      0.1     27    50911      0.7     21   eS1     29443     1.0     17    116866    2.5     9     146309     1.9     14   wS1     21279     0.7     19    1139096   24.2    1     1160375    15.1    1    xS1     5632      0.2     29    53283     1.1     15    58915      0.8     20   xZ3     8103      0.3     26    3625      0.1     28    11728      0.2     33   xZ2     82016     2.8     11    293012    6.2     5     375028     4.9     7    wZ1     724       0.0     31    22990     0.5     19    23714      0.3     27   xH2     170       0.0     32    44725     1.0     17    44895      0.6     23   xG4     6212      0.2     28    7283      0.2     26    13495      0.2     32   xG3     149436    5.0     7     215626    4.6     6     365062     4.8     8    xG2     6515      0.2     27    115842    2.5     10    122357     1.6     16   Littora 11220     0.4     24    16662     0.4     21    27882      0.4     26   Lakes   11220     0.4     24    108681    2.3     11    119901     1.6     18   xG1     0         0.0     33    76848     1.6     12    76848      1.0     19   xF1     0         0.0     33    13966     0.3     23    13966      0.2     31   WT03-B26-111IA028-000298-B042-42http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap2b.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175040 text/html 19182HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:48:36 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 04:47:46 GMTContent-length: 19007 Quantifying The Disturbance. Space data was the only data type that met the requirements forconducting this assessment within the resources available; asargued earlier in The View From Space . A commercially available, geocoded digital mosaic of Landsat MSSdata for the entire continent formed the primary dataset for quantifyingthe location, severity and extent of landcover disturbance. Thestrategy and associated methodology are now described. The principal dimensions of this dataset were two - spectral andspatial. There was no temporal dimension. This dataset was takenas a time slice of the continental landcover conditions as ofapproximately 1991. No change detection was applied to imagesof different dates. The only time dimension in this analysis wasan implied one: all (significant) change detected using the 1991dataset was assumed to have occurred in the last 200 years. Exactlywhen this change occurred cannot be directly inferred from thissatellite dataset alone. The project set out to answer one question - what is the currentstate of the continental landcover? This we hold, makes a small but significant contribution to anational understanding of the severity and location of bioticerosion. Another significant contribution will come from quantifyingthe dynamics of landcover change; the rate and location of habitatdisturbance across the continent. There are limits to this secondquestion. The high spatial and temporal resolution of landcoverchange is only possible using satellite data since 1972; eg seeGraetz et al (1992), Sivertsen (1994), Wilson et al (1993).The rates of clearing can be determined further into the pastusing archived aerial photography and surveyor's maps; eg Hobbs et al (1993). The spatial dimension of this dataset was determined by its resolution;ie by the size of the ultimate unit of data capture and representation,or pixel. The pixel size of the supplied dataset was 0.001 x 0.001,or approximately 1 hectare. Thus the continental aggregate representeda very large data volume to process. What is more important, thisfine spatial resolution was far, far greater than that of theNatural Vegetation dataset. The latter was published at a scaleof 1:5,000,000 and appears to have an intrinsic resolution of,at best, 1 km2, or more realistically 25 km2. Thus, this basicdataset was 2500 times more coarse than the Landsat source dataset.Therefore, the Landsat MSS dataset was resampled to 0.005 x 0.005(500 x 500 m or 25 ha) for the analysis and further resampledto exactly 1 x 1 km for reporting. The de-focusing of the satellite dataset may, at a superficialglance, seem to reduce the acceptance of the findings. Hectare-sizedpatches of landscape are human-scaled and easily experienced.An area twenty-five times larger is less easily imagined in themind's eye, and therefore commands less validity. Nonetheless,the use of coarse (25 ha) rather than a finer-grained (1 ha) pixelsize introduces insignificant error in the overall assessment. The 1: 1, 000, 000 scale map sheet BRISBANE covering the cityof Brisbane, the nearby coast and inland; total area approximately120, 000 km2. Even with a pixel size of 25 ha, there is an abundanceof detail in the image. Fine details of the dunes and sand blowoutson Fraser Island are detectable, as are subtle and obvious patternswithin the landscape as a whole. Overall, a visual appreciationof the extent of clearing and fragmentation of the original vegetationis easily obtained. If you can do this, then you have instinctivelylearned to assimilate both the spectral (colour) and spatial (grain)dimensions of satellite images. The computer techniques used inthis project imitate the analysis and assessment that you havejust made. The final dimension of the satellite dataset - the spectral dimension- was the most critical because it determines what informationcan be derived. MSS data has four spectral channels, traditionallylabelled from #4 to #7, each giving four values for the reflectedlight from each pixel regardless of its size. For most landcovertypes, these four wavebands are highly correlated and can be reducedto two: a measure of cover and of greenness. Cover includes boththe cover of dark foliage over the brighter soils and the shadowswithin a canopy. Greenness is a measure of the abundance of youngand vigorous leaves within the canopy, be they trees, shrubs orthe herbaceous understorey. Under dry conditions, ie with no preceding rainfall, the coverof live vegetation is linearly but inversely related to the brightnessof one channel, the reflected red radiation recorded as MSS #5.In this waveband, the intact woody canopy is dark whereas thatof the replacement crop, pasture, or even bare soil, is bright.In addition, for the interpreter digitally interacting with thisimage, there are both spectral and spatial clues to what is cleared,and what is uncleared woody vegetation. It is remarkably easyfor a human to correctly interpret a complex image. It is considerablymore difficult to achieve the same result using a computer. Theconcepts discussed above are illustrated using an image of theArmidale area of eastern Australia. The 1: 1, 000, 000 scale map sheet ARMIDALE; total area approximately120, 000 km2. Setting aside the unnatural or false colours ofthe image, just using the clues of tone (light to dark) and thespatial pattern or texture within the image makes a rapid interpretationof what is undisturbed natural vegetation, and what has been clearedfor pastures and crops. Much of the remnant natural vegetationis restricted to areas of significant topographic relief: herein the ILZ, relief is the most frequent protection against futureclearing. The intensity of the red colour indicates the levelof greenness in the landcover. In this scene, both remnant naturalvegetation and some of the pastures were green on the ground andwere thus portrayed as red in this image. The several smoke plumesand their location indicate the continuing nature of landcoverdisturbance. Clearing All spectral channels of the satellite dataset were used to understandand interpret the images for all vegetation types. For the IntensiveLanduse Zone, the objective of the assessment was to allocateeach pixel into one of five disturbance classes; uncleared, thinned,cleared, indeterminate, and other. The uncleared class was characterised by having an intact canopy;this being determined relative to all the remnants of any landcovertype. The uncleared class may be disturbed by grazing but withinthe ILZ, this was disturbance that could not be separated fromclearing. For the landcover types with an open and sparse canopy, ie projectedfoliage cover (pfc) < 30%, it was difficult to separate clearing,the loss of the overstorey, from the effects of acute overgrazing,the loss of the understorey. This difficulty was one of the twoprincipal sources of error; see below. The cleared class was characterised by the effective replacementof the canopy with a herbaceous layer of crop or pasture plants.Here the overstorey cover was assessed to be reduced to < 5%;ie scattered or no trees. The thinned class was determined tobe an intermediate class of tree cover between uncleared and cleared.It was included to increase understanding of the severity of clearing.It is our contention that, in terms of biotic erosion, thinnedand cleared are effectively equivalent. The indeterminate class was assigned by the analyst to two situations.The most common was where an allocation to clearing was not ecologicallymeaningful; eg for a naturally occurring grassland. More rarely,it was used to indicate that isolated clearing could be detectedby the interpreter but not consistently detected by computer analysis.This occurred principally in the Northern Territory where whatlittle clearing has occurred was scattered within a very seasonallydynamic landscape. The other class was reserved for lakes mappedwithin the Natural Vegetation dataset. Overall the procedure was straightforward. The allocation decisionrules were based on the expert judgement of the analyst (Graetz)after intensive examination of the satellite data in digital format.Decisions were made only after a visual reconnaissance of thescene and a consultation of ancillary data (maps, etc.). After prolonged exploration of the image data for any one vegetationtype, the analyst selected MSS #5 values that separated unclearedfrom thinned, and thinned from cleared. Those values and thischannel alone were used to allocate each pixel into one of thesethree disturbance classes. Since the Landsat MSS #5 data werecontinuous in nature with no obvious thresholds, the choice ofMSS #5 values varied by landcover type and by climatic region.Thus expert judgement was critical in assigning values to classes.The allocation process was then computerised. We reiterate the point that even at the finest spatial resolutionof 0.001 x 0.001, a pixel contains a mixture of landscapeelements - tree canopies, shadows, understorey and so forth. Thiswas particularly so with the pixel size used here, 0.005 x 0.005,where the full spectra of mixtures of overstorey and understoreyare possible. The category thinned was created to capture themost uncleared part of this spectrum where the canopy was approximatelyhalf that of the uncleared state. The category of cleared willalso comprise spectrum mixtures from totally treeless to sparsescattered trees. The broad classification was adequate for thefocus of this project; ie quantifying that area of landcover thatwas uncleared. Because of the nature of the number of decision classes and artefactswithin the MSS dataset, there are uncertainties associated withthe assessment values derived. These errors are most usefullydiscussed in relation to the uncleared category as being eithererrors of commission, where the true value for the uncleared categoryis inflated, or omission, where actual value for this categoryis diminished. Both error types were unavoidably included in theanalyses reported here. A large and consistently occurring error of commission resultsfrom the cleared grassy landscapes often being green and activelygrowing at the time of image acquisition. This tends to darkenthem towards the signature of cleared woody canopies with theresult that a proportion of the cleared class was allocated touncleared. One example of this error of commission is in Armidaleimage where green actively growing pasture (reddish in colour)occurs in a N-S strip just to the west of the Great Dividing Range.This landcover is obviously non-woody canopy, being quite distinctto the eye from the neighbouring forested upland remnants. Nonetheless,it was impossible to set decision rules that consistently separatedthis green pasture from the surrounding forest remnants becausethose to the east were also green and actively growing (reddishin colour) while those remnants to the west were not. This source of uncertainty was inherent in the dataset and intensiveand systematic efforts to remove it failed. Moreover, carefulselection of decision rules to minimise this error lead to theconverse omission error in the drier, less dense canopies. Overall,a strategy was followed to minimise the size of the error andto stabilise its sign; ie consistently to one of commission oromission. The decision rules for the uncleared category were alwaysset not only to achieve the smallest uncertainty possible in thesituation, but also to keep the error consistently one of commission.Furthermore, the emphasis was on getting the values correct forthe more mesic landcover types, the forests and woodlands. Thisstrategy was hampered by significant variation within the datasetthat was not related to the surface. The net result was that therewere both errors of commission and omission in the results reportedhere. The difficulty is illustrated by the Albany image. The south-west of Western Australia. This area experiencesboth high rainfall and cloud cover almost all the year. As a consequence,the cleared areas of crops and pastures, are usually green. Underthese conditions, it was far more difficult to separate unclearedfrom cleared for landcovers near the coast than it was in thedrier inland. Significant errors of commission and omission werepossible with small changes in the decision rules set for thisscene that is a spectacular example of loss and fragmentationof natural vegetation. Grazing And Burning The objective for the Extensive Landuse Zone of the continentwas to use satellite data to allocate part or whole of each vegetationtype to one of the following disturbance categories: slight, substantial,significant, indeterminate, and other. The allocation was to reflect the contemporary level of disturbanceimposed by the two principal agents of landuse; grazing by domesticstock, and to a much smaller extent, repeated burning. The impactof grazing is by far the most influential in generating both systemicand cumulative landcover changes. The temporary and cumulative impacts of grazing on the landcovercan be detected and interpreted using satellite data for mostvegetation types. Similarly, even though the dataset used wasuni-temporal, some appreciation of the nature of the fire regimescan be interpreted, but this was far less certain than that forgrazing. The critical difference between the assessment of grazing andburning, and that for clearing, was that the former cannot beimplemented by computer. The assessment of the disturbance levelcan only be based on expert decision and opinion; a decision thatwas reached only after detailed interpretation of the spectraland spatial patterns within the image, and the integration ofancillary data. The subjective component of this assessment was thus higher thanthat involved in the assessment of clearing. To maintain a highlevel of transparency, the source document contains example imagesthat explain and support the decision taken for each vegetationtype. The nature of the evidence and its interpretation is exemplifiedby the Rawlinna image. The Nullarbor Plain near Rawlinna, Western Australia, pastorallyoccupied and a part of the ELZ. The predominant landcover typeis a low open chenopod shrubland - bluebush and saltbush country- with sparse mulga inland. The landcover consequences of pastoralismare quite obvious from 900 km in space and with a coarse groundresolution of 25 ha. The landcover change within whole paddocksand around watering points can easily be detected and assessedby eye. The level of disturbance here ranges from substantialto significant. However, when this relatively small area of thislandcover type was considered along with the all the others notwithin this scene, the disturbance level was assessed overallas substantial. Where natural grasslands (xG) were designated by the Natural Vegetationdataset within the ILZ, they were allocated to the indeterminateclass for the clearing assessment and manually interpreted forthe ELZ. Finally, there is no category for undisturbed. There is no vegetationtype that was absolutely undisturbed by the direct (landuse) orindirect (feral animal) effects of human activity. Therefore weused a relative scale: by definition landcover types that weredesignated unused or protected by tenure were used as benchmarksfor the assessment and were always set to disturbance category1, slight. Furthermore, the disturbance rating that was finally assignedtook into account local variations in disturbance level, suchas shown in the Rawlinna image above, as well as the conditionof the landcover type that occurred within the ILZ but was notactually cleared. Doing It Yourself At this point, the reader may be less than convinced that allof this interpretation and assessment of landcover disturbanceis possible using satellite data. It is not easy to illustrate this without drowning the argumentwith images. Therefore we have included a set of images coveringthe continent in a section called Exploring Your Country.Each image covers one sheet of the excellent 1:1, 000, 000 mapsheet series and are named accordingly. We recommend that youexplore your country using each of these images (5 x 6in size) and try to interpret the type and level of landcoverdisturbance that you can detect. For the ILZ, the interesting areas are in the south-western cornerof Western Australia, New South Wales and Queensland. For theELZ, the interesting areas are South Australia, the Northern Territory,Queensland and Western Australia. If you have a particular interest in the state of the nationalforests, then examine New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania. WT03-B26-112IA028-000298-B042-80http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap2c.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175106 text/html 8703HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:49:22 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 05:27:54 GMTContent-length: 8529 Adding What Is Known To reiterate a critical point made earlier: the MSS dataset wasthe primary source for detecting landcover disturbance. However,ancillary datasets were equally important in the interpretation,quantification, and enhancement of that disturbance assessment.In this section, these ancillary datasets are listed and discussedin order of importance. Tenure Tenure is a key factor in any assessment of landuse and landcoverbecause tenure is a licence that prescribes or proscribes variouslanduses, and thus various types of landcover disturbance. Moreover,the tenure type is a strong guide to future landuse and landcoverchange. For example, there is far more certainty about the futurelanduse activities on land held under public tenure than thatfor private tenure. Thus, tenure can indicate actual and potentiallanduse as well as its consequences for landcover disturbance. The basic dataset used was that compiled by AUSLIG (1994). Thisdigital dataset contains an initial 16 categories that were aggregatedinto a smaller set of 6 to indicate the probability of futurelandcover disturbance by grouping by differing levels of tenureprotection. The protection is principally against the threat of clearing butalso includes grazing. We created classes of tenure protectionthat range from 0 with freehold tenure to 5 with existing dedicatedconservation reserve tenure; Table 4 and the Tenure image. Thisassigned rank was used to rate and score the tenure protectionfor each landcover type. Table 4: The aggregation of the AUSLIGtenures into six groups that offer different levels of protectionagainst future landcover disturbance. Type         Grouping          Area (km2)        %        Protection ____________________________________________________________________ 1   Freehold                   1591592         21            0            Mining leasehold                                                  2   Pastoral leasehold         3257354         42            1            Defence tenure                                                    3   Forestry                    247467          3            2            Water Supply                                                          Mixed, Other, Multi-                                              4   Aboriginal freehold /      1110656         14            3            leasehold national park                                               Aboriginal leasehold                                                  national park                                                     5   Unallocated crown land      961057         12            4            (unused)                                                          6   Dedicated nature            523875          7            5            conservation                                                     The size and distribution of the six tenures that reflect protectionagainst future landcover disturbance. The protection rankingsand colour codes are: 0, red; 1, brown; 2, purple; 3, light blue;4, blue; 5, green. Feral Animals After landuse-driven landcover disturbance, the next most significantcontributor to the process of biotic erosion is habitat invasionby feral (exotic) animals; eg Newsome (1994), Short and Smith (1994), Short and Turner (1994). By comparison, the significance of habitat invasion by feral plantsis much less well understood or documented on a continental scale;eg Humphries et al (1994). Thus, exoticplants were not included in this project. It is difficult to overestimate the significance of the impactof feral animals on the flora and fauna of this continent. Muchhas been made of the relentless influence two predators, the feralcat and fox, on the small-sized fauna, particularly in the ELZ.However, the rabbit cannot be ignored in the overall assessmentof the driving forces of animal extinction. Its arrival and establishmentin the more arid parts of the ELZ led to the destruction of entirelandscapes as captured in this image of the Strzelecki Track inSouth Australia. Continental datasets of density distribution for a range of pestmammals have been compiled; Wilson et al (1992).From this larger set, four were selected as being the most influentialin the process of biotic impoverishment on continental scales;the rabbit, cat, fox and pig. Other feral species (camel, goat,horse) are not as widespread or as influential as the chosen species. The feral density datasets are of relative rather than absolute,and overall their quality is relatively poor. Nevertheless, theyare unique and were used to assess the spatial patterns of intensityof each feral species' current threat to biodiversity. The density distributions of the four feral animal speciesused in the project. Clockwise from the top left the distributionsare rabbit, cat, fox, and pig. The density codes are None (white);low (yellow); moderate (blue); high (red). Fire Season And Frequency The best available datasets of fire season and fire frequencyfor the continent known to the authors were digitised and usedto assess the current level of landuse disturbance from this facetof landuse. The continental distribution of fire season. The categoriesand codes are: Winter-Spring (purple), Spring (blue); Spring-Summer(light blue); Summer (brown); Summer-Autumn (red). This datasetwas derived from that published by Luke and McArthur (1978). The continental distribution of fire frequency aggregated intojust three classes: 1-3 years (red); 5-10 years (blue); > 10years (brown). This dataset was derived from that published byWalker (1981) These two datasets were used to express their influence on theprocess of biotic erosion. In doing so we question the conventionalwisdom: not that fire has always been a part of the environmentof all biota on this continent, but whether the fire regimes whichwe see today differ significantly from pre-European times. Whilewildfires occur from lightning ignition, particularly in the hummockgrasslands of Central and Western Australia, and are constrainedby climatically controlled fuel production and curing, we assertthat the predominant source of ignition is increasingly from landuse;that is deliberate ignition. The ancillary datasets discussed above were used at 0.01 x 0.01(approximately 1 x 1 km) resolution; a much finer scale than atwhich any of them were compiled. This is not as serious a problemas is the veracity of the data itself. Nevertheless, these datarepresent the best continentally consistent sets available andthey were used to derive the best continentally consistent assessmentsof landcover disturbance possible now. WT03-B26-113IA028-000298-B042-127http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap3a.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175136 text/html 19368HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:49:41 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 04:29:04 GMTContent-length: 19193 Clearing This type of landcover disturbance defines the ILZ. We summariseour findings for the continent under the following four headings Aggregate Area Within the ILZ, we assessed that 1,547,863 km2, or 51.9% of thearea was either cleared or thinned. This in turn translates to approximately 20% of the whole continent. Table 5: A summary of the five classesof clearing disturbance aggregated for the Intensive landuse Zone(ILZ) and for the continent. Cover class           km2                     ILZ (%)          Continent (%)_________________________________________________________________________Uncleared          1059741                     35.5                13.8         Thinned             518223                     17.4                 6.7         Cleared            1029640                     34.5                13.4         Indeterminate       365350                     12.2                 4.7         Other                10953                      0.4                 0.1         _________________________________________________________________________Total              2983908                    100.0                38.8         How good is this estimate? There is no single dataset to test the validity of this estimate.There were however two national estimates that allow us to examineits plausibility. The first of these is the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS)estimates for the total area of crops and pastures in 1990; ABS (1994).The ABS figure is 475, 000 km2; roughly one third of the figurederived in this study. However, the areas reported by the ABShave two important qualifications: they do not equate to the totalarea cleared, and the figures were derived by survey samplingnot census sampling as in this study. The figure published bythe ABS is the area used for crops in that year. In cereal croppingareas with a 2-3 year crop rotation, it suggests that the totalarea cleared for cropping may be three times that used in anyone year. Since the ABS reports that the area of crops peakedat approximately 220, 000 km2 in 1983-84, then the total areacleared for cropping alone may be 660, 000 km2. The area cleared for the establishment of pastures was more difficultto separately identify. Undoubtedly, in some agricultural areasthere is a reciprocal substitution of pasture and crop dependingon commodity prices. Nonetheless, there has been an expansionof clearing for the establishment of sown pastures alone. Thisclearing and establishment have been most marked in northern NSW,and especially Queensland. Here the second set of figures addsplausibility to the total figure derived in this study. The estimates of landcover change published by AUSLIG (1990)were based on the manual interpretation of satellite data acquireda decade ago. That survey recorded extensive thinning as wellas clearing of woodlands for the establishment or enhancementof pastures. The aggregate figures produced by the AUSLIG surveysuggest that in the last 200 years, there has been a net increaseby thinning of 400, 000 km2 of open woodlands, and by clearing,a net increase in grassland and pasture areas of 710, 000 km2.The sum of these two AUSLIG estimates is markedly less than thearea of thinning and clearing that we measured, indicating analarming increase of those activities over the last decade. No doubt there were uncertainties associated with both estimatesbut it is unlikely that the agreement between the two census assessmentsbased on satellite data was fortuitous. Distribution Where is the clearing? The distribution of the ILZ and the extent of clearing and thinningwithin it, is shown in this ILZ disturbance image. The continental distribution of disturbance by clearing. Theclasses and colour codes are: uncleared (green); thinned (brown);cleared (white); indeterminate (blue); lakes (black). Clearing and thinning extends across the southern areas of thecontinent, including the central area of Tasmania, and northwardsthrough Central Queensland. The most southerly areas of clearingwere associated with cereal cropping and improved pastures; thatin northern NSW and Central Queensland was mostly for the establishmentof pastures. How to interpret the four disturbance classes displayed in thisimage? The three key classes are uncleared, thinned and cleared. Thesewere allocated as progressive steps from uncleared, where thevegetation canopy was intact, to cleared, where the spectral signatureof the intact canopy was replaced by that of understorey. Thethinned class was an intermediate step within these two extremesbased solely on spectral signature; it was not primarily basedon the measurements of the degree of thinning, such as tree densities,but the two are closely related. The decision rules for the allocationof each pixel in this image to one of these three classes wereformulated after exacting expert interpretation, and consistentlyapplied. The image depicts our assessment of the extent and locationof vegetation disturbance by clearing as of approximately 1990. The indeterminate class displayed in the image illustratesthe landcover types within the ILZ for which an assessment ofclearing disturbance could not be made. The largest area was in the Northern Territory where localisedclearing, almost entirely for pastures, could be detected butnot reliably mapped. The areas involved, including the Ord Riverirrigation development, were trivial compared with the clearingin southern Australia. The indeterminate areas outside the Northern Territory were thelandcover types without a woody overstorey, the grasslands, forwhich the classification of clearing was inappropriate. This is not to say that these landcover types are undisturbed.Cultivation was detectable within the cleared grasslands (xG4)on the west coast of Tasmania and within the most mesic grasslandsof the other States and Territories; see, for example, TASMANIA.The grasslands at the drier edges of the ILZ (xG3, xG2) are alsodisturbed, principally by grazing. This display of the clearing data-set also illustrates the natureand strength of the uncertainties associated with the assessmentsreported in this document. The error here is misclassification:uncleared was classified as thinned or cleared, and the converse.As explained earlier, because of the intrinsic nature of the sourcesatellite data-set and the fallibility of the expert process,such errors can never be eliminated. Rather, in this project, the uncertainty has been managed by minimisingand systematising the error by consistently biasing it in onedirection. With a focus on the uncleared class, a bias towardsthe error of commission was preferred. That is, the unclearedclass decision rules were set to optimistic values, to err towarda high value. Generally we achieved that so that the actual undisturbedareas with the ILZ were less that the values reported here. Errors of commission concerning the uncleared class are difficultto demonstrate in the image. However, the converse, error of omissionwhere uncleared vegetation was labelled as thinned or clearedcan be illustrated. Along the clearing boundaries of parts of Western Australia, SouthAustralia, Tasmania and northern Queensland, there are areas labelledas cleared that are not. We encourage you to examine the imagesof these areas provided in Exploring Your Country.In particular, you will find the images of TOWNSVILLE,CLERMONT, CHARLEVILLE,BOURKE, BROKEN HILL,ADELAIDE, PORT AUGUSTA,TASMANIA, ESPERANCE,ALBANY, PERTHand MEEKATHARRA are of particularinterest. This error could not be avoided, only minimised. There are twoprincipal sources of this error: problems intrinsic to the satellitedataset, and limitations to separating clearing from significantdisturbance by grazing. Nevertheless, the nature and size of theseerrors were small compared with the information content of thisdataset that is summarised in the remainder of this section. Landcover Type Is the clearing and thinning evenly distributed across all landcovertypes? Considering the entire ILZ, the distribution of disturbance byclearing between landcover types is summarised in Table 6. A simpleindex of Loss (thinned and cleared) was also calculated reflectingthe view that for the process of biotic erosion, there is littledifference between thinned and cleared. Table 6: A summary of the relativedistribution (%) of clearing within each landcover type. The grasslands(xG) and low shrublands (xZ2) were excluded. The index Loss wasthe sum of the cleared and thinned classes.    Type      Uncleared     Thinned      Cleared    Indeterminate   Loss    _____________________________________________________________________________   xTML4        73.9         17.2         8.9          0.0         26.1        eTML3        61.6         17.0         20.1         1.3         37.1        wTML3        19.7         36.7         43.6         0.0         80.3        xTML3        29.1         17.0         53.9         0.0         70.9         eM2         26.7         22.5         42.8         8.0         65.3         wM2         19.6         14.2         66.2         0.0         80.4         xM2         43.3         24.7         32.0         0.0         56.7         eL2         18.6         10.3         29.3         41.9        39.6         wL2         13.6         21.3         65.0         0.0         86.4         xL2         90.3         2.0          7.7          0.0          9.7         eM1         7.8          43.3         48.9         0.0         92.2         eL1         20.5         11.0         21.8         46.6        32.9         wL1         96.5         0.0          3.5          0.0          3.5         xL1         60.7         4.1          35.1         0.0         39.3         eS3         1.0          1.5          97.5         0.0         99.0         wS3         37.5         18.5         44.0         0.0         62.5         xS3         43.8         3.1          53.1         0.0         56.2         eS2         17.6         19.1         63.3         0.0         82.4         wS2         97.1         2.2          0.7          0.0          2.9         xS2         38.8         18.4         42.8         0.0         61.2         eS1         14.0         11.6         74.4         0.0         86.0         wS1        100.0         0.0          0.0          0.0          0.0         xS1        100.0         0.0          0.0          0.0          0.0         xZ3         38.7         16.3         45.0         0.0         61.3         wZ1        100.0         0.0          0.0          0.0          0.0      Littoral      100.0         0.0          0.0          0.0          0.0     Overall the average proportion of a landcover type that was clearedor thinned (Loss) was 47% with values ranging between 0-99%. As might be expected, the highest Loss values are for the smallestlandcover types as is illustrated in the following Loss of Areagraph. The relationship between the Loss index (thinned and cleared)and area for the ILZ landcover types. The highest Lossvalues are for the smallest, and most likely restricted, landcovertypes. To appreciate which landcover types have experienced the greatestdisturbance in absolute terms, the aggregate contribution of thecleared and thinned areas was plotted in the following descendingsize rank graph. Landcover types arranged in descending order of the total absolutearea disturbed (thinned and cleared classes). The landcover type with the largest disturbed area was theopen eucalypt forests (eM2), which combined with the next largestlandcover type (eS2) account for 45% of the total area. By far the largest clearing has taken place in the open eucalyptforests (eM2), followed by the open eucalypt shrublands (eS2),forests (eTML3), sparse forests (eM1) and so forth. The area clearedwithin the first two landcover types accounts for 45% of the totalarea cleared. Tenure Tenure is a land management tool; a type of landuse licence issuedby state governments. Landuse activities are prescribed and proscribedby certain tenures, and clearing is one such activity. Thus, thedistribution of the landcover disturbance classes between varioustenure types reflects the management of clearing by state governments.All six tenure types defined in Table 4are represented within the ILZ and their relative sizes are illustratedby the following tenure pie chart. The relative area of the six tenure types within the ILZ. Tenure type 1 (Freehold, Mining leasehold) and type 2 (Pastoralleasehold, Defence tenure) between them account for 81% of theILZ. What is the proportional area of each tenure type that is eithercleared or thinned? The relative size of the area that was thinned and cleared relativeto the total area of that tenure type is displayed as the followingtenure-clearing pie chart. For tenure type 1 (Freehold, Mining),this proportion was high (74%) and less so for tenure type 2 (35%)the Pastoral (and Defence) tenures. The relative area of thinned and cleared landcover within eachof the six tenure types. Tenure type 1 (Freehold) and type 2 (Pastoral)dominate; this is where the clearing is mostly found. In absolute terms, these are the two tenures that contain thecleared and thinned landcovers as would be expected. All of agriculture,a replacement landuse, is held under Freehold tenure while mostpastoral activity, a harvesting landuse, is conducted mostly underPastoral tenure with some under Freehold. Can we use this finding to check on the overall validity of ourassessment of clearing and thinning? The tenure-clearing pie chart revealed that there was a smalloccurrence of cleared and thinned classes within the tenure typesthat offer high protection against clearing; types 4, 5 and 6.Type 6 is dedicated conservation reserve. These occurrences areobviously a misclassification and an error of omission; unclearedlandcover classified as cleared. Table 7: The distribution of absolutearea (km2) of the three critical disturbance classes within thesix tenure types of the ILZ. Tenure    Grouping         Uncleared      Thinned       Cleared     Thinned+Cleared____________________________________________________________________________________   1    Freehold              278230       280655        822838      1103493            Mining leasehold                                                            2    Pastoral              434700       177134        142970       320104            leasehold                                                                        Defence tenure                                                              3    Forestry              146064        12920         10061        22981             Water Supply                                                                     Mixed, Other,                                                                    Multi-                                                                      4    Aboriginal             22153         2001          2639         4640             freehold /                                                                       leasehold                                                                        national park                                                                    Aboriginal                                                                       leasehold                                                                        national park                                                               5    Unallocated crown      38315         9895         14125        24020             land (unused)                                                               6    Dedicated nature      127778        30228         26585        56813             conservation                                                              Total                       1047240       512833       1019218      1532051    In relative terms within each tenure type the error of omissionwas large; up to 40% for tenure type 5 (Unused). However, in absoluteterms, it is less damaging. If we assume that there should beno clearing at all in tenure types 3 to 6, then the proportionof misclassified pixels was 108454 from a total of 549014; anomission error rate of 20%. This is a worst case error analysis which if continentally applicable,reduces the total area thinned and cleared from 1, 550, 000 km2to 1, 240, 000 km2. We are confident that the error detected by this check was notcontinentally applicable but we are unable to substantiate thisopinion. Nevertheless, this calculation is a measure of the uncertaintyassociated with all aggregate measurements reported in this project. WT03-B26-114IA028-000298-B042-163http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap3b.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175206 text/html 7213HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:50:26 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 04:33:16 GMTContent-length: 7039 Grazing The assessment of landcover disturbance for the ELZ was basedentirely on expert interpretation of the satellite image data.As such, it was far more subjective and far less quantitativein its result than the assessment for clearing. Accepting these limitations, what were the findings for this typeof landcover within the ELZ? This question is answered in three parts: how much?; where?; andwhich landcover type was most affected? Aggregate Area The relative distribution of disturbance classes across all landcovertypes aggregated indicates the largest area of the ELZ (62%) tobe only slightly or not disturbed, approximately 15% to be substantiallydisturbed, and some 26% to be significantly disturbed. The latterclass was allocated only to landcover types within tenure types1 (Freehold) and 2 (Pastoral). This was not an entirely surprisingresult given the large proportion of the ELZ that is subject tolittle or no grazing landuse. Table 8: The distribution of the areaof the ELZ among the four landcover disturbance classes. Whereno valid interpretation could be made, the indeterminate classwas assigned. Disturbance    Slight    Substantial  Significant  Indeterminate   Total    ________________________________________________________________________Area (km2)    2773596      655700       1152127      6189        4708092     ELZ (%)         58.9         13.9         24.5         0.1         100.0       Continent (%)   36.1          8.5         15.0         0.1          61.2                                                                    Translating these figures from just the ELZ to the entire continentwe have: 37% was slightly or not disturbed, 9% was substantiallydisturbed, and 15% was significantly disturbed. The area of significantly disturbed landcover was approximatelythe same as the area cleared (See Table 5). In terms of the management of biotic erosion, the figures arenot as daunting as those for clearing because clearing representsa far more severe and permanent impact than do the landcover impactsof grazing Distribution Where is the landcover disturbance? The spatial patterns are displayed in this ELZ disturbance image. ELZ disturbance image The pattern of assessed disturbance for all landcover typeswithin the ELZ. The colour code is: slight (dark green); substantial(brown); significant (white); indeterminate (blue). The indeterminateclass was allocated where no valid assessment could be made. These patterns are the result of the interaction of irregularlandcover boundaries with the geometric tenure boundaries. Recallthat the assessment of landcover disturbance was based on landcovertype within tenure types. Landcover Type Which landcover types are most disturbed? The distribution of disturbance between landcover types variedgreatly. Table 9: The proportion of each landcovertype within the ELZ allocated to each of the four disturbanceclasses. Code        Indeterminate       Slight       Substantial    Significant  _______________________________________________________________________xTML4                0             100             0              0        eTML3                0              75             25             0        wTML3                0             100             0              0        xTML3                0             100             0              0        eM2                  0             100             0              0        xM2                  0             100             0              0        eL2                  0             100             0              0        wL2                  0             100             0              0        xL2                  0              44             56             0        eM1                  35             65             0              0        eL1                  0             100             0              0        wL1                  0              24             0              76       xL1                  0              58             42             0        wS3                  34             66             0              0        xS3                  3              97             0              0        eS2                  0             100             0              0        wS2                  0              37             0              63       xS2                  0              12             0              88       eS1                  0              65             35             0        wS1                  0              68             0              32       xS1                  0              25             0              75       xZ3                  56             44             0              0        xZ2                  0              34             66             0        wZ1                  0              3              0              97       xH2                  0             100             0              0        xG4                  0              81             19             0        xG3                  0              5              95             0        xG2                  0              3              0              97       Littoral             0             100             0              0        xG1                  0              21             79             0        xF1                  0              16             0              84       These differences in condition reflect both their relative distributionwithin tenure types, and their resilience under grazing. Most landcover types were only slightly disturbed. The significantlydisturbed landcover types were the open grasslands (xG2), andthe open and sparse Acacia forests and shrublands. The disturbancestatus of many of these landcover types is presented in greaterdetail in Case Studies. WT03-B26-115IA028-000298-B042-198http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/states.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175228 text/html 7780HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:50:46 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 04:35:58 GMTContent-length: 7606 States And Territories An interesting question to ask at this point is who is responsible?Who controls landuse? The controls of landuse associated with each tenure type are setby state governments and as a consequence, there is slight variationbetween States and Territories. The extent and location of clearing within a state as measuredin this project are thus a reflection of the history of land managementby individual States and Territories. Thus it is informative to summarise clearing by state boundaries. Beginning with clearing, Table 10 sets out the proportion of eachState of the ILZ, and within that, the relative distribution ofthe three principal landcover disturbance classes. Table 10: The proportion of the ILZof each state in the three critical disturbance classes. The firstcolumn is the proportion of each state within the ILZ.              ILZ (%)      Uncleared      Thinned      Cleared   Thinned & Cleared_____________________________________________________________________________________NSW            88           38.0          18.1          40.2          58.3      Vic            100          24.8          12.0          52.8          64.8      Qld            62           40.2          26.7          25.8          52.5      SA             28           40.3          11.6          44.3          55.8      WA             17           33.0           8.5          48.0          56.5      Tas            100          54.0           6.2          25.8          31.9      NT             15            4.2           0.0           0.0           0.0      ACT            100          48.7          13.9          37.4          51.3      Almost all States show the same level of clearing, approximately50%, within their respective intensive agricultural and pastoralareas. Tasmania shows the lowest clearing percentage; Victoriathe largest. Similarly for grazing, Table 11 sets out the proportion of eachState of the ELZ, and within that, the relative distribution ofthe three principal landcover disturbance classes. Table 11: The proportion of the ELZof each state in the three critical disturbance classes. The firstcolumn is the proportion of each state within the ELZ.                   ELZ (%)         Slight      Substantial    Significant   ________________________________________________________________________NSW                  12             19             37             44       Qld                  38             27             29             43       SA                   72             54             22             24       WA                   83             71             6              23       NT                   85             68             14             17       From these relative figures, one appreciation of the landcovercondition of any State was gained by comparing the distributionwithin the three levels of disturbance. New South Wales and Queensland both have the largest proportionof their ELZ areas in the significant disturbance class. In contrast,South Australia, Western Australia and the Northern Territoryhave the largest proportion of their ELZ areas in the class ofleast disturbance. However, with absolute area this assessment was largely reversed:the smallest area of landcover significantly disturbed by grazingwas in the ELZ of NSW (43, 000 km2), followed by South Australia(160, 000 km2), Northern Territory (196, 000 km2), Queensland(271, 000 km2), and Western Australia (482, 000 km2). The two sets of figures above do not convey an overall assessmentof the status of landcover disturbance within each of the Statesand Territories with the same power as does the view from space. This view communicates the extent of landcover change as wellas its spatial patterning. Even though we cannot quantify the relationship between the lossof biodiversity and the extent and severity of landcover disturbance,the view from space does give an overall appreciation of the taskconfronting conservation efforts, especially within the ILZ. Therefore we provide images of the ILZ for Queensland, New Southwales (incorporating the Australian Capital Territory), Victoria,South Australia, Western Australia, and the Northern Territoryfor the reader to interpret and contemplate. Don't forget there is also an image of Australia torefresh your understanding of the whole picture; both ILZand ELZ. In addition there is an image of the island state ofTasmania. The ILZ of Queensland is presented at a spatial resolutionof 1 x 1 km, and in Albers projection. The extent of the clearingbecomes most obvious when you realise how much of the image isremnants of the original landcover. The ILZ of New South Wales displayed at a spatial resolutionof 1 x 1 km, and in Albers projection. Almost all the forest remnantsare restricted to the uplands of the Great Dividing Range. The ILZ of Victoria, in this case the whole state, presentedat a spatial resolution of 1 x 1 km, and in Albers projection.In terms of relative areas, this is the most cleared of all states.As for New South Wales, the forest remnants are restricted tothe uplands of the Great Dividing Range. The ILZ of South Australia, a part of a large state,at a spatial resolution of 1 x 1 km, and in Albers projection.If you spend time interpreting this image, it is not hard to seewhy in this state, there have been several attempts to determinethe limits to sustainable agriculture, the margins of the goodearth. The ILZ of Western Australia, a small fraction of thislargest state, at a spatial resolution of 1 x 1 km, and in Albersprojection. The wheatbelt of this state is almost devoid of anynative vegetation. The ILZ of the Northern Territory displayed at a spatialresolution of 1 x 1 km, and in Albers projection. There has beensmall and scattered clearing within this region but we could notsystematically map changes against a dynamic background of burningand seasonal contrast. These are fascinating landscapes to interpret. WT03-B26-116IA028-000298-B042-231http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap3c.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175243 text/html 1921HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:50:59 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:25:22 GMTContent-length: 1747 Additional Disturbance Factors Feral animals are significant agents of biotic erosion and theyare likely to exacerbate the consequences of landcover disturbanceby clearing and grazing. The distribution of feral animal densityvaries across the continent. In broad terms, the simplest questionto ask of the feral animal distribution data is whether therewas a significant contrast between the ILZ and ELZ? The answer to this question was not surprising and is presentedin graphical form. The greatest presence of rabbits (low, moderate and high densities)was found in the ILZ rather than the ELZ. The same can be saidfor both foxes and pigs. Conversely, the density of feral cats was evenly distributed betweenthe two landuse zones. The conclusion that we draw from the graphs is that the highestdensities, and thus probable impacts on biodiversity, of rabbits,foxes and pigs are coincident with the most significant landcoverdisturbance, clearing. WT03-B26-117IA028-000298-B042-265http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap3d.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175319 text/html 6230HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:51:29 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Feb 1996 05:29:48 GMTContent-length: 6056 A Bigger Picture How can we draw this all together? The disturbance assessments applied to the ILZ and ELZ are qualitativelydistinct and thus have been separately reported as Table 5and Table 8. The two sets of figures cannot be simply aggregated. Nonetheless, we present the following argument to support a combinationof these two sets of figures to produce a systematic continentalassessment. Further, we then use these figures to compare thestatus of the Australian continent with global assessments compiledby Hannah et al (1994, 1995). For the ILZ, we have argued that with impact on biodiversity,the thinned and cleared classes should be aggregated. By far thelargest proportion of the indeterminate class area was grasslandsor shrublands; disturbed by grazing but not cleared. This classcannot be ignored but it should not be equated to uncleared. In our opinion, compared with the impact on biodiversity of clearing,the three levels of grazing disturbance assigned for the ELZ arefar less severe or permanent. The indeterminate class can by defaultbe added to the slightly disturbed class. Therefore, we create a combined scale of landcover disturbancewith three levels: undisturbed (uncleared, slight), partiallydisturbed (indeterminate clearing, substantial grazing), and significantlydisturbed (thinned and cleared, significant grazing). We stressthat this aggregation is based on personal judgement. What ismore important, it ignores the threat of feral animals. Table 12: Combining the ILZ and ELZdisturbance classes to produce a continental aggregate of disturbedarea. Disturbance       ILZ          ELZ        Component     Combined     Continent                                               (km2)         (km2)         (%)      _______________________________________________________________________________Undisturbed  Uncleared                      1059741			                             Slight         2773596			                         Indeterminate         6189                                     		Other         Other          131434       3970960          51.6      Partially    Indeterminate                   365350			                           Substantial       655700       1021050          13.3      Significantly Thinned                        518223		              Cleared                       1029640			                          Significant       1152127       2699990          35.1      From the combined figure in Table 12, morethan one third (35%) of the continent was significantly disturbed.From the tenure figures of Table 4,it can be determined that only 81% of the continental area issubject to active landuse. The remainder is allocated to unused(12%) or in conservation reserves (7%). From this we can conclude that almost half of the landcover subjectto landuse was assessed by us as significantly disturbed. How should we to interpret Table 12 interms of biotic erosion? Many concerned individuals regard the land reserved by conservationtenure as the only area worth considering in the difficult taskof preventing or slowing biotic erosion: only the National Parksand nature reserves matter, the rest is lost. In contrast, Pressey (1995), proposes a wider and more usefulplan for effective conservation to which we subscribe. We believe the critical areas to be those which are significantlydisturbed. These are the areas most in need of remedial management. In addition, we propose that for conservation management, thepartially and undisturbed areas are equivalent and deserve a lowerpriority for action than the significantly disturbed areas. However,we note that we are here ignoring the relentless impact of feralspecies. Lastly, how do the overall figures for Australia compare withthe other continents? The most recent global figures on disturbance are those compiledby Hannah et al (1994, 1995). Using different techniques, theyproduce a three-level classification of disturbance that was overallmore severe than reported here. In our opinion, their most disturbedcategory, human dominated, represents a greater level of disturbanceand irreversibility than used here. This was shown by their assessmentof Australasia being 62% undisturbed, 26% partially disturbed,and 12% human dominated; Table 2 of Hannah et al 1994. The aggregateof their last two categories (38%) was comparable with our mostdisturbed category (35%). Using this relationship, we recalculate Table 2 of Hannah et al(1994) to produce a disturbance ranking of all the continents.In relative terms, Australasia and South America have equal lowestproportions of significantly disturbed landcover (38%), with Europecontaining the highest (86%). Disturbance ranking of all the continents A comparison of the proportion of five continents that is significantlydisturbed. The data were recalculated from Table 2 of Hannah etal (1994). Note these figures are for Australasia. WT03-B26-118IA028-000298-B042-326http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap4b.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175351 text/html 7628HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:52:12 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:25:22 GMTContent-length: 7454 Disturbance By Clearing A summary of the relative (%) distribution of the total area ofthis landcover type among the four classes of clearing disturbanceis reported in the following table. Table 13: A summary of the areas(km2) in each of the three key disturbance classes for each ofthe landcover types of the ILZ. The index Loss was calculatedas the percentage of the total area of each landcover type thatwas thinned and cleared. The disturbance score was assigned thus:no clearing (-); <10% (*); 11-30% (**); >31% (***). Code    Uncleared  Thinned   Cleared    Loss (%)    Clearing    Fragmentation ______________________________________________________________________________xTML4     32517      7585       3929       26          **            *       eTML3     271355     75008     88498       37          ***           **      wTML3     21269      39595     47097       80          ***          ***      xTML3      5641      3284      10429       71          ***          ***      eM2       206336    174296     331281      65          ***           **      wM2        200        145       676        80          ***           -       xM2        6056      3445       4470       57          ***           **      eL2       29405      16232     46344       40          ***          ***      wL2       20126      31524     96081       86          ***          ***      xL2       107518     2321       9164       10           *            *       eM1       13441      74262     83840       92          ***          ***      eL1       30646      16519     32633       33          ***          ***      wL1       40962        8        1491        4           *            *       xL1       41454      2834      24005       39          ***           *       eS3        205        300      19388       99          ***          ***      wS3       12944      6381      15188       62          ***           *       xS3        8513       597      10310       56          ***          ***      eS2       41926      45516     151005      82          ***          ***      wS2       25798       593       174         3           *            *       xS2       17338      8247      19130       61          ***          ***      eS1        4123      3422      21898       86          ***          ***      wS1       21279        0         0          0           -            -       xS1        5632        0         0          0           -            -       xZ3        3135      1321       3644       61          ***          ***      xZ2       80747        0         0          0           -            -       Only the three critical classes, uncleared, thinned and clearedare displayed. Where all one landcover was classified as indeterminate,such as for the grasslands (xG), its disturbance rating was determinedby visual interpretation and reported in Disturbance by Grazing. For each type, the simplest index of Loss was calculated as theaggregate area that was either thinned or cleared. This indexwas arbitrarily rated and scored thus: < 10% was low (* );10-30% was moderate (** ); > 30% was substantial ( ***). A second index of habitat loss was derived from a measure of thefragmentation of the remaining uncleared landcover patches. Thereare many published indices of landscape pattern and fragmentation;eg Turner (1990). However, since robustrelationships between the rate of biotic erosion and landcovertype and degree of fragmentation are lacking, there was littlepoint in computing complicated measures of landscape pattern;eg Cale and Hobbs (1994), Hobbs (1994), Murcia (1995). The calculation of the index of fragmentation comprised both objectiveand subjective parts. The objective basis was, for each landcovertype, a graphical comparison of the cumulative distribution ofpatch size between that mapped in Natural Vegetation, by definitionuncleared, with its contemporary fragmented condition measuredby satellite. This specimen fragmentation chart illustrates theprinciples involved. A comparison of the cumulative distribution of proportionaluncleared patch size for the baseline (undisturbed) and contemporary(fragmented) states. The degree of fragmentation was rated andscored by the comparison of three curve attributes: ordinate,slope and asymptote. This example is for the closed forests. For this landcover type, there are 40 separate occurrences withinthe ILZ. These patches are sorted by size, converted to a proportionof the total area and plotted as a cumulative baseline curve.The largest patch size alone constituted approximately 25% ofthe total area (the ordinate); the next largest patch adds approximately10% and so forth until the asymptote of 100% is reached with thelast and smallest patch. The ordinate (proportion occupied by the largest patch) and theshape of the curve as it approaches the asymptote express thesize ranks within the ILZ. In this example there are many smallpatches; the last twenty patches accounting for just the remaining20% of the total area. The process was repeated for the contemporary uncleared patches.With clearing, there will be more patches of smaller size thanthe baseline set. Sorting these by size and plotting only thefirst 40 patches, the same as the undisturbed yields a very differentshaped curve. Three comparisons of the two curves indicate the degree of lossand fragmentation: the ordinate (comparative size of the largestuncleared patch); the shape of the curve; and the difference inasymptotes, in this example 70% compared with 100%. This simple objective comparison was quite insightful. A highlycleared and fragmented landcover type will show large ordinatedifferences; a flat curve generated by many small patches; anda large disparity between the endpoints of the two curves. Conversely,a little fragmented landcover type would return a curve similarto the baseline. The first three case studies in the Case Studiesare good illustrations of the nature of fragmentation. The graphicalcomparison was subjectively rated and scored as either low ( *),moderate (** ) or substantial (*** ). WT03-B26-119IA028-000298-B042-370http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap4c.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175424 text/html 5140HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:52:37 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:25:22 GMTContent-length: 4966 Disturbance By Grazing For the ELZ, these two facets of landuse, grazing and burning,dominate. However within the ILZ, and particularly along the boundariesof the two zones, grazing, and to a much lesser extent, burning,assume dominance over clearing as disturbance agents. Thereforeeven though the assessment was notionally reported only for theELZ, the condition of the uncleared grazing land on the outermargins of the ILZ was taken into account. Tenure as well as landcover type boundaries were used in the assessment.By definition, the disturbance status of all Unused land was assessedas the lowest class, slight. This assessment was reported simply as a table of the absoluteand relative areas in the four disturbance classes: slight (littleor no detectable impact); substantial (detectable but localisedimpact); significant (widespread significant landscape change);indeterminate (unable to interpret). These four classes were assigned disturbance ratings of 0, 1,2, and 0, respectively. A numeric measure was calculated as thesum of the products of the proportional distribution of areasand the respective disturbance ratings above and has a potentialrange of 0-200. The rating and score were then assigned thus:0-50 was low (*); 50-100 was moderate (**); >100 was high (***). Table 14: The distribution of relativearea (%) of the four disturbance levels for all landcover typeswithin the ELZ. The score was based on the sum of the productsof the percentage areas and the disturbance ratings, slight (0)to significant (2), and assigned 0-50 was low (*); 50-100 wasmoderate (**); >100 was high (***). Landcover Slight  Substantial    Significant    Indeterminate  Score         type                                                                         _____________________________________________________________________xTML4     100     0              0              0              *             eTML3     75      25             0              0              *             wTML3     100     0              0              0              *             xTML3     100     0              0              0              *             eM2       100     0              0              0              *             xM2       100     0              0              0              *             eL2       100     0              0              0              *             wL2       100     0              0              0              *             xL2       44      56             0              0              **            eM1       65      0              0              35             *             eL1       100     0              0              0              *             wL1       24      0              76             0              ***           xL1       58      42             0              0              *             wS3       66      0              0              34             *             xS3       97      0              0              3              *             eS2       100     0              0              0              *             wS2       37      0              63             0              ***           xS2       12      0              88             0              ***           eS1       65      35             0              0              *             wS1       68      0              32             0              **            xS1       25      0              75             0              ***           xZ3       44      0              0              56             *             xZ2       34      66             0              0              **            wZ1       3       0              97             0              ***           xH2       100     0              0              0              *             xG4       81      19             0              0              *             xG3       5       95             0              0              **            xG2       3       0              97             0              ***           Littoral  100     0              0              0              *             xG1       21      79             0              0              **            xF1       16      0              84             0              ***           WT03-B26-120IA028-000298-B043-18http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap4d.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175458 text/html 5585HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:53:16 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:25:22 GMTContent-length: 5411 Vulnerability To Future Disturbance The vulnerability to future disturbance is determined by dynamicfactors that drive landuse change; principally market demand,new technologies or climatic shifts. Equally important are the constraints to landuse change; suchas the intrinsic and static nature of the landscape itself, thesoils and topography, and the social dynamic of tenure. All factors have, are, and will continue to interact, changingboth rapidly and slowly over decades. Only tenure, the criticalsocial control of landuse, was considered here; and for both theILZ and ELZ combined. The assessment was focused on tenure vulnerability and was basedon the relative distribution of the area of each landcover typebetween the tenure types set out in Table 4.The six tenures listed in this Table offer different levels ofprotection against future disturbance ranging from none, withFreehold, to total protection with Conservation tenure. A numericmeasure was computed as the mean of the sum of the products ofthe percentage area in each of the six tenure classes of Table 4and their protection ratings (0-5). Based on this value, a vulnerabilityrating and score was arbitrarily but plausibly set as low (* ,> 50% protected), moderate (** , 25-50% protected), and high(*** , < 25% protected). Table 15: The distribution of relativearea (%) of the six tenure levels for all landcover types withinthe ILZ and ELZ. The score was based on the mean sum of the productsof the percentage areas and the tenure protection ratings thatare lowest with tenure type 1 and highest with tenure type 6.                                  Tenure type                                                                       1         2          3         4          5         6          Score     _______________________________________________________________________________xTML4     40        6          25        3          4         23         **        eTML3     49        9          23        10         0         10         ***       wTML3     71        27         1         1          0         1          ***       xTML3     65        13         9         5          0         7          ***       eM2       52        26         4         8          7         4          ***       wM2       20        80         0         0          0         0          ***       xM2       53        18         22        7          0         0          ***       eL2       23        47         2         19         3         6          **        wL2       36        39         1         7          9         8          ***       xL2       9         77         1         6          2         5          ***       eM1       40        58         1         0          0         1          ***       eL1       3         51         2         18         21        6          **        wL1       12        69         1         2          7         9          **        xL1       7         43         1         33         12        4          **        eS3       98        0          1         0          0         2          ***       wS3       35        28         1         1          28        8          **        xS3       39        2          1         0          50        8          **        eS2       43        16         1         5          12        23         **        wS2       0         64         1         15         15        4          **        xS2       52        22         1         1          7         17         ***       eS1       12        28         2         32         18        7          **        wS1       1         32         1         31         28        6          **        xS1       1         76         1         6          7         9          **        xZ3       27        19         9         12         3         31         **        xZ2       6         65         1         6          11        10         **        wZ1       2         95         0         2          0         1          ***       xH2       0         49         1         20         15        14         **        xG4       12        26         6         43         0         13         **        xG3       45        47         4         1          1         1          ***       xG2       2         95         0         0          0         3          ***       Littoral  5         56         2         22         9         5          **        xG1       0         79         1         6          0         13         **        xF1       0         84         0         0          0         16         **        WT03-B26-121IA028-000298-B043-57http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap4e.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175518 text/html 4650HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:53:31 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:25:22 GMTContent-length: 4476 Disturbance By Habitat Invasion The next most significant disturbance factor after habitat destructionand fragmentation was habitat invasion by feral animals. Only four species were considered; rabbits, foxes, cats and pigs.Nonetheless, these four are regarded as the most significant contributorsto biotic impoverishment mediated through habitat destruction,competition and predation; eg Newsome (1994). The assessment of the current and future threat of all four specieswas based on determining the relative distribution of each landcovertype within four mapped levels of feral animal density: none,low, medium, high. In a similar manner to tenure vulnerabilitydiscussed above, the three levels of feral vulnerability werebased on the mean of the sum of the products of proportional area(%) and density class (0-3). The range of this numeric was 0-100,and the thresholds used were low (< 25, *), moderate (25-50,**) and high (> 50, ***). The respective scores for all fourferal species are set out in Table 16. Table 16: A summary of the scores assigned to each landcover type based on the relative distribution of the densities of the four feral species in both the ILZ and ELZ. Landcover      Rabbits        Cats           Foxes          Pigs           __________________________________________________________________xTML4          *              **             *              **             eTML3          **             **             **             *              wTML3          **             **             **             **             xTML3          **             **             **             **             eM2            **             **             **             *              xM2            **             **             *              *              eL2            **             **             **             **             wL2            *              ***            *              **             xL2            **             ***            **             *              eM1            *              **             *              ***            eL1            **             ***            **             **             wL1            *              ***            *              *              xL1            **             ***            *              *              wS3            **             **             *              *              xS3            **             **             ***            *              eS2            **             **             ***            *              wS2            **             **             **             *              xS2            **             **             ***            *              eS1            **             **             *              *              wS1            ***            ***            ***            *              xS1            **             **             *              *              xZ3            *              **             *              *              xZ2            ***            **             *              *              wZ1            **             **             **             *              xH2            ***            **             **             *              xG4            **             ***            *              *              xG3            **             **             *              *              xG2            *              **             *              ***            Littoral       *              ***            *              **             xG1            *              ***            *              **             xF1            *              **             *              **             WT03-B26-122IA028-000298-B043-87http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap4f.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175530 text/html 5382HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:53:50 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:25:22 GMTContent-length: 5208 Disturbance By Fire This is a contentious area for two reasons: the continental datasetsare poor, and the relationships between current fire regimes andbiodiversity status are poorly understood. Two simple descriptive statistics were derived for each landcovertype: the relative distribution of area among the five fire seasons(Winter + Spring, Spring, Spring + Summer, Summer, Summer + Autumn)and among the three fire frequencies (1-3 years, 5-10 years, and> 10 years). The translation of these statistics into indices of disturbancewas based on the following reasoning that however plausible, isnot yet supported by detailed evidence. We argue that for fireseason, the greatest biodiversity disturbance is likely to resultfrom fires in the hottest time of the year. Therefore the fireseasons were weighted for disturbance from Winter + Spring (0)to Summer and Autumn (4). A three-class rating and score of disturbancewas then calculated as for feral density; low (0-25,*), moderate(25-50**) and high (> 50, ***). For fire frequency, it was argued that the most frequent firesoffer the largest disturbance to biodiversity. Therefore, thedisturbance value of fire frequency classes was weighted as thefrequency; from high (2) for the highest frequency to low (0)for the lowest frequency. In a similar manner, a numeric measurewas calculated from the mean aggregate product of proportionalareas and the disturbance rating; range 0-100. From this measurea three-class rating and score of disturbance was then calculated;low (0-25,*), moderate (25-50**) and high (> 50, ***). Therespective fire disturbance scores are set out in Table 17. Table 17: A summary of the disturbance scores assigned to each landcover type based on fire season and fire frequency in both the ILZ and ELZ. Landcover               Fire season              Fire frequency          _______________________________________________________________xTML4                   **                       ***                     eTML3                   **                       **                      wTML3                   **                       ***                     xTML3                   **                       **                      eM2                     **                       **                      wM2                     *                        ***                     xM2                     **                       **                      eL2                     *                        ***                     wL2                     **                       *                       xL2                     *                        **                      eM1                     **                       **                      eL1                     *                        **                      wL1                     **                       *                       xL1                     **                       *                       eS3                     ***                      *                       wS3                     ***                      *                       xS3                     ***                      **                      eS2                     ***                      *                       wS2                     **                       *                       xS2                     ***                      **                      eS1                     **                       *                       wS1                     **                       *                       xS1                     **                       *                       xZ3                     **                       **                      xZ2                     ***                      *                       wZ1                     **                       *                       xH2                     **                       *                       xG4                     *                        ***                     xG3                     *                        **                      xG2                     **                       *                       Littoral                *                        **                      xG1                     **                       *                       xF1                     **                       *                       WT03-B26-123IA028-000298-B043-116http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/chap4g.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175544 text/html 4218HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:53:59 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 01:14:39 GMTContent-length: 4044 Report Card In the Case Studies, all of these assessments are brought togetheras one table. It is to be read and interpreted like a report cardwith the exception that the score for each disturbance factoris relative only for that factor. It was meant to compare betweenlandcover types and not across disturbance factors. Because the relative importance of the individual disturbancefactors was large, eg clearing and fragmentation was judged tobe of far greater consequence than fire season, comparisons betweenlandcover types based on the total at the bottom of the tablewill be misleading. Thus, these scores are relative and not absolute numbers; therecan be no simple bottom line of the report card. Furthermore,unlike traditional report cards, the lower the score (*) the better:that is, the lower the score, the lower the actual and potentiallandcover disturbance, and thus the lower the threat to impoverishment. The Scoreboard The purpose of generating Tables 13 - 17was to bring all the disturbance factors together simplified toscores. These scores for each landcover type are relative withinthat disturbance factor. Nonetheless, these five summaries canbe examined as a scoreboard and some interesting conclusions made. From Table 13, it is apparent that ahigh clearing score is usually matched by a high fragmentationscore. This is not an entirely surprising conclusion but it doesindicate the pervasiveness of the disturbance offered by clearingto all landcover types within the ILZ. In contrast, within the ELZ, Table 14,only five of the thirty-one landcover types assessed were significantlydisturbed, five were substantially disturbed, and the remainingnineteen were rated as slight. These large differences are generatedby the interaction of the relative areas subject to grazing andthe resilience of the landcover type to disturbance. Some landcovertypes, such as the grasslands (xG), are resilient compared withthe mulga country (wS2). Furthermore, for all landcover types,there is no correlation between the ILZ and ELZ disturbance scores. The range of scores for tenure vulnerability is both limited andhigh; Table 15. No landcover type iswell protected by tenure. This may be a somewhat surprising conclusiongiven that 7% of the continent is within conservation reserves;Table 4. The density distribution of the four feral animal species variesnotably between landcover types; Table 16.No single landcover type has a low or high score for all fourspecies. Little comfort can be taken from this. We suspect that relationshipbetween feral animal density and the rate of biotic erosion isnon-linear with a low threshold; low densities are sufficientto cause disproportionately high rates of other species loss. Finally, the scoreboard for fire disturbance presents a contrastbetween the two factors; Table 17. Forfire season, only seven landcover types have a low disturbancescore, with the majority being assessed as moderate. In contrast,the fire frequency score is assessed as low for the majority oftypes. The extremes of these two disturbance factors are not correlated:no landcover type has a low or high score for both fire seasonand fire frequency. WT03-B26-124IA028-000298-B043-184http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/xtml4.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175622 text/html 3330HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:54:40 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 05:31:57 GMTContent-length: 3156 Description Description xTML4 Tall, medium and low closed forest: dominant overstorey genusis other than Eucalyptus or Acacia; PFC is >70% Ground view Size and location             ILZ        %       ELZ        %    Continent       %     Size               (km2)              (km2)              (km2)               Rank    xTML4      44031      1.5      1696      0.0     45727        0.6     22     The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations forxTML4. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of xTML4 within thatlandscape. Disturbance: clearing Disturbance: grazing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: habitat invasion Disturbance: fire Report card xTML4                                 Score___________________________________________Loss                                  **             Fragmentation                         *              Grazing                               *              Tenure vulnerabilty                   **             Rabbits                               *              Cats                                  **             Fox                                   *              Pigs                                  **             Fire season                           **             Fire frequency                        ***            WT03-B26-125IA028-000298-B043-216http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/etml3.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175635 text/html 3328HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:54:55 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 05:32:54 GMTContent-length: 3154 Description Description eTML3 Tall, medium and low forest: dominant overstorey genus is Eucalyptus;PFC is 30-70% Ground view Size and location            ILZ        %      ELZ        %     Continent    %      Size              (km2)             (km2)               (km2)             Rank                                              eTML3     440494    14.8    52799      1.1     493293     6.4       5     The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations foreTML3. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of eTML3 within thatlandscape. Disturbance: clearing Disturbance: grazing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: habitat invasion Disturbance: fire Report card eTML3                                 Score___________________________________________Loss                                  ***            Fragmentation                         **             Grazing                               *              Tenure vulnerabilty                   ***            Rabbits                               **             Cats                                  **             Fox                                   **             Pigs                                  *              Fire season                           **             Fire frequency                        **             WT03-B26-126IA028-000298-B043-251http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/wtml3.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175655 text/html 3359HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:55:12 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 05:33:38 GMTContent-length: 3185 Description Description wTML3 Tall, medium and low forest: dominant overstorey genus is Acacia;PFC is 30-70% Ground view Size and location            ILZ          %       ELZ        %      Continent     %      Size              (km2)                (km2)                (km2)              Rank                                         wTML3     107962       3.6     14050      0.3      122012      1.6      17     The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations forwTML3. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of wTML3 within thatlandscape. Disturbance: clearing Disturbance: grazing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: habitat invasion Disturbance: fire Report card wTML3                                 Score___________________________________________Loss                                  ***            Fragmentation                         ***            Grazing                               *              Tenure vulnerabilty                   ***            Rabbits                               **             Cats                                  **             Fox                                   **             Pigs                                  **             Fire season                           **             Fire frequency                        ***            WT03-B26-127IA028-000298-B043-280http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/em2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175716 text/html 3316HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:55:38 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 04:52:35 GMTContent-length: 3142 Description Description eM2 Medium open forest: dominant overstorey genus is Eucalyptus ;PFC is 10-30% Ground view Size and location            ILZ        %      ELZ        %    Continent     %       Size              (km2)             (km2)              (km2)               Rank                                                        eM2       773927    26.0    199421     4.2     973347    12.7        2     The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations foreM2. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of eM2 within that landscape. Disturbance: clearing Disturbance: grazing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: habitat invasion Disturbance: fire Report card eM2                                   Score___________________________________________Loss                                  ***            Fragmentation                         **             Grazing                               *              Tenure vulnerabilty                   ***            Rabbits                               **             Cats                                  **             Fox                                   **             Pigs                                  *              Fire season                           **             Fire frequency                        **             WT03-B26-128IA028-000298-B043-296http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/el2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175730 text/html 3297HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:55:48 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 04:48:04 GMTContent-length: 3123 Description Description eL2 Low open forest: dominant overstorey genus is Eucalyptus; PFCis 10-30% Ground view Size and location            ILZ          %       ELZ       %     Continent     %      Size            (km2)                (km2)              (km2)              Rank                                 eL2      158227        5.3     62251     1.3      220478     2.9      10  The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations foreL2. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of eL2 within that landscape. Disturbance: clearing Disturbance: grazing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: habitat invasion Disturbance: fire Report card eL2                                   Score___________________________________________Loss                                  ***            Fragmentation                         ***            Grazing                               *              Tenure vulnerabilty                   **             Rabbits                               **             Cats                                  **             Fox                                   **             Pigs                                  **             Fire season                           *              Fire frequency                        ***            WT03-B26-129IA028-000298-B043-326http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/wl2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175744 text/html 3311HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:56:05 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 05:34:21 GMTContent-length: 3137 Description Description wL2 Low open forest: dominant overstorey genus is Acacia; PFC is 10-30% Ground view Size and location             ILZ        %         ELZ        %    Continent     %      Size               (km2)                (km2)              (km2)              Rank                                                      wL2       147730      5.0       58549      1.2     206280     2.7      11     The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations forwL2. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of wL2 within that landscape. Disturbance: clearing Disturbance: grazing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: habitat invasion Disturbance: fire Report card wL2                                   Score___________________________________________Loss                                  ***            Fragmentation                         ***            Grazing                               *              Tenure vulnerabilty                   ***            Rabbits                               *              Cats                                  ***            Fox                                   *              Pigs                                  **             Fire season                           **             Fire frequency                        *              WT03-B26-130IA028-000298-B044-10http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/xl2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175815 text/html 3347HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:56:22 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 05:35:02 GMTContent-length: 3173 Description Description xL2 Low open forest: dominant overstorey genus is other than Eucalyptusor Acacia; PFC is 10-30% Ground view Size and location            ILZ        %        ELZ        %     Continent     %       Size              (km2)               (km2)               (km2)               Rank                                                    xL2      119002      4.0      20087      0.4     139090      1.8       15     The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations forxL2. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of xL2 within that landscape. Disturbance: clearing Disturbance: grazing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: habitat invasion Disturbance: fire Report card xL2                                   Score___________________________________________Loss                                  *              Fragmentation                         *              Grazing                               **             Tenure vulnerabilty                   ***            Rabbits                               **             Cats                                  ***            Fox                                   **             Pigs                                  *              Fire season                           *              Fire frequency                        **             WT03-B26-131IA028-000298-B044-35http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/em1.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175829 text/html 3348HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:56:48 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 04:51:51 GMTContent-length: 3174 Description Description eM1 Medium sparse forest: dominant overstorey genus is Eucalyptus; PFC is <10% Ground view Size and location            ILZ         %        ELZ         %     Continent    %      Size              (km2)                (km2)                (km2)             Rank                                                                                eM1      171560       5.8       2473       0.1     174033     2.3      12     The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations foreM1. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of eM1 within that landscape. Disturbance: clearing Disturbance: grazing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: habitat invasion Disturbance: fire Report card eM1                                  Score__________________________________________Loss                                  ***            Fragmentation                         ***            Grazing                               *              Tenure vulnerabilty                   ***            Rabbits                               *              Cats                                  **             Fox                                   *              Pigs                                  ***            Fire season                           **             Fire frequency                        **             WT03-B26-132IA028-000298-B044-64http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/el1.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175844 text/html 3333HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:57:05 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 04:46:59 GMTContent-length: 3159 Description Description eL1 Low sparse forest: dominant overstorey genus is Eucalyptus; PFCis <10% Ground view Size and location            ILZ         %        ELZ         %     Continent     %     Size              (km2)                (km2)                (km2)             Rank                                                                               eL1      149512       5.0     768347      16.4     917859     12.0     3     The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations foreL1. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of eL1 within that landscape. Disturbance: clearing Disturbance: grazing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: habitat invasion Disturbance: fire Report card eL1                                   Score      ___________________________________________Loss                                  ***            Fragmentation                         ***            Grazing                               *              Tenure vulnerabilty                   **             Rabbits                               **             Cats                                  ***            Fox                                   **             Pigs                                  **             Fire season                           *              Fire frequency                        **             WT03-B26-133IA028-000298-B044-95http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/es3.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175859 text/html 2887HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:57:18 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 05:35:45 GMTContent-length: 2713 Description Description eS3 Tall shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is Eucalyptus; PFC is30-70% Ground view Size and location            ILZ        %       ELZ        %      Continent     %        Size              (km2)              (km2)                (km2)                Rank                                            eS3       19893      0.7       0        0.0       19893      0.3        29     The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations foreS3. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of eS3 within that landscape. Disturbance: clearing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: fire Report card eS3                                   Score___________________________________________Loss                                  ***            Fragmentation                         ***            Grazing                               -              Tenure vulnerabilty                   ***            Rabbits                               -              Cats                                  -              Fox                                   -              Pigs                                  -              Fire season                           ***            Fire frequency                        *              WT03-B26-134IA028-000298-B044-124http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/ws3.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175927 text/html 3339HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:57:34 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 05:36:23 GMTContent-length: 3165 Description Description wS3 Tall shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is Acacia; PFC is 30-70% Ground view Size and location            ILZ         %       ELZ        %      Continent     %       Size              (km2)               (km2)                (km2)               Rank                                                                              wS3       34543       1.2      8933      0.2       43476      0.6      24     The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations forwS3. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of wS3 within that landscape. Disturbance: clearing Disturbance: grazing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: habitat invasion Disturbance: fire Report card wS3                                   Score___________________________________________Loss                                  ***            Fragmentation                         *              Grazing                               *              Tenure vulnerabilty                   **             Rabbits                               **             Cats                                  **             Fox                                   *              Pigs                                  *              Fire season                           ***            Fire frequency                        *              WT03-B26-135IA028-000298-B044-153http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/es2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114175951 text/html 3323HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:58:09 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 05:37:10 GMTContent-length: 3149 Description Description eS2 Tall open shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is Eucalyptus;PFC is 10-30% Ground view Size and location             ILZ         %       ELZ        %    Continent      %     Size               (km2)               (km2)              (km2)              Rank                                                          eS2       238537       8.0     43146      0.9     281683      3.7     9     The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations foreS2. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of eS2 within that landscape. Disturbance: clearing Disturbance: grazing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: habitat invasion Disturbance: fire Report card eS2                                   Score___________________________________________Loss                                  ***            Fragmentation                         ***            Grazing                               *              Tenure vulnerabilty                   **             Rabbits                               **             Cats                                  **             Fox                                   ***            Pigs                                  *              Fire season                           ***            Fire frequency                        *              WT03-B26-136IA028-000298-B044-180http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/xs2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114180002 text/html 3346HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:58:22 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 05:38:07 GMTContent-length: 3172 Description Description xS2 Tall open shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is other than Eucalyptusor Acacia; PFC is 10-30% Ground view Size and location            ILZ        %      ELZ         %     Continent      %       Size              (km2)             (km2)                (km2)                Rank                                                xS2       44717      1.5     6195       0.1      50911       0.7       21     The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations forxS2. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of xS2 within that landscape. Disturbance: clearing Disturbance: grazing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: habitat invasion Disturbance: fire Report card xS2                                   Score___________________________________________Loss                                  ***            Fragmentation                         ***            Grazing                               ***            Tenure vulnerabilty                   ***            Rabbits                               **             Cats                                  **             Fox                                   ***            Pigs                                  *              Fire season                           ***            Fire frequency                        **             WT03-B26-137IA028-000298-B044-205http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/es1.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114180012 text/html 3272HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:58:33 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 05:38:41 GMTContent-length: 3098 Description Description eS1 Tall sparse shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is Eucalyptus;PFC is <10% Ground view Size and location            ILZ        %       ELZ        %       Continent    %       Size              (km2)              (km2)                 (km2)              Rank    eS1       29443      1.0     116866     2.5       146309     1.9       14     The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations foreS1. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of eS1 within that landscape. Disturbance: clearing Disturbance: grazing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: habitat invasion Disturbance: fire Report card eS1                                   Score___________________________________________Loss                                  ***            Fragmentation                         ***            Grazing                               *              Tenure vulnerabilty                   **             Rabbits                               **             Cats                                  **             Fox                                   *              Pigs                                  *              Fire season                           **             Fire frequency                        *              WT03-B26-138IA028-000298-B044-236http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/xz2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114180023 text/html 3138HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:58:44 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 05:39:32 GMTContent-length: 2964 Description Description xZ2 Low open shrubland: dominant overstorey genus is other than Eucalyptusor Acacia; PFC is 10-30% Ground view Size and location            ILZ        %       ELZ       %       Continent    %       Size              (km2)              (km2)                (km2)              Rank                                        xZ2       82016      2.8     293012    6.2       375028     4.9        7     The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations forxZ2. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of xZ2 within that landscape. Disturbance: grazing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: habitat invasion Disturbance: fire Report card xZ2                                   Score___________________________________________Loss                                  -              Fragmentation                         -              Grazing                               **             Tenure vulnerabilty                   **             Rabbits                               ***            Cats                                  **             Fox                                   *              Pigs                                  *              Fire season                           ***            Fire frequency                        *              WT03-B26-139IA028-000298-B044-258http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/xg3.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114180104 text/html 3058HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 17:59:22 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 05:40:11 GMTContent-length: 2884 Description Description xG3 Grassland: dominant genus is variable; PFC is 30-70% Ground view Size and location           ILZ        %        ELZ        %    Continent      %      Size             (km2)               (km2)              (km2)               Rank    xG3     149436      5.0     215626      4.6     365062      4.8       8     The relative size and distribution of the mapped locations forxG3. The first image of the pair shows a typical regional landscape:the second image shows only the location of xG3 within that landscape. Disturbance: grazing Future disturbance: tenure vulnerability Disturbance: habitat invasion Disturbance: fire Report card xG3                                   Score___________________________________________Loss                                  -              Fragmentation                         -              Grazing                               **             Tenure vulnerabilty                   ***            Rabbits                               **             Cats                                  **             Fox                                   *              Pigs                                  *              Fire season                           *              Fire frequency                        **             WT03-B26-140IA028-000298-B047-93http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/tutorial/history.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114181158 text/html 1458HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:10:07 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:27:25 GMTContent-length: 1284 A new history! The image of what was happening on theground in Kakadu National Park on the morning of September 2,1986 will never die! That is an interesting thought! Not onlydo we have an enormously powerful tool at our disposal that hasprovided a unique view of our environment, we also have powerfulway of exactly recording the state of that environment at thattime. Never before in human history has there been such a powerfulmechanism with which to assess and monitor the condition of ourliving environment. What is more, the same imaging device thatcaptured this wildfire on September 2, 1986 is still operating10 years later. In the intervening period, it has captured anadditional 200 images of this exact area of Kakadu National Park.Like the image that we have used, these newly acquired imageswill also never die. The data that constitute these images arepainstakingly archived and await analysis by those who want tolook backwards to better understand what awaits us. WT03-B26-141IA028-000298-B047-179http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/tutorial/space.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114181358 text/html 1789HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:12:02 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:27:26 GMTContent-length: 1615 Space images are new! In the last twenty years, frequent exposure to satellite images,such as the cloud images used in TV weather segments, has generateda familiarity with space images that disguises just how modernthis technology is. Three thousand years ago, Greek natural philosophers(scientists) deduced from its shadow on the Moon that the shapeof planet Earth was a sphere. That deduction was not completelyconfirmed until 1969 when a small and privileged group of UnitedStates astronauts en route to the Moon observed that the Earthis truly a globe. The most revealing views of Earth are not to be had on its surface.An individual standing on top of Mt Everest with the best telescopeavailable and under the best viewing conditions, might be ableto see about 0.000025% of the total surface of the Earth. It isdifficult to appreciate and describe the curved surface of a spherewith surface observations only. Cartography was crude and inaccurateuntil aerial photography provided a new perspective from 10 kmsor so above the surface of the Earth. Now observations from heightsof 1000 kms, or in the case of the TV weather cloud images, 30000 km are routine. Nonetheless it is notable to remember thatuntil remote sensing technology became routinely available, itwas easier to draw maps of the Moon than of the Earth. WT03-B26-142IA059-000318-B040-68http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/tutorial/limits.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114181532 text/html 1947HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:13:51 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 03:17:46 GMTContent-length: 1773 The limits of small. A ground resolution unit of 60 m x 80 m is human scale becauseit is approximately the area of a football field. It is somethingwe can visualise and comprehend. But this cognisance becomes moredifficult as the unit of ground resolution or pixel, increasesin size. For example, another type of satellite, the NOAA AVHRRsystem, has a pixel size of 1000 m x 1000 m. That is, this imaging system averages the landscapes into pointsor pixels that are 1 kilometre on a side; a unit of resolutionthat is difficult to visualise or comprehend. It is the same resolutionused for reporting the findings of this project. If you standat any point, in the city or the country, and imagine that thedifferent brightness of every component within a square pixel1 x 1 kilometre in size is averaged to just one value, you wouldeasily be persuaded that the result will be meaningless or ofvery little value. It is a difficult concept to grasp! Nevertheless,when we view a NOAA AVHRR image, the patterns and colours makesense. We can interpret what we see. We have no difficulty withthe whole, only with the component parts, the pixels. This difficultywill pass! WT03-B26-143IA059-000318-B040-94http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/tutorial/newtruth.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114181629 text/html 3763HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:14:19 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:27:26 GMTContent-length: 3589 The new truth. Satellite data are objective. Satellite data are acquired, transmittedand archived by machines. No human editing, biasing or censorshipis involved in the data acquisition stage. Each pixel is an objectivemeasurement of the condition of the surface of the Earth. Thedata coding the relative brightness in each waveband for eachpixel are collected systematically in space as well as in timewith a census sample; ie. complete coverage of the surface ofthe Earth. It is only in the final stage of interpretation thatsubjective interpretation occurs. That presents no problems. Ifyou and I disagree about the interpretation of a satellite imagein this book, that is healthy and good for science. We can differonly about our interpretation and not about the data. The datathat we both use, the image, remain the same. Satellite data areobjectively acquired and there are enormous volumes of it. Withinthe national satellite archives in Canberra, there are approximately250 Landsat MSS images of every pixel of the Australian continentsince mid-1972. There is a very great contrast between the systematic, objectivemeasurement systems onboard satellites and the assessment andmonitoring of our environment that people do. Our assessment issubjective rather than objective and it is based on a very smallsample in comparison with the complete 'wall-to-wall' coverageof satellite imaging systems. The greatest disparity is in theway in which we humans monitor the world around us compared withwhat can be achieved using satellite data. Our archive of whatthe world was like is our memory. Our memory, our operationalarchive, is, unfortunately seriously flawed in its creation andfallible in its retrieval. We selectively remember things in thefirst instance and then do not always recall all relevant information.As an archive, we are biased and forgetful. These failings shapeour lives because we are what we remember. That is the natureof human beings; a nature that is the product of the way we haveevolved during the last million years or so. It is a characteristic of our behaviour to react to rapid or episodicchange in preference to slow and monotonous change. It's far easierto occupy ourselves with the daily micro-hassles of life thanwith changes occurring over the longer term. Our social, politicaland economic lives are dominated by the now rather than the criticallyimportant future. This domination is largely dictated by our mediathat, with words, images and skill, force our concentration ondaily trivia, eg. a knee operation for a football player, whilecompletely ignoring the long term changes, such as the relentlessincrease in the atmospheric concentration of chlorofluorocarbons(CFCs) and greenhouse gases. Now, bearing all of these points in mind, we can ask a simpleyet important question: If you wanted to discover what was reallyhappening to your world, which archive would you tap? Would youuse the collective human memory? This archive we know to be familiarbut neither objective, complete or systematically updated. Orwould you rather access a database that has it all there? A databaseof objective measurements, not subjective impressions, that wasmade systematically in space and in time? WT03-B26-144IA059-000318-B040-161http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/tutorial/summary.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114181726 text/html 743HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:15:49 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 03:23:38 GMTContent-length: 570 A summary of the characteristics of the Multi Spectral Scanner(MSS) imaging device used on the Landsat series of spacecraft. Channel		Waveband (nm)	Colour______________________________________MSS#4		500-600		greenMSS#5		600-700		redMSS#6		700-800		near-infra redMSS#7		800-1100	near-infra red WT03-B26-145IA059-000318-B040-394http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/tutorial/colours.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114182118 text/html 927HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:19:22 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:27:25 GMTContent-length: 754 The new colours. Because satellites work above the atmosphere, satellite sensorsystems must completely ignore the blue part of the visible spectrumbecause blue light is scattered by the atmosphere. This phenomenon,called Rayleigh scattering, explains why the sky is blue and whysunsets are orange to red in colour. An image of the Earth's surfacein the blue wavelengths would usually be fuzzy and blurred. However,the colour blue is always used in displaying the information inthese images. WT03-B26-146IA059-000318-B041-13http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/tutorial/endless.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114182137 text/html 1034HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:19:56 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:27:25 GMTContent-length: 861 The endless truth. Any involvement with satellite data rapidly generates a realisationof the immense volumes of data that are required to create, store,and then recreate images. Let's work through an example usingthe full Landsat MSS scene that contained the introductory wildfire. This image comprised ~2 600 lines, each of which was made up of~2 600 pixels. This image is best visualised as an array of 2600 columns and 2 600 rows giving a total of ~7 000 000 locationsor cells in the array. For Landsat MSS with 4 wavebands, thisgives a total of 28 000 000 numbers to represent one image. WT03-B26-147IA059-000318-B041-37http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/pubs/dest_la/www/tutorial/landsat.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114182146 text/html 1560HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:20:08 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Wed, 14 Feb 1996 00:27:26 GMTContent-length: 1386 Landsat in Australia. This satellite, like most Earth observing satellites, orbitsthe planet from pole to pole with each orbit taking about 100minutes. That orbit is fixed and the Earth rotates below the orbitingsatellite. The instruments onboard each spacecraft image the Earth'ssurface directly below, usually in a continuous strip. If youimagine the reverse process - that the satellite is wrapping theglobe with a continuous strip of bandage - Landsat-5 completelycovers the Earth every 16 days. Thus every 16 days, Landsat-5can acquire a fresh image of every part of the planet, cloud coverpermitting. In Australia, the Data Access Facility (DAF) or ReceivingStation at Alice Springs systematically tracks and records datafor the Australian continent and its surrounds every day of theyear. The orbit of Landsat, like most other satellites, is sun synchronous;ie. the satellite passes over any location at the same local timeof day. For Australia this time is approximately 0930 hours AESTand Landsat passes North to South. The orbital paths are inclinedabout 12 degrees from geographic north. WT03-B26-148IA059-000318-B041-62http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin72/7205.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114182207 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:20:19 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:17 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-149IA059-000318-B041-132http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/wshop3.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114182313 text/html 3021HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:21:20 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:08 GMTContent-length: 2847 Land AVHRR Data Users Group Workshop - Towards Product Standards 3. STANDARD PRACTICE AND RESEARCH EXCELLENCE If there are well defined standards, it places research and developmentinto context and protects it from being confused with operational production.Research is needed in cases where the standard processing is inadequate,where it does not solve the user's problems and also needed to create newproducts which may eventually become standard processes. The important advancefor researchers in this situation is that when users ask researchers totry new methods because the standard ones are inadequate it is they, andnot the researchers, who take on the risk that the result may not be anybetter. Having a solid base of established standards also puts into context thedifficult issue of "Best Practice". I think the name is the problem!It is always better to use "Best Current Practice" and even betterjust to say "Standard Practice". I think that 'best practice'is actually what the 'best people' do and always will be. It is impossibleto specify the 'best' or create it by documentation and imposition of measuresof success. What it is possible to specify is the currently acceptable standardsand it is in everyone's interest that these standards exist and providea measure against which new methods can prove their worth. The area where research lives is in the quest for the best but it may notbe that current research really is better. The measure of 'better' to theuser lies as much in repeatability and consistency as it does in the incorporationof more 'realistic' components or complex physics. However, the researcherneeds to have room to explore and can move the horisons to create what maybe tommorrow's standards. An example of such a slow but sure process can be seen in evaporation methodsas practiced in Irrigation Engineering. In evaporation standard practicethe scientifically superior Penman-Monteith method has taken many years(more than 30) to become included in the standard manuals. It has had tobe proven in operational practice to be simply applicable, reliable, consistentand even conservative so that it could replace tried although maybe notvery true methods in use for many years in operational calculations of "Consumptive"Water Use. WT03-B26-150IA059-000318-B041-166http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/avout3.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114182341 text/html 5318HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:22:04 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:03 GMTContent-length: 5144 Land AVHRR Workshop 3. OUTCOMES AND DISCUSSIONS FROM THE LAND AVHRR WORKSHOP Data receiving stations should process data so that the base and standardproducts are both correct and repeatable within and between stations. Thatis, for the same region observed by two stations during a single overpassboth the base and standard product digital counts must be the same. 1. Accurate and quantifiable measures of correctness should be definedjointly and then adhered to. 2. Geometric accuracy was suggested to be at RMS of 1pixel. This qualityspecification can be determined by a number of GCP's being selected in eachimage to ensure that the geometric accuracy is being meet. 3. Absolute radiometric correction was suggested to be specifiable to5%. The main issue for such a specification is how to provide the supportingmeasures. Options include a combination of ground based or remotely senseddata collected from other satellite systems to enable radiometric qualityto be documented for both base and standard products. 4. Additional data quality levels to the receiving stations standardsshould be produced and monitored by appropriate groups. There needs to be understanding of the complexities involved by all membersof the AVHRR community. For example, all members would like a correct, accurateand fast cloud detection and cloud contamination algorithm in place in allreceiving stations. Some initial research has been undertaken on this topic.However, due to computational demands few if any algorithms have been operationallyimplemented. There still exists the opportunity that research will be ofbenefit due to a combination of algorithm development and faster processingcomputers. We would all like the AVHRR data to be physically correct andobtainable in a timely fashion to predefined standards. To do this, we mustdefine the problems and offer solutions to them. There is an important opportunityand obligation for CSIRO to engage some basic research. Solutions shouldbe scientifically correct and also operationally implementable. This hasobvious advantages to all members of the AVHRR community. Several issues were raised about how to ensure that present data archivesare made consistent and correct. Such archives will form a baseline forfuture environmental monitoring projects and the need to ensure correctnessand consistency is paramount. It was decided that rather then reprocessall images based on the notion that someone may want to use such data inthe future, what is required is the knowledge, and specifications to beclearly, completely and correctly documented to allow reprocessing of specialdata archives. Is all this information known and documented? It is thought that CSIRO Marine Labs, CSIRO DAR, AIMS, WASTAC and the BofMetneed to get their systems all consistent and meeting the same common setof standards. Operational running of receiving stations and base data archivingalso needs to be eventually transferred from CSIRO to BofMet. There is currentlyan agreement being discussed between the two organisations and greater discussionsneed to be undertaken not only between these two but also include ACRESand the AIMS/Townsville facility. Data standards need to address the needs of the user community. Most importantis the operational data user community, those agencies who are currentlyusing AVHRR data to make management decisions. Any changes to data formats,standards etc need to be documented and feedback from the user communityobtained before they take place. This needs to be rigorously planned andimplemented on predetermined known dates and not undertaken in an ad hocway. There were also concerns about data availability expressed by some membersof the user community. Management systems have been developed in which AVHRRdata are the central element and continuity, both of geometrically and radiometricallycorrect data must be ensured to the level of control that the data acquisition,base and standard product community have. Also, issues of CSIRO data gatherersproviding data to research applications internal to CSIRO must be addressed.This is an issue for CSIRO to address possibly under the banner of the recentlyformed EOC. People must be willing to accept that some changes in the Australian AVHRRreception and subsequent processing pathways will occur. The changes willallow for a better consistent national set of standards to be met. All membersof the remote sensing community that receive, process and use AVHRR datamust be taken into account before any changes are made. WT03-B26-151IA059-000318-B041-189http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/brdff1.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114182359 text/html 423HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:22:16 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:09 GMTContent-length: 250 Figure 1 Aircraft with sun and scan directions WT03-B26-152IA059-000318-B041-213http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/brdff2.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114182410 text/html 428HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:22:33 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 24 May 1996 01:57:43 GMTContent-length: 255 Figure 2 DATM Hotspot effect and models WT03-B26-153IA059-000318-B041-242http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/tasks/task4.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114182443 text/html 3032HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:22:57 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Aug 1996 23:40:24 GMTContent-length: 2858 EOC primary Tasks and forward looking Working Groups for 1996/97 4. WORKING GROUPS In the medium and longer term, the EOC and Divisional scientists andgroups will jointly seek funds from the Sectors and external bodies forTasks. These Tasks will be developed in 1996/97 through the action of arange of Working Groups. Potential WGs for this year include: Airborne Remote Sensing Issues; Hyperspectral Specification; Spectral Libraries; Generic Issues in Atmospheric Correction; Future sensors and satellites and processing implications; Cal & Val issues in international missions; Energy & Water Balances & Fluxes; Optical Water Quality and Ocean Colour; Spectral Unmixing; Radar applications (including land and marine); Software implementation and /or Commercial interactions in processing andVAP release; Cloud issues - cloud clearing and cloud climatology; Measurable Standards for Earth Observation Products; Data Integration Issues. 5. REFERENCES COSSA (1996). CSIRO Earth Observation Centre Strategic Science Plan.Vision, Mission and Strategies 1996-2000. (EOC Web Site) Jupp, DLB (1996a). Land AVHRR Data Users Group Workshop - Towards ProductStandards, ARSC8, Canberra. (EOC Web Site). Jupp, DLB (1996b). Earth Observation Science - A Common Thread in CSIROSectors. A Multi-Sector View. (EOC Web Site). Jupp, DLB (1996c). Getting the EOC Started - the initial candidate Tasksand the Threads they Serve. Jupp, DLB (1996d). Issues in Reflectance Measurement. (EOC Web Site). Jupp, DLB and Strahler, AH (1996). Image Brightness & BRDF WorkshopIssues. ARSC8, Workshop Report. (EOC Web Site). McVicar, T. (1996). Land AVHRR Workshop, ARSC8, Canberra, Monday 25th March1996. Meeting Report. (EOC Web Site). Prata, AJ (1996). Working Group on Australian AVHRR Science. Final Report:Recommendations and Proposal for a Common AVHRR-data Processing Scheme -CAPS. Revised April 1996. Simpson, JJ, Barton, IJ, Kingwell, J, Neal, AB and Wallace, J. (1995). Reviewof CSIRO Multi-Divisional Program on satellite data acquisition and utilisation(MDP-19)/ Analysis of CSIRO Earth Observation needs., COSSA Publication34, May 1995 Flow Chart for Primary Thread WT03-B26-154IA059-000318-B041-277http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcata3.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114182502 text/html 27563HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:23:20 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:36:51 GMTContent-length: 27388 Catalogue Library catalogue A: SPACE, ASTRONAUTICS (continued) (other than communications (C), remote sensing (R), & astronomical aspects(X) [see also Aeronautics, (F)]. Also used for Space in General, or combinationsof above. AC Space Stations, Colonies in Space, Space Platforms in general [SEE (RS)for Polar Platforms] AD Defence aspects ("Star Wars", SDIO, Weapons in Space) AE Space engineering & technology, Astronautical Engineering, SpaceResearch facilities as test labs., specifications for individual items.SEE also Engineering (E) & Aircraft Engineering (FE), Space Industry(AI) AG Microgravity, also Space laboratories [in Space]; microgravity technology;SEE also Space Commercial use AH Space Instrumentation & Equipment; Payloads; Payload Transport Systems& Carriers; Space Instrumentation in general: SEE (CH) for CommunicationsInstruments, (RI) for Remote Sensing, Environmental Research Instruments,(XH) for Astronomical Instruments AI Space Industry, Astronautical, Space Industry R&D etc. [SEE (FE)for Aircraft, Aerospace Industry; (AE) for Space Engineering & Technology;(IN) Industrial R&D in general.] AJ "Junk" in Space; Orbital Debris AK Launch Vehicles, Space Transport Systems, science & technology oflaunch systems, human-operated launches in space; Launch & SatelliteTrajectories [SEE (AR) for Rockets and Rocketry] AL Launch Sites & Facilities (Cape York, etc.); launch schedules AM Manned Spacecraft & Spaceflight. [SEE ALSO Space planes (FS) Unmanned SEE Satellites: (AN);(CS);(RS); Space probes, astronomical satellites (XF) general) special missions (XI, XL, XP, XS.) AN Satellites & Unmanned spacecraft and satellites in general, and multipurpose satellites. [SEE ALSO (CS), (RS) and (XF)] AP Space Science, Space Programs, Space Exploration in General, Space planning activities in general; [SEE also Remote sensing programmes (RZ); (PS), generalscience] [SEE also Astronomy (X) esp. (XA) (XI)(XI),(XL),(XP),(XS), ( XZ)] AR Rocketry & Rockets, esp. sub-orbital or principles of. SEE also AKspecifically for Launch Vehicles AS Space Resources, commercial use, Mining, Manufacture, Industralization AX Films, videos on space. [Exclude Astronomy, see (XX)] AZ General overviews of space, Principles & Practice (General &Collective) @\ STS pricing policy \ \Lee.C \Stone.B \ \NASA \ \Satellites \Marketing \Launch vehicles \International \United States \ \n.d. \4p. \AK5-12 \(paper) \#G P.419 Reclassified from RS5-12. 1986?. jk 15.5.92 @\Concept of Highly Maneuverable [sic] Experimental Space (HIMES) Vehicle[paper presented at] IAF'85, 36th Congress of the IAF, Stockholm, Sweden,Oct. 7-12, 1985 \IAF-85-137 \Nagatomo.M \Naruo.Y \Inatani.Y \IAF \ISAS \Launch vehicles \Spacecraft \HIMES \Japan \Space \ \1985 \11p. \AK15-63 \(conference paper) \ #G P.918 Conference preprint. @\Study on two-stage launcher with air-breathing propulsion [paper from]Joint AAS-Japanese Rocket Society (JRS) Symposium,Dec. 15-19, 1985, Honolulu. \AAS 85-643 \Tanatsugu.N \Lo.R \Manski.D \AAS/Japanese Rocket Society (JRS) Symposium \ISAS \Launch vehicles \Space planes \Spacecraft \Space \Japan \West Germany \1985 \18p. \AK15-63 \(conference paper) \ #G P.917 AAS Preprint. Study from ISAS Japan & DFVLR, & Universityof Stuttgart, West Germany. 4th author: U.M.Schoettle @\Miscellaneous information : launch sites and launch vehicles. \ \ \ \ \COSSA \ \Launch sites \Launch vehicles \Space programs \International \United States \Japan \1988 (?) \Various \AL1-05 \Folder \#G P.841.1, P.841.2 Two folders of reprints and other information, probablycollected by COSSA during Cape York spaceport early studies. 17.6.92 @\Civilian Launch Vehicles and Spaceports, a World Perspective \COSSA Seminar 6 April 1987 \Pike.G \ \ \AUSSAT \ \ Launch vehicles \Launch sites \ \International \Australia \ \1987 \46p \AL1-05 \Monograph \#G P.1010 ISBN 0 643 038582, ISSN 0818 4291, COSSA Publication 0013A. Reportis organised in 2 parts: PART I is a worldwide survey of commercial launchvehicles, PART II describes existing & potential launch sites. mk 16.10.92.See also copy at AR1-05. @\The Guiana Space Center \ \ \ \ \CNES \ESA \Launch sites \Ariane Program \ \Europe \French Guiana \ \1988 Feb \5p \AL1-26 \Brochure \#G P.914 . Overview of ESA/Arianespace Launch complex in South America.2.12.92 @\ Esrange, space is our place \ \ \ \ \Swedish Space Corp. \ \Launch sites \Esrange \ \Sweden \ \ \n.d. \14p. \AL1-39 \Monograph \ #G P.934 Esrange: space research range. @\ Australian study of a launching site for equatorial orbits [for ELDO,an Australian proposal, Dec. 1965] \ELDO Project Study 5.4 \ \ \ \Weapons Research Establishment (Salisbury, S.A.) \Australia. Dept. of Supply \Launch sites \ \ \Australia \ \ \1965 \136p. \AL3-80 \Monograph \#G P.128 (Copy 1), P.129 (Copy 2). Proposal for ELDO launch site near Darwin- competing with French-backed proposal for Kourou. jk 30/5/91 @\Australian Satellite Launch Service. Australian Industry Involvement \ \ \ \ \Transfield \ \Launch programs \Launch vehicles \Launch sites \Australia \ \ \1990 \87p \AL5-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.167. The Australian Satellite Launch Service aims to provide acommercial launch service for satellites up to 1200 kg into low earth orbit(200-1000 km). The proposal (to the ASO) is for a service managed by TransfieldPty Ltd in conjunction with Australian Launch Vehicles Pty Ltd and otherforeign & Australian companies. Transfield later withdrew. mk 17.7.92 @\ TITLE: Senate Standing Committee on Transport, Communications and Infrastructure \ SERIES.TITLE Official Hansard Report \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 Australia. Parliament \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Launch sites \ KEYWORD.2 Government policy \ KEYWORD.3 \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 Queensland \ REGION.3 South Australia \ DATE 1991 \ PAGINATION 244p \ CLASSC'N AL7-80 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.44 Copy 1, 1992.205 Copy 2 . Hansard record 29 November1991, containing testimony by Dr Harris, Dr Middleton of ASO, AustralianSpace Insurance Group, and Dr Sam Paltridge. @\ TITLE: Developing satellite launching facilities in Australia and therole of government \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 Australia. Parliament \ CORP.AUTHR.2 Senate Standing Committee on Transport, Communications andInfrastructure \ KEYWORD.1 Launch sites \ KEYWORD.2 Government policy \ KEYWORD.3 Rockets \ REGION.1 Australia \ REGION.2 Queensland \ REGION.3 South Australia \ DATE 1992 Apr \ PAGINATION 142p \ CLASSC'N AL7-80 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.58 ; 1992.62 (Copy 2), 1992.192 (Copy 3) . ISBN 0 64217482 2 Committee chaired by Sen D Foreman. Other members Sens H Chapman,J Faulkner, C Kernot, I Macdonald, J Panizza, J Powell, C Schacht, P Walsh.jk 4.5.92 @\ Selection of a location for a space launch facility in Hawaii: finalreport to Dept. of Business and Economic Development, State of Hawaii April1988 \ \ \ \ \Arthur D. Little Inc. \Hawaii. Dept. of Business and Economic Development. \Launch sites \Environmental studies \Little, Arthur, Inc. \Hawaii \ \ \1988 \varies \AL9-12 \Monograph \Includes fold. maps and tables. P.130 (copy 1) P.131 (copy 2). jk 30/5/91 @\Woomera our outback space town [article from Australian Geographic] \ \Raffaele.P \ \ \Australian Geographic \ \Launch sites \Woomera \History \Australia \ \ \1988 \19p. \AL12-80 \(paper) \P.100, P.933 (Copy 2) Copy of pp.98-115 of Australian Geographic, no.12,Oct-Dec 1988 @\ Fire across the desert : Woomera and the Anglo-Australian Joint Project1946-1980. \ \ Morton.P \ \ \ DOD \ \ Launch sites \ Rockets \ History \ South Australia \ Australia \ UK \ 1989 \ 575p \ AL12-85 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.22 Definitive history of Woomera and Australia/UK rocket and missiletests there. Commissioned by DOD and published by AGPS. ISBN 0 644 060689 . jk 28/5/91 @\ Woomera - the final test. \ \Muir.T \ \ \ \ \Launch sites \ \ \South Australia \Australia \ \1990 \3p \AL12-85 \Journal article \#G 1990.134 Plans to turn Woomera into a commercially viable launch rangeare discussed. mk 17.7.92 @\ Registration of participation: Cape York International Spaceport, Nov.1987. Vol. 1 0f 8 \ \ \ \ \Cape York Space Agency \ \Launch sites \Cape York spaceport project \ \Australia \Queensland \ \1987 \varies \AL15-88 \Monograph \Multivolume (8) looseleaf. #G P.127 jk 29/5/91 @\ Cape York International Spaceport: Infrastructure and environmental issuesscoping study \Cape York International Spaceport Scoping Studies \ \ \ \Macdonald Wagner \Hollingsworth Consultants \Launch sites \Cape York spaceport project \Environmental studies \Queensland \ \ \1987 \30p. \AL15-88 \Monograph \ #G P.1045 ; Copy 2 P.1047. ISBN o 85825 390 9 Pub. by IEA @\ Cape York International Spaceport legal issues scoping study \ Cape York International Spaceport scoping studies \ \ \ \Chambers McNab Tully & Wilson \IEA \Launch sites \Cape York spaceport project \Legal affairs \Australia \Queensland \ \1987 \41p. \AL15-88 \Monograph \#G P.1044 ISBN 0 85825 392 5 @\ Cape York International Spaceport management processes scoping study \Cape York International Spaceport scoping studies \ \ \ \Touche Ross International \IEA \Launch sites \Cape York spaceport project \Management \Queensland \Australia \ \1987 \20p. \AL15-88 \Monograph \ #G P.1046 ISBN 0 85825 391 7 @\ Cape York International Spaceport commercial opportunities scoping study \Cape York International scoping studies \ \ \ \AUSSAT Ltd \IEA \Launch sites \Cape York spaceport project \Marketing \Queensland \Australia \ \1987 \44p. \AL15-88 \Monograph \#G P.1062 1.12.92 @\ Cape York International Spaceport economic impact scoping study \Cape York International Spaceport scoping studies \ \ \ \Peat Marwick Mitchell Services \IEA \Launch sites \Cape York spaceport project \Economics \Queensland \Australia \ \1987 \16p. \AL15-88 \Monograph \#G P.1061 1.12.92 @\Cape York International Spaceport infrastructural and environmental issuesscoping study report \Cape York International Spaceport scoping study reports \ \ \ \Macdonald Wagner \Hollingsworth Consultants \Launch sites \Cape York spaceport project \Environmental studies \Queensland \Australia \ \1987 \varies \AL15-88 \Monograph \3rd author: Crooks Michell Peacock Stewart Ltd; pub. by IEA. @\ Cape York International Spaceport, a vision and a plan \ \Behn.A \ \ \Cape York Space Agency \ \Launch sites \Cape York spaceport project \ \Australia \Queensland \ \1988 \14p. \AL15-88 \Monograph \ #G P.1048 @\ Cape York International Spaceport: Phase 1, report to government, September1988, summary and conclusions [in folder] \ \ \ \ \Cape York Space Agency \ \Cape York spaceport project \Launch sites \ \Australia \Queensland \ \1988 \various \AL15-88 \Monograph in folder \CONFIDENTIAL./Commercial In Confidence. #G P.1049. @\ Cape York International Spaceport : Part 1 of a Feasibility Study, areport prepared under ...National Committee on Space Engineering of theIEA for the Co-ordinator General, Premier's Dept. Queensland \ \Simmons.J \Schaetzel.S \ \IEA \Queensland. Premier's Dept. \Launch facilities \Cape York spaceport project \ \Queensland \Australia \ \1987 \193p. \AL15-88 \Monograph \ #G P.126. Former No. 822 Copy 2 (photocopy) is P.143. jk 25.5.91 @\International spaceport proposed for Cape York \ \ Kingwell.J \ \ \ \ \ Cape York spaceport project \ Launch sites \ Economics \ Queensland \ Australia \ \ 1988 \ 5p \ AL15-88 \ Reprint \ #G P.125 Appeared in Space Policy, 1988, p240-244. Summarises historyand status of proposal. Extensive references. jk 28/5/91 @\Round Trip to Orbit: Human Spaceflight Alternatives, Special Report \OTA-ISC-419 \Williamson.R \Johns.L \Shaw.A \US.Congress \US.Office of Technology Assessment \Space Shuttle \Space Programs \Launch Vehicles \United States \ \ \1989 Aug \116p \AM1-12 \Monograph \#G 1992.309 Library of Congress Catalog Card No. 89-600744 . Review ofShuttle alternatives to carry out US human spaceflight programs (includingNational Aerospace Plane, NASP). mvk 24.1.93 @\ The Space Shuttle \ \ \ \ \NASA? \ \Spacecraft \Space Shuttle \Space programs \Space \United States \ \n.d. \n/a \AM2-01 \Monograph \ #G P.962 Photocopy of item, probably pub. by NASA @\ Holocaust in the sky, special report [from Discover, April 1986] a 4article survey \ \Biddle.W \McKean.K \Garelik.G \Discover \ \Challenger \Spacecraft \Disasters \Space \United States \Russia \1986 \n/a \AM2-12 \Reprint \#G P.958 @\Turning Shuttle around \ \Furniss.T \ \ \Flight International \ \Launch programs \Space Shuttle \ \United States \ \ \1985 \4p. \AM2-12 \(paper) \ #G P.959 From Flight International, 22-6-1985, pp.34-37. First of 3 articleson orbiter, payload & launch processing. @\ Space shuttle: a blueprint for disaster \ \Joyce.C \ \ \New Scientist \ \Spacecraft \Disasters \Challenger \United States \ \ \1986 \2p. \AM2-12 \(paper) \ #G P.960 Copy of pp.17-18 of New Scientist, 12 June 1986 @\ Hermes \ \ \ \ \ESA \CNES \Space programs \Space planes \Hermes \Europe \ \ \n.d. \ca 32p. \AM2-30 \Monograph \ #G P.953, P.956 (Copy 2) On pub:PR-P 87-5 [1987?] @\Hermes spaceplane \ \ \ \ \CNES \ \Space planes \Hermes \ \France \Space \ \1985 \ca 30p. \AM2-30 \Monograph \ #G P.957 @\ First German Spacelab Mission D1 \ \ \ \ \Germany. Federal Republic. BMFT \DFVLR \Space missions \Space science \Spacelab \West Germany \Space \ \n.d. \8p. \AM2-38 \Monograph \1984 ? #G P.961 ? @\ASTRO-1 Exploring the invisible universe of ultraviolet and X-ray astronomy. \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Astronomical spacecraft \Space Shuttle \Satellite observatories \Space \ \ \1990 (?) \ \AM3-01 \Pamphlet \#G 1991.18. Space Shuttle payload carrying 4 astronomical experiments,launched 1991. jk 13/5/91 @\ Benefits of manned space flight \ \Scheunemann.R \Richter.H \ \DFVLR \ \Space missions manned \Economics \Industrial research & development \Space \West Germany \ \1985 \16p. \AM5-01 \Monograph \ #G P.952 @\Seeing Earth in a new way \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \SIR instruments \X-SAR \Global change \United States \Germany \International \ \Various \AM9-05 \Brochure \#G 1996.61 DARA/ASI/NASA Space Radar Laboratory or SIR-C/X-SAR ShuttleMission; reference to NASA's Mission to Planet Earth . mvk 8.4.96 @\The Dream Machines: an illustrated history of the spaceship in art, scienceand literature \ \Miller.Ron \ \ \ \ \Spacecraft \Spaceplanes \History \Inteernational \Space \ \1993 \714p \AM12-05 \Monograph \#G 1996.7 ISBN 0 89464 039 9 Kreiger, hardback, $US112. With Forward byA C Clarke. Voluminous, profusely illustrated review of real and imaginaryspacecraft from 360 BC to the mid 1990s. mvk 15.2.96 @\ U.S. manned space-flight log \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space missions manned \Spacecraft \ \Space \United States \ \n.d. \2p. \AM12-12 \(paper) \ #G P.955 @\In Gagarin's Trail \ \ \ \ \Novosti Press Agency \ \Space missions \Space missions manned \Space technology \Russia \Space \ \1986 \ \AM12-56 \Monograph \#G 1993.58 Overview of Yuri Gagarin's flight, subsequent Soviet missions& plans,. including cooperation with France, India. Pub. 3607000000.mvk 22.6.93 @\ Manned Mars missions, a Working Group report,based on Working Paperspresented at Marshall Space Flight Center, (Huntsville, Ala., June 10-14,1985), May 1986 \NASA M001 \Duke.M \Keaton.P \ \NASA \Los Alamos National Laboratory \Space missions manned \Mars \Space probes \Space \United States \ \1986 \85p. \AM15-12 \Monograph \ #G P.954 @\Satellites that serve us [series of articles] \ \Canby.T \ \ \National Geographic \ \Satellites \Remote sensing \Communications \International \United States \ \1983 \ca.103p. \AN1-05 \(papers) \ #G P.947 Copy of pp.281-334 of National Geographic, September 1983. @\ International satellite directory 19- , the complete guide to the internationalsatellite industry/satellite communication industry \ \ \ \ \Design Publishers \ \Satellites \Directories \ \International \ \ \HOLD 1st, 1986; 9th, 1994; \various \AN1-05 \Serial \ #G P.938 $US226.58 ISBN 0 936361 01 8 To be published annually. Also 1994.70ISBN 0 9366361 12 3, ISSN 1041 4541 mvk 8.6.94. @\ Satellites, the Canadian experience \ \ \ \ \Canada. External Affairs \ \Satellites \Space programs \ \Canada \ \ \1984 \25p. \AN1-11 \Monograph \ #G P.946 @\ NESDIS Programs, NOAA Satellite operations \ \ \ \ \ NESDIS \ NOAA \ Meteorology \ Environmental research \ Remote sensing satellites \USA \ International \ \1985 March \ 264p \ AN1-12 \ Monograph \ #G Multiple copies inc P.21, P.22 Celebrates 25 years of weather satellites @\ INSAT the Indian National Satellite system [an overview] \ \ \ \ \INSAT \ \Satellites \Space programs \INSAT \India \ \ \1984 \52p. \AN1-53 \Monograph \ #G P.939 See also P.949 at AN3-53, 1988 report. @\ Australian science and application spacecraft feasibility study, by ASASStudy Group \ \Simmons.J \Schaetzel.S \ \Hawker de Havilland \DITAC \Satellites \Space programs \Remote sensing applications \Australia \ \ \1987 \varies \AN1-80 \Monograph \#G P.945 HDH Technical Publications Department. Also hold Advance Copy,P.944, slightly different @\ Satellite Data Systems Newsletter, Launches During January 1989 \Satellite Data Systems Newsletter \Davies.G \ \ \ \ \Rocket launches \Space junk \Fragments \Space \ \ \1989 \7p. \AN2-01 \Paper \ISSN 0817-4938, 1989, No.1 P.915 19.10.92 mk @\ Multimission Modular Spacecraft (MMS) External interface spacificationand user's guide, Feb. 1978 \ S-700-11 \ \ \ \NASA \ \Spacecraft \Payload transport systems \MMS \Space \United States \ \1978 \various \AN2-12 \Monograph \ #G P.948 @\Down to earth space & communications \ \ \ \ \British Aerospace \ \Satellites \Space industry \ \Great Britain \ \ \1984 \8p. \AN2-32 \Monograph \ #G P.943 @\ Janus [in French] \ \ \ \ \Matra \ \Satellites \Janus \ \France \ \ \n.d. \7p. \AN2-34 \Monograph \Data sheets in French . #G P.940 . @\ Mission: Recovery, executive summary \ \ \ \ \Hughes Aircraft Co \ \Satellite recovery \Space Shuttle \ \Space \ \ \1985 \4p. \AN3-01 \Folder \Recounts recovery by Space Shuttle crew of Westar VI and Palapa-B2 satellites,one later reused as ASIASAT 1 #G P.942 . @\ EOS Reference Handbook, EOS Earth Observing System \ \ \ \ \ GSFC \ NASA \ EOS \ Global change \ Environmental research \ International \ USA \ \ HOLD 1990, 1991, 1993 \ Various (around 150p) \ AN3-05 \ Serial \ #G 1990.11 (copy 1) 1990.100 (copy 2, kept by jk). 1991 copy 1994.148,1993 copy is 1993.128 mvk 14.11.94, 26.6.95 @\ Indian National Satellite System, INSAT \ \ \ \ \Government of India \INSAT \Remote Sensing \Earth Observation \ \India \Space \ \1988 \31p. \AN3-53 \Monograp \#G P.949 See also P.939, 1984 report, at AN1-53. @\Eos, A Mission to Planet Earth \ \ \ \ \ NASA \ \ Eos \ Global change \ \ United States \ Multinational \ \ 1990 \ 36p \ AN9-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1990.64 , P.950, P.951 (3 copies) See also under RI3-05 @\Understanding our changing Earth \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Global change \Environmental change \ \United States \International \ \ \Various \AN9-05 \Folder of brochures \#G 1996.49 Includes DARA/ASI/NASA Space Radar Laboratory or SIR-C/X-SARbrochure; NASA's Mission to Planet Earth Earth Observing Mission booklet.mvk 5.4.96 @\ The RAE table of earth satellites \ \ \ \ \RAE, Farnborough \ \Satellites \Launch data \ \International \ \ \ HOLD 1957-1982; 1983-1985, 1st Jan. 1986: 1957-1989 ; 1990-1991 pub 1992 \Various (1957-82 753p) (1957-89 1056p) \AN12-05 \Monograph \ #G P.1090 (1957-82) ISBN 0 333 353749, written by King-Hele.D, Pilkington.J,Walker.D; P.941 (1983-85); 1990-91 1992.194 , written by Winterbottom.A,Perry.G. 1957-89 1992.195, St160 ISBN 0 951654209, written by King-Hele.D,Walker.D; Winterbottom.A. mk 24.10.92 @\Spacecraft Tables 1957-1990 \ \Heyman.J \ \ \ \ \Satellites \Launch data \ \International \Australia \ \1991 \231p \AN12-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.316 ISBN 0 912183 07 1 Published by Univelt, San Diego, $US66.Long term loan from HQ Library. Contains limited launch data (date, re-entrydate) on satellite launches, including classified payloads, lists undertype and launching organisation. mvk 27.1.93 @\ Minutes of Investigators Working Group Meeting \ EOS Investigators Working Group reports \ Greenstone.R \ Wilson.S \ \ NASA \ \ EOS \ Global Change \ Remote sensing instruments \ United States \ International \ \ HOLD 1990, 1991, 1994/1, 1994/10 \ Various \ AN15-12 \ Conference reports \ #C (Eos) 1991.6 Contains Facility and PI Instrument reports from IWG meeting,Langley, 6-8 November 1990. 1992.50 has Minutes of IWG Meeting in Universityof Washington, Seattle, 28-30 August 1991; 8th Meeting, San Antonio TexasJanuary 11-13, 1994 - 1994.68 , including report on "policy-relevantresearch" by Eric Barron of Penn State University. 9th Meeting HuntValley, Maryland, October 19-21 1994. 1995.53, inc. paper by J Townshendon Global 1 km AVHRR Project and Land Pathfinder, and by P. Cornillon onAVHRR Ocean Pathfinder. JK 2/4/91, 12.3.92., mvk 8.6.94, 13.5.95. @\ NOAA's satellite programs for the 1990's and beyond \ \ Menzel.P \ \ \NOAA \ \ Planning \ NOAA \ GOES \ United States \ Space \ \ 1990, October \ \ AN15-12 \ Copy of transparencies \ #G 1990.103 from paper at Fifth Australasian Remote Sensing Conference,Perth, October 1990. 1990.103 @\ Earth Observations and the Polar Platform \ NOAA Technical Report NESDIS \ McElroy.J \ Schneider.S \ \ NESDIS \ NOAA \ Platforms \ Planning \ Meteorology \ United States \ International \ \ 1985 Jan \ 16p \ AN15-12 \ Monograph \ #G P.138, NOAA Technical Report NESDIS 18, report/specification of broaddata and sensor requirements for operational monitoring of oceans, atmosphere,land and space environment from perspective of NOAA. jk 19.8.9 WT03-B26-155IA059-000318-B041-309http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcata5.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114182542 text/html 36086HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:23:43 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:36:53 GMTContent-length: 35911 Catalogue Library catalogue A: SPACE, ASTRONAUTICS (continued) (other than communications (C), remote sensing (R), & astronomical aspects(X) [see also Aeronautics, (F)]. Also used for Space in General, or combinationsof above. AC Space Stations, Colonies in Space, Space Platforms in general [SEE (RS)for Polar Platforms] AD Defence aspects ("Star Wars", SDIO, Weapons in Space) AE Space engineering & technology, Astronautical Engineering, SpaceResearch facilities as test labs., specifications for individual items.SEE also Engineering (E) & Aircraft Engineering (FE), Space Industry(AI) AG Microgravity, also Space laboratories [in Space]; microgravity technology;SEE also Space Commercial use AH Space Instrumentation & Equipment; Payloads; Payload Transport Systems& Carriers; Space Instrumentation in general: SEE (CH) for CommunicationsInstruments, (RI) for Remote Sensing, Environmental Research Instruments,(XH) for Astronomical Instruments AI Space Industry, Astronautical, Space Industry R&D etc. [SEE (FE)for Aircraft, Aerospace Industry; (AE) for Space Engineering & Technology;(IN) Industrial R&D in general.] AJ "Junk" in Space; Orbital Debris AK Launch Vehicles, Space Transport Systems, science & technology oflaunch systems, human-operated launches in space; Launch & SatelliteTrajectories [SEE (AR) for Rockets and Rocketry] AL Launch Sites & Facilities (Cape York, etc.); launch schedules AM Manned Spacecraft & Spaceflight. [SEE ALSO Space planes (FS) Unmanned SEE Satellites: (AN);(CS);(RS); Space probes, astronomical satellites (XF) general) special missions (XI, XL, XP, XS.) AN Satellites & Unmanned spacecraft and satellites in general, and multipurpose satellites. [SEE ALSO (CS), (RS) and (XF)] AP Space Science, Space Programs, Space Exploration in General, Space planning activities in general; [SEE also Remote sensing programmes (RZ); (PS), generalscience] [SEE also Astronomy (X) esp. (XA) (XI)(XI),(XL),(XP),(XS), ( XZ)] AR Rocketry & Rockets, esp. sub-orbital or principles of. SEE also AKspecifically for Launch Vehicles AS Space Resources, commercial use, Mining, Manufacture, Industralization AX Films, videos on space. [Exclude Astronomy, see (XX)] AZ General overviews of space, Principles & Practice (General &Collective) @\Report of the fact-finding mission, CSIRO Space Science & TechnologyStudy Group: Vol.3 [Sept. 1984], of [Reports] \ \McCracken.K \Astley-Boden.C \ \CSIRO \ \Overseas visits \Space science \Economics \International \ \ \1984 \n/a \AP3-80 \Part of set \#G P.1065 Copy 1 , P.1119 Copy 2 ISBN 0 643 03757 8 Mission 17 June-13August 1984. Index entry. Full set also catalogued. @\CSIRO Space Science and Technology Study Group, [Reports] Vol.1:Reportand Statement of executive decisions Dec. 1984; Vol.2: Reports of the WorkingGroups Oct. 1984; Vol.3: Report of the Fact-Finding mission Sept. 1984 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Space science \Space technology \Economics \Australia \ \ \1984 \Various \AP3-80 \Monograph in 3 vols. \Volume 1 Copy 1 P.1115 ; Copy 2 P.1116; Vol 2 Copy 1 P.1117, Copy 2 P.1118.Vol 3 by McCracken & Astley-Boden,also indexed separately. @\Australian space research 19- , report to the...Meeting of COSPAR \ \ \ \ \AAS \Australian National Commitee for Space Research \Space science \Space technology \ \Australia \ \ \HOLD (22nd )1978; (23rd)1979; 1990 (1990.13, .14) \Various \AP3-80 \Monograph as serial \1978 report (pub 1979) is P.1113; 1979 report (pub 1980) is P.1114. Regularlypub. in same format. 1990 report Copy 1 is 1990.13; Copy 2 is 1990.14; thispublished by Academy of Science for the Australian National Committee forSolar Terrestrial and Space Physics. @\Ready for launch, a discussion paper on space science in Australia \ \Cole.K \ \ \AAS \ASO \Space science \Economic impact \Future planning \Australia \ \ \1989 \92p. \AP3-80 \Monograph \Paper commissioned by the ASO & produced by a specialist committeeof the AAS, chaired by K.Cole. #G P.29, Copy 2 P.107 ISBN 0 85847 152 3. @\Conference Proceedings, Space Science and Remote Sensing. \ \Cole.K \Green.R \ \AAS \ASO \Space science \Economic impact \Future planning \Australia \ \ \1989 \227p \AP3-80 \Monograph \Important but ultimately fruitless conference, sponsored by ASO, chairedby K.Cole for the AAS, supposed to guide ASB in Space science support. LaTrobe University, 19-20 December 1988. #G P.515 Copy 1, Copy 2 is P.516ISBN 0 85847 151 5. @\ Canadian Space Program background paper for Miscellaneous Estimates Committee,by Minister of State for Science and Technology, May 1985 \ \Siddon.T \ \ \Canada.Science & Technology \ \Space programs \Economics \ \Canada \ \ \1985 \8p. \AP4-11 \(paper) \#G P.1120 @\ Planning and control of NASA programs and resources, prepared by NASAOffice of Management, July 1983 \ NASA Technical Memorandum \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space programs \NASA \Management \United States \ \ \1983 \36p. \AP4-12 \Monograph \#G P.1121 No. 85840. @\Economic potential of European space program initiatives in the 1980's:the need for large scale incentives \ \Heiss.K \ \ \ECON \ \Space programs \Economics \ \Europe \ \ \1980 \11p. \AP4-30 \(paper) \ #G P.1122 From Proceedings of International Colloquium on Economic Effectsof Space and Other Advanced Technologies (1980, 2830 : Strasbourg) @\NASA Commercial Programs : a progress report, 1988 \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space industry \ \ \United States \ \ \1988 \24p \AP5-12 \Monograph \#G P.912 26.6.92 @\Preparing for the future: the ESA technological research and developmentprogramme 1986-1988 \ESA SP-1079 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space programs \Industrial research & development \Future planning \Europe \ \ \1985 \147p. \AP5-30 \Monograph \ #G P.1123 Cost $AUS9. CSIRO HQ Library catalogued at 629.4094 Eu, COSSA'scoy, numbered 87-136. Corrected jk 9.4.92 @\Industrial Prospectus \ \McCracken.K \ \ \COSSA \ \Space Programs \Space Technology \Space Industry \Australia \ \ \1985 \37 pages \AP5-80 \Monograph \ @\Industry Survey \ \ \ \ \COSSA \ \Space Industry \Industrial questionnaires \ \Australia \ \ \No Date \18 pages \AP5-80 \Monograph \ @\Role of COSSA in the Science - Technology - Marketing Cycle \ \Astley-Boden.C \ \ \COSSA \Australasian Remote Sensing Conference \Space Science \Space Technology \Marketing \Australia \ \ \September 1987 \18 pages \AP5-80 \Monograph \Conference Paper, 4th Conference @\ TITLE: Space activities of the United Nations and International Organizations; a review of the activities and resources of the United Nations, of itsspecialised agencies and of other competent international bodies relatingto the peaceful uses of outer space. \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 U.N. \ CORP.AUTHR.2 COPUOS \ KEYWORD.1 International cooperation \ KEYWORD.2 Space Law \ KEYWORD.3 Developing countries \ REGION.1 International \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1986 \ PAGINATION 271p \ CLASSC'N AP7-05 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.48 UN Document A/AC.105/358, ISBN 92 1 100287 7. Coversspace activities of COPUOS, WMO, ESCAP, UNDRO, UNEP, FAO, World Bank, IMO,WIPO, IAEC, ESA, ICSU et al. @\Science policy in Belgium, its objectives and its implements \ \ \ \ \Belgium. Science Policy Office \ \Government policy \Scientific research \Industrial research & development \Belgium \ \ \1984 \59p. \AP7-34 \Monograph \ #G P.1031 18.8.92 @\Space research- plan for man's benefit \ \Pardoe.G \ \ \Design engineering \ \Space science \Social factors \ \International \ \ \1974 \5p. \AP11-05 \(paper) \ #G P.1124 Photocopy of pp.161-171 of Design Engineering (Lndon) Sept.1974 @\National space program from the Fifties into the Eighties \National Security Affairs Monograph Series \Schichtle.C \ \ \National Defense University \ \Space programs \ \ \United States \ \ \1983 \122p. \AP12-12 \Monograph \#G P.1105 No.83-6 @\ Beyond the atmosphere, early years of space science \ NASA History series \ Newell.H \ \ \NASA \ \Space science \History \NASA \United States \International \ \1980 \497p. \AP12-12 \Monograph \ #G P.997 NASA SP-4211. Excellent overview of NASA's early history andspace science to about 1970. @\NASA: a history of the US civil space program \ \Launius.Roger \ \ \ \ \Space programs \History \ \United States \ \ \1994 \276p \AP12-12 \Monograph \#G 1996.8 ISBN 0 89464 878 0 Kreiger Publishing. Launius is Chief Historianof NASA. Staightforward linear narrative of main events in NASA's history.With index. mvk 15.2.96 @\ Orders of magnitude, a history of NACA and NASA, 1915-1980. 2nd ed. \NASA SP-4403 \Anderson.F \ \ \ NASA \ \NASA \Space programs \ \United States \ \ \1981 \106p. \AP12-12 \Monograph \#G Reclassified from OA12-12 28.4.92 Copy 1 P.241, Copy 2 P.242. jk Formerdbase no. 22 @\ We've proven it can fly \ \ \ \ \TRW \ \High technology industry \TRW \ \United States \ \ \1987 \ \AP12-12 \Monograph \ #G 1993.2 History of TRW Space and Technology Group space probes &programs. mvk 10.2.93 @\ Status of space science and technology in developed countries- the Europeanexperience \ \Elliot.H \ \ \Adv. Space Res. \ \Space science \Space technology \ \Europe \ \ \1983 \8p. \AP12-30 \(paper) \#G P.1125 Photocopy of pp.45-52 of Vol.3, no.7, 1983 @\ Europe two decades in space, 1964 - 1984, recollections by some of theprincipal pioneers \ESA SP-1060 \Longdon.N \Guyenne.D \ \ESA \ \Space science \Space programs \History \Europe \ \ \1984 \147p. \AP12-30 \Monograph \#G P.1110 ISSN 0379 6566 Includes historic articles. @\Europe in Space: Edoardo Amaldi and the inception of ESRO \ESA History Study Report HSR 5 \De Maria.Michelangelo \ \ \ESA \ \Space programs \Space research facilities \Space science \Europe \ \ \1993 March \36p \AP12-30 \Monograph \#G 1993.132 Performed by ESA History Project, University of Rome. Teamconsists of Professor De Maria; Dr J Krige, European University Institute;and Professor Russo, University of Palermo. Book describes crucial contributionof Italian physicist and science administrator Edoardo Amaldi to the creationof European Space Research Organisation (particularly its west-Europeanand non-military bias) and its uneasy relationship with the European LauncherDevelopment Organisation (largely formed, in De Maria's view, as a meansof justifying the Blue Streak and French , military-derived launcher programs.Amaldi worried that these political, military and industry imperatives wouldend up setting the scientific research agenda). Published by ESA PublicationsDivision, ESTEC, Noordwijk. mvk 26.9.93 @\ The definition of a scientific policy: ESRO's satellite programme in1969-1973. \ESA History Study Report HSR 6 \Russo.Arturo \ \ \ESA \ \Space programs \Space research facilities \Space science \Europe \ \ \1993 March \55p \AP12-30 \Monograph \#G 1993.133 Performed by ESA History Project, University of Rome. Teamconsists of Professor De Maria; Dr J Krige, European University Institute;and Professor Russo, University of Palermo. Book describes the four yearswhich "..were the most important in the history of European cooperationin space. They marked the end of the illusion that ESRO's sister organizationELDO could ever build an all European heavy satellite launcher, and thetransformation of ESRO itself from an organization solely devoted to scientificresearch to one mainly engaged in the domain of application satellites.Facing the growing political and economic importance of space activities,European governments were involved in long and painful discussions aboutthe possible definition of a coherent space policy for the Old Continent,trying to find a compromise between conflicting national interests. In 1973this compromise was finally agreed on, starting a process which led in 1975to the birth of the European Space Agency (ESA), out of the ashes of ELDOand the wealth of ESRO. " Published by ESA Publications Division, ESTEC,Noordwijk. mvk 26.9.93 @\The launch of ELDO \ESA History Study Report HSR 7 \Krige.John \ \ \ESA \ \Space programs \Space transportation systems \Launch vehicles \Europe \ \ \1993 March \36p \AP12-30 \Monograph \#G 1993.134 Performed by ESA History Project, University of Rome. Teamconsists of Professor De Maria; Dr J Krige, European University Institute;and Professor Russo, University of Palermo. Book describes origins (includingbackground in political, military and industrial development theory) ofthe European Space Vehicle Launcher Development Organization, establishedin 30 April 1962 (signing of ELDO Convention by Italy, Britain, France,Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands and Australia). The Convention came intoforce on 29 February 1964. Emphasises role of Blue Streak project; "ELDO then was a child of political, not technical parentage. In particular,it was a child of the Macmillan government, which saw the rocket [Blue Streak]as at once enabling it to achieve a measure of independence from the UnitedStates and to draw closer to its continental partners, and indeed to thenewly-fledged European Economic Community. There were other arguments ofcourse for continuing with the project - but it was these political concernsthat dominated the thinking of Macmillan and Thorneycroft from the timethe Blue Streak missile was cancelled." Refer also 1993.132, 1993.133for early history of ELDO's sister organization ESRO. Published by ESA PublicationsDivision, ESTEC, Noordwijk. mvk 26.9.93 @\Via satellite [ Telespazio 1961-1981], in Italian \ \ \ \ \Telespazio \ \Space programs \Satellites \ \Italy \ \ \n.d. \160p \AP12-35 \Monograph \ #G P.1107 @\Australian Developments in space: 1984 - 1987 \SpIN \McCracken.K \ \ \COSSA \ \Space Programs \ \ \Australia \ \ \October 1987 \Pages 3-4 \AP12-80 \Journal Article; see P.1106 @\COSSA: 1984-1987 years of progress \ \ \ \ \COSSA \ \Space programs \Space technology \COSSA \Australia \ \ \1987 \27p. \AP12-80 \Serial issue \ #G P.1106 Special issue of Space Industry News,SpIN no.12, Ocober 1987 @\Space Australia: the story of Australia's involvement in Space \ \Dougherty.Kerrie \James.Matthew \ \Power House Museum \ \Space programs \History \Woomera \Australia \ \ \1993 \144p \AP12-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.16 ISBN 1 86317 034 0 . Comprehensive and readable history of Australianspace activities from mid 1940s. Dougherty is Curator of Space Technologyat Sydney's Powerhouse Museum. Well illustrated. mvk 21.2.94 @\ Internationalization: harmony or tension [by Fred Guterl] [from: IEEESpectrum, Sept. 1983, Special Issue: Space 25] \ \Guterl.F \ \ \IEEE Spectrum \ \Space programs \International cooperation \Satellites \International \Space \ \1983 \9p. \AP14-01 \(paper) \#G P.1111 Photocopy of pp.41-49 of IEEE Spectrum, Sept. 1983 @\Space Perspectives 1986 : Report of Visit : June-July 1986 [to Europe& the US, & Space Commerce 86 Conference.] \ \Astley-Boden.C \ \ \COSSA \ \Space Programs \Space Commerce 86 \Overseas visits \United States \Great Britain \Netherlands \August 1986 \129 pages \AP14-05 \Monograph \#G P.1066 . COSSA Publication No. 008A . ISBN 0 643 03850 7.Report of OverseasVisit by CAB. @\Review of NASA international programs [as at Jan.1, 1982] \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space programs \International cooperation \Space science \International \United States \ \1982 \129p. \AP14-12 \Monograph \ #G P.1073 mvk 2.12.92 @\Changing patterns of international co-operation in space \Orbit: a Foundation Series \Johnson-Freese.Joan \ \ \ \ \Space coordination \Government policy \International relations \United States \International \ \1990 \122p \AP14-12 \Monograph \#G ISBN 0 89464 022 4 Forward by David C Webb. Examines factors which impacton co-ordination of space ventures, from an American perspective. Historyof international co-operation, prospects for future. Author was Director,Center for Space Policy and Law, University of Florida. mvk 20.2.96 @\Feasibility of space cooperation among ESCAP member states, prepared forpresentation at the United Nations Regional Seminar on Space Applicationsfocusing on the implementation of the recommendations of UNISPACE 82 [1983,30 May-3 June: Bangkok) \ \Djojodihardjo.H \ \ \LAPAN \ \International cooperation \ESCAP \Space programs \East Asia \Pacific \Space \1983 \28p. \AP14-60 \Monograph \ #G P.1074 mvk 2.12.92 @\Papers from ESCAP Ministerial Conference on Space Applications for Development,19-24 September 1994, Beijing China. \ \ \ \ \ESCAP \ \International cooperation \ESCAP \Space programs \East Asia \Pacific \Space \1994 \ \AP14-60 \Conference papers \ #C (ESCAP) Papers and publications from Ministerial Conference and PreparatoryMeeting of Senior Officials (23-24 and 19-22 September, respectively), heldat China World Hotel Beijing. Attended by Dr John Boyd from ASO and by BEmbleton and J Kingwell for CSIRO. Dr David Jupp (seconded to Instituteof Remote Sensing Applications, Beijing), and Associate Professor John Trinder,also attended the Technical Symposium from Australia (Trinder representingthe ISPRS). Also a Technical Exhibition (Ken Stone of ASO attending). 1994.137.1List of Participants for Officials Meeting; 1994.137.2 List of Participantsfor Ministerial Conference; 1994.137.3 Exhibition Directory; 1994.137.4"Information In Formation", Newsletter of Landcare Research RemoteSensing/GIS Issue 2, April 1994; 1994.137.5 "Geographic InformationSystems and Remote Sensing for sustainable development", UNDP/ESCAP;1994.137.6 The Chinese Academy of Sciences (book, 124p); 1994.137.7 SpaceTechnology and Applications for sustainable development in Asia and thePacific; a compendium, 272p; 1994.137.8 National Remote Sensing Centre ofChina; 1994.137.9 Information for Participants brochure; 1994.137.10 ConferenceBulletins and speech notes for Kingwell and opening speeches by Vice PremierQian Qichen, message from Boutros-Boutros Ghali, Takahashi, Ahmed; 1994.137.11Statement by Delegation of Australia; 1994.137.12 Draft report of PreparatoryMeeting of Senior Officials; 1994.137.13 Inter-regional Project on SpaceCommunications Technology (SPACECOM) ITU Telecommunications DevelopmentBureau; 1994.137.14 Meteorological Satellite Data Receiving and ProcessingSystem (China Meteorological Admininstration); 1994.137.15 The Balloon,a space vehicle (CNES); 1994.137.16 TRSC Newsletter, Volume 11 No. 3 July1994; 1994.137.17 An Introduction to the National Satellite MeteorologicalCenter (China); 1994.137.18 The State Key Laboratory of resources and EnvironmentInformation System (Institute of Geography, Chinese Academy of Sciences);1994.137.19 China Remote Sensing Satellite Ground Station; 1994.137.20 IRSAInstitute of Remote Sensing Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences; 1994.137.21SJ-4 Space Environment Satellite, Center for Space Science and Applied Research,Chinese Academy of Sciences; 1994.137.22 Programme of Symposium . 30.10.94,15.2.95 mvk @\Space Technology and Applications for sustainable development in Asiaand the Pacific: a compendium. \ST/ESCAP/1420 \ \ \ \ESCAP \ \International cooperation \ESCAP \Space programs \East Asia \Pacific \Space \1994 \272p \AP14-60 \Conference papers \ #G Compiled mainly by Virgilio Santos, with some material from J Kingwell,at ESCAP Secretariat, 1993-4. Comprehensive summary of Asia-Pacific spacecapability, except in launchers. Presented at ESCAP Ministerial Conference,Beijing, September 1994. mvk 1.9.95. @\Report of the meetingof the eminent experts on space applications fordevelopment in the Asia Pacific region, 27-30 October, 1993, Bangkok, Thailand \ST/ESCAP/1331 \ \ \ \ESCAP \ \Space programmes \ESCAP \International cooperation \East Asia \Pacific \Oceania \1993 \35p \AP14-60 \Monograph \#G 1996.37 Included ACRES' Carl McMaster. Preparatory to the MinisterialConference on Space Applications for Development, Beijing, September 1994.mvk 5.4.96 @\Visit to Japan by Director , COSSA \ \McCracken.K \ \ \COSSA \ \Space Programs \MOS-1 \International Symposium of Space Technology and Science [ISTS] \Japan \Australia \ \May 1986 \32 pages \AP14-80 \Monograph \#G P.1072 COSSA Publication 006A ISBN 0 643 03848 5 Report of OverseasVisit, and 15th Symposium, ISTS. @\Proceedings of the Pacific ISY Conference, a planning meeting for the International Space Year (1987, 19-21 Aug.: Kona, Hawaii) \ \ \ \ \Pacific ISY Conference \ \International Space Year \Space science \Space programs \Space \International \ \1987 \152p. \AP15-05 \Monograph \ #C ("ISY - Pacific") P.993 ; P.1050 (Copy 2) Includes paperby J. Kingwell & J. Prytz, COSSA. @\Report on the Pacific ISY Conference, a planning meeting for the International Space Year (1987, 19-21 Aug.: Kona, Hawaii) \ \ McCord.T \ \ \Pacific ISY Conference \ \International Space Year \Space science \Space programs \Space \International \ \1987 \91p. \AP15-05 \Monograph \ #C ("ISY - Pacific") P.994. Pub. by University of Hawaii Press.11.8.92 @\Report of the 2nd Pacific ISY Conference, A planning conference for theInternational Space Year. \ \ Meyerson,H \ \ \ Pacific ISY Conference \ \ International Space Year \ Space science \ Space programs \ International \ \ \ 1991 \ 105p. \ AP15-05 \ monograph \ #C 1992.17 This conference was held in Hawaii October 13-15, 1991. Thereport is also meant to serve as an educational document for the generalpublic. @\ Report of the ISY Mission to Planet Earth Conference, A Planning Conferencefor the International Space Year, Durham, New Hampshire, April 29-May 1,1988 \ \Meyerson,H, ed. \ \ \ \ \International Space Year \Space programs \Global Information Systems, GIST \Space \International \ \1988 \38p. \AP15-05 \Monograph \ #C P.1054 mk 16.10.92 @\ Space Agency Forum on the International Space Year (SAFISY) \ \ \ \ \ SAFISY \ \ Space coordination \ Planning \ International relations \ International \ Italy \ Japan \ HOLD 1989, 1990, 1991 \ Various \ AP15-05 \ Monograph \ #C Second Meeting (ESA) Frascati May 1989; Third Meeting (STA/NASDA/ISAS)17-18 May 1990 Kyoto (1991.149); Fourth Meeting Moscow 1991 (1992.74, Ed.by T-D Guyenne, pub. by ESA Dec 1991 as ISBN 92 9092 140 4, ESA SP-1141);Fifth Meeting Washington Aug 1992 @\ International Space Year ; Conference on Earth and Space Science DataSystems, February 10-13, 1992, Pasadena California USA \ \ \ \ \ NASA \ JPL \ Space coordination \ Planning \ Data management \ International \ USA \ \ 1992 \ Various \ AP15-05 \ Conference Proceedings and papers \ #C ("International Space Year - Conference on Earth & Space ScienceInformation Systems") 1992.14 Attended by Jeff Kingwell. Related papersinclude some from NOAA 1 km Data Project meeting, held same venue 14 February.Papers numbered from 1992.14.1 to 1992.14.22 (Kingwell visit report of 11March 1992). 21.2.92 @\ International Space Year ; Conference on Earth and Space Science DataSystems, February 10-13, 1992, Pasadena California USA \ AIP Conference Proceedings No. 283 \ Zygielbaum.Arthur \ \ \ NASA \ JPL \ Space coordination \ Planning \ Data management \ International \ USA \ \ 1993 \ 924p \ AP15-05 \ Conference Proceedings and papers \ #C ("International Space Year - Conference on Earth & Space ScienceInformation Systems", ESSIS) 1994.82 Published by American Instituteof Physics. ISBN 1 56396 094 X . Includes excellent summary of Pathfinderdata sets (A Booth/M Maiden), paper by K Arai on multi-sensor SST. See also1992.14 Attended by Jeff Kingwell. Related papers include some from NOAA1 km Data Project meeting, held same venue 14 February. Papers numberedfrom 1992.14.1 to 1992.14.22 (Kingwell visit report of 11 March 1992). 21.2.92,mvk 27.6.94 @\Perspectives from Space \ \ \ \ \COSPAR \SAFISY \ International Space Year \ Space science \ Space coordination \ International \ Space \ \ 1991 May \ 73p \ AP15-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.49 Report of COSPAR/SAFISY Panel of Experts on Space Science,Third Meeting held at ESA HQ, Paris, 14-15 March 1991. Report gives summaryof 30 proposed ISY Space Science activities in the fields of Astrophysics,Life Sciences, Materials Sciences, Planetary Exploration, Space Physics,Terrestrial Atmospheres, Education & outreach. jk 22/7/91 @\University Education in Space Science and Engineering \ \ \ \ \COSPAR \SAFISY \ International Space Year \ Postgraduate courses \ Education \ International \ Space \ \ 1992 \ 52p \ AP15-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1993.161 Report of COSPAR/SAFISY Panel of Experts on Space Science(chaired by David Abir, Israel) for distribution at World Space Congress,Washington, 28 August - 5 September 1992 . See also 1992.261 , #C COSPAR. mvk 17.10.93 @\Perspectives from Space - Revised Edition \ \ \ \ \COSPAR \SAFISY \ International Space Year \ Space science \ Space coordination \ International \ Space \ \ 1991 August \ 70p \ AP15-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.57 Revised Report of COSPAR/SAFISY Panel of Experts on Space Science,Third Meeting held at ESA HQ, Paris, 14-15 March 1991. Report gives summaryof 30 proposed ISY Space Science activities in the fields of Astrophysics,Life Sciences, Materials Sciences, Planetary Exploration, Space Physics,Terrestrial Atmospheres, Education & outreach. Membership of Panel ofExperts is appended. jk 4/9/91 @\ TITLE: International Space Year 1992. Developing Country Perspectives \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 AID\Agency for International Development \ CORP.AUTHR.2 University of New Mexico \ KEYWORD.1 Remote sensing \ KEYWORD.2 International cooperation \ KEYWORD.3 Developing countries \ REGION.1 International \ REGION.2 United States \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1992 (?) \ PAGINATION 10p \ CLASSC'N AP15-05 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #G 1992.66 jk 27.4.92 @\ TITLE: Asia-Pacific ISY Conference 16-20 November 1992 \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 STA \ CORP.AUTHR.2 ISAS \ KEYWORD.1 Remote sensing \ KEYWORD.2 International cooperation \ KEYWORD.3 International Space Year \ REGION.1 International \ REGION.2 Japan \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1992 \ PAGINATION 258, 408p \ CLASSC'N AP15-05 \ FORMAT Monograph \ OTHER.DATA #C (ISY) Vol 1 1995.54.1, Vol 2 1995.54.2 mvk 13.5.95 @\ The uses of heaven : a survey of space \The Economist, June 15 1991 \Morton.O \ \ \ \ \Space programs \Space missions \Remote sensing \International \United States \ \1991 \Various \AP15-05 \Paper \#G 1992.164 Selection of 8 articles on space flight, space missions, launchvehicles, earth-observation satellites, & management of satellite data.mk 16.7.92 @\ Canadian Space Program plan for 1982-83- 1984-85, December 1981 \MOSST Background Paper \ \ \ \Canada. MOSST \ \Space programs \ \ \Canada \ \ \1981 \14p. \AP15-11 \Monograph \#G P.1070 Background Paper No. 20 @\Canadian space program plan for 1981-82- 1983-84, April 1981 \MOSST Background Paper \ \ \ \Canada. Science & Technology \ \Space programs \ \ \Canada \ \ \1981 \25p. \AP15-11 \Monograph \#G P.1071 MOSST Background Paper No.19 @\ Leadership and America's future in space: a report to the Administrator \ \Ride.S \ \ \NASA \ \Space programs \Future planning \ \United States \ \ \1987 \63p. \AP15-12 \Monograph \#G P.1068 Report to NASA Administrator by (former astronaut) Dr Sally Ride @\ 1985 long-range program plan \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space programs \Future planning \NASA \United States \ \ \1985 \various \AP15-12 \Monograph \#G P.1069 @\Earth Science and Applications Division : the Program and Plans for FY19- 19- \ \ \ \ \NASA \Earth Science and Applications Division \Future planning \Space programs \ \United States \ \ \HOLD 1987-1989, 1988-1990 \Various \AP15-12 \Monograph \#G P.862 , P.887 (1987-89); P.888 (1988-90) 21.6.92 @\ Pathfinder Program Overview Fall 1988 : research and technology to enablefuture space missions \ \ \ \ \ NASA \ Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology \ Space technology \ Future planning \ Planets \ United States \ Space \ \ 1988 (Sept) \ 100 (approx) \ AP15-12 \Monograph \ #G P.66 Information on "Pathfinder" technology initiative -goals, technical content amnd management. Mars Rover and Comet Nucleus SampleReturn programs and similar robotic and later human missions. JK 8/4/91 @\ Annual NASA/Contractors Conference on Quality and Productivity SummaryReport \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space Programs \Space technology \Quality control \United States \ \ \HOLD 1991 \Various \AP15-12 \Conference papers \#C (NASA) 1992.190 ISSN 1049 667X mk 19.10.92 @\TOPS: Toward Other Planetary Systems, a report by the Solar System ExplorationDivision \ \Burke.B \ \ \NASA \ \Planets \Space Science \Space missions \United States \Space \ \1992 \120p \AP15-12 \Monograph \#G 1992.244 . Copy 2 at 1992.262 . Report based upon TOPS Workshop in January1990, in turn following report of NASA's Solar System Exploration Division(approx. 1985-88) and of the Committee on Planetary and Lunar Exploration(COMPLEX) of the Space Science Board, culminating in a second TOPS Workshop(to consider use of the Keck 10m telescope in Hawaii) in 1992. Report concentrateson technical aspects of planetary detection, using astrometry. The purposeof the proposed program is to develop means of detecting planetary systemsaround nearby stars. Long term loan from HQ Library (AS:HQ 523.1 Un , 39009 00288910 9 ) mvk 29.12.92 @\Solar System Exploration 1995-2000: a report by the Solar System ExplorationSubcommittee \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Planets \Space Science \Space missions \United States \Space \ \1994 Sept \35p \AP15-12 \Monograph \#G 1995.97 . mvk 19.8.95 Covers NASA plans for planetary exploration, includingGalileo, Casssini, Mars Observer, Mars Surveyor, Pluto Flyby @\ Outline of a long-term European space plan [by] European Space AgencyCouncil, 21 November 1984 \ESA/C(84)46 rev.1 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space science \Future planning \Space programs \Europe \ \ \1984 \varies \AP15-30 \(paper) \#G P.89 @\With an eye on the future ; ESA general studies programme 1988 \ESA SP-1100 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space programs \Space science \Environmental research \Europe \ \ \1988 \41p \AP15-30 \Monograph \#G P.1067 2.12.92 Record reconstructed jk 9.4.92 WT03-B26-156IA059-000318-B041-353http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatr3.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114182737 text/html 52662HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:25:24 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:25 GMTContent-length: 52487 Catalogue Library catalogue R: REMOTE SENSING. [SEE ALSO (FR) Research aircraft] RA Agricultural/Forestry Applications; Drought; Agricultural land use; [not Land Use in general (RE); not Land use mapping aspect, (RC) nor Soil science(RT)] RC Cartographic (Mapping) Applications; Mapping aspect of Land Use & Vegetation, Surveying applications. [SEE ALSO (RT)] RD Defence/Surveillance, Arms Treaty Verification Applications [SEE ALSO(CN) Distress systems of Search & rescue; AD for Space Weapons] RE Environmental Applications; Land use in general; earth resources, geographical applications (land + people); regional & town planning applications,vegetation index; Fire detection; mixed applications RF Fisheries Applications (salt or freshwater) RH Hydrological Applications; fresh water resources applications apart from fisheries RI Instrumentation & equipment, instrument systems, emphasis on measurement technology [SEE RS for satellites, mission descriptions] RK Airborne research, aircraft carried remote sensing missions [SEE ALSO(FR) research aircraft, emphasis on aircraft] RM Marine/Oceanographic Applications, includes Coastal zones, [BUT SEE (RD) Surveillance, (CN) Distress systems] RR Remote sensing information & image processing, computer programs,facilities including Remote Sensing Groundstations [but SEE CN for navigation, communication ground facilities], Geographic Information Systems [SEE ALSO (RI) instruments, (CC) computers , (CL) Information systems, (CN) navigation, reception etc.] RS Remote sensing satellites (SPOT, Landsat, ERS-1, Polar Platform, MOS-1etc.); Earth observation satellites [multipurpose satellites SEE AN; Astronomical satellites SEE (XF) etc.] RT Terrestrial, Geological Applications; minerals & mining; Magneticsapplications; Glaciology applications; Topographical applications other than mapping;[SEE ALSO (TC- TZ)] ; Land Surveying etc., Topographic mapping SEE (RC) RW Weather (Forecasting) & Meteorological Applications, Atmospheric,Climate, Rainfall applications [if not (RH)] . Prefer (W) Weather if emphasis on discipline rather than remote sensing methods RX Films & videos on remote sensing RZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective); General remotesensing; overviews, scientific methods, calibration and validation where not specificto discipline; training, tenders for RS items. [ SEE ALSO Science & Environment side (TR), (PS)] @\ Ocean Colour Workshop: proceedings of a ESA Workshop (1986, 5-6 Nov.:Villefranche-sur-Mer, France) \ESA SP-1083 \Guyenne.T \ \ \ESA \ \Remote sensing applications \Oceanography \Ocean colour monitoring \Europe \ \ \1986 \118p. \RM3-30 \Monograph \#G P.179 @\ERS-1 Wind and Wave Calibration Workshop, proceedings of an ESA Workshop(1986, 2-6 June: Schliersee, Germany) \ESA SP-262 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Remote sensing instruments \Oceanography \Validation \International \Europe \ \1986 \233p. \RM3-30 \Monograph \#G P.280 @\ Proceedings of the Regional Seminar on the Application of Remote SensingTechniques to Coastal Zone Management and Environmental Monitoring, Dhaka,Bangladesh (Nov. 1986) \ \ \ \ \Bangladesh Space Research and Remote Sensing Organization \ESCAP \Remote sensing applications \Coastal zones \Environmental research \Bangladesh \South East Asia \ \1986 \345p. \RM3-50 \Monograph \UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme (UNDP/RAS 81-034) @\The Technical Proceedings of the Second Pacific Ocean Remote Sensing ConferencePORSEC '94 Melbourne Australia March 1-4 1994 \PORSEC \Le Marshall.John \Jasper.David \ \PORSEC \Bureau of Meteorology \Oceanography \Ocean colour monitoring \Ocean dynamics monitoring \Oceania \International \Australia \1994 \ \RM3-75 \Conference papers \#C (Australasian Remote Sensing Conference) . In 2 volumes. Volume 1 is1994.28, Volume 2 is 1994.29 . This was the Second PORSEC: the first wasin Okinawa, 25 August - 3 September 1992. The Conference was held simultaneouslywith the 7th Australasian Remote Sensing Conference. Papers include descriptionsof GOOS and GCOS. mvk 6.3.94 @\ Marine and coastal remote sensing in the Australian tropics \ \McCracken.K \Kingwell.J \ \COSSA \AMSTAC \Remote sensing applications \Marine science \Tropical ecology \Australia \ \ \1988 \52p. \RM3-80 \Monograph \Includes lidar; radar.#G P.281 COpy 1 P.506 Copy 2 ISBN 0 643 04759 X @\ Remote sensing for oceanographic research into climate and ocean circulationand applications to the Fishing Industry. A Proposal to the Australian ResearchCouncil \ \Harris.G \Nilsson.C \ \CSIRO Marine Laboratories \ \Fishing Industry \Oceanography \Marine science \Australia \ \ \1988 \Varies \RM3-80 \Monograph \ #G P.283 @\Workshop report on Radar probing of the oceans and its applications, 22-23August 1989 Medlow Bath, NSW. \ \Jones.I \ \ \University of Sydney \ \JERS-1 \Seasat \WOCE \Australia \Japan \International \1989 \15p \RM3-80 \Workshop report \#G P.111 ISBN 0 86758 321 5 @\ Australian proposal for altimetry research in ocean circulation: responseto TOPEX-POSEIDON announcement of opportunity. Part A North Australian tropicalseas circulation study, Vol.1 & Vol.2; Part B Dynamics and topographyof the South Pacific , Southern and Indian Oceans, Vol.1 & Vol.2 \ \Burrage.D \Inoue.M \Andrews.J \AIMS \ \Remote sensing applications \Oceanography \TOPEX-POSEIDON \Australia \Pacific Ocean \Indian Ocean \1987 \102p. \RM3-80 \Monograph \Region 4: Southern Ocean. In 1 physical vol. (P.12) Another copy in 2 physicalvols: Part A (North Australian Tropical Seas Circulation Study, P.13 andP.16); and Part B(Dynamics and Topography of the south Pacific, Southernand Indian Oceans, P.14 [Vol 1] and P.15 [Management Plan]). #G @\Remote Sensing of the Coastal Zone, International Symposia, Gold Coast,Queensland, 7-9 Sept., 1988 \ \ \ \ \Queensland. Dept. of Geographic Information \International Symposia \Remote sensing \Coastal zones \Environmental research \Australia \International \ \1988 \various \RM3-80 \(conference papers) \Conference programme and papers, #C @\Remote sensing for planning and managing the Great Barrier Reef of Australia \ \Jupp.K \Mayo.K \Kuchler.D \Photogrammetria \ \Remote sensing applications \Mapping \ \Australia \Queensland \ \1985 \22p. \RM3-88 \Reprint \Reprint of pp.21-42 of Photogrammetria, 40(1985). @\The application and potential of remote sensing in the Great Barrier ReefRegion \ \ Jupp.D \ \ \ GBRMPA \ \ Remote sensing applications \ Oceanography \ Great Barrier Reef \ Queensland \ Australia \ \ 1986 \ 56p. \ RM3-88 \ Monograph \#G P.282 ISBN 0 642 52449 1 @\LANDSAT based interpretation of the Cairns section of the Great BarrierReef Marine Park \Natural Resources Series \Jupp.D \Mayo.K \Kuchler.D \CSIRO Division of Water and Land Resources \ \Great Barrier Reef \Remote sensing information processing \Mapping \Queensland \ \ \1985 \51p. \RM3-88 \Monograph \#G P.65 (Copy 1), P.284 (Copy 2). Natural Resources Series No.4. CSIRODiv. of Water & Land Resources. Research used BRIAN methodology. ISBN0 643 03882 5 @\ A Program for International Polar Oceans Research [PIPOR]: a proposalto NASA Office of Space Science and Applicatons \ \Carsey.F \Weeks.W \ \JPL \NASA \Oceanography \SAR \PIPOR \Polar regions \International \ \[1987?] \varies \RM3-90 \(paper) \Not dated; latest reference 1987. @\Microwave remote sensing of sea ice \Geophysical Monograph 68 \Carsey.Frank (Editor) \ \ \ \ \Glaciology \Microwaves \Oceanography \Polar regions \ \ \1992 \462p \RM3-90 \Monograph \#G 1995.66 ISBN 0 87590 033 X ISSN 0065 8448 Hardback on Long Term Loanfrom HQ Library AS:HQ 551.343 Mi 3 9009 00327651 2 $US68. Published by AmericanGeophysical Union. Includes useful Table of periods and locations of satellitedata archives relevant to polar science p451) . mvk 5.6.95 @\ A Programme for International Polar Oceans Research [PIPOR]: PIPOR ScienceWorking Group Report. \ESA SP \Battrick.B \Rolfe.E \ \ESA \ \Oceanography \SAR \PIPOR \Polar regions \International \ \1985 \42p \RM3-90 \Monograph \#G. ESA SP-1074 (final version). P.114 @\ Networking for Sustainability - a Conference on Remote Sensing and GeographicInformation Systems for Coastal Zone Management, Lismore, 24-26 September1991. \ \ \ \ \ \ \ Geographic Information Systems \ Coastal zones \ Environmental research \ Australia \ \ \ 1991 Sept \ \ RM9-80 \ Conference papers \ #C 1991.66 Abstracts and other conference material, including ERIN Program,brochure on Water and Land Care Program, and opening address by Ms JeanetteMcHugh MP, Chair of House of Representatives Committee on Environment. jk15.10.91 @\Remotely sensed data from space: distribution, pricing, and applications \OTA Background Paper \ \ \ \US. Office of Technology Assessment \US. Congress \Remote sensing information processing \Information dissemination \Data policy \United States \International \ \1992 July \21p \RR1-12 \Monograph \#G 1994.132 Assisted by Earth Observation Systems Advisory Panel, chairedby Rodney Nichols, NY Academy of Sciences . Summarise results of 1 day workshopby OTA, 20 May 1992, on data pricing and distribution. mvk 4.9.94 @\The NOAA-NASA Pathfinder Program \ \ \ \ \NOAA \NASA \Remote sensing information processing \Global change \Data management \United States \International \ \1994 Aug \22p \RR1-12 \Monograph \#G 1995.60 Prepared for NOAA/NASA by University Corporation for AtmosphericResearch. mvk 4.6.95 @\ UK ERS Data Centre Phase B Study Team and its relationship to the UKPAF [Processing and Archiving Facilities]; Appendix II [to Reports? partof Ground Segment of ESA Remote Sensing Satellite project, and ERS-DC, (UKNational ERS Data Centre Programme), February 1986 \ NRSC PF-HO-RAE-PM-001 \ \ \ \NRSC \ \Remote sensing information processing \ERS-1 \ \Europe \Great Britain \ \1986 \various \RR1-32 \Monograph \#G P.285 Data Centre facility to be at RAE, Farnborough @\AUSPACE Limited \ \ \ \ \AUSPACE \MATRA \Geographic Information Systems \Remote sensing information processing \Mapping \Australia \France \Canada \1988 (?) \Various \RR1-80 \Folder containing 4 brochures \#G P.1055 Set of 4 brochures: overview of AUSPACE Ltd, details of products& services in image processing and GIS, computer-asssted mapping andEASI/PCI overview (image processing software/company). mk 16.10.92 @\Remote sensing and geographical information systems \ \ \ \ \Swedish Space Corp. \ \Remote sensing information processing \Geographic information systems \ \International \Sweden \ \1986 \10p. \RR2-05 \Monograph \#G P.286 @\ ERS-1 Ground Station Products, Specifications for Users \ ERS-IS EPO-GS-0204, Issue 2/0 \ \ \ \ ESA/European Space Agency \ ESRIN \ Remote sensing information processing \ ERS-1 \ \ International \ Italy \ \ 1990 \ Various \ RR2-05 \ Leaflet \ #G P.161 @\ Launch-ready ERS-1 products: an information note to the AO CI's and PI's. \ ER TN ESA GS 10053 Issue 1/10 \ Guignard.J \ Fea.M \ \ ESA/European Space Agency \ ESRIN \ ERS-1 \ Remote sensing information processing \ Earth resources satellites \International \Europe \ \1990 \57p \RR2-05 \Leaflet \#G P.162 @\ ERS-1 SAR Products Computer Compatible Tapes Format Specifications \ ERS-IS EPO-GS-0506, IS/RE 1/1 \ \ \ \ ESA/European Space Agency \ ESRIN \ Remote sensing information processing \ ERS-1 \ \ International \ Italy \ \ 1990 \ 92p \ RR2-05 \ Leaflet \ #G P.163 @\ ERS-1 D-PAF Global Products Manual \ \ \ \ \ ESA/European Space Agency \ DLR \ Remote sensing information processing \ ERS-1 \ Data management \ International \ Germany \ Europe \ 1993 \ \ RR2-05 \ Folder \ #G 1994.17 Booklet plus 8 pamphlets on ERS-1 products from DLR's GermanProcessing and Archiving Facility for ERS-1 (D-PAF). mvk 21.2.94 @\ ERS-1 User Handbook \ ESA SP-1148 \ Battrick.B \ \ \ ESA/European Space Agency \ \ Remote sensing information processing \ ERS-1 \ Data management \ International \ \ Europe \ 1993 September \ 128p \ RR2-05 \ Folder \ #G 1994.18 ISSN 0379 6566 ISBN 92 9092 029 7 Description of data productsfrom ERS-1 and how to order and use them. mvk 21.2.94 @\Meridian Image Analysis system, image analysis functional specification,July 1985 \ \ \ \ \MacDonald Dettwiler \ \Imagers & imaging \Remote sensing information processing \Meridian \Canada \ \ \1985 \various \RR2-11 \Monograph \Restriction on use, copying, noted inside front cover. #G P.288. Also acopy with brochure "MERIDIAN integrated image analysis and mappingsystem", P.289. @\ MERIDIAN integrated image analysis and mapping system \ \ \ \ \MacDonald Dettwiler \ \Mapping \Remote sensing information processing \Meridian \Canada \ \ \n.d. \3p. \RR2-11 \Folder \#G P.290 Brochure current 1985. @\ PC image workstation, product description, October 1985 \ \ \ \ \MacDonald Dettwiler \ \Computer hardware \Remote sensing information processing \Meridian \Canada \ \ \1985 \various \RR2-11 \Monograph \#G P.291 Workstation for Meridian image analysis system @\Geocomp, a NOAA AVHRR data geocoding and compositing system \ \Robertson.Brian \Erickson.Arvon \Friedel.Jim \CCRS \MacDonald Dettwiler \Remote sensing information processing \Radiometers \AVHRR \Canada \International \ \1992 (?) \79 \RR2-11 \Photocopy \#G 1994.31 Probably a journal article. Possibly from AVHRR 1 Km Meetingin Maspalomas, April 1992. Describes Geocomp geometric correction and navigationsystem. mvk 6.3.94 @\ Interactive Digital Image Manipulation System (IDIMS) \ \ Carson-Jeske.C \ Tanaka.S \ Putnam.R \ Terra-Mar Resource Information Services \ \ Remote sensing information processing \ Software \ \ United States US \ International \ \ 1990 \ 14p \ RR2-12 \ Folder of information \ #G 1991.121 System description of preliminary version of IDIMS. Publishedby Terra-Mar Resource Information Services, Inc. @\Image masking using polygon fills and morphological transformations \ \Simpson.James \ \ \ \ \Remote sensing information processing \AVHRR \Data management \United States \International \ \1992 \22p \RR2-12 \Preprint \#G 1994.32 (Copy 1), 1994.33 (Copy 2), from Remote Sensing of the Environment,40, 161-183, 1992. Relates to AVHRR, CZCS, GOES and Landsat preprocessing.Simpson is from Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla California.mvk 6.3.94 @\Data Format Standards for civilian remote sensing satellites \OTA Background Paper \ \ \ \US. Office of Technology Assessment \US. Congress \Remote sensing information processing \Information dissemination \Data products \United States \International \ \1992 (?) \13p \RR2-12 \Monograph \#G 1994.133 Assisted by Earth Observation Systems Advisory Panel, chairedby Rodney Nichols, NY Academy of Sciences. Summarise results of 1 day workshopby OTA, 2 October 1992, on formats, media and standards for civilian remotelysensed data. mvk 4.9.94 @\EosDIS Information Management System Users Manual \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Guides \EosDIS \Information networks \United States \International \ \1994 July \134p \RR2-12 \Monograph \#G 1995.9 Reference manual for EoSDIS Version 0 Information ManagementSystem (IMS) and guide to use of its Graphical User Interface (GUI). Preparedby Hughes STX Corporation for NASA. mvk 2.1.95 @\ Remote sensing ground station LANDSAT-5-SPOT \ \ \ \ \SEP \ \Ground communication stations \Remote sensing information processing \Remote sensing satellites \France \ \ \n.d. \11p. \RR2-34 \Monograph \#G P.292 Product brochure @\ Description of a LANDSAT, SPOT and ERS receiving and processing facility \ \ \ \ \MBB \ \Remote sensing information processing \Ground receiver stations \Remote sensing satellites \Europe \ \ \n.d. \25p. \RR2-38 \Monograph \#G P.293 @\ ERS-1 Ground Segment processing and archiving facility provided by Germany,Sept. 4th 1986 \ESA/RS-AG(86)5 Annex IV \ \ \ \DFVLR \ \Remote sensing information processing \Information systems \ERS-1 \Germany \Europe \ \1986 \49p. \RR2-38 \Monograph \#G P.294 @\ PDR document on MEOSS Ground segment at NRSA, April 1984 [by] NationalRemote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad \ \ \ \ \NRSA \ \Remote sensing information processing \MEOSS \SROSS \Space \India \ \1984 \n/a \RR2-53 \Monograph \#G P.295 . See also 1991.113, P.338, 1991.114 @\ Internation training course on Geographic Information Systems, May 29-June20, 1985, Asia Institute of Technology, Bangkok, Thailand \ \ \ \ \ESCAP \ARRSTC \Remote sensing information processing \Geographic information systems \Training \East Asia \International \ \1985 \42p. \RR2-60 \Monograph \#C P.287 (ESCAP) Organised by the UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme(RAS/81/034) @\NEC Earth Observation System Data Processing Subsystem \ \ \ \ \NEC Corp \ \Remote sensing information processing \Remote sensing satellites \JERS-1 \Japan \ \ \n.d. \n/a \RR2-63 \Monograph \#G P.296 Pre 1991. @\ ERSDAC, in search of mineral wealth of the Mother Earth from Space, EarthResources Satellite Data Center \ \ \ \ \ERSDAC \ \Remote sensing information processing \Information systems \ERSDAC \Japan \ \ \1988 \18p. \RR2-63 \Monograph \#G P.297 @\ Image analysis takes a big leap forward [EPIC image processing softwareby Progeni and N.Z. D.S.I.R.] \ \ \ \ \Progeni \NZ.DSIR \Remote sensing information processing \Computer software \EPIC \New Zealand \ \ \n.d. \15p. \RR2-78 \Monograph \Information booklet. #G P.299 @\The BRIAN handbook, an introduction to Landsat and the BRIAN (BarrierReef Image ANalysis) system for users \Natural Resource Series \Jupp.D \Heggen.S \Mayo.K \CSIRO \ \Remote sensing information processing \Imagers & imaging \BRIAN \Australia \ \ \1985 \43p. \RR2-80 \Monograph \#G P.300 (Copy 1) P.301 (Copy 2) Natural Resources Series No.3. CSIRO Div.of Water & Land Resources @\ microBRIAN, an applications oriented image processing workstation \ \ \ \ \Microprocessor Applications \CSIRO \Computer software \Remote sensing information processing \microBRIAN \Australia \ \ \n.d. \4p. \RR2-80 \(paper) \Brochure by Microprocessor Applications. #G P.298 @\ microBRIAN, An Applications Oriented Image Processing System, Basic User'sGuide \ \ \ \ \Microprocessor Applications Pty Ltd \Australian Key Centre in Land Information Studies \Remote Sensing \Image Processing \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \Varies \RR2-80 \Papers \ @\microBRIAN User manual Version 3. \The microBRIAN resource manuals \ \ \ \MPA \CSIRO \Imagers and imaging \Remote sensing information processing \ \Australia \ \ \1992 \272p. \RR2-80 \Monograph \#G1992.295Document Number MB3-301 September 1992 mvk 11.1.93 @\ Collected Conference Papers describing Remote Sensing Application Projectsusing the microBRIAN Image Processing System. Technical Memorandum 89/3,March 1989 \Technical Memorandum \ \ \ \Division of Water Resources \ \Remote Sensing \Information Processing \Geographic Information Systems \Australia \International \ \1989 \101p. \RR2-80 \Monograph \#G ISBN 0 643 04879 0 Copy 1 P.302 Copy 2 P.303 @\ microBRIAN, An Applications Oriented Image Processing System, First InauguralmicroBRIAN User Group Meeting September 5,6 1988 \ \ \ \ \Microprocessor Applications Pty Ltd \Australian Key Centre in Land Information Studies \Remote Sensing \Image Processing \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \Varies \RR2-80 \Papers \ #G P.304 @\QDS-1000: a modular expandable image processing workstation [in Folderwith other papers and brochures on Quentron Digital Systems products] \ \Knight.D \Ashenden.P \Barter.C \Quentron \CSIRO \Remote sensing information processing \Computer hardware \ \Australia \ \ \nd \9p \RR2-80 \paper \ \ In folder, RR2-80. Workstation using SLIP/DISIMP software @\ Interactive Image Processing software, DISIMP, SLIP, IMAGED, developedat the Division of Computing Research CSIRO for general image processing... \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \Quentron \Remote sensing information processing \Computer software \Imagers & imaging \Australia \ \ \1983 \4p. \RR2-80 \Folder \HELD in Folder RR2-80 with Quentron documents. @\Processing of satellite altimetry data for geodesy and oceanography \ \Rizos.C \Coleman.R \ \University of NSW \ \Oceanography \Remote sensing information processing \Altimetry \Australia \ \ \n.d. \87p. \RR2-80 \(paper) \Latest reference in paper 1985. #G P.305 @\Satellite Data Unit \ \ \ \ \Macquarie University \ \Ground communication stations \Remote sensing information processin \Remote sensing satellite \Australia \NSW \ \1990 \ \RR2-80 \Monograph \#G 1992.286 Booklet including colour pictures, giving overview of NOAA/GMSreceiving and data processing station. mvk 9.1.93 @\Nimbus-7 data product summary \ \Hurley.E \Fleig.A \Barba.P \NASA \ \Remote sensing instruments \Data products \Nimbus \International \United States \ \1984 \13p. \RR3-05 \monograph \Lists & describes tapes & microfilm products from Nimbus data.#G P.306 @\Bibliography of CCRS Publications on Optical Remote Sensing Radiometry \ \ \ \ \CCRS \ \Bibliographies \Remote sensing instruments \Validation \Canada \ \ \1993 June \8p \RR3-11 \Monograph \#G 1993.157 Copy 1, 1993.158 Copy 2. mvk 17.10.93 @\ Indian remote sensing satellite system, IRS, announcement on the availabilityof IRS data, June 1986 \ \ \ \ \ISRO \ \Remote sensing satelites \Remote sensing information processing \IRS \India \International \ \1986 \19p. \RR3-53 \Monograph \#G P.307 @\Remote sensing and GIS for land and marine resources and environment management.Suva, Fiji.,13-17 February, 1995. Proceedings. \ST/ESCAP/1545 \ \Remote sensing information processing \Geographic information systems \Environmental research \Pacific \East Asia/ESCAP region \Fiji \Feb. 1995 \159 p. \RR3-60 \Report of workshop \#G 1996.64 mvk 10.6.96 @\ CSIRO Institute of Physical Sciences Seminar on Digital Image Analysisand Processing, 11-12 November 1985: Program and Abstracts \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Remote sensing information processing \Imagers & imaging \Scientific research \Australia \ \ \1985 \n/a \RR3-80 \Monograph \ #G P.308 @\ Low Cost LIS State of the Art and Future Implications, InternationalSymposia, Gold Coast, Queensland, 12-15 September 1988 \ \ \ \ \Department of Geographic Information \ \Land Information Studies \Remote Sensing \Earth Observation \Australasia \Space \ \1988 \Varies \RR3-80 \Papers in Binder \#C @\ Report on economic aspects of strengthening and expanding national andregional data banks and establishing an International Space InformationService as a co-ordinating Centre \ Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space \ \ \ \ COPUOS \ \ Data sets \ Data collection systems \ \ International \ \ \ 1990 Dec \ 22p \ RR4-05 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.39 A/AC.105/474. Reviews sources, applications, and archivingof remotely sensed data. jk 14/6/91 @\ER Mapper 4.0 \ \ \ \ \Earth Resource Mapping \ \Remote sensing information processing \SAR \Mapping \International \Australia \ \1994 \ \RR5-05 \Folder \#G 1994.175 Contains information on ER Mapper products including ER Radar.mvk 22.11.94 @\Remotely sensed data: technology, management and markets \OTA-ISS-604 \ \ \ \US. Office of Technology Assessment \US. Congress \Remote sensing information processing \Information dissemination \Data policy \United States \International \ \1994 September \194p \RR5-12 \Monograph \#G 1994.201 ISBN 0 16 045180 9 Assisted by Earth Observation Systems AdvisoryPanel, chaired by Rodney Nichols, NY Academy of Sciences . Also based oninput from Project staff and workshop, "The Future of Remotely SensedData". Includes policy; management; EOSDIS; role of private sector;international issues. mvk 26.12.94 @\ Image processing, consultancy [report] for CSIRO Office of Space Scienceand Applications (COSSA), September 1987 \ \Foster.A \ \ \Sirotech Ltd \ \Remote sensing information processing \Imagers & imaging \Industrial research & development \Australia \ \ \1987 \71p \RR5-80 \Monograph \ #G Estimation of markets and technology overview. Copy 1 P.309, Copy 2P.310. Includes bibliography. @\Information Prospectus : satellite data reception and image processingequipment \ \ \ \ \Sirotech Ltd \CSIRO \Remote sensing information systems \Computer hardware \Information systems \Australia \ \ \1987 June \29p \RR5-80 \Monograph \#G P.1171 Seeking licencees for "Signal Processing Experiment"eqipment and software developed by the CSIRO Division of Mineral Physicsand Mineralogy. Not successful. mvk 3.1.93 @\Remote sensing and geographic information systems for the Pacific: reportof the Working Group Meeting on Regional co-operation in Applications forRemote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems Technology for the SouthPacific, Suva, Fiji, 18-22 March 1991. \ UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme (RAS/86/141) \ \ \ \ UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme \ AIDAB \ Remote sensing information processing \ Geographic Information Systems \ International co-ordination \ Pacific Islands \ Fiji \ \ 1991 \ 90p \ RR14-77 \ Monograph \ #C (ESCAP) 1992.4 Jointly organised by ESCAP, University of the SouthPacific, Fiji Lands Survey and AIDAB. @\Earth Observing System Data and Information System Draft 4 \ \ Maiden.M \Blazek.M \ \NASA \ \Global change \Information systems \ \International \United States \ \1991 \69p \RR15-05 \Monograph \#C ("EOS") 1992.182 Report arising from series of Workshops ofthe EOSDIS Science Working Groups. mvk 25.8.92 @\EosDIS Baseline Report \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Global change \Informations systems \ \International \United States \ \1988 \ \RR15-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.202 Contract publication 031 3088500 88 05B by Computer TechnologyAssociates of Maryland for NASA GSFC.mvk 2.12.92 @\Earth Observing System Interdisciplinary Science Investigations, Objectivesand Data Product Requirements. \ \Schier.M \Way.J \ \NASA \Jet Propulsion Laboratory \Global Change \Remote sensing information processing \Data management \International \United States \ \1990, Oct \80p and extensive appendices \RR15-05 \Monograph \#G P.1087 JPLD-7931 mk 16.10.92 @\ Science Data Plan for the EOS Data and Information System Version 0 andBeyond Draft 0.3 \ \ \ \ \ NASA \ \Data management \Remote sensing information processing \Information systems \International \United States \ \1991 Sept \Various \RR15-05 \Monograph \#G P.1088 16.10.92 mk @\ Science Data Plan for the EOS Data and Information System covering Version0 and Beyond Draft Document Version 2.0 \ \Schwaller.Mathew \Andrews.Michael \ \ NASA \GSFC \Data management \Remote sensing information processing \Information systems \International \United States \ \1993 June \Various \RR15-05 \Monograph \#G 1994.15 SDP Version 2.0 Schwaller (CEOS WGD/Universities Space ResearchAssociation/GSFC Code 505); Andrews Hughes STX. Obtained by Kingwell duringDAAC visits September 1993. mvk 21.2.94 @\EOS Data and Information System (EOSDIS) \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing information processing \Geographic information systems \Global change \International \United States \ \1992 \31p \RR15-05 \Brochure \#G 1992.186 mk 19.10.92 @\Earth Observing System: output data products and input requirements. InterimVersion \ \ \ \ \NASA \GSFC \Remote sensing information processing \EosDIS \Information networks \International \United States \ \1994 July \ \RR15-05 \Monograph \#G 1994.164 Detailed tables of products for EosDIS planning. mvk 20.11.94 @\CEOS Ad hoc Working Group on Networks Progress Report \ \ \ \ \STA \NASDA \Data management \Remote sensing information processing \Information systems \International \Japan \ \1994 July \Various \RR15-05 \Monograph \#G 1995.12 Presented at CEOS 8th Plenary, Berlin Sept 1994. Copy also as1994.136 document 13 (#C, CEOS). mvk 15.2.95 @\The US Global Change Data and Information Management Program Plan \ \ \ \ \US. Office of Technology Assessment \National Science Foundation \Data management \Information networks \Global change \International \United States \ \1992 \94p \RR15-12 \Monograph \#G 1994.131 Report by Committee on Earth and Environmental Sciences, prefaceby D Allan Bromley, Director of OTA. Report was prepared for the Committeeby the IWGDMGC, Interagency Working Group on Data Management for GlobalChange, mvk 4.9.94 @\Report on the Fifth Catalog Interoperability Workshop, January 9-11, 1990 \ \Thieman.James \James.Mary \Bailey.Patricia \NASA \NSSDC \Data management \Data systems \Data sets \United States \International \ \1990 Aug \ \RR15-12 \Report \#G 1995.24 Report on fifth of series of meetings (commencing 1987) to defineUS standard for Directory Interchange Format (DIF) and to create a MasterDirectory (MD) of global change data held by US agencies. Related to effortsof Interagency Working Group on Data Management for Global Change (IWGDMGC).Attendees predominantly NASA, NOAA, US universities, and representing bothplanetary and EO communities. However, several Japanese attendees from RESTEC,NASDA. mvk 19.2.95 @\Report on the Sixth Catalog Interoperability Workshop,October 1-3,1990,SilverSpring, Maryland. \ \Thieman, James \Scialdone, John \ \NASA \NSSDC \Data systems \Data management \Data collection systems \United States \ \ \1991 \ \RR15-12 \Report \#G 1995.35 Hold Fifth report also. mvk 23.4.95 @\Pre-feasibility study for the development of an Australian Earth ObservationNetwork \AN-RP-50-6261 \ \ \ \MacDonald Dettwiler \ \Remote sensing information processing \Information networks \ \Australia \Oceania \International \1994 June \ \RR15-80 \Monograph \#G 1994.166 NB Proprietary information contained, not for loan. Reportcommissioned by Australian Space Office, on possible future earth observationdata network. mvk 20.11.94 @\TERSS: the Tasmanian earth resources satellite station \ \Nilsson.C \Finney.A \ \TERSS project\CSIRO Division of Oceanography \Ground communications stations \Earth resources satellites \Remote sensing applications \Tasmania \Australia \ \1987? \21p. \RR15-84 \Monograph \#G P.1172 , Copy 2 P.1173 mvk 3.1.93 @\ TERSS, the Tasmanian earth resources satellite station, the TERSS ProjectJune 1987 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Oceanography \University of Tasmania \Ground communications stations \Earth resources satellites \TERSS project \Tasmania \ \ \1987 \8p. \RR15-84 \Monograph \ @\ A proposal for a Tasmanian Earth Resources Satellite Station (TERSS)in Hobart \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Oceanography \University of Tasmania \Ground communications stations \Earth resources satellites \TERSS project \Tasmania \ \ \1989 \ \RR15-84 \Monograph \ #G P.1174 Marked "Commercial in Condidence" mvk 3.1.93 @\ A preliminary business plan for the commercial development of earth satellitereceiving systems in Australia \ \ \ \ \ Earth Receiving Systems \ Australian Space Office \ TERSS project \ Ground communications stations \ Technology Transfer \ Tasmania \ \ \ 1989 \ various \RR15-84 \Monograph \ #G P.1176 Marked "Commercial in Confidence". m.v.k. 3.1.93 @\ Addendum to: A preliminary business plan for the commercial developmentof earth satellite receiving systems in Australia \ \ \ \ \ Earth Receiving Systems \ Australian Space Office \ TERSS project \ Ground communications stations \ Technology Transfer \ Tasmania \ \ \ 1990 \ 25p. \RR15-84 \Monograph \ #G P.1177 Marked "Commercial in Confidence". m.v.k. 3.1.93. @\ An assessment of the proposal to establish a Tasmanian Earth ResourcesSatellite Station \ \ Tate,A \ Bongiovanni,J \ \ Australian Space Office \ \ TERSS project \ Earth resources satellites \ Ground communications station \ Tasmania \ \ \ 1990 \ 25p. \ RR15-84 \ Monograph \ #G P.1175 Marked " Commercial in Confidence" m.v.k. 3.1.93 @\Report of Attendance at International Forum for Earth Observation UsingSpace Station Elements : Tokyo , November 1987 \ \Astley-Boden.C \ \ \COSSA \ \Remote Sensing \IFEOS \Space Stations \ \ \ \January 1988 \48 pages \RS1-05 \Monograph \Report on Overseas Visit @\ Weather satellites: systems, data, and environmental applications. \ American Meteorological Society Monographs \ Rao.P \ Holmes.S \ Anderson.R \ \ \ Meteorology \ Environmental Research Satellites \ Data management \ International \ \ \ 1990 \ 503p \ RS1-05 \ Monograph \ #G ISBN 0 933876 66 1 . Comprehensive review of NOAA, GMS, INSAT, USSRMeteor and other meteorological satellites; covers data archiving and processing,applications including agriculture, climate, land and ocean science; andgeneral principles of remote sensing. Long term loan from HO Library, AS:HQ551.6354 We.0 jk 15.8.91 @\Characteristics and availability of data from earth-imaging satellites \U.S. Geological Survey Bulletin \Southworth.C \ \ \US. Geological Survey \ \Remote sensing satellites \Data \Environmental research \United States \International \ \1985 \102p. \RS1-05 \Serial \#G P.377. USGS Survey Bulletin No.1631. Missing:(from pocket): Index ofearth reources observation systems. jk 13.5.92 @\Earth Observation Remote Sensing \ \Kramer.H \ \ \DLR \DFD \Remote sensing Instruments \Satellite sensors \Platforms \International \Space \ \1992 June \251p \RS1-05 \Monograph \#G 1992.231 Hardback pub. Springer-Verlag. Alphabetically arranged listof missions and sensors, with Appendices on Acronyms, Principles of RemoteSensing. ISBN 3 540 55579 X mvk 26.12.92 @\Landsat-D Program \ \ \ \ \General Electric \ \Remote sensing satellites \LANDSAT \Remote sensing information processing \International \United States \ \nd \24p \RS1-12 \Monograph \1981? #G P.311 Marked SSD 1281-20. Record re-written 27.12.92 @\The Radarsat System \ \ \ \ \Spar/ Spar Aerospace Ltd., Canada \Radarsat/Project Office, Canada \Remote sensing \Satellites \Radarsat \Canada \ \ \nd \ \RS1-11 \Monograph \#G 1992.79 Contains information on the Organisation, its managment, andmany diagrams on the Radarsat program and its systems. 12.6.92 @\Landsat-D Program \ \ \ \ \ \ \Remote sensing satellites \LANDSAT \Remote sensing information processing \International \United States \ \n.d. \24p. \RS1-12 \Monograph \1981? #G P.311 Marked SSD 1281-20. @\ SPOTIMAGE : the catalogue of SPOT products and services \ \ \ \ \ SPOTIMAGE \ \ SPOT \ Remote sensing satellites \ Data products \ France \ International \ \ 1988 (?) \ 54p \ RS1-34 \Monograph \ #G 1991.31 Overview of SPOT products. jk 29/5/91 note: copy replaced 19.6.92 @\ SPOT: management and decision making tool - some examples developed byFrench and Foreign operators \ \ \ \ \ SPOT Image \ \ SPOT \ Remote sensing satellites \ Remote sensing applications \ France \ International \ \ 1989 \ 43p \ RS1-34 \Monograph \ #G 1991.32: 1992.134 (Copy 2, usually in foyer) 22.6.92 Overview of SPOTproduct applications @\Spot Image \ \ \ \ \SPOT IMAGE \ \Remote sensing applications \Remote sensing satellites \SPOT \France \International \ \1988 (?) \31p \RS1-34 \Monograph \#G 1992.135 22.6.92 Overview @\ SPOT 3 Launch Press Brief kit \ \ \ \ \ SPOT Image \ CNES \ SPOT \ Remote sensing satellites \ Remote sensing applications \ France \ International \ \ 1993 Oct \ \ RS1-34 \ Kit \ #G 1995.5 Information about the launch of SPOT 3, 26 September 1993. mvk1.1.95 @\Current Science : Special Issue, remote Sensing for National development \ \Ramaseshan.S \ \ \ \ \Remote sensing applications \Remote sensing instruments \IRS-1 \India \ \ \1991 Aug \187p \RS1-53 \Journal Special Issue \#G 1992.126 Comprises Nos. 3 & 4 of Vol.61, Current Science. devotedlargely to IRS-1 applications and overviews. 19.6.92 @\Information for Press ; launch of Japanese Earth Resources Satellite -1 by H-1 launch vehicle (H24F) \ NASDA Press Kit \ \ \ \ NASDA \ \ JERS-1 \ Remote sensing satellites \ \ Japan \ International \ \ 1992 (Feb) \ 59p \ RS1-63 \ Monograph \ #G 1992.29 Explanation of mission, spacecraft function, launch sequence,launch personnel, site amenities and facilities, and NASDA plans and satelliteprogram. @\Earth Resources Satellite-1 ERS-1 \ \ \ \ \ NASDA \ \ JERS-1 \ Remote sensing satellites \ \ Japan \ International \ \ 1990 (Mar) \ 30p \ RS1-63 \ Monograph \ #G 1992.303 Explanation of mission, spacecraft function, launch sequence,launch personnel, site amenities and facilities, and NASDA plans and satelliteprogram. mvk 24.1.93. @\ NASDA Press Kit: Launching and tracking/control of Marine ObservationSatellite-1 (MOS-1) via launch vehicle no. 16(F), Nov. 1986 \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \MOS-1 \Satellite control \Launch programs \Japan \ \ \1986 \37p. \RS1-63 \Monograph \NASDA IA - 121 #G P.345 (Copy 1), P.354 (Copy 2) jk 13.5.92. Excellentgeneral guide and summary. @\ TITLE: 2nd International Conference on Japanese Earth Observation ProgramsProceedings of Pre ISY International Symposium \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 NASDA \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 MOS-1 \ KEYWORD.2 Adeos \ KEYWORD.3 J ERS-1 \ REGION.1 Japan \ REGION.2 International \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1991 \ PAGINATION 364p \ CLASSC'N RS1-63 \ FORMAT Conference papers \ OTHER.DATA #C "Japanese Earth Observation Programs" 1992.43Contains reports on environmental data sets, from ESA, NASDA, Canada, CSIRO(Nilsson and Kingwell), Brazil, Thailand. Conference (19 November 1991,at Tsukuba) attended by Carl Nilsson, Division of Oceanography. @\Advanced Earth Observing Satellite ADEOS \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Satellites \ADEOS \ \Japan \ \ \1992 (?) \24p. \RS1-63 \Monograph \ #G 1992.305 Shows Hobart on reception plan. mvk 24.1.93 @\The first ADEOS Symposium/Workshop, 2 Vols. \ \ \ \ \NASDA \EA \Satellites \ADEOS \ \Japan \International \ \1994 (?) \Vol. 1 345p, Vol. 2 699p. \RS1-63 \Conference papers \ #C (Japanese Earth Observation Programs) . 1995.102.1, Vol. 1, and 1995.102.2,Vol. 2 . Conference sponsored by NASDA, Environment Agency, and Ministryfor International Trade and Industry, at December 6-9 1994, Kyoto InternationalConference Hall, attended by CSIRO DAR Fred Prata, COSSA Jeff Kingwell,mvk 19.8.95 @\ Report on the International Forum for Earth Observation using Space StationElements, and a related visit to the U.S.A.- 1986 \DIT Overseas Visit Report \Ellis.P \ \ \NZ.DSIR \IFEOS \Space stations \Overseas visits \Polar platforms \New Zealand \United States \ \1986 \13p. \RS1-78 \Monograph \Report no.V12.Copy 1 P.312 Copy 2 P.313. @\ Remote sensing from the Polar Platform: opportunities and issues forAustralia, paper presented at the 3rd National Space Engineering Symposium(1987, 30 June-2 July) \ \Richards.J \Kingwell.J \O'Sullivan.K \ \ \Polar platforms \Remote sensing \ \Australia \Space \ \1987 \9p. \RS1-80 \(paper) \Data sheets for presentation. @\ NOAA, Nimbus 7 Users' Guide \NOAA Library \Madrid.C \ \ \NASA \ \Remote Sensing \Satellites \Space engineering technology \International \ \ \1978 \4p. \RS2-01 \Monograph \#G P.314 @\Technical Proceedings of the Fourth International TOVS (TIROS OperationalVertical Sounder) Study Conference, Igls , 16-22 March 1988 \ \Menzel.P \ \ \Co-operative Institute for Meteorological Studies \University of Wisconsin \Atmospheric research \Meteorology \NOAA \International \Austria \ \1988 \412p \RS2-05 \Conference papers \#C P.116 @\A report on the Fourth International TOVS (TIROS Operational VerticalSounder) Study Conference, Igls , 16-22 March 1988 \ \Lynch.M \ \ \Co-operative Institute for Meteorological Studies \University of Wisconsin \Atmospheric research \Meteorology \NOAA \International \Austria \ \1988 \86p \RS2-05 \Conference papers \#C P.315 Gives summary of recommendations, Working Group Reports. See alsoP.116 for technical papers. @\Transmittances for the TIROS Operational Vertical Sounder \NOAA Technical Report NESS 85 \Weinreb.M \Fleming.H \McMillin.L \NOAA \ \Meteorology \Atmospheric research \NOAA \International \United States \ \1981 \60p \RS2-05 \Monograph \#G P.868 21.6.92 @\Data extraction and calibration of TIROS-N/NOAA Radiometers \NOAA Technical Memorandum NESS 107 \Lauritson.L \Nelson.G \Porto.F \NOAA \ \Remote sensing information processing \Meteorology \NOAA \International \United States \ \1979 \58p + xiv \RS2-05 \Monograph \#G Photocopy P.869 21.6.92 @\ Report of the International Polar-Orbiting Meteorological Satellite Group(3rd meeting: 1986, 30 Sept.-2 Oct.: Washington, D.C.) \ \ \ \ \IPOMS \ \Remote sensing satellites \Meteorology \Polar orbiting satellites \International \ \ \1986 \14p. \RS2-05 \(paper) \#G P.316 (Copy 1) P.317 (Copy 2). @\ Workshop report on requirements for a satellite mission to measure tropicalrainfall (1985, 18-20 Nov.) \NASA Reference Publication. Final draft. \ \ \ \NASA \Remote sensing applications \Climatology \Rainfall \International \ \ \1986 \83p. \RS2-05 \Monograph \#G TRMM, Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission. @\ Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission \ \ \ \ \NASA \Remote sensing applications \Climatology \Rainfall \International \ \ \1984 \13p. \RS2-05 \Brochure \#G Brochure . 1991.33 jk 29/5/91 @\ Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission \ \ \ \ \NASDA \Remote sensing applications \Climatology \Rainfall \International \ \ \1992 (Oct) \18p. \RS2-05 \Brochure \#G Brochure . 1992.304 mvk 24.1.93 @\ The First TRMM Symposium/Workshop, 7-8 December, Kyoto. \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Remote sensing applications \Remote sensing satellite \Rainfall \International \ \ \1994 \252p. \RS2-05 \Conference papers \#G Workshop at Kyoto International Conference Hall. Attended by Jeff Kingwellfor CSIRO/COSSA. mvk 16.9.95 @\GOES,a primary observing system in the Weather Watch of the 1990's \ \ \ \ \Ford Aerospace \ \Remote sensing satellites \Meteorology \GOES \United States \International \ \n.d. \4p. \RS2-05 \Folder \#G Ca.1985? Diag. of Weather Watch System of the 1990' @\Passive microwave observing from environmental satellites - a status reportbased on NOAA's June 1-4, 1987 Conference \NOAA Technical Report NESDIS 35 \ \ \ \NOAA \US. Department of Commerce \Remote sensing instruments \ \ \International \United States \ \1988 \ 292p \RS2-05 \Monograph \#G 1990.111 Covers 3 main instruments viz Advanced Microwave Sounder (AMSU)for NOAA K-, Special Sensor Microwave/Temperature (SSM/T) for DMSP, andthe SSM/I imager also on DMSP. 12.6.92 @\ Executive summary for RADARSAT phase C/D proposal \ \ \ \ \Spar \ \Satellites \Space programs \RADARSAT \Canada \ \ \1985 \20p. \RS2-11 \Monograph \Photocopy @\ Radarsat, briefing to Australian Space Science Technology Study Group,19 July, 1984 \ \ \ \ \RADARSAT \ \Remote sensing satellites \RADARSAT \ \Canada \Australia \ \1984 \4p. \RS2-11 \Monograph \#G P.318 Contains lyrics to "Waltzing Mat-radar", remote sensinghumour (?) [ R continues next page ] WT03-B26-157IA059-000318-B042-37http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatr5.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114182841 text/html 43550HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:26:53 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:29 GMTContent-length: 43375 Catalogue Library catalogue R: REMOTE SENSING. [SEE ALSO (FR) Research aircraft] RA Agricultural/Forestry Applications; Drought; Agricultural land use; [not Land Use in general (RE); not Land use mapping aspect, (RC) nor Soil science(RT)] RC Cartographic (Mapping) Applications; Mapping aspect of Land Use & Vegetation, Surveying applications. [SEE ALSO (RT)] RD Defence/Surveillance, Arms Treaty Verification Applications [SEE ALSO(CN) Distress systems of Search & rescue; AD for Space Weapons] RE Environmental Applications; Land use in general; earth resources, geographical applications (land + people); regional & town planning applications,vegetation index; Fire detection; mixed applications RF Fisheries Applications (salt or freshwater) RH Hydrological Applications; fresh water resources applications apart from fisheries RI Instrumentation & equipment, instrument systems, emphasis on measurement technology [SEE RS for satellites, mission descriptions] RK Airborne research, aircraft carried remote sensing missions [SEE ALSO(FR) research aircraft, emphasis on aircraft] RM Marine/Oceanographic Applications, includes Coastal zones, [BUT SEE (RD) Surveillance, (CN) Distress systems] RR Remote sensing information & image processing, computer programs,facilities including Remote Sensing Groundstations [but SEE CN for navigation, communication ground facilities], Geographic Information Systems [SEE ALSO (RI) instruments, (CC) computers , (CL) Information systems, (CN) navigation, reception etc.] RS Remote sensing satellites (SPOT, Landsat, ERS-1, Polar Platform, MOS-1etc.); Earth observation satellites [multipurpose satellites SEE AN; Astronomical satellites SEE (XF) etc.] RT Terrestrial, Geological Applications; minerals & mining; Magneticsapplications; Glaciology applications; Topographical applications other than mapping;[SEE ALSO (TC- TZ)] ; Land Surveying etc., Topographic mapping SEE (RC) RW Weather (Forecasting) & Meteorological Applications, Atmospheric,Climate, Rainfall applications [if not (RH)] . Prefer (W) Weather if emphasis on discipline rather than remote sensing methods RX Films & videos on remote sensing RZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective); General remotesensing; overviews, scientific methods, calibration and validation where not specificto discipline; training, tenders for RS items. [ SEE ALSO Science & Environment side (TR), (PS)] @\Report of the Twenty-Second meeting of the Co-ordination Group forMeteorological Satellites (CGMS), Annapolis, Maryland USA 11-15 April 1994 \ \ \ \ \CGMS \ \Meteorology \International co-operation \Data policy \International \ \ \1994, April \ \RS14-05 \Monograph \#G 1994.188 Inc. GMS monitoring of Pinatubo eruption; secular changes toGMS3 and GMS4 reflectance values [GMS Pathfinder relevant] (Tokuno and Itaya,1994) ; satellite support for GOOS. mvk 22.12.94 @\ ENVIROSAT-2000 report, International coordination of and contributionsto environmental satellite programs, June 1985 \ \Uhlir.P \Shaffer.L \ \NOAA \NESDIS \International coordination \Data policy \Remote sensing satellites \United States \International \Space \1985 \48p. \RS14-12 \Monograph \ NB Different to P.408, Envirosat - 2000 report, Plan for Space StationPolar-Orbiting Platform. #G P.421 . Explores international cooperation inNOAA program, also international coordination of Geostationary Meteorologicalsatellites. Glossary, list of major documents on international environmentalsatellite cooperation. jk 15.5.92 @\ Applications of earth resources satellite data to development aid programmes,September 1978 \ESA SP-1010 \d'Hoore.J \ \ \ESA \ \Remote sensing applications \Development assistance \Earth resources satellites \International \Europe \ \1978 \53p. \RS14-30 \Monograph \# G P.417 ESA SP-1010. jk 15.5.92 @\ Earth observations and the polar platform \NOAA Technical Report NESDIS 18 \McElroy.J \Schneider.S \ \ US. Department of Commerce \NOAA \Satellites \ \ \Space \United States \International \1985 Jan \16p \RS15-01 \Monograph \#G 1990.125 12.6.92 @\ The Polar Platform for Earth observation \ \McElroy.J \Schneider.S \ \ US. Department of Commerce \NOAA \Satellites \ \ \Space \United States \International \1985 Mar \13p \RS15-01 \Conference paper \#G Presented at 23rd Goggard Memorial Symposium & 19th European SpaceSymposium, Greenbelt MD March 29 1985. 1994.36 mvk 20.3.94 @\The future of remote sensing from space: civilian satellite systems andapplications \OTA-ISC-558 \ \ \ \US. Office of Technology Assessment \US. Congress \Remote sensing satellites \Information dissemination \Data policy \United States \International \ \1993 July \199p \RS15-05 \Monograph \#G 1994.134 Assisted by Advisory Panel, chaired by Rodney Nichols, NY Academyof Sciences. Incorporates results of 1 day workshop by OTA, 21 April 1992,on future of remote sensing from space; also workshop on Potential Militaryuses of civilian satellites, 8 July 1992. ISBN 0 16 041884 4 mvk 4.9.94 @\ Assessment of Satellite Earth Observation Programs 1991 \ \ \ \ \ National Research Council \ Space Studies Board \ Global change \ Earth sciences \ Remote sensing satellites \ US \ International \ \ 1991 Sept \ 67p \ RS15-12 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.65 Part of series (unnamed) by Space Sciences Board on US NationalResearch Council, examining status of NASA, NOAA and commercial US earthobservation satellites and on the response of US government to precedingdecade of advice from the SSB. See SpIN, Oct. 1991. Accompanying letterfrom P.Uhlir (see P.421 ?). jk 14.10.91. @\Atmospheric and Environmental Research Satellite ATMOS \ \ \ \ \DLR \ \Remote sensning satellite \Space programs \ \Germany \International \Space \1991 Jan \30p \RS15-38 \Photocopied paper \#G 1994.116 Document DLR-ATMOS-MR/91/1-02 . ATMOS later cancelled. mvk27.7.94 @\ Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) Feasibility Study in Japan \ \ \ \ \ TRMM Feasibility Study Group \ \ Rainfall \ Climatology \ Global change \ Japan \ International \ USA \ 1988 March \ 198p \ RS15-63 \ Monograph \ #G 1990.23 @\Earth resources satellites - current Australian activities and futureuser requirements. (A five-year look at developments in satellite remotesensing and user needs with reference to services provided by the AustralianLandsat Station), Vol. 1: Executive report, April 1982 \ \ \ \ \ALCORSS \ \Earth resources satellites \Remote sensing \LANDSAT \Australia \ \ \1982 \54p. \RS15-80 \Monograph \#G P.422 (Copy 1), P.146 (Copy 2) Prepared by the Working Party on a Five-YearFoward Look, for the Australian Liaison Committee on Remote Sensing by Satellite.Was one of inputs leading to upgrade of ALS to receive Landsat TM. jk 20.8.91 @\Minsat Project: preliminary business plan \ \ \ \ \COSSA \Sirotech Ltd \Minerals & Mining \Remote sensing satellites \Space programs \Australia \Space \International \1986 \17p \RS15-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.114 CONFIDENTIAL NOT FOR LOAN OUTSIDE CSIRO WITHOUT SPECIAL CONFIDENTIALITYARRANGEMENTS. Study of commercial pay for view mixed public access satelliteproposal based on CSIRO Mineral Physics imaging spectrometer work. Estimatedcost around $330 million. Based on mining company investment. Did not proceed.Followed by ASAS, Mirrabooka, AMMSAT, and related proposals. Based on detailedtechnical and market studies by R Jeremy and M Aubrey, respectively, around1986. mvk 16.9.95 @\The Australian Mineral Mapping Satellite Project Overview for Managers \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \CSIRO Division of Exploration and Mining \Minerals & Mining \Remote sensing satellites \Space programs \Australia \Space \International \1995 October \29p \RS15-80 \Monograph \#G 1995.130 COMMERCIAL IN CONFIDENCE NOT FOR LOAN OUTSIDE CSIRO WITHOUTSPECIAL CONFIDENTIALITY ARRANGEMENTS. Study of commercial pay for view mixedpublic access satellite proposal based on CSIRO Mineral Physics imagingspectrometer work. Estimated cost around $63 million. Based on mining companyinvestment. Similar to Minsat, ASAS, Mirrabooka. Project renamed (unilaterally)ARIES by Australian Space Office, October 1995. mvk 4.11.95 @\Tectonic map of the linear structures on the territory of China (by usingof the satellite images) \ \ \ \ \Chinese Academy of Geological Sciences \ \Mapping \ \ \1981 \ \RT1-61 \Map \With booklet [in Chinese with English summary] # G P.423 jk 15.5.92 @\ Geological exploration using LANDSAT data \ \ \ \ \CCRS \ \Remote sensing applications \Minerals & mining \LANDSAT \Canada \International \ \1984 \4p. \RT2-11 \Folder \#G P.424 @\ LANDSAT data for operational mineral exploration: the Canadian experience,by Bill Bruce [and] Vernon Singhroy \ \Bruce.W \Singhroy.V \ \ CCRS \ \Remote sensing applications \Minerals & mining \LANDSAT \Canada \ \ \n.d. \n/a \RT2-11 \(paper) \#G P.443 Dated after April 1984 @\ Hydrologic and land sciences applications of NOAA polar-orbiting satellitedata \ \Matson.M \Parmenter-Holt.F \ \NOAA \ \NOAA satellites \Remote sensing applications \Earth sciences \United States \ \ \1985 \20p. \RT2-12 \Monograph \#G P.425 @\Geologic remote-sensing methods, an assessment of status, needs, and researchdirection, report of the Remote-Sensing Methods [Workshop] Questionnaireinterviews and workshop (1987, 25-27 Aug.:Norman, Okla.) \ \Williams.T \Henderson.F \ \University of Oklahoma. CIARS \GEOSAT \Remote sensing applications \Geology & geophysics \Remote sensing instruments \United States \Canada \ \1987 \56p. \RT2-12 \Monograph \Questionnaire, interviews and workshop results of the Geological Remote-SensingMethods Workshop. #G P.426 @\Report of the China/Sri Lanka Pilot Study on the Application of RemoteSensing Technology to Geologic and Coastal Research Nov. 1986 \ \ \ \ \Sri Lanka. Geological Survey Dept. \East China Normal University \Remote sensing applications \Geology & geophysics \Coastal zones \Sri Lanka \ \ \1986 \63p. \RT2-60 \Monograph \#G P.427 UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme (UDP/RAS 81-034) @\ Remote sensing for Geotectonic Mapping and Mineral Exploration. Proceedingsof the Regional Seminar 26 September to 6 October 1990 \ UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme (RAS/86/141) \ \ \ \ UNDP/ESCAP \ \ Remote sensing applications \ Geology \ \ USSR South Asian Region \ International \ \ 1990 \ 190p \ RT2-68 \ Monograph \ #C ("ESCAP") 1991.117. Conference held in Tbilisi, Georgia.Phil Soole (Division of Geomechanics) attended with COSSA/ESCAP support.22.12.91 @\Geodetic measurement of crustal deformation in the Australian region:a submission to the Council of AAS \AAS Quadrennial report series \Stolz.A \ \ \AAS \National Committee for Solid Earth Sciences \Geodetic measurement \Geology & geophysics \Remote sensing applications \Australia \ \ \1985 \47p. \RT2-80 \Monograph \# G P.428 @\Side-looking airborne radar for geology: general principles, interpretationmethods and evaluation at Mt Isa \ \Maffi.C \ \ \BMR \ \Geology & geophysics \Research aircraft \Remote sensing applications \Australia \ \ \1974 \49p \RT2-80 \Monograph \#G 1993.21 BMR Record 1974/150 Includes map & bibliography. mvk 6.3.93 @\U.S.- Australia Joint Scanner Project, Background documents. \ \ \ \ \CSIRO Division of Mineral Physics \ \U.S./ Australia Joint Scanner Project \Remote sensing instruments \Geology and geophysics \Australia \ \ \Dec. 1984. \various \RT2-80 \Bound collection of journal articles \#G 1996.12 mvk 17.3.96. @\Sediment Source for the Martian North Polar Dune Fields, Tectonic Ramificationsof Asteroid Impacts, \ \Leach.J \ \ \CSIRO Division of Geomechanics \ \Earth observation \Remote Sensing \Planetory exploration \Space \ \ \1988 \Varies \RT3-01 \Papers \#G P.432. ISSN 0729 011X ISBN 0 909869 56 1 . Reprint from Ninth AustralianGeological Convention, 1-5 February 1988, Brisbane. @\ A Satellite-Based Investigation of the Significance of Surficial Depositsfor Surface Mining Operations \ \Leach.J \Mallett.C \ \CSIRO Division of Geomechanics \ \Remote sensing \Surface mining \Satellite sensors \Queensland \ \ \1988 \16p. \RT3-05 \Paper \#G P.437 @\Measuring thermal budgets of active volcanoes by satellite remote sensing \ \Glaze.L \Francis.P \Rother.D \ \ \Volcanoes \Remote sensing applications \ \International \ \ \1989 \3p. \RT3-05 \Paper \#G Paper from Nature. Vol.338, 9 March 1989. P.429 @\ Commercial applications and scientific research requirements for thermal-infraredobservations of terrestrial surfaces: a report of the Joint EOSAT/NASA ThermalInfrared Working Group \ \Goward.S \Taranik.J \ \EOSAT \NASA \Thermal infrared observations \Remote sensing applications \LANDSAT \International \United States \ \1986 \145p. \RT3-05 \Monograph \#G Not found 17.5.92 Found 2.12.92 P.1063 . @\Magnetic field explorer/Magnolia, joint NASA/CNES phase A study, Feb.1987 \ \ \ \ \NASA \CNES \Magnetics \Space science \Satellites \International \ \ \1987 \152p. \RT3-05 \Monograph \#G P.430 Copy 1 P.432 Copy 2. Joint NASA/CNES fesibility study for earth-orbitingmagnetic field satellite. @\ Geopotential Research Mission, science engineering and program summary,July 1986 \NASA Technical Memorandum \Keating.T \Taylor.P \Kahn.W \NASA \ \Remote sensing applications \Geomagnetics \GRM \United States \International \ \1986 \208p. \RT3-05 \Monograph \#G P.442 NASA Technical Memorandum No. 86240 @\Remote sensing - a geophysical perspective \ \Watson.K \ \ \Geophysics \ \Remote sensing \Geology & geophysics \ \International \United States \ \1985 \16p. \RT3-12 \(paper) \#G P.444 Reprint of pp.2595-2610, Geophysics, vol. 50, no. 12 Dec. 1985 @\ Joint NASA/GEOSAT Test Case Project, Part 1, executive summary, October1984 \ \Settle.M \ \ \NASA \GEOSAT \Mapping \Minerals & mining \Remote sensing applications \United States \ \ \1984 \30p. \RT3-12 \Monograph \#G P.445 Pub. AAPG Bookstore, Tulsa. ISBN 0 89181 654 2 . Test to evalutegeological utility of remote sensing techniques, esp. for expoloration andmapping. Data from eight sites used to examine uranium, copper, oil andgas. @\ Study of ocean and ice topography from space, a joint NERC-SERC proposal,September 1983 \ \Allan.T \Croom.D \ \NERC \SERC \Remote sensing applications \Oceanography \Glaciology \International \Great Britain \ \1983 \50p. \RT3-32 \Monograph \ #G P.441 @\Proceedings of the Regional Seminar on the Application of Remote SensingTechniques for Geological Mapping and Mineral Prospecting (1986: Moscow:4-9 June) \ \ \ \ \ESCAP \USSR. Ministry of Geology \Minerals & mining \Mapping \International \USSR \South East Asia \1986 \240p.+ booklet of photos. \RT3-60 \Monograph \#C (ESCAP) P.439 UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme (UDP/RAS81-034) @\Proceedings of the Seminar on Remote Sensing for Geological Applications(1984: Beijing:12-19 April) \ \ \ \ \ESCAP \China. Ministry of Geology and Mineral Resources \Remote sensing applications \Geology & geophysics \Minerals & mining \China \South East Asia \ \1984 \593p. \RT3-60 \Monograph \#C (ESCAP) P.446 UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme (UDP/RAS81-034) @\ Airborne spectroradiometry: the application of AIS data to detectingsubtle mineral absorption features, July 1986 \ \Cocks.T \Green.A \ \CSIRO \US/Australia Joint Scanner Project \Remote sensing applications \Geology & geophysics \AIS \Australia \ \ \1986 \11p. \RT3-80 \Monograph \#G P.448 Copy 1 P.449 Copy 2 . @\Use of Landsat radiance parameters to distinguish soil erosion stabilityand deposition in arid Central Australia \ \Pickup.G \Nelson.D \ \Remote Sensing of Environment \ \Remote sensing applications \LANDSAT \Soils \Australia \ \ \1984 \15p. \RT3-80 \(paper) \#G P.447 Reprint of pp.195-209 of Remote Sensing of Enironment v16 (1984) @\Preliminary geological investigation of AIS data at Mary Kathleen, QueenslandAustralia, July 1986 \ \Huntington.J \Green.A \Craig.M \CSIRO \US/Australia Joint Scanner Project \Remote sensing applications \Geology & geophysics \AIS \Queensland \Australia \ \1986 \11p. \RT3-80 \Monograph \ Not found 17.5.92 @\ Geology and Exploration, Volume 2, Publication of the 13th CMMI Congress,Structure of the Bowen Basin, Queensland, Australia; \ \Leach.J \Mallett.C \Hobbs.B \CSIRO Division of Geomechanics \ \Earth observation \Remote Sensing \ \Queensland \Australia \ \1988 \6p. \RT3-86 \Paper \#G P.433 @\ Satellite observations of the major Structural elements of the BowenBasin \ \Leach.J \ \ \CSIRO Division of Geomechanics \ \Earth observation \Remote Sensing \ \Queensland \Australia \ \1988 (?) \2p. \RT3-86 \Paper \#G P.436 @\ Regional geotechnical studies as an aid to surface mine planning - acase study from the Bowen Basin, Queensland, Australia; Satellite Observationsof the Major Structural Elements of the Bowen Basin. 13th CMMI Congress,- Geology \ \Mallett,C \Grimstone.L \Leach.J \CSIRO Division of Geomechanics \ \Remote Sensing \Earth observation \ \Queensland \ \ \1988 \6p \RT3-86 \Papers \#G P.434 @\ The Possible Correlation of Major Geological Structures in the BowenBasin. Bathymetric Contours in the Coral Sea and Regional Seismic Activityin North East Australia. Pacific Rim Congress 87. \ \Leach.J \Rynn.J \Mallett.C \CSIRO Division of Geomechanics \Department of Geology and Mineralogy, Uni.Qld. \Remote Sensing \Earth Observation \Mining \Queensland \Australia \ \1987 \4p. \RT3-86 \Paper \ #G P.425 Pacrim Conference 1987. @\ The Use of Remote Sensing to Monitor Mine Rehabilitation programs onNorth Stradbroke Island; Mining and Environment, A Professional Approach,National Conference, Brisbane, July 1987 \ \Leach.J \ \ \CSIRO Division of Geomechanics \ \Remote Sensing \Mining \Earth Observation \Queensland \ \ \1987 \7p. \RT3-86 \Paper \ #G P.438 @\ Improving the value of Landsat imagery Part B: a Landsat study of theWeipa bauxite province, North Queensland \Restricted Investigation report 1302R \Huntington.J \Gabell.A \Green.A \CSIRO \ \Landsat \Minerals & mining \Remote sensing applications \Queensland \ \ \1982 \27p. \RT3-88 \Monograph \#G P.450 AMIRA Project 77-P85 @\Satellite remote sensing for ice sheet research \NASA Technical Memorandum \Thomas.R \Bindschadler.R \Cameron.R \NASA \ \Glaciology \Remote sensing \Remote sensing satellites \Arctic \Greenland \Antarctica \1985 \32p. \RT3-90 \Monograph \NASA Technical Memorandum 86233. P.113, Copy 1; P.451, Copy 2; #G, formerdbase no. 646 @\Satellite remote sensing of Polar Regions: applications, limitations anddata availability \Polar Research Series \Massom.Robert \ \ \ \ \Polar regions \Antarctic studies \Remote sensing satellites \1991 \307p \RT3-90 \Monograph \#G 1994.25 ISBN 1 85293 179 5 , US ed. 0 87372 607 8 Pub. by Belhaven Pressin association with Scott Polar Research Institute, University of Cambridge.Third in Polar Research Series (Ed. Bernard Stonehouse). Covers polar remotesensing including history, snow and ice sensing, data management: bulk ofbook describes performance of various existing & planned satellites.mvk 4.3.94. @\Polar research from Satellites \ \Thomas. Robert \ \ \Joint Oceanographic Institutions, Inc. \ \Polar regions \Remote sensing satellites \ \Polar regions \Antarctica \ \1990 (?) \91p \RT3-90 \Monograph \#G 1994.211 Review . Undated, but References up to 1990. mvk 28.12.94 @\Surface elevation contours of Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets \ \Zwally.H \Bindschadler.R \ \Journal of Geophysical Research \ \Glaciology \Remote sensing applications \SEASAT \Greenland \Antarctica \Polar Regions \1983 \8p. \RT3-90 \(paper) \Copy of pp.1589-1596 of Journal of Geophysical Reearch Vol.88 no C3, February28, 1983. #G P.452 @\High spectral resolution imaging spectroscopy for earth resources remotesensing: a Mirrabooka science instrument proposal to the Department of IndustryTechnology and Commerce by CSIRO Div. of Mineral Physics, University ofNSW, and Electronics Research Laboratory Salisbury,S.A. \ \Cocks.T \Green.A \ \CSIRO \University of NSW \Remote sensing instruments \Mirrabooka \Spectrometers \Space \Australia \ \1985 \n/a \RT15-80 \Monograph \#G P.144, P.664 Copy 2 Response to announcement of opportunity re. Mirrabookaproject (in competition with astronomical proposal). Collaborative CSIRO(DEG)/UNSW/DSTO proposal. See also extensive records of astronomical Mirrabooka,XF2-80 jk 20.8.91 @\ [Supplement to ] High spectral resolution imaging spectroscopy for earthresources remote sensing: a Mirrabooka science instrument proposal to [DITAC]by CSIRO Div. of Mineral Physics & Mineralogy, University of NSW, andElectronics Research Laboratory, Salisbury,S.A., June 1986 \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Remote sensing \Mirrabooka \Spectrometers \Space \Australia \ \1986 \n/a \RT15-80 \Monograph \# G P.145 Copy 1 P.453 Copy 2. Updates 1985 Proposal. (in competition withastronomical proposal for ASAS). Collaborative CSIRO (DEG)/UNSW/DSTO proposal.See also extensive records of astronomical Mirrabooka, XF2-80 jk 20.8.91 @\ Remote Sensing instrumentation based on metal silicide Schottky barrierdiode IRCCD's - an overview of CSIRO activities \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \CSIRO Division of Exploration Geoscience \Remote sensing \Mirrabooka \Spectrometers \Space \Australia \ \1988 Jan \n/a \RT15-80 \Monograph \# G P.937 Labelled "Attachment 1". No authors given. Refers to1985 Proposal. (in competition with astronomical proposal for ASAS). CollaborativeCSIRO (DEG)/UNSW/DSTO proposal. See also extensive records of astronomicalMirrabooka, XF2-80 jk 8.7.92 @\ Introduction to Meteorological Satellite Center of Japan MeteorologicalAgency \ \ \ \ \Japan Meteorological Agency \Meteorological Satellite Center (Japan) \Meteorology \Remote sensing satellites \Meteorological Satellite Center (Japan) \Japan \ \ \1984 \35p. \RW1-63 \Monograph \#G P.454 Photocopy @\ Selected bibliography of remote sensing in meteorology, May 1986 \Meteorological Note 168 \Kingwell.J \Ward.R \ \Bureau of Meteorology \ \Remote sensing applications \Meteorology \Bibliographies \Australia \International \ \1986 \88p. \RW1-80 \Monograph \#G P.455 @\Some aspects of a proposed tropical rainfall measuring mission (TRMM) \ \Simpson.J \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing satellites \Research aircraft \Rainfall \International \ \ \[1987?] \18p. \RW2-05 \(paper) \#G P.456 Paper from International Workshop on the validation of satellite-derivedprecipitation measurements for the Global Precipitation Climatology Projectof the World Climate Research Programme. TRMM (Tropical rainfall measuringmission) @\ Report of the Science Steering Group for a Tropical Rain Measuring Mission.Final Draft \ \Simpson.J (Editor) \ \ \NASA \ \Research Aircraft \Forecasting \Climate \International \ \ \April 1988 \133p. \RW2-05 \Monograph \# G P.457 Copy 1 P.458 Copy 2. TRMM/Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission @\Workshop report on requirements for a satellite mission to measure tropicalrainfall \NASA Reference Publication XXXX \Theon.J \ \ \NASA \ \Meteorology \TRMM \ \International \United States \ \1986 \83p \RW2-05 \Monograph \#G P.459 @\Windsat system \ \Huffaker.R \ \ \ \ \Remote sensing applications \Meteorology \WINDSAT \United States \International \ \n.d. \3p. \RW2-12 \(paper) \#G P.460 Photocopy of pp.107-109 of unidentified document. Author at NOAA/ERL/WavePropagation Lab., Boulder, Colo. @\ Statistical and synoptic evaluations of TIROS-N and NOAA-6 retrievals \ NOAA Technical Reports \ Brodrick.H \ Watkins.C \ Gruber.A \ NOAA \ NESDIS \ Meteorology \ Climatology \ NOAA satellites \ United States \ \ \ 1981 \ 48p \ RW2-12 \ Monograph \ #G 1991.36 Technical Report NESS 86. jk 30/5/91 @\ Ericsson weather information systems \ \ \ \ \Ericsson \ \Meteorology \Information systems \Remote sensing information processing \Sweden \International \ \n.d. \11p. \RW2-39 \Monograph \#G P.461 @\CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research/ NASA WINDSAT study \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ \Atmospheric research \Research aircraft \WINDSAT \Australia \ \ \n.d. \4p. \RW2-80 \(paper) \#G P.462 Outline of project @\The future of spaceborne altimetry: oceans and climate change - a longterm strategy \ \Koblinsky.C \Gaspar.P \Lagerloef.G \ \ \Altimetry \Oceanography \Climatology \International| \ \ \1992 Mar \75p \RW3-05 \Monograph \#G 1993.139 Prepared by Future Altimetry Working Group of the Joint OceanographicInstitutions Incorporated, Washington DC. Includes contribution by CSIRO'sJohn Church. Refers to Topex-Poseidon, DORIS, Laser Tracking, PRARE, GPS.mvk 27.9.93 @\The 1995 Meteorological Satellite Data Users' Conference \Proceedings EUM P17 \ \ \ \NRSC \EUMETSAT \Meteorology \Remote sensing applications \ \International \Europe \ \1995 Sept \612p \RW3-05 \Conference proceedings \#G 1996.44 Conference in Winchester UK 4-8 September 1995 ISBN 92 9110017 X Attended by COSSA's B J J Embleton mvk 8.4.96 @\ Satellites in meteorology, oceanography and hydrology \WMO-no.585 \ \ \ \WMO \ \Satellites \Meteorology \Oceanography \International \ \ \1982 \56p. \RW3-05 \Monograph \#G P.381 . WMO-No. 585. jk 13.5.92 @\ International Satellite Land-Surface Climatology Project (ISLSCP) \ISLSCP- Report no. 10 \Becker.F \Bolle.H-J \Rowntree.P \United Nations Environmental Programme \ \Landsat satellites \Atmospheric research \ \International \ \ \1987 \100p. \RW3-05 \Monograph \#G P.464 Co-sponsored ICSU, IAMAP, WMO. On cover: COSPAR,IAMAP. Containslist of acronyms. @\Network for the detection of statospheric change: report of the Workshop(1986, 5-7 Mar.: Colorado) \ \ \ \ \NASA \NOAA \Atmospheric research \Remote sensing applications \Stratosphere \International \United States \ \1986 \[unpaged] \RW3-05 \Monograph \#G P.463 @\ [EMEX; AMEX; STEP; 1987 Experiment: briefing papers, with COSSA PressRelease] \ \ \ \ \COSSA \Bureau of Meteorology \AMEX \EMEX \STEP \Australia \ \ \1987 \unpaged \RW3-80 \(papers) \Manila folder of papers. #G P.465 @\ Scientific objectives of EMEX [discussion leader: Houze] [and other paperson EMEX; Operational document for the Jan-Feb 1987 AMEX-EMEX-STEP FieldExercise (Northern Australia) by D. Jasper; and the BMRC Australian MonsoonExperiment] \ \Houze.J \Jasper.D \ \Bureau of Meteorology \ \Atmospheric research \EMEX \AMEX \Australia \ \ \1986 \various \RW3-80 \(papers) \Folder of papers. #G P.466 @\ Seminaire de prospective scientifique sur le Projet BEST (Bilan energetiquedu systeme tropical) [Seminar (1986, 27-28 Feb.: Palaiseau, France)] resumedes communications [seminar report] \ \ \ \ \CRPE \SA \BEST \Climatology \Remote sensing applications \International \France \ \1986 \227p. \RW15-34 \Monograph. \In French. BEST = Budget energy syste'me Tropical, project to measure theenergy budget(temperature, wind, humidity) in the tropics. Ref.p.123 ofAstley-Boden: "Space perspectives 1986". #G P.467 . See also P.64. @\ BEST: Tropical System Energy Budget \ \ Fellows.J \ \ \ CNES \ \ Global change \ WRCP \ Climatology \ France \ International \ \ 1988 October \ 58p \ RW15-34 \ Monograph \ #G, P.64 @\HIRIS A clear and precise look at our world. \ \ \ \ \TRW \ \HIRIS \Remote sensing instruments \ \United States \ \ \1991 (?) \ \RX1-12 \Video \#G 1991.92 PAL Video . Case no. A2217217 T15. @\ Volcanic Ash Radiometer \ \ \ \ \ CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research \ \ Remote Sensing Applications \ Disasters \ \ Australia \ Japan \ \ 1991 \ \ RX3-80 \ Video \ #G 1991.48 11 min PAL video of AVADS inc. testing on Piper Navaho aircraft(Aerotechnology Ltd) in Tasmania, Dec. 1990, and at Sakurajima VolcanologicalObservatory March 1991. jk 11/7/91 @\A Thousand and One Mirrors Watching the Earth \ \ \ \ \EURISY \ \Remote sensing satellites \Global Change \ \Europe \International \ \1992 \ \RX9-30 \Video \#G 1993.52 18 min. VHS PAL Format. Produced to celebrate InternationalSpace Year. Six chapters ; climate, natural resources, all-weather operation,natural hazards, pollution, and co-ordination. mvk 16.6.93 @\Keyguide to information sources in remote sensing \ SERIES.TITLE \ AUTHOR.1 Hyatt.E \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Directories \ KEYWORD.2 Space programs \ KEYWORD.3 Information dissemination \ REGION.1 International \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1988 \ PAGINATION 274p \ CLASSC'N RZ1-05 \FORMAT Monograph \OTHER.DATA #G 1992.49 ISBN 0 7201 1854 9 Long term loan from HO Library,AS:HQ 621.367807 Hy, Jan 1991. $100.95, London, Mansell. @\ Remote sensing glossary \ \Kingwell.J \Griersmith.D \ \Bureau of Meteorology \Australia. Dept. of Science \Remote sensing \Meteorology \Glossaries \Australia \International \ \April 1986 \64p. \RZ1-05 \Monograph \#G P.468 Copy 1 P.469 Copy 2 1st ed. Replaced by Griersmith & Kingwell'sPlanet under scrutiny @\Planet under scrutiny: an Australian remote sensing glossary \ \Griersmith.D \Kingwell.J \ \Bureau of Meteorology \ \Remote sensing \Meteorology \Glosssaries \International \Australia \ \1988 \85p. \RZ1-05 \Monograph \#G P.470 Copy 1 P.471 Copy 2 ISBN 0 644 069481 Replaces Kingwell &Griersmith's Remote sensing glssary. @\Remote Sensing from Space Status Report [of Panel of Experts, to] Summitof Industrialized Nations, Working Group on Technology Growth and Employment.Brussels, April 4-5, 1984 [and other papers] \ \ \ \ \Panel of Experts on Remote Sensing from Space \Summit of Industrialized Nations \Remote sensing \International cooperation \Climatology \International \ \ \1984 \various \RZ1-05 \(paper) \#G P.476 Predecessor of CEOS. Includes paper: Remote sensing and climatechange detection; Report of meeting...on polar-orbiting meteorological satellites @\Space-based remote sensing of the earth - a report to the Congress \ \ \ \ \NASA \NOAA \Government policy \ \ \United States \International \Space \1987 \123p \RZ1-12 \Monograph \#G P.482 US Government Printing Office 1987 0 193 095: QL 2. Contains tablessummarising bands and functions of several satellite sensors. @\Looking down Looking forward \ESA SP-1073 \Battrick.B \ \ \ESA \ \Remote sensing \Environmental research \ \International \Europe \ \1985 \53p. \RZ1-30 \Monograph \#G P.477 ISSN 0396566 @\ Nationaal Remote Sensing Programma: Brief van der Minister van Onderwijsen Wetenschappen [in Dutch] \ \ \ \ \Netherlands. Ministry of Education etc \Netherlands. Staten Generaal. Tweede Kamer [2nd Chamber ] \Space programs \Remote sensing \ \Netherlands \ \ \1986 \39p. \RZ1-34 \Monograph \#G P.478 On document: Tweede Kamer, vergaderjaar 1985-86, 19442, nos. 1-2 @\National Remote Sensing Program 1990-2000 \ \Bunnik.N \ \ \Netherlands Remote Sensing Board \ \Remote sensing \Strategies \ Space programs \Netherlands \ \ \1991 \43p \RZ1-34 \Monograph \#G 1991.139, 1991.140 (Copy 2). Programme of the Netherlands Remote SensingBoard. Translated into English from the Dutch original - some details (includingfinancial arrangements) not translated. jk 7.7.92 @\ Overview of the French Space Program with emphasis on remote sensingactivities \ \ \ \ \CNES \ \Space programs \Remote sensing \ \France \ \ \1986 \8p. \RZ1-34 \(paper) \#G P.479 Written on paper: Paper presented to Japan Seminar [Japan Seminaron Space Applications, March 23-28, 1986, Tokyo, Japan] @\ German Remote Sensing Data Centre \ \ \ \ \DFVLR \ \Remote sensing \Information systems \ \West Germany \ \ \n.d. \n/a \RZ1-38 \Monograph \1984?#G P.480 @\Remote sensing in Sweden through the mid-80's \ \ \ \ \Swedish Space Corp. \SBSA \Remote sensing \ \ \Sweden \ \ \1982 \57p. \RZ1-39 \Monograph \Abbrev. version of programme: Svensk fjrranallysverksamhet infor 80-talet.#G P.481 Copy 1 P.484 Copy 2. @\Report on the third session of the Intergovernmental Consultative Committeeon the Regional Remote Sensing Programme (3rd Session: 1986, 17 May: Colombo) \ \ \ \ \ESCAP \Intergovernmental Consultative Committee [ESCAP] \Remote sensing \ \ \East Asia \Pacific \International \1986 \10p. \RZ1-60 \(Conference pub.) \#C (ESCAP), P.483. Report on 1st Session bound with [U.N. Meeting of Experts:...report 1984, Jakarta, at RE7-60] @\Remote Sensing Centres and Programmes in the ESCAP Region ; Report ofthe ...... Session of the Intergovernmental Consultative Committee on theESCAP/UNDP Regional Remote Sensing Programme and Proceedings of the Meetingof the Directors of the National Remote Sensing Centres/Programmes in theESCAP Region. \ESCAP RAS \ \ \ \ESCAP \ \International coordination \Remote sensing applications \ \East Asia \Pacific \ \HOLD 1986, 1988, 1989, 1991; 1993; 1994 \Various \RZ1-60 \Monograph as series \#G 1986 meeting in Colombo, 15-19 May 1986, P.485 (Copy 1 ) P.486 (Copy2). 5th Session in Shanghai, 12-17 July 1988 , P.1169; 6th Session in Manila,1-7 June 1989 , 1991.19. 8th Session of ICC in Hyderabad, 9-15 September1991, 1992.32 . Country reports (incl. C McMaster for Australia) from meetingin Manila.; 1994.139, 1994.198 (copy 2) 10th Session, Tehran, Islamic republicof Iran, 22-26 May; jk 13/5/91, mvk 30.10.94 @\Remote sensing Centres and Programmes in the ESCAP Region ; Report ofthe Eighth Session of the Intergovernmental Consultative Committee on theESCAP/UNDP Regional Remote Sensing Programme and Proceedings of the Meetingof the Directors of the National Remote Sensing Centres/Programmes in theESCAP Region. \ESCAP RAS \ \ \ \ESCAP \Indian National Remote Sensing Agency \International coordination \Remote sensing applications \ \East Asia \Pacific \ \1991 (?) \250p \RZ1-60 \Monograph \#G 1992.32 . RAS/86/141 . Country reports (incl. P Wise for Australia)from meeting in Hyderabad, India, 9-15 September 1991. @\Roster of remote sensing scientists and specialists in the ESCAP region. \ \ \ \ \ESCAP \ \Remote sensing \Personnel \ \Asia \International \Pacific \HOLD 1985, 1987 \various \RZ1-60 \Monograph \#G Supplement to 1985 edition, P.472. !987 Edition (2nd), Copy 1 P.473,Copy 2 P.474. UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme (RAS 86-141) @\Register of remote sensing projects in the ESCAP region \ \ \ \ \ESCAP \ \Remote sensing \Directories \ \Asia \Pacific \International \ HOLD 1985, 1989 \Various \RZ1-60 \Monograph \#G P.475 UNDP/ESCAP Regional Remote Sensing Programme (UDP/RAS 81-0340)1989 Version (2nd Edition) 1992.254 RAS/86/141 mvk 29.12.92 @\ Proceedings of the 6th Symposium on Remote Sensing of the Remote SensingApplication Research Center of Chinese Universites \ \ Cheng.J \ Peng.W \ Xu.X \ \ \ Remote sensing applications \ Information systems \ \ China \ \ \ 1990 \ 276p \ RZ1-61 \ Conference proceedings \ #C ("Symposium on Remote Sensing, Chinese Universities"), 1991.51ISBN 7 80003 124 1/Z.1 jk 25/7/91 @\ Proceedings of the 11th Asian Conference on Remote Sensing \ \ \ \ \ ACRS \ \ Remote Sensing Applications \ Information Systems \ \ China \ Asia \ \ 1990 \ \ RZ1-61 \ Conference Proceedings \ #C ("Asian Conference on Remote Sensing") in 2 Vols, 1991.52.1and 1991.52.2 From ACRS 11, 15-21 November 1990, Guangzhou China. jk 25/7/91 @\ Proceedings of the 12th Asian Conference on Remote Sensing \ \ \ \ \ ACRS \ \ Remote Sensing Applications \ Information Systems \ \ Singapore \ Asia \ \ 1991 \ \ RZ1-61 \ Conference Proceedings and papers \ #C ("Asian Conference on Remote Sensing") in 2 Vols, 1992.12and 1992.13 From ACRS 12, 30 October - 5 November 1991, Singapore. Attendedby COSS's Don de Vries. Also papers on NASDA-chaired meeting on InternationalDirectory Network, including overheads by J Thieman and two floppy disks (both in 3.5 and 5.25 inch) for Master Directory systemoverview. 21/2/92 [ R contimues next page ] WT03-B26-158IA059-000318-B042-57http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin70/spin704.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114182855 text/html 742HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:27:18 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 18 Jul 1996 07:03:00 GMTContent-length: 569 SpIN no.70 WT03-B26-159IA059-000318-B042-85http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin71/7104.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114182925 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 18:27:39 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:34 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-160IA059-000321-B003-140http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin72/7206.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114194825 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:46:46 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:20 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-161IA059-000321-B003-174http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/wshop4.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114194904 text/html 3563HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:47:13 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:08 GMTContent-length: 3389 Land AVHRR Data Users Group Workshop - Towards Product Standards 4. BRINGING PRODUCERS AND USERS TOGETHER In order to bring about these standards, it is important that Australiawork closely with any moves or existing progress in these directions inthe international community. However, there is a need for Australian usersand data or value added product producers to get together and define whatthe needs of Australian users are - whatever the progress or lack of progressinternationally. In the case of Land AVHRR Data I think the need is critical.This Workshop is an ideal place to start the process as there are researchers,data providers, value adders and some end users all meeting together todiscuss the issues facing the 'industry'. Let's not waste the opportunity. In any transaction of the kind we are discussing, involving a producer anda user, there are two risks that must be minimised or at least balancedif the transaction is to be fair and even for it to keep occurring. Theseare the "Producer's Risk" and the "User's Risk". Theyassume there is a measure of quality available for the product and a strategyof testing. In this case, the producers risk is the probability that a perfectlygood product will be rejected as poor and the consumer's risk is the probabilitythat a product called acceptable is poor. Clearly, standards, measures andstrategies of testing must all be developed by users and producers togetherto create a situation everyone can live with. In practice, the financialviability of a product to the producers may be an important component inthe definition of a standard. In our area of AVHRR data and products there are two forums for standards.These are the interface between data producers and data users (or valueadders) and the interface between value adders and the end users. In theend, the two will form part of the same 'sentence' and need to be compatible: "With data produced at certified Level x, using processing methodsoutlined in manual y, with staff and infrastructure of capability z it ispossible to produce specified product p with accuracy q." Perhaps this Workshop, with its useful blend of researchers, data managers,data suppliers, value adders and users, can outline the cases where Australianusers can fill in the gaps in sentences like this one and help define whatLevel x is for the benefit of the data producers. Perhaps there is no existingsentence of this type of which we can be confident. In either case, whatare the base standards, what can reliably and consistently be achieved andwhat measures can we put into place to ensure in the future (to the benefitof producers and users alike) that they are being met? I claim that althoughthe answers to these questions do not always involve scientific issues ofinterest to leading edge researchers it is in their interest and essentialfor their long term survival that some answers be found. WT03-B26-162IA059-000321-B003-208http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/avout4.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114194942 text/html 1672HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:48:00 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Fri, 17 May 1996 06:09:03 GMTContent-length: 1498 Land AVHRR Workshop 4. RECOMMENDATIONS Out of the wide ranging discussions and issues addressed there were threewhich were agreed as of particular importance for the AVHRR community toachieve as soon as possible. These are: Data receiving stations should process data so that the base and standardproducts are consistent and to a specifiable and repeatable standard withinand between stations; Geometric accuracy should aim to be RMS of 1pixel with recommended algorithmsand processing plus measures of quality to be developed and implementedas the next step; Absolute radiometric correction should aim to 5% with measures of qualityto be developed and implemented as the next step. The resonsibility for taking steps to achieve these recommendations restsjointly with CSIRO, BofMet, WASTAC, AIMS as well as the prime data usersin the State and Commonwealth Departments. Therefore a fourth recommendationis: CSIRO EOC should convene a group consisting of data receivers and datausers to establish the workable solutions for these goals. Tim McVicar May 1, 1996 WT03-B26-163IA059-000321-B003-229http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/eoc/tasks/chart.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114194951 text/html 472HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:48:12 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 27 Aug 1996 23:40:22 GMTContent-length: 299 EOC primary Tasks and forward looking Working Groups for 1996/97 Flow Chart for Primary Thread WT03-B26-164IA059-000321-B003-256http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcata4.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195004 text/html 33360HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:48:22 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:36:52 GMTContent-length: 33185 Catalogue Library catalogue A: SPACE, ASTRONAUTICS (continued) (other than communications (C), remote sensing (R), & astronomical aspects(X) [see also Aeronautics, (F)]. Also used for Space in General, or combinationsof above. AC Space Stations, Colonies in Space, Space Platforms in general [SEE (RS)for Polar Platforms] AD Defence aspects ("Star Wars", SDIO, Weapons in Space) AE Space engineering & technology, Astronautical Engineering, SpaceResearch facilities as test labs., specifications for individual items.SEE also Engineering (E) & Aircraft Engineering (FE), Space Industry(AI) AG Microgravity, also Space laboratories [in Space]; microgravity technology;SEE also Space Commercial use AH Space Instrumentation & Equipment; Payloads; Payload Transport Systems& Carriers; Space Instrumentation in general: SEE (CH) for CommunicationsInstruments, (RI) for Remote Sensing, Environmental Research Instruments,(XH) for Astronomical Instruments AI Space Industry, Astronautical, Space Industry R&D etc. [SEE (FE)for Aircraft, Aerospace Industry; (AE) for Space Engineering & Technology;(IN) Industrial R&D in general.] AJ "Junk" in Space; Orbital Debris AK Launch Vehicles, Space Transport Systems, science & technology oflaunch systems, human-operated launches in space; Launch & SatelliteTrajectories [SEE (AR) for Rockets and Rocketry] AL Launch Sites & Facilities (Cape York, etc.); launch schedules AM Manned Spacecraft & Spaceflight. [SEE ALSO Space planes (FS) Unmanned SEE Satellites: (AN);(CS);(RS); Space probes, astronomical satellites (XF) general) special missions (XI, XL, XP, XS.) AN Satellites & Unmanned spacecraft and satellites in general, and multipurpose satellites. [SEE ALSO (CS), (RS) and (XF)] AP Space Science, Space Programs, Space Exploration in General, Space planning activities in general; [SEE also Remote sensing programmes (RZ); (PS), generalscience] [SEE also Astronomy (X) esp. (XA) (XI)(XI),(XL),(XP),(XS), ( XZ)] AR Rocketry & Rockets, esp. sub-orbital or principles of. SEE also AKspecifically for Launch Vehicles AS Space Resources, commercial use, Mining, Manufacture, Industralization AX Films, videos on space. [Exclude Astronomy, see (XX)] AZ General overviews of space, Principles & Practice (General &Collective) @\Earthview- remote sensing of the earth from space \ \McElroy.J \ \ \NOAA \ \Meteorology \Remote sensing \Planning \United States \ \ \1994 May 8 \62p \AN15-12 \Monograph \#G 1994.07 10-chapter note on future earth observation needs. Includesconsideration of data ploicy, freedom of speech and expresiion, & otherpolicy aspects of international earth observation. mvk 2.2.94 @\ Utilization of the Polar Platform of NASA's Space Station Program forOperational Earth Observations \ NOAA Technical Report NESDIS \ McElroy.J \ Schneider.S \ \ NESDIS \ NOAA \ Platforms \ Planning \ Meteorology \ United States \ International \ \ 1984 Sept \ 67p \ AN15-12 \ Monograph \ #G P.138 NOAA Technical Report NESDIS 12 @\ Report of the Working Group on Earth Observation requirements for thePolar Orbiting Platform elements of the International Space Station \ \ \ \ \ ESA \ \ Global change \ Eos \ Polar platform \ Europe \ International \ \ 1986 May \ 97p \ AN15-30 \ Monograph \ #G P.72 @\Report on Pacific International Space Year Conference : Hawaii 19 - 21August 1987 \ \Kingwell.J \ \ \COSSA \ \Space Programs \International Space Year \Pacific ISY Conference \Pacific Region \United States \Japan \January 1988 \129 pages \AP1-05 \Monograph \Report of Overseas Visit @\ Canada, report to COSPAR July 1984 [Twenty-fifth Plenary Meeting (1984,July: Graz, Austria) by] Associate Committee on Space Research (CanadianNational Committee for COSPAR) \ \ \ \ \National Research Council Canada \ \Space programs \Space science \Space technology \Canada \ \ \1984 \33p. \AP1-11 \Monograph \ #G P.1025 Bound with French language edition. @\Canadian Space Program, Programme Spatial Canadien [News release March20, 1985 with booklets] \ \ \ \ \Canada. Government \ \Space programs \Space stations \RADARSAT \Canada \ \ \1985 \various \AP1-11 \Folder \ #G P.1026 Folder of booklets: Interim Space Plan 1985-1986; Canadian participationin Space Station; MSAT; RADARSAT. @\ NASA pocket statistics \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space programs \Statistics \ \United States \ \ \1984 \ca. 115p. \AP1-12 \Annual \ #G P.1024 Limited distribution @\Brief description of the current status and future plans of the BrazilianApplication Satellite Program \ \Parada.N \ \ \Meeting of Experts \ \Space programs \Satellites \ \Brazil \ \ \1983 \17p. \AP1-22 \(paper) \ #G P.1023 Paper presented to First Intergovernmental Meeting of SpaceTechnology Experts (1983, 4-6 Feb.: Columbia Unversity,USA) @\European space- on course for the 21st Century \SA BR-39 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space science \Space programs \Future planning \Europe \ \ \1987 \48p. \AP1-30 \ #G P.1020; P.1021 (Copy 2) Monograph \ @\Twenty years of European cooperation in space '64 '84, an ESA report \ \Longdon.N \Hunt.J \ \ESA \ \International cooperation \Space science \Space technology \Europe \ \ \1984 \259p. \AP1-30 \Monograph \ #G P.1022 Special anniversary pub. replacing Annual Report 1983. @\ESA [information sheet publication] \ \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space programs \ESA \ \Europe \ \ \n.d. \94p. \AP1-30 \Monograph \ #G P.1019 Project sheet dated 1984; on cover written:status 1985 @\Austria in space; report on activities \ \ \ \ \ASA \ \Space programs \Space missions manned \Space research facilities \Austria \Europe \ \Undated (between 1991 & 1993) \61p \AP1-30 \Monograph \#G 1994.111 Forward by Dr Erhard Busek, Vice Chancellor & Ministerfor Science & Research. Covers multilateral programs with ESA (eg ERS,POEM, PRAREE, Meteosat, Olympus) and bilateral programs especially withRussia (eg AUSTROMIR-91). mvk 23.7.94 @\ Britain in space \ \ \ \ \U.K. Dept. of Industry \ \Space programs \Space science \ \Great Britain \ \ \1982 \6p. \AP1-32 \Monograph \ #G P.1018 @\UK Space activities 1994-1995 \ \ \ \ \BNSC. British National Space Centre \ \Space programs \Space industry \ \Great Britain \ \ \1995 \23 p. \AP1-32 \brochure \#G 1996.73 mvk 11.7.96 @\Space activities in France \ \ \ \ \CNES \ \Space programs \Space science \Space technology \France \Europe \ \1993(?) \31p \AP1-34 \Monograph \#G Overview of french space programs and space industry. 1994.138 mvk 30.10.94 @\ Piano Spaziale Nazionale, proposta di aggiornamento 1984-1988, a curadel P.S.N./C.N.R. Dicembre 1983 [in Italian] \ \ \ \ \CNR \P.S.N./C.N.R . \Space programs \ \ \Italy \ \ \1983 \60p. \AP1-35 \Monograph \ #G P.1017 @\Outer space - our links to the future \ \Abiodun.A \ \ \COPUOS \ \Remote sensing applications \International cooperation \ \Equatorial Africa \Nigeria \ \1987 \32p + \AP1-43 \Monograph \#G 1992.109 Photocopy of invited paper delivered at National Assembly complex,Lagos, 24 March 1987. Includes outline of proposal for national remote sensingfacility for Nigeria. 5.6.92 @\COSMOS , a survey of achievements in Space by the USSR to celebrate theSoviet Space Exhibition at the Museum of Victoria, August 1984, sponsoredby Elders IXL Ltd. \ \ \ \ \Michael Edgley International \USSR Academy of Sciences \Space programs \Exhibitions \ \USSR \ \ \1984 \55p. \AP1-55 \Monograph \ #G P.1016 Cover title: COSMOS, the USSR in space @\The First Session of the Asia Pacific Regional Space Agency Forum \ \ \ \ \ISAS \STA \Space programs \International cooperation \ \Pacific \Oceania \Asia \1993 \ \AP1-60 \Conference papers \#C (Asia Pacific Regional Space Agency Forum). 1995.6.1 Report; 1995.6.2Reports of National Space Program, inc. Australian National Space Programby John Boyd. Meeting in Tokyo, 9-10 September 1993. mvk 1.1.95 @\Space in Japan \ \ \ \ \Japan. Science and Technology Agency \ \Space programs \Space co-ordination \Space agencies \Japan \ \ \HOLD 1992, 1994-95 \approx. 50p \AP1-63 \Monograph \#G 1992.170 (1992) , 1994-95 is 1994.174. Published by KEIDANREN. mvk 20.7.92,21.11.94 @\Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Usesof Outer Space, National paper: Philippines [revised ed.] \A/CONF.101-NP/3, 5 May 1982 \ \ \ \Philippines \UN Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space \Space programs \Space technology \Space science \Philippines \ \ \1982 \20p. \AP1-72 \(paper) \ #G P.1015 Rev. ed of A/CONF.101-NP/3, 1981. Conference= UNSPACE '82 @\Space activities in the Asia Pacific Region \NASDA-CM183 \ \ \ \NASDA \ISAS \ISY \Space programs \International cooperation \Oceania \Japan \International \1992 \88p \AP1-75 \Monograph \#G 1994.62 Papers from Pre-Asia Pacific ISY Conference, Tokyo, March 1992.Useful summary of space programs in region. mvk 30.4.94 @\ CSIRO Space Science and Applications, a progress report, April 1986 \ \McCracken.K \ \ \COSSA \ \Space programs \ \ \Australia \ \ \1986 \10p. \AP1-80 \(paper) \ #G P.1013 @\The Second Progress Report \ \McCracken.K \ \ \COSSA \ \Space Programs \ \ \Australia \ \ \February 1987 \18 pages \AP1-80 \Monograph \ #G P.1014 See also P.1013 for First Progress Report, 4/86. Delivered atCOSSA Seminar (1987, 2 Feb.:Canberra @\Australia and Space - The Imperative Need for Coordination, transcriptof a talk [given at] COSSA Seminar 13 Oct. 1986 \ \Somervaille.R \ \ \Australian Space Board \COSSA \Space Programs \ \ \Australia \ \ \October 1986 \17 pages \AP1-80 \Monograph \COSSA Seminar @\National and international space programs Australia \ \ \ \ \CSIRO \ASO \Space programs \ \ \Australia \ \ \1988 \10p. \AP1-80 \(paper) \ #G P.1012 Paper presented at 31st session of UN.COPUOS, June 1988, presentedby L.Thorburn for CSIRO/ASO @\Space activities in Australia \ \Tuohy.I \ \ \Australian Geographic \ANU Observatories \Space science \Satellites \History \Australia \ \ \1988 Jan \13p \AP1-80 \Monograph \#G 1990.112 An entry for the Fifth Edition of the Australian Encyclopedia(published by Australian Geographic) 2.6.92 @\Exploration studies Technical Report, FY 1988 Status \NASA Technical Memorandum 4075 \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space facilities \Lunar laboratories \Planets \United States \Space \ \1988 \47p; 400p \AP2-12 \Monograph in 2 vols \Vol 1 P.911.1; Vol 2 P.911.2 . Inc. studies of possible human expeditionsto Phobos, Mars, Lunar Observatory, and Lunar Outpost. 26.6.92 @\Nordic Mission to Planet Earth \ \ \ \ \Norwegian Space Centre \Swedish Space Board \International Space Year \Space Programs \ \Scandinavia \International \Global change \1992 \24p \AP2-39 \Monograph \#G 1993.111 Summary of ISY activities and background from perspective ofremote sensing in the Nordic/Scandinavian countries. Contributions fromDenmark (Ministry of Education and Research); Finland (Finnish Space Committee);Norway (Norwegian Space Centre); and Sweden (Swedish National Space Board& Swedish Space Corporation). mvk 27.7.93 @\ Space development activities in Japan [paper] presented to the 14th InternationalSymosium on Space Technology and Science, 14th ISTS (1984 28 May-1 June:Nippon Toshi Center, Tokyo), Preliminary ed. \ \ Yamanouchi.Y \ Takenaka.Y \ \ International Symposium on Space Technology and Science \ \ Space programs \ Space technology \ Space science \ Japan \ \ \ 1984 \ 56p. \ AP2-63 \ (conference paper) \ #G P.1011 @\Mission to Planet Earth: Japan Earth Observation Program \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Remote sensing satellites \Global change \ \Japan \ \ \1992 (?) \6p \AP2-63 \Brochure \#G 1992.302 Description of JERS-1, MOS-1, and plans for TRMM, ADEOS, GMS.mvk 24.1.93 @\ TITLE: Report to COSPAR Meeting in the Hague, Netherlands, 25 June -6 July 1990 \ SERIES.TITLE COSPAR Reports \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Space science \ KEYWORD.2 Space technology \ KEYWORD.3 International cooperation \ REGION.1 International \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1990 \ PAGINATION Various \ CLASSC'N AP3-05 \ FORMAT Conference reports \ OTHER.DATA #C (COSPAR) 1992.57 National reports to XXVIII Plenary of COSPAR;1 Sweden ; 2 Brazil ; 3 Japan ; 4 Germany ; 5 France; 6 ESA ; 7 Switzerland; 8 Finland ; 9 Poland ; 10 Pakistan ; 11 Austria ; 12 India ; 13 Belgium; 14 Hungary ; 15 UK ; 16 Australia (AAS Australian National Committee forSolar Terrestrial and Space Physics), contains comprehensive report on CSIROactivity. updated jk 27.4.92 @\ TITLE: Report to COSPAR Meeting in Washington, August 1992 \ SERIES.TITLE COSPAR Reports \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Space science \ KEYWORD.2 Space technology \ KEYWORD.3 International cooperation \ REGION.1 International \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1992 \ PAGINATION Various \ CLASSC'N AP3-05 \ FORMAT Conference reports \ OTHER.DATA #C (COSPAR) 1992.261 National reports to XXIX Plenary of COSPAR(The World Space Congress); 1 Switzerland; 2 Hungary ; 3 Japan ; 4 Austria;5 Pakistan; 6 Australia 7 Australia (copy 2) ISBN 0 85847 108 9 ; (AAS AustralianNational Committee for Solar Terrestrial and Space Physics), contains comprehensivereport on CSIRO activity 8 Background Paper on the Canadian Space Program.9. Finland (ISSN 0788 7434) mvk 2.1.93 @\ TITLE: Report to COSPAR Meeting in Hamburg, Germany, July 1994 \ SERIES.TITLE COSPAR Reports \ AUTHOR.1 \ AUTHOR.2 \ AUTHOR.3 \ CORP.AUTHR.1 \ CORP.AUTHR.2 \ KEYWORD.1 Space science \ KEYWORD.2 Space technology \ KEYWORD.3 International cooperation \ REGION.1 International \ REGION.2 \ REGION.3 \ DATE 1994 \ PAGINATION Various \ CLASSC'N AP3-05 \ FORMAT Conference reports \ OTHER.DATA #C (COSPAR) 1994.143 National reports to XXX Plenary of COSPAR;1 ESA , ESA SP-1169 233p ; 2. Austria, 1994.204; 3. Israel 1994.203 ; 4.Finland 1995.19 ; 5. France 1995.55 ; 6. Poland ISBN 83 902319 5 9 SpaceResearch Centre PAS 1995.57 ; 7. India ("Space Research in India")1995.61 127pp ISRO-INCOSPAR-SR-44-94 mvk 1.11.94, 24.12.94; 26.12.94; 16.2.95,13.5.95, 4.6.95 @\Report to COSPAR, 27th Plenary Meeting, Espoo, Finland, July 1988, bythe Associate Committee on Space Research \ \ \ \ \National Research Council Canada \ \Space science \Space technology \Space programs \Canada \ \ \1988 \40p. \AP3-11 \Monograph \ #G P.1043 Biennial. @\Space Science \ \ \ \ \Canadian Space Agency \ \Space science \Space programs \Government policy \Canada \ \ \1994 \17p \AP3-11 \Brochure \#G 1994.212 ISBN 0 662 21514 1 Pub. by Minister of Supply and ServicesCanada. Gives Canadian space science milestones from 1839 and confirms importanceto Canadian space program of scientific programs in Upper Atmosphere, MaterialsScience, Life Sciences & Solar Terrstrial Physics. mvk 28.12.94 @\ Aeronautics and space report of the President: 19-- Activities \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Space science \Space industry \Space programs \United States \ \ \HOLD 1982; 1983; 1985; 1986; 1987 (2 copies); 1988; 1989-90; 1994 \Various \AP3-12 \Serial \ #G 1982 Activities (pub. 1983) is P.1042; 1983 Activities (pub. 1984)is P.1041; 1985 (pub. 1986 is P.1040; 1986 Activities inc. many referencesto Challenger disaster, P.1039; 1987 Activities (pub. 1989) is P.134, Copy2 P.171 , 182p, giving comprehensive review of aeronautics (inc. research,launches) throughout US administration. jk 14/6/91 1988 is #G 1991.74, 196p,a comprehensive report. 1989-90 is #G 1991.75 173p,a comprehensive report.Fiscal Year 1994 is 1996.4, published 1995, summarises space programs inNASA, DoD, DoE, DoC, other Departments. Gives NASA 94 budget as greaterthan DoD, for first time in over a decade (12.4 cf 10.9 $US billion). mvk4.1.96 @\ Small-class Explorer mission, announcement of opportunity, May 17, 1988 \ A.O.no. OSSA 2-88 \ \ \ \NASA \ \Satellites \Scientific research \Explorer program \Space \United States \ \1988 \various \AP3-12 \Monograph \#G P.1038 @\Report presented by the European Space Agency to the 25th COSPAR meeting(Graz, Austria, June 1984), May 1984 \ ESA SP-1061 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space science \Space programs \Space technology \Europe \ \ \1984 \309p. \AP3-30 \Monograph @\ ESA report to the 27th COSPAR meeting (1988, July: Helsinki), June 1988[on scientific missions] \ESA SP-1098 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space science \Space programs \ \Europe \ \ \1988 \159p. \AP3-30 \Monograph \#G P.1037 18.8.92 @\Report presented by the European Space Agency to the 25th COSPAR meeting(Graz, Austria, June 1984), May 1984 \ ESA SP-1061 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space science \Space programs \Space technology \Europe \ \ \1984 \309p. \AP3-30 \Monograph \ @\ Europe's place in space \ \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space programs \Space technology \Space science \Europe \ \ \1981 \47p \AP3-30 \Monograph \ #G P.1036 Space activities and ESA's contribution. Record reconstructedjk 9.4.92 @\ Report presented by the European Space Agency to the 26th COSPAR meeting,Toulouse, France June 1986 \ESA SP-1078 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space science \Space technology \Space programs \Europe \ \ \1986 \330p. \AP3-30 \Monograph \ #G P.1032 18.8.92 @\International Symposium on Radars and Lidars in Earth and Planetary Sciences,2-4 September, Palais des Festivals, Cannes, France. \ \Guyenne.T \Hunt.J \ \ESA \ \Lidar \Magellan \Space PRograms \Europe \International \Space \1991 \153p \AP3-30 \Monograph \#G 1993.88 ISSN 0379 6566 ISBN 92 9092 154 4 Long term loan from HQ Library,AS:HQ 621.3848 Ra. $96 . Covers Radarsat, Magellan, ERS-1, LIRA and otherplanned exploratory spacecraft. mvk 18.7.93 @\ Britain in space \ \ \ \ \BNSC \ \Space science \Space programs \Space technology \Great Britain \ \ \n.d. \24p. \AP3-32 \Monograph \ Forward by Roy Gibson. #G P.1035 1986. Publicity booklet.Includes HOTOL @\ Space science in the United Kingdom \ \ \ \ \SERC \ \Space science \Astronomy \ \Great Britain \ \ \1982 \7p. \AP3-32 \Folder \#G P.1034 @\ United Kingdom report on space research 1984 and 1985, prepared on behalfof the British National Committee on Spcae Research, submitted to ...Meetingof COSPAR, 1986 \ \ \ \ \Royal Society \ \Space science \Space technology \Space programs \Great Britain \ \ \1984-85 \131p. \AP3-32 \Monograph \#G P.1033 18.8.92 @\ Space research in Belgium 1982-1983, report to COSPAR meeing in Graz,Austria, 25 June- 7 July 1984 \ \ \ \ \Belgian National Committee on Space Research \ \Space programs \Space science \ \Belgium \ \ \1984 \48p. \AP3-34 \Monograph \#G P.1030 @\ Space research in Belgium 1986-1987, report to COSPAR meeting in Espoo,Finland, 18-29 July 1988 \ \ \ \ \Belgian National Committee on Space Research \ \Space programs \Space science \ \Belgium \ \ \1988 \70p. \AP3-34 \Serial? \#G P.1029 18.8.92 @\ Space research in Belgium 1988-1989 \ \ \ \ \ Belgian National Committee on Space research \ \ Astronomy \ Space programs \ Space science \ Belgium \ \ \ 1990 \ 65p. \ AP3-34 \ Monograph \ #G 1992.24 ISSN 0772-9804. Report to COSPAR meeting in The Hague The Netherlands,25 June - 6 July 1990. This report summarizes basic and applied space researchundertaken by Belgian teams in various institutes and universities.Theseare listed (with their addresses),in the appendix. Another copy (1992.57.13)in #C (COSPAR) @\ National report on space research in Poland in 1984-85; presented atthe 26 COSPAR General Assembly (1986: Toulouse) \ \ \ \ \Polish Academy of Sciences \ \Space science \ \ \Poland \ \ \1986 \61p. \AP3-37 \Monograph \#G P.1164 ISBN 83 01 83 01 07533 3 @\Report on space research activities in Hungary 1982-83, prepared by theHungarian National Committee of COSPAR, Budapest 1984 \ \ \ \ \Hungarian Academy of Sciences \ \Space science \Space technology \Space programs \Hungary \ \ \1984 \24p. \AP3-37 \Monograph \#G P.1166 @\ Report on space research activities in Hungary 1984-1985, prepared bythe National Committee for COSPAR \ \ \ \ \Hungarian Academy of Sciences \ \Space science \Space technology \Space programs \Hungary \ \ \1985 \30p. \AP3-37 \Monograph \ #G P.1027 18.8.92 @\ Space research in Hungary 1986-1987, report prepared by the NationalCommittee for COSPAR of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences for the XXVIIthPlenary Meeting of the Committee on Space Research (COSPAR) of ICSU \ \Erdos.G \ \ \Hungarian Academy of Sciences \ \Space programs \Space science \Space technology \Hungary \ \ \1988 \47p. \AP3-37 \Monograph \#G P.1165 ISBN 963 372 414 7 @\ Space research in Switzerland 1986, 1987, report to COSPAR by the Committeeon Space Research \ \ \ \ \Swiss Academy of Sciences \ \Space science \Scientific research \ \Switzerland \ \ \1987 \24p. \AP3-38 \Monograph \#G P.1159 @\ Fourth Space Programme of the Federal Republic of Germany [English trans.of 2nd rev. German ed.] \ \ \ \ \Germany. Federal Republic.BMFT \ \Space programs \ \ \West Germany \ \ \1983 \72p. \AP3-38 \Monograph \#G P.1161 @\ Austrian report to COSPAR, 27th Plenary Meeting (1988: Espoo, Finland) \ \Bauer.S \Mondre.E \ \Austrian National Committee for COSPAR \ASA \Space science \Space technology \ \Austria \ \ \1988 \27p. \AP3-38 \Monograph \#G P.1160 @\ Space research activities in the German Democratic Republic, 27th PlenaryMeeting of COSPAR 1988 [Espoo, Finland] \ \Bohme.W \Knuth.R \ \National COSPAR-Commission [East Germany] \ \Space science \Space technology \ \East Germany \ \ \1988 \19p. \AP3-38 \Monograph \#G P.1162 @\ Space research in the Federal Republic of Germany 1986 and 1987 [Reportfor COSPAR, 27th Plenary meeting, 1988, Espoo, Finland] \ \ \ \ \COSPAR-Landesausschuss \DFG \Space science \Space technology \ \West Germany \ \ \1988 \54p. \AP3-38 \Monograph \#G P.1163 @\ Space research in Norway \ \ \ \ \Norwegian Space Centre \ \Space science \Space technology \ \Norway \ \ \HOLD 1986 \varies \AP3-39 \Serial \#G 1986 report is P.1148, ISBN 82 7224 235 4 . Published annually [thispub. June 1987]. NSC established Jan. 1987, before was Space Activity Div.of NTNF. @\ Space research in Sweden 19.. - 19.. , report to COSPAR meeting \ \ \ \ \SBSA \ \Space programs \Space science \Space technology \Sweden \ \ \HOLD 1981; 1984-85; 1986-87; \various \AP3-39 \Monograph issued serially \#G Biennial. 1981 report is P.1167; 1984-5 presented 1986, P.1028; 1986-7is P.1155 etc. @\ Swedish space activities during 1981 [paper] Dnr 83-82, 1982-02-25 \ \ \ \ \SBSA \ \Space programs \Space science \ \Sweden \ \ \1982? \9p. \AP3-39 \(paper) \ #G P.1167 @\ Space research in Denmark 1986-87, report to COSPAR, 27th Plenary Meeting[1988: Espoo, Finland] \ \ \ \ \Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters \ \Space science \Astronomy \Space technology \Denmark \ \ \1988 \14p. \AP3-39 \Monograph \#G P.1145 @\ Space activities in Finland in 1982-83 \ \Urpo.S \ \ \Finnish National Committee on Space Research \Space programs \Space science \ \Finland \ \ \1983 \12p. \AP3-39 \Monograph \#G P.1147 @\ Biannual [sic] report to COSPAR Space activities in Israel, 19 - \ \ \ \ \Israel National Committee for Space Research \Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities \Space science \Space technology \Space programs \Israel \ \ \HOLD 1988 \various \AP3-46 \Serial \#G P.1146 Monograph issued serially, biennial. @\ Space research in Pakistan 19 , report to COSPAR \ \ \ \ \SUPARCO \ \Space science \Space technology \Space programs \Pakistan \ \ \HOLD 1984; 1986 \varies \AP3-52 \Serial \#G Issued biennially for COSPAR meeting. 1986 report Copy 1 is P.1149:Copy 2 is P.1150. @\ Indian space programme \ \ \ \ \ISRO \ \Space programa \ \ \India \ \ \n.d. but after 1981. \24p. \AP3-53 \Monograph \1981? #G P.1156. Another (photocopied) publication with same title, pub.1988, about 30p, at P.1157. @\Space research in India Jan 1988 - Dec 1989 \ \Rao,U. \ \ \ISRO\ Indian Space Research Organisation \COSPAR\ Committee on space research \Remote-sensing \Space science \Space programs \India \ \ \1990 \135p \AP3-53 \monograph \ #C 1992.23 Presented at XXVIII COSPAR meeting June 25 - July 6, 1990 TheHague, The Netherlands. @\Space research in India Jan 1990 - Dec 1991 \ \Rao,U. \ \ \ISRO\ Indian Space Research Organisation \COSPAR\ Committee on space research \Remote-sensing \Space science \Space programs \India \ \ \1992 \89p \AP3-53 \monograph \ #C 1993.14 (Copy 1), 1993.15 (Copy 2) Presented at XXIX COSPAR meetingAugust 28 - September 5 1992, Washington DC USA. ISRO INCOSPAR SP 62 92. Highlights include IRS-1B , SROSS-C, ASLV (Augmented Satellite LaunchVehicle), MST radar, and Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope. mvk 22.22.93 @\Soviet year in space [7th ed.] 1987. \ \Johnson.N \ \ \Teledyne Brown Engineering \ \Space programs \Space technology \Satellites \USSR \ \ \1988 \157p. \AP3-55 \Monograph \#G Copy 1 P.172, Copy 2 P.1158. Issued regularly since 1981. Includes listsofspace launches, frequencies used by Soviet & Chinese satellites, bibliographyetc. @\Space research for scientific progress : Soviet Balloons in the atmosphereof Venus; Rendezvous with Halley's comet \ \ \ \ \Novosti Press Agency \ \Space programs \Phobos project \Planets \Russia \ \ \1987 \ \Monograph \AP3-56 \#G 1993.57 Diagrams and descriptions of Phobos, Venera, Veha, and Halley'scomet missions. mvk 20.6.93 @\Some Technical Aspects of the Chinese Space Program : Report of Visit: November 1987 \ \Astley-Boden.C \ \ \COSSA \ \Space Programs \Space Technology \ \China \ \ \January 1988 \41 pages \AP3-61 \Monograph \Report on Overseas Visit @\ Space research in Japan 19--, submitted to the --th Meeting of the ICSUCommittee on Space Research [COSPAR] \ \ \ \ \Japanese National Committee on Space Research \ISAS \Space science \Space programs \Satellites \Japan \ \ \HOLD 1984; 1986;1988; 1994 \various \AP3-63 \Monograph issued serially \#G 1984 is P.1153; 1986 is P.1154; 1988 is P.1112, coversHimawari, Sakigake,Suisei, Ginga, MOMO, EXOS, Muses, Geotail, Solar-A, Astro-D, and (J) ERS-1.1994 issue is 1994.213, 40p, pub. by ISAS, features ASTRO-D and GEOTAILBiennial. mvk 28.12.94 @\ Space research in Japan, national report submitted to the 25th Meetingof the ICSU Committee on Space Research (Graz, Austria, 25 June-7 July,1984) \ \ \ \ \Japanese National Committee on Space Research \ISAS \Space programs \Space science \Satellites \Japan \ \ \1984 \75p. \AP3-63 \Monograph \#G P.1153. See also generic entry. @\ Space in Japan \ \ \ \ \KEIDANREN \Japan. Science & Technology Agency \Space programs \Space science \ \Japan \ \ \HOLD 1983-84; 1986-87 \various \AP3-63 \Monograph issued serially \#G 1983-1984 is P.1151; 1986-1987 is P.1152. WT03-B26-165IA059-000321-B003-289http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/library/libcatr4.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195020 text/html 46917HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:48:36 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Tue, 03 Sep 1996 02:37:27 GMTContent-length: 46742 Catalogue Library catalogue R: REMOTE SENSING. [SEE ALSO (FR) Research aircraft] RA Agricultural/Forestry Applications; Drought; Agricultural land use; [not Land Use in general (RE); not Land use mapping aspect, (RC) nor Soil science(RT)] RC Cartographic (Mapping) Applications; Mapping aspect of Land Use & Vegetation, Surveying applications. [SEE ALSO (RT)] RD Defence/Surveillance, Arms Treaty Verification Applications [SEE ALSO(CN) Distress systems of Search & rescue; AD for Space Weapons] RE Environmental Applications; Land use in general; earth resources, geographical applications (land + people); regional & town planning applications,vegetation index; Fire detection; mixed applications RF Fisheries Applications (salt or freshwater) RH Hydrological Applications; fresh water resources applications apart from fisheries RI Instrumentation & equipment, instrument systems, emphasis on measurement technology [SEE RS for satellites, mission descriptions] RK Airborne research, aircraft carried remote sensing missions [SEE ALSO(FR) research aircraft, emphasis on aircraft] RM Marine/Oceanographic Applications, includes Coastal zones, [BUT SEE (RD) Surveillance, (CN) Distress systems] RR Remote sensing information & image processing, computer programs,facilities including Remote Sensing Groundstations [but SEE CN for navigation, communication ground facilities], Geographic Information Systems [SEE ALSO (RI) instruments, (CC) computers , (CL) Information systems, (CN) navigation, reception etc.] RS Remote sensing satellites (SPOT, Landsat, ERS-1, Polar Platform, MOS-1etc.); Earth observation satellites [multipurpose satellites SEE AN; Astronomical satellites SEE (XF) etc.] RT Terrestrial, Geological Applications; minerals & mining; Magneticsapplications; Glaciology applications; Topographical applications other than mapping;[SEE ALSO (TC- TZ)] ; Land Surveying etc., Topographic mapping SEE (RC) RW Weather (Forecasting) & Meteorological Applications, Atmospheric,Climate, Rainfall applications [if not (RH)] . Prefer (W) Weather if emphasis on discipline rather than remote sensing methods RX Films & videos on remote sensing RZ Principles & Practice (General & Collective); General remotesensing; overviews, scientific methods, calibration and validation where not specificto discipline; training, tenders for RS items. [ SEE ALSO Science & Environment side (TR), (PS)] @\RADARSAT Platform System Summary document, March 1986 \SSD-RST-D2004 \ \ \ \British Aerospace \ \Remote sensing satellites \RADARSAT \ \Great Britain \Space \ \1986 \various \RS2-11 \Monograph \#G P.319 Confidential commercial document. @\Radarsat \ADRO Program Announcement \ \ \ \Canadian Space Agency \NASA \Announcements of Opportunity \Radarsat \ \Canada \ \ \1994, Dec. \50, 35 \RS2-11 \Monograph in 2 volumes \#G 1995.86 AO description V1 ISBN 0 662 22918 6; sytem description V2 0662 22913 4 . mvk 13.8.95 @\Presentation on the Radarsat Program \ \Ahmed.Shabeer \Andean.J \ \Canadian Space Agency \ \ \Radarsat \Remote sensing satellites \Space programs \Canada \ \ \1995 (?) \ \RS1-11 \Overheads \#G 1995.89 (Copy 1), 1995.90 (Copy 2). Visit to Canberra during 1995 toprepare way for use of Tidbinbilla DSN for Radarsat TC&C. mvk 13.8.95 @\ NOAA polar orbiter data (TIROS-N, NOAA-6, NOAA-7, and NOAA-8) users guide \ \Kidwell.K \ \ \NESDIS \NOAA \Polar orbiting satellites \Data \NOAA satellites \United States \ \ \1984 \various \RS2-12 \Monograph \#G P.320 @\Modeling of the SeaWIFS Solar and Lunar Observations \SeaWIFS Technical Report Series Volume 10 \Woodward.Robert \Barnes.Robert \McClain.Charles \NASA \ \Remote sensing satellites \Marine resources \ \United States \ \ \1993 May \26p \RS2-12 \Monograph \#G 1993.138 NASA Technical Memorandum 104566 Vol. 10. Other authors Esaias.Wayne,Barnes.William, and Mecherikunnel.Ann . Describes calibration scheme forSeaWIFS sensor, using solar and lunar radiance observations. mvk 26.9.93 @\Satellite activities of NOAA 1983, compiled by National EnvironmentalSatellite Data and Information Service, July 1984 \ \ \ \ \NOAA \ \Remote sensing satellites \NOAA satellites \ \United States \ \ \1984 \23p. \RS2-12 \Monograph \#G P.321 @\ENVIROSAT-2000 Report, GOES, next overview, September 1985 \ \Schwalb.A \Cotter.D \Hussey.W \NOAA \ \Remote sensing instruments \NOAA satellites \GOES \United States \International \ \1985 \various \RS2-12 \Monograph \#G P.322 Summary of GOES-Next plans, functions in relation to NationalWeather Service. To be built by Ford Aerospace. jk 12.5.92 @\GOES Data-Collection System instrumentation, installation, and maintenancemanual \USGS Open-File Report 86-479 \Blee.J \Herlong.H \Kauffman.C \USGS \ \Remote sensing satellites \Data collection systems \Handbooks \United States \International \ \1986 \Various \RS2-12 \Monograph \#G Loose leaf report. 1992.153 . No cost, on exchange from USGS. jk 7.7.92 @\Operating manual for the US Geological Survey's Data-Collection Systemwith the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite \USGS Open-File Report 91-99 \Jones.J \Tracey.D \Sorensen.F \USGS \ \Remote sensing satellites \Data Collection Systems \Handbooks \United States \ \ \1991 \237p \RS2-12 \Monograph \#G 1992.154b jk 7.7.92 @\UARS: Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite Mission - a program to studyglobal ozone change \ \ \ \ \NASA \GSFC \Atmospheric research \Stratosphere \Global change \United States \International \Polar regions \1985-1989 \Various \RS2-12 \Folder of papers \#G Collection of papers and brochures from NASA Australia, including missionobjectives and specifications. 1990.40. @\UARS: Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite - a program to study globalozone change. \ \ \ \ \NASA \GSFC \Atmospheric research \Stratosphere \Global change \United States \International \Polar regions \1990 (?) \ \RS2-12 \Pamphlet \#G Fold out pamphlet describing UARS mission, technical details and datastream. 1991.20. jk 13/5/91 @\ Nimbus-7, observing the atmosphere and oceans \ \Hurley.E \Jones.R \ \NASA \ \Atmospheric research \Global change \Oceanography \United States \International \Space \1983 Dec \29p \RS2-12 \Monograph \#G P.378 @\SeaWiFS Data system, Mission operations, ground system, critical designreviews. \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \SeaWiFS \Remote sensing instruments \Oceanography \United States \International \ \1992 April \Various \RS2-12 \Papers \#G 1992.250 Ground and space segment specifications, from meeting in USA,13-14 April 1992. mvk 29.12.92 @\What's the forecast? The European space meteorology operational programme \ \ \ \ \ESA \ \Meteorology \Remote sensing satellites \Meteosat \Europe \ \ \1986 \5p. \RS2-30 \Folder \#G @\ERS-1 ESA Remote Sensing Satellite \ \Ulke.H \ \ \ESA \Dornier \Meteorology \Remote sensing satellites \ERS-1 \Europe \ \ \1985 (?) \24p. \RS2-30 \Monograph \#G P.341 jk 12.5.92 @\Summary report for a Tropical Earth Resources Satellite, TERS, Phase A-1Technical Study; Appendix I to JTERS 84-10; [executed for NIVR] \NTERS 84-07 \ \ \ \Fokker \NLR \remote sensing instruments \Remote sensing satellites \TERS \Netherlands \Indonesia \ \1984 \various \RS2-34 \Monograph \Other participants: Signaal, SRON, T TERS: joint Netherlands- Indonesiaproject. #G P.327 @\ Report on the Phase A Study of a joint Indonesian-Netherlands TERS program \JTERS 84-10 \Irsyam.M \Hoeke.A \ \LAPAN \NIVR \Space programs \Remote sensing satellites \TERS \Indonesia \Netherlands \ \44p \RS2-34 \Monograph \#G P.326 @\a Tropical Earth Resources Satellite, TERS, Phase A-1 Technical Study;Appendix I to JTERS 84-10; [executed for NIVR] \NTERS 84-07 \ \ \ \Fokker \NLR \Remote sensing instruments \Remote sensing satellites \TERS \Netherlands \Indonesia \ \1984 \various \RS2-34 \Monograph \Other participants: Signaal, SRON, TPD. TERS: joint Netherlands- Indonesiaproject. @\ Draft proposal for a System Definition Study of a joint Indonesian-NetherlandsTERS program, 85.03.08 \JTERS 84-11 \ \ \ \LAPAN \NIVR \Remote sensing satellite \Space program \TERS \Indonesia \Netherlands \ \1984 \24p. \RS2-34 \Monograph \#G P.328 @\ Proposal to N.I.V.R. for a System Definition Study of a Tropical EarthResources Satellite. Appendix to JTERS 84-11 \NTERS 84-11 \ \ \ \Fokker \NLR \Remote sensing satelLites \Remote sensing instruments \TERS \Netherlands \Indonesia \ \n.d. \ca 172p. \RS2-34 \Monograph \Dated ca. 1984. Other participants: Signaal; Sron; TPD; Fokker. #G P.329 @\SPOT Satellite - based remote sensing system \ \ \ \CNES \ \Remote sensing satellites \SPOT \ \France \International \ \1984 March \15p. \RS2-34 \Monograph \#G P.323 @\Matra Espace SPOT, French remote sensing satellite \ \ \ \ \Matra \ \Remote sensing satellites \SPOT \ \France \ \ \n.d. \4p. \RS2-34 \Folder \#G P.324 12.5.92 @\ SPOT products and agriculture \ \ \ \ \ SPOT Image \ \ SPOT \ Remote sensing satellites \ Agriculture \ France \ International \ \ 1986 \ \ RS2-34 \Monograph \ #G 1991.24 jk 29/5/91 @\ SPOT and the environment \ \ \ \ \ SPOT Image \ \ SPOT \ Remote sensing satellites \ Environmental protection \ France \ International \ \ 1986 \ \ RS2-34 \Monograph \ #G 1991.25 jk 29/5/91 @\ SPOT and forestry \ \ \ \ \ SPOT Image \ \ SPOT \ Remote sensing satellites \ Primary industry \ France \ International \ \ 1986 \ \ RS2-34 \Monograph \ #G 1991.26 jk 29/5/91 @\ Planning for urban growth \ \ \ \ \ SPOT Image \ \ SPOT \ Remote sensing satellites \ Mapping \ France \ International \ \ 1986 \ \ RS2-34 \Monograph \ #G 1991.27 jk 29/5/91 @\ SPOT and cartography \ \ \ \ \ SPOT Image \ \ SPOT \ Remote sensing satellites \ Mapping \ France \ International \ \ 1986 \ \ RS2-34 \Monograph \ #G 1991.28 jk 29/5/91 @\ SPOT in oil and gas exploration \ \ \ \ \ SPOT Image \ \ SPOT \ Remote sensing satellites \ Minerals & mining \ France \ International \ \ 1986 \ \ RS2-34 \Monograph \ #G 1991.29 jk 29/5/91 @\ SPOT products and mineral exploration \ \ \ \ \ SPOT Image \ \ SPOT \ Remote sensing satellites \ Minerals & mining \ France \ International \ \ 1986 \ \ RS2-34 \Monograph \ #G 1991.30 jk 29/5/91 @\DORIS, Determination Orbit Radiopositioning Integrated Satellite, background/objectiveto provide accurate orbital RADIAL determination for Poseidon Project \ \ \ \ \CNES \IGN \Satellites \DORIS \TOPEX-POSEIDON \France \Space \ \n.d. \n/a \RS2-34 \Monograph \#G P.325 . Copy 2 is P.867 On cover written: Appendix IV. Project of CNES,IG, GRGS. @\DORIS \ \ \ \ \CNES \IGN \ \Topex-Poseidon \Oceanography \DORIS \France \International \ \nd \ \RS2-34 \Photocopy \#G Probably before May 1986. P.867 21.6.92 @\ Spot Image [folder of material on SPOT inc. some SPOT Newsletters ] \ \ \ \ \CNES \ \Remote sensing satellites \SPOT \ \France \ \ \HOLD 1984; 1986 \n/a \RS2-34 \Folder \Folder of leaflets, booklets maps photographs etc. P.123 jk 23/5/91 @\ Proposition de passager pour SPOT 3 & 4 ; Mission de surveillanceglobale d'environnement (vegetation - oceans) \ \ \ \ \CNES \LERTS \Remote sensing satellites \SPOT \ \France \ \ \nd \70p \RS2-34 \Monograph \#G P.339 In French. jk 12/5/92 @\ Viking- the first Swedish satellite \ \ \ \ \Swedish Space Corp. \ \Satellites \Viking \ \Sweden \ \ \n.d. \9p. \RS2-39 \Folder \#G P.331 (Copy 1) P.332 (Copy 2). @\ [Janus viewgraphs] PAJEOS: a low-cost satellite for domestic earth resourcessensing in Pakistan \ \ \ \ \Matra \ \Remote sensing applications \Earth resources \PAJEOS \Pakistan \ \ \1986 \135p. \RS2-52 \(paper) \Extract of Matra's proposal, presented by Matra. #G P.333 @\ Brief description of the Stretched Rohini Satellite series, SROSS \ \ \ \ \ISRO \ \Satellites \SROSS \ \India \ \ \1986 \15p. \RS2-53 \(paper) \Presented by ISRO. Attachment: MEOSS document. #G P.334 jk 12.5.92 @\ Telemetry tracking and command (TTC) support for SROSS-2 Mission, Annexure-1March 1985; [with] Note on MEOSS reception and ACCT generation at DFVLR,Annexure-II \ \ \ \ \ISRO \ \Remote sensing satellites \SROSS \MEOSS \India \West Germany \ \1985 \various \RS2-53 \(papers) \#G P.335 jk 12.5.92 @\ IRS-1A Indian Remote Sensing Satellite \ \ \ \ \Department of Space \Government of India, Bangalore \Remote Sensing \Information Processing \IRS \India \ \ \1988 \Various \RS2-53 \Reprint \#G P.336 jk 12.5.92 @\ IRS-1A Data Availability, An Announcement \ \ \ \ \Department of Space \Government of India, Bangalore \Remote Sensing \Information Processing \IRS \India \ \ \1988 \Various \RS2-53 \Reprint \#G P.337 Announcement of opportunity jk 12.5.92 @\ Indian remote sensing satellite: a programme overview \ \Navalgund.R \Kasturirangan.K \ \Proc. Indian Acad. Sci (Engg. Sci.) \ \Remote sensing satellites \Space programs \IRS-1 \India \ \ \1983 \23p. \RS2-53 \Reprint \#G P.384 Reprint of pp.313-336 of Vol.6, Pt.4, Dec. 1983 @\ IRS-1C Data Users Handbook \ \ \ \ \NRSA. National Remote Sensing Agency \ISRO. Indian Space Research Organisation \Data products \Remote sensing \IRS \India \ \ \Sept. 1995 \169 p. \RS2-53 \monograph \#G. 1996.69 A handbook on reception, processing and distribution of IRS-1Cdata. @\ JERS-1 Verification Program Announcement of Opportunity \ \ \ \ \ NASDA \ MITI \ JERS-1 \ Remote sensing Satellites \ Announcements of Opportunity \ Japan \ International \ \ 1990 \ \ RS2-63 \ Papers \ #G 1990.19. Historic material, not for loan. Includes material from AustralianJERS-1 AO responses arranged through CSIRO OSSA, Dec 1990. See also RegistryFile GS36/008 @\ JERS-1 Project Proposals \ \ \ \ \ COSSA \ \ JERS-1 \ Remote sensing Satellites \ Announcements of Opportunity \ Japan \ International \ \ 1992 \ \ RS2-63 \ Papers \ #G 1992.234. Copies of Australian JERS-1 project proposals coordinatedby COSSA under NASDA-ACRES reception agreement of NOV. 1992. mvk 26.12.92See also Registry File GS36/008 @\ Japanese ERS-1 to ground station interface description \ \ \ \ \ NASDA \ \ JERS-1 \ Remote sensing Satellites \ Reception \ Japan \ International \ \ 1990 \ \ RS2-63 \ Papers \ #G 1990.63. G 1991.82 ( 2 copies ) See also Registry File GS36/008, 1990.19. @\Summary of Advanced Earth Observing Satellite, ADEOS, for the 2nd Meetingof the International Forum IFEOS, Nov. 17, 1987 \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Satellites \ADEOS \ \Japan \ \ \1987 \17p. \RS2-63 \Monograph \Photocopy. #G P.342 Copy 1, P.343 Copy 2 jk 13.5.92 @\ Advanced Earth Observing Satellite, ADEOS. Development Status \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Satellites \ADEOS \ \Japan \ \ \1990 \19p. \RS2-63 \Monograph \Photocopies #G 1991.80; #G 1991.81. @\ MOS-1 Marine observation satellite - 1 \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \MOS-1 \Remote sensing \Satellites \International \Japan \ \1987 \n/a \RS2-63 \Monograph \#G P.344 Several spare copies. jk 13.5.92 @\ Technical description for design of MOS-1 ground stations, September1983 \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Ground communications stations \MOS-1 \Remote sensing \Japan \International \ \1983 \41p. \RS2-63 \Monograph \Photocopy #G P.346 jk 13.5.92 @\ MOS-1 system \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \MOS-1 \Remote sensing satellites \Environmental research \Japan \International \ \n.d. \n/a \RS2-63 \Monograph \Photocopy of viewgraphs. #G P.347 jk 13.5.92 @\ Announcement of opportunity for MOS-1 verification program (MVP), Nov.1985 [with] Outline of the MOS-1 earth observation system, October 30, 1985 \ \ \ \ \NASDA \COSSA \MOS-1 \Space science \Remote sensing satellites \Japan \International \ \1987 \12+ 28p. \RS2-63 \Monograph \Photocopies of 2 monographs, stapled. Front picture sheet: The MOS-1 satellitesystem, specifications and objectives. Issued by COSSA, ed. J Kingwell.#G P.348. AO papers alone, P.357, pub. NASDA 1985 November. jk 13.5.92 @\MOS-1 to ground station interface description \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \MOS-1 \Interfaces \Remote sensing satellites \Japan \International \ \1985 \varies \RS2-63 \Monograph \Photocopy. @\1st MOS-1 Operation & Management Group (MOMO) Meeting July 14-16 1988 \ MOS-1 Operation & Management Group Meetings \ \ \ \ National Space Development Agency of Japan \ \ MOS-1 \ Data Management \ Data Collection Systems \ Japan \ Multinational \ \ 1988 \ 200p (aprox) \ RS2-63 \ Conference Publication \ #C . See also P.355. @\ Marine Observation Satellite-1 International Symposium, March 2 1989,Tokyo, Japan \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Remote Sensing \Earth Observation \Satellites \Space \International \ \1989 \189p. \RS2-63 \Monograph \ # C @\ The Third Symposium on MOS-1 Verification Program (MVP) \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Earth Observation \Remote Sensing \MOS-1 \Japan \Space \International \1989 \436p \RS2-63 \Conference proceedings \#C P.350. 27 February - 1 March at Tokyo Yubin Chokin Kaikan. Forward byShigeru Igarashi. jk 13.5.92 @\ Proceedings of the first ADEOS : Advanced Earth Observing Satellite Symposium \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Earth Observation \Remote Sensing \ADEOS \Japan \Space \International \1988 \123p \RS2-63 \Conference proceedings \#C P.379 (Copy 1), P.380 (Copy 2, unbound). March 23 at Shiba Grand Plaza,Tokyo. Forward by Akira Kubozono. jk 13.5.92 @\Report on the status of the Australian MOS-1 Experiment and ReceptionFacilities \ \Kingwell.J \Bryce.I \Buckley.R \ \ \MOS-1 \Remote sensing \ \Japan \Australia \International \1988 \13p \RS2-63 \Conference paper \#G P.355. Paper presented at First MOMO (MOS-1 Management and Operation)Meeting, Tokyo 14-16 July 1988. Overhead transparencies/viewgraphs for paperin envelope as P.358. jk 13.5.92 @\MOS-1 Format Synchroniser Technical Description \ \Baber.A \ \ \Baber Enterprises Pty Ltd \ \MOS-1 \Ground receiver equipment \Remote sensing \Japan \Australia \ \1988 ? \63p + diag. \RS2-63 \Monograph \#G P.356 Important technical documentation of equipment funded by COSSAand Australian Space Board and developed by Baber Enterprises (Vict.) forthe Australian MOS-1 Experiment. jk 13.5.92 @\ [Some details of Japanese ERS-1 and MOS-1 satellites] \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Remote sensing satellites \JERS-1 \MOS-1 \Japan \ \ \n.d. \6p. \RS2-63 \(papers) \Photocopies of papers. #G P.351 jk 13.5.92 @\MOS-1 data users handbook, March 1987 [by] Earth Observation Center \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Remote sensing satellites \Handbooks \MOS-1 \Japan \Space \ \1987 \various \RS2-63 \Monograph \ @\ Technical Information on the Revised Version of the MOS-1 to Ground StationInterface Description \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Earth Observation satellites \Remote Sensing \Space \Space \Japan \International \July 1988 \Various \RS2-63 \Data Sheets \#G P.352 See also P.346. jk 13.5.92 @\GMS-3 [Japan Geostationary Meteorological Satellite-3] \ \ \ \ \NASDA \ \Meteorology \Remote sensing satellites \GMS \Japan \Space \ \1983 updated \35p. \RS2-63 \Monograph \GMS. Received 1988? P.353 jk 13.5.92 @\ International Conference on Japanese Earth Observation Programs, 29 October- 2 November 1990, Tsukuba Japan. \ \ \ \ \ NASDA \ \ Remote sensing satellites \ Environmental research \ Global change \ Japan \ International \ \ 1990 \ Various \ RS2-63 \ Conference proceedings (set of 5) \ #C "International Conference on Japanese Earth Observation Programs",1991.9 Set of 5 reprints of Conference held at Tsukuba Center for Institutes,29 October to 2 November 1990. 1991.9.1 deals with Plenary ; 1991.9.2 withMOS-1 ; 1991.9.3 with ADEOS ; 1991.9.4 with TRMM ; and 1991.9.5 with JERS-1. Extensive technical program detail and status reports. jk 26/4/91. @\ERS-1 Calibration and validation in Australasia \COSSA Publication No. 020A \Barton.I \ \ \COSSA \ \Remote sensing applications \ERS-1 \ \Australia \ \ \1988 Jan \27p. \RS2-80 \Monograph \# G P.359 ISBN 0 643 04756 5 jk 13.5.9 @\Australian - New Zealand Proposals for Science , Applications and ValidationExperiments Utilising ERS-1- Data : Response to Announcement of Opportunityby the European Space Agency \COSSA Publication 018 \Kingwell.J \ \ \COSSA \ \Remote Sensing Applications \ERS-1 \ \Australia \New Zealand \ \December 1987 \257 pages \RS2-80 \Monograph \#G P.360 Ed. by J Kingwell. @\ERS-1 Australasian Oceanographic Proposals \COSSA Publication 018 \Nilsson.C \ \ \CSIRO Marine Laboratories \ \Remote Sensing Applications \ERS-1 \ \Australia \New Zealand \ \1986 November \Various \RS2-80 \Monograph \#G P.361 (copy 1, bound; P.362, Copy 2 loose) Ed. by C Nilsson @\ Australian/New Zealand response to ERS-1 announcement of opportunity:Geophysical validations of ATSR (interim proposal) \ \Barton.I \ \ \CSIRO \Rutherford Appleton Lab. \ERS-1 \Remote sensing instruments \Validation \Australia \New Zealand \ \1986 \n/a \RS2-80 \paper) \#G P.363 (copy 1) P.364 (Copy 2) Forms part of P.360. @\ Australian/New Zealand response to ERS-1 announcement of opportunity:On-land applications of ERS-1, 1(B) Land use and vegetation \ \Richards.J \Milne.A \ \University of NSW \ \ERS-1 \Forest research & development \Remote sensing applications \Australia \ \ \1986 \n/a \RS2-80 \(paper) \#G P.365 Forms part of P.360. jk. 13.5.92 @\ Australian/New Zealand response to ERS-1 announcement of opportunity:On-land applications of ERS-1, 1(A) Geology \ \ \ \ \BMR \CSIRO \ERS-1 \Geology & geophysics \Remote sensing applications \Australia \ \ \1986 \8p. \RS2-80 \(paper) \#G P.366 Forms part of P.360 jk 13.5.92 @\Australian/New Zealand response to ERS-1 announcement of opportunity:On-land applications of ERS-1, (C) Mapping and tropical environments \ \Divett.N \ \ \Queensland. Dept. of Mapping & Surveying \ \ERS-1 \Mapping \REGIS project \Australia \Queensland \ \1986 \12p. \RS2-80 \(paper) \Theme: evaluation of SAR image data...with a geographical information system.P.367. Forms part of P.360 @\ Australian/New Zealand response to ERS-2 announcement of opportunity:Antarctic studies, proposals for programmes of research... \ \ \ \ \Antarctic Div. \ \ERS-1 \Antarctic studies \Remote sensing applications \Australia \Antarctica \New Zealand \1986 \n/a \RS2-80 \(paper) \#G P.368 . Forms part of P.360. jk 13.5.92 @\Assessment of ERS-1 data requirements for Australian Scientific Investigations \COSSA Publication 011 \Nilsson.C \ \ \COSSA \ \Remote Sensing Applications \ERS-1 \ \Australia \ \ \February 1987 \31 pages \RS2-80 \Monograph \#G P.389 ISBN 0 643 03855 8 ISSN 0818 4291 jk 14.5.92 @\ERS-1 scientific program preliminary report \COSSA Publication 0003A \ \ \ \COSSA \ \Announcements of opportunity \ERS-1 \ \Australia \International \Europe \1985 March \14p \RS2-80 \Monograph \#G P.396 (Copy 1) P.397 (Copy 2) ISBN 0 643 03843 4 Call for "Preliminaryexpressions of interest" in the ERS-1 science program. Contains somehistorical information on origin of ERS-1 DEU and FDP projects (App. A ),apparently as one of COSSA's first tasks. jk 14.5.92 @\ Earth resources satellites: Australian facilities. A report to the PrimeMinister \ \ \ \ \ASTEC \ \LANDSAT \Earth resources satellites \Ground communications stations \Australia \ \ \1982 \29p. \RS2-80 \Monograph \ #G Copy 1 is P.369 Copy 2 is P.122 Recommended i) upgrade of AustralianLandsat Station to X-band at cost of approx. $6.5m (suggested that fullcost recovery possible via product sales) ii) transfer of ALS to privatesector iii) promotion of Landsat product sales by ALS jk 10/5/91 @\ Aspects of Australian involvement in the ERS-1 satellite program \ \ \ \ \British Aerospace Australia\ \ERS-1 \Space technology \Space industry \Australia \South Australia \ \nd (1986?) \38p \RS2-80 \Viewgraphs and speech \#G P.370 (Copy 1) P.372 (Copy 2) Details BAeA work on Fast Data Processor,Digital Electronics Unit for ERS-1. Lists CSIRO as partner (with MDA, SACRS,CSA) jk 13.5.92 @\Polar platform papers by NOAA] [Folder] \ \ \ \ \NOAA \ \Polar platforms \NOAA satellites \IPOMS \Space \United States \ \n.d. \various \RS3-05 \(papers) in Folder \Folder of NOAA papers dated ca. 1985. Marked on file: ND/7-2. Containspapers from the first IPOMS Meeting, in Washington 19-20 November 1984.#C P.416 ("IPOMS"). Australian representatives J W Zillman andB Tucker. jk 14.5.92 @\ Proceedings, North American NOAA Polar Orbiter Users Group First Meeting(1987, 14-16 July: Boulder, Colorado) \ \Hastings.D \Emery.W \Weaver.R \NOAA \NANPOUG \Remote sensing applications \Polar orbiting satellites \ \United States \International \1987 \273p. \RS3-12 \(Conference pub.) \ #C P.99 (Copy 1) , P.374 (Copy 2) @\ ENVIROSAT-2000 Report: plan for Space Station Polar-Orbiting Platform,June 1985 \ENVIROSAT-2000 Report \McElroy.J \Schneider.S \Miller.D \NOAA \NESDIS \Polar platforms \Space stations \ENVIROSAT program \Space \United States \ \1985 \82p. \RS3-12 \Monograph \#G P.408 @\ NESDIS Programs, NOAA Satellite Operations: NOAA satellite programs briefing,March 1985 \ \ \ \ \NOAA \NESDIS \Satellites \Information systems \NESDIS \International \United States \ \1985 \264p. \RS3-12 \Monograph \#G P.383 (Copy 1) P.385 (Copy 2) @\ Earth observations and the Polar Platform, Jan, 1985 \NOAA Technical Report NESDIS \McElroy.J \Schneider.S \ \NOAA \NESDIS \Polar platforms \Remote sensing applications \ \1985 Jan \16p \RS3-12 \Monograph \#G P.410 NOAA Technical Report NESDIS 18 jk 14.5.92. @\ Space station Polar Platform: integrating research and operational missions,Jan. 1985 \NOAA Technical Report NESDIS \McElroy.J \Schneider.S \ \NOAA \NESDIS \Polar platforms \Space stations \Space missions \United States \Space \International \1985 \19p. \RS3-12 \Monograph \#G P.411 Copy 1; P.623 Copy 2. NOAA Technical Report NESDIS 19. jk 14.5.92 @\ Utilization of the Polar Platform of NASA'S Space Station program foroperational earth observations \NOAA Technical Report NESDIS \McElroy.J \Schneider.S \ \NOAA \NESDIS \Polar platforms \Space stations \Remote sensing applications \United States \Space \International \1984 \67p. \RS3-12 \Monograph \#G P.412 NOAA Technical Report NESDIS 12 Copy 2 is P.413 jk 14.5.92 @\ Space Station Polar Platform: NOAA systems considerations and requirements \NOAA Technical Report NESDIS \McElroy.J \Schneider.S \ \NOAA \ \Space stations \Polar platforms \Environmental research \International \United States \Space \1985 \155p. \RS3-12 \Monograph \#G P.414 Unbound photocopy of NOAA Technical Report NESDIS 22. jk 14.5.92.Bound copy P.995, 11.8.92. @\Space Station Polar Platform: NOAA systems considerations \ \McElroy.J \Schneider.S \ \NOAA \ \Polar platforms \Space Station \ \United States \ \ \1986 ? \Various \RS3-12 \Overheads \#G P.415 Set of overheads (paper form) and technical specifications jk14.5.92 @\Landsat-4 Science characterization early results; Proceedings of the ...Symposium (1983, 22-24 Feb.: Goddard Space Flight Centre) \NASA Conference pub. \Barker.J \ \ \NASA \ \Landsat \Remote sensing applications \Remote sensing instruments \United States \International \ \1983 \various \RS3-12 \4 vol. in 5 \NASA Conference Pub. 2355. All in #C ("Landsat 4 Science Symp. 1983")Vol.1: Multispectural scanner (MSS) P.390; Vol.2: Thematic mapper (TM),Part 1 P.391; Vol.3: Thematic mapper (TM), Part 2 P.392 (Copy 1), P.393(Copy 2); Vol.4: Applications P.394. jk 14.5.92 @\ Anglo-French Colombus Utilisation Working Group on the Use of the SpaceStation Polar Platforms, Phase B1 report, [and] Annex Document to PhaseB1 report, Payload instrument data sheets, 14th February 1986 [2 vols] \ \Revah.I \Hardy.D \ \Anglo-French Colombus Utilisation Working Group \ \Space stations \Polar platforms \Colombus \Space \Great Britain \France \1986 \54 + ca.300p. \RS3-30 \Monograph \#G In 2 vols. P.372 and P.373 (Appendix 1A). jk 13.5.92 @\ESA Announcement of Opportunity for Provision of Earth Observation Instrumentationon European Polar Platform of the Space Station \EPOP-1-A.0.1 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Remote Sensing \Payloads \International Co-operation \Europe \International \ \1988 \Various \RS3-30 \Booklet \#G P.375 Simultaneous announcements of opportunity with ESA an Japan. @\ESA Announcement of Opportunity for ERS-1 Science, Application, Validation \ \ \ \ \ESA \ \Remote Sensing \Announcements of opportunity \International Co-operation \Europe \International \ \1986 May \21p \RS3-30 \Booklet \#G P.376 (AO); P.648 , Technical Annex, ERS-1 System Description. See P.360for Australian responses. @\ Report of the working group on earth observation requirements for thepolar orbiting platform elements of the International Space Station, Mai1986 \ \ \ \ \ESA \ \Remote sensing \Polar platforms \Space stations \Space \Europe \ \1986 \97p. \RS3-30 \Monograph \#G P.406 Copy 1 P.407 Copy 2 jk 14.5.92 \Programme proposal for the Earth Observation Preparatory Programme, Vol.1,Draft issue 1, 1 April 1985 \ \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space programs \Environmental research \EOPP \Europe \International \ \1985 \50p. \RS3-30 \Monograph \#G P.508 @\Espoir: proceedings of the European Symposium on Polar platforn Opportunitiesand Instrumentation for Remote -sensing, (Avignon: June 1986) \ESA SP-266 \ \ \ \ESA \ \Polar platforms \Remote sensing \Instrumentation \Europe \ \ \1986 \122p. \RS3-30 \Monograph \#G P.382 ESA Workshop proceedings jk 13.5.92 @\ERS-1: 500 days in orbit \ \ \ \ \ESA \ \Space programs \Space technology \Space science \Europe \ \ \1993 \35p \RS3-30 \Monograph \#G 1993.135 Published by ESA Public Relations Division, Paris. Gives overviewof ERS-1 (launched 17 July 1991), describes 24 selected images and resultsvarious sites in Europe, Antarctica, Alaska, South America; plus Hurricanesand oceans). mvk 26.9.93 @\Land and sea applications of ERS-1 data \ESA BR-109 \ \ \ \ESA \ \ERS-1 \Environmental research \Remote sensing applications \ \Europe \International \ \1995 \various \RS3-30 \Folder of brochures \#G 1996.50 Demonstrates many applications of data from ESA's remote sensingsatellite ERS-1. mvk 8.4.96 @\New views of the Earth: scientific achievements of ERS-1 \ESA SP-1176 \ \ \ \ESA \ \ERS-1 \Environmental research \Remote sensing applications \ \Europe \International \ \1995 \162p \RS3-30 \Monograph \#G 1996.41 ISBN 92 9092 141 2 Demonstrates many applications of data fromESA's remote sensing satellite ERS-1; classified by area (ocean and atmosphere;sea ice; snow; land; crustal dynamics). mvk 8.4.96 @\Columbus/Space Station United Kingdom utilisation study 1985-6: PolarPlatform instrument data sheets, 31 Dec. 1986 \ \Thomas.I \ \ \BNSC \ \Columbus \Polar platforms \Remote sensing instruments \Space \Great Britain \ \1986 \various \RS3-32 \Monograph \#G P.409. Multivolume Columbus Study, to which this is addenda, classedat AC3-32. Actual revision date 12 Dec. jk 14.5.92 @\Announcement of opportunity for Polar Orbiting Platform Program, Jan.15, 1988 \ \ \ \ \STA Japan \ \Polar platforms \Remote sensing applications \Announcements of opportunity \Japan \ \ \1988 \28p. \RS3-63 \(paper) \#G P.405 Contact was T Mukai . jk 14.5.92 @\ Satellites signals and uses, programme [and papers] ANZAAS Congress (57th:Townsville:1987) Section C. \ \ \ \ \ANZAAS Congress \ \Remote sensing applications \Satellites \Scientific research \Australia \ \ \1987 \ca.50p. \RS3-80 \(Conference pub.) \ #C ("ANZAAS") P.395 Papers by J Weinman, University of Wisconsin-Madison;P Arlett, JCUNQ; K McCloy; K Bryceson; G Paltridge; P. Catt. jk 14.5.92 @\Satellite images of Australia \ \McCracken.K \Astley-Boden.C \ \Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Group \CSIRO \Remote sensing applications \Environmental research \LANDSAT \Australia \ \ \1982 \62p. \RS3-80 \Monograph \Collection of papers re. LANDSAT. authorised by CSIRO, published by HarcourtBJG. @\The International Polar Platform Program : Australian and New ZealandRequirements and Opportunities : Volume 1 : Main Text, Nov. 1987; Volume2: Working Party Reports, Feb. 1988 \COSSA Publication \Richards.J \ \ \COSSA \Polar Platform Study Group \Remote Sensing Applications \Polar Platforms \Space Stations \Australia \New Zealand \ \1987-1988 \65 + 167p. \RS3-80 \Monograph \#G In 2 volumes. Vol 1 P.398, ISBN 0 643 04573 0, COSSA Publication No.017A; Vol 2 Copy 1 P.399 , ISBN 0 643 04752 2 , COSSA Publication No. 017B,Copy 2 P.400 . P.404 is original of Vol 1, with University of NSW/AustralianDefence Force Academy cover. jk 14.5.92 @\ International Polar Platform Program [Overheads, Australian project] \ \Astley-Boden.C \ \ \COSSA \ \Remote sensing applications \Polar platforms \Space stations \Australia \International \ \n.d. \n/a \RS3-80 \Overheads/viewgraphs \#G P.401 1988? OHPs for P398 - P.400, jk 14.5.92 @\ The International Polar Platform: remote sensing opportunities at theend of the century; [paper from] proceedings of 4th Australasian RemoteSensing Conference, Adelaide, 1987 14-18 Sept., Vol.1, p. 94-106 \ \Richards.J \Kingwell.J \O'Sullivan.K \ \ \Remote sensing applications \Polar platforms \ \Australia \International \ \1987 \13p \RS3-80 \(paper) \#G P.402 Copy 1 ; P.403 Copy 2 jk 14.5.92 @\ Resources satellites, a management tool of the 1980s, from a talk givento the National Science Forum, 29th June, 1982 \ \McCracken.K \ \ \National Science Forum \ \Remote sensing satellites \Industrial management \Economics \Australia \ \ \1982 \14p. \RS4-80 \(paper) \#G P.418 jk 15.5.92 @\Looking forward...looking down! Global opportunities for British businessfrom Europe's latest satellite mission \ERS2: Europe's second remote sensing satellite \ \ \ \BNSC \ \ERS2 \ \ \Europe \International \ \n.d. \7p. \RS5-30 \brochure \#G 1996.67 mvk.10.6.96 @\Satellite remote sensing: industrial dynamics and pricing policy \CIRCIT Research Report No. 4 \Mansell.R \Hawkins.R \Paltridge.S \Centre for International Research on Communication and Information Technologies \Centre for Information and Communication Technologies, University of Essex \Data policy \Remote sensing satellites \Marketing \Australia \Great Britain \ \1993 April \75p \Monograph \#G 1993.93 Published by CIRCIT, ISSN 1039 0994 . Commissioned study basedupon reports prepared for Logica Space & Communications, for the Commissionof the European Communities. Detailed examination of data policies and options.CIRCIT is a venture of the Government of Victoria and the Universities ofMonash and Melbourne. mvk 19.7.93 @\ SPOT : One earth, one environment \ \ \ \ \ SPOT Image \ \ SPOT \ Remote sensing satellites \ Environmental research \ France \ International \ \ 1991 (?) \ 44p \ RS9-05 \Monograph \ #G 1992.7 Award - winning publication on use of satellite data for environmentalmnoitoring. @\ SPOT art \ \ \ \ \ SPOT Image \ \ SPOT \ Remote sensing satellites \ \ France \ International \ \ 1987 \ \ RS11-34 \Monograph \ #G 1991.23 jk 29/5/91 @\ Meteorological satellites from the earth to polar orbit \ \Schmidt.C \ \ \RCA Astro-Electronics \ \Remote sensing satellites \Meteorology \ \International \United States \ \n.d. \14p. \RS12-05 \Monograph \#G P.148 Brochure with large colour diagrams and descriptions of TIROS,ESSA, ITOS, NOAA and DMSP families and their instruments. @\Announcement of Opportunity. Part Three: EOS Science, Operations, andData Management. EOS. Background Information Package (BIP) \A.O. No. OSSA- \ \ \ \NASA \ \Polar Platforms \Remote Sensing \ \International \Space \ \1988 \Various \RS14-01 \Booklet \Not found jk 15.5.92 @\ Announcement of Opportunity No. OSSA-1-88, Part Four, Polar PlatformPayload, Accommodations Handbook, Applicable to all Polar Platform InstrumentInvestigations. Earth Observing System (EOS), Background Information Package(BIP) \AO No.OSSA- \ \ \ \NASA \ \Instrumentation \Space technology \Remote Sensing \Space \ \International \1988 \39p. \RS14-01 \Booklet \Various \RS14-01 \Not found jk 15.5.92 @\ Announcement of Opportunity No.OSSA-3-88. Space Station, Attached Payloads.To be co-ordinated with A.O. No. OSSA-1-88 \A.O. No. OSSA- \ \ \ \NASA \ \Astrophysics \Life sciences \EOS \Space \ \ \1988 \Various \RS14-01 \Booklet \Not found jk 15.5.92 @\ EOS. Preliminary Attached Payload Accommodations for the Early SpaceStation. EOS Preproposal Briefing (A.O. No. OSSA-3.88) \ \Cressy.P \ \ \Office of Space Science & Applications, Flight Systems Division \ \OES \Remote Sensing \astrophysics \space \ \ \1988 \20p. \RS14-01 \Loose papers \Not found jk 15.5.92 @\Eos preproposal briefing: preliminary attached payload accommodationsfor the early space station, March 22, 1988 \ \Cressy.P \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing satellites \Eos \Payloads \United Staates \Space \ \1988 \n/a \RS14-01 \Data sheets \One of set of Eos Data Sheets Not found jk 15.5.92 @\ EOS AO process description and proposed schedule, revised 3-15-88 asper HQ; [Earth system science] \ \ \ \ \NASA \ \Remote sensing satellites \Eos \Space programs \United States \Space \ \1988 \n/a \RS14-02 \(data sheets) \One of set of Eos Data Sheets Not found jk 15.5.92 @\ International meteorological satellite system: issues and options \ \ \ \ \NOAA \NESDIS \Meteorology \Data policy \International cooperation \International \ \ \1983 \124p. \RS14-05 \Monograph \#G P.420 Examines 1983 status (GOES, Meteosat, GMS, Insat, GOMS; NOAA,Meteor; looks at models of WMO, Eumetsat, CGMS, Intelsat. jk 15.5.92 [ R continues next page ] WT03-B26-166IA059-000321-B003-322http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin70/spin705.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195033 text/html 742HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:48:51 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 18 Jul 1996 07:26:16 GMTContent-length: 569 SpIN no.70 WT03-B26-167IA059-000321-B003-351http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin71/7105.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195059 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:49:05 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:37 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-168IA059-000321-B003-384http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin72/7207.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195109 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:49:30 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:22 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-169IA059-000321-B003-410http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin70/spin706.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195127 text/html 742HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:49:40 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 18 Jul 1996 07:23:01 GMTContent-length: 569 SpIN no.70 WT03-B26-170IA059-000321-B004-24http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin71/7106.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195153 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:50:02 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:39 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-171IA059-000321-B004-50http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin72/7208.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195208 text/html 648HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:50:26 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:24 GMTContent-length: 475 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-172IA059-000321-B004-86http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin70/spin707.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195227 text/html 742HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:50:48 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 18 Jul 1996 07:23:01 GMTContent-length: 569 SpIN no.70 WT03-B26-173IA059-000321-B004-122http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin71/7107.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195248 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:50:59 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:41 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-174IA059-000321-B004-146http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin70/spin708.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195324 text/html 742HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:51:24 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 18 Jul 1996 07:15:57 GMTContent-length: 569 SpIN no.70 WT03-B26-175IA059-000321-B004-173http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin71/7108.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195344 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:52:04 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:43 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-176IA059-000321-B004-192http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin70/spin709.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195404 text/html 743HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:52:15 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 18 Jul 1996 07:15:57 GMTContent-length: 570 SpIN no.70 WT03-B26-177IA059-000321-B004-218http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin71/7109.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195419 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:52:37 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:45 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-178IA059-000321-B004-247http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin70/spin7010.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195431 text/html 744HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:52:52 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 18 Jul 1996 07:15:55 GMTContent-length: 571 SpIN no.70 WT03-B26-179IA059-000321-B004-271http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin71/7110.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195452 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:53:03 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:47 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-180IA059-000321-B004-307http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin70/spin7011.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195508 text/html 745HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:53:28 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 18 Jul 1996 07:15:56 GMTContent-length: 572 SpIN no.70 WT03-B26-181IA059-000321-B004-331http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin71/7111.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195520 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:53:41 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:50 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-182IA059-000321-B004-359http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin70/spin7012.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195547 text/html 632HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:54:07 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 18 Jul 1996 07:15:56 GMTContent-length: 459 SpIN no.70 WT03-B26-183IA059-000321-B004-387http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin71/7112.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195603 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:54:22 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:52 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-184IA059-000321-B005-3http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin71/7113.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195631 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:54:52 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:54 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-185IA059-000321-B005-25http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin71/7114.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195649 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:55:03 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:57 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-186IA059-000321-B005-62http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin71/7115.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195718 text/html 760HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:55:38 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:31:59 GMTContent-length: 587 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-187IA059-000321-B005-92http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/spin71/7116.htm 138.44.40.1 19970114195732 text/html 648HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 19:55:51 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Thu, 31 Oct 1996 03:32:01 GMTContent-length: 475 SpIN no.71 WT03-B26-188IA059-000314-B011-185http://gaia.cossa.csiro.au:80/ 138.44.40.1 19970114153625 text/html 2102HTTP/1.0 200 Document followsDate: Tue, 14 Jan 1997 15:34:42 GMTServer: NCSA/1.5Content-type: text/htmlLast-modified: Mon, 13 Jan 1997 01:47:20 GMTContent-length: 1928 CSIRO Earth Observation Centre 		    Office of Space Science & Applications Earth Observation Centre Address For general information about CSIRO please refer to the CSIROHomepage. What's New EOC Earth Observation Centre COSSA CSIRO Office of Space Science and Applications GMS Pathfinder Project CEOS IDN Australian node EOSDISV0 IMS Web Gateway AirSAR / TOPSAR Meetings and Missions calendar Publications & Reports Staff Your Feedback WT03-B26-189IA055-000922-B002-160http://www.vital-info.com:80/ 204.69.248.245 19970208003942 text/html 18024HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 00:51:01 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 17852Last-modified: Mon, 03 Feb 1997 15:42:04 GMT Vital Information - Spectacular Stock Selection/Magnificent Market Timing Stock Pick Of The Week Feb. 3, 1997 Investment Newsletters Think you have a great stock pick? Then take the Saxena Stock Challenge for a chance to win a one year subscription to the high-octane Hot Stocks Digest! Hot Stocks Digest Growth Stocks Report Hot Funds Analyst Do you ever wonder why you seem to be the only one who is not making money in the market? Do you ever feel like your investment program has no direction or that the person giving you advice is the only one making money from his/her recommendations? Then let me introduce to you three investment advisory newsletters that perform like no others. These newsletters not only outperform the market, they do so by leaps and bounds! HSD Members Click Below Free Sample Top of Page STOCK PICK OF THE WEEK brought to you by Hot Stocks Digest Hot Stocks Digest Click for more details As an astute investor, you know that achieving results far superior to the averages requires an effective discipline and timely information. Our weekly newsletter gives you superb small-cap stock recommendations generated by the highly successful, CANSLIM based Alpha-RSM System. Fax or e-mail delivery insures that no time is wasted and that you are able to act swiftly when lucrative opportunities arise. By subscribing to the Hot Stocks Digest, which is limited to only 2000 members, youll join the ranks of an elite group of investors for whom spectacular performance has become the norm. Click on chart for performance history GSR Members Click Below Free Sample Top of Page Growth Stocks Report Click for more details Imagine a portfolio filled with winners like these: * Accustaff (ASTF) -- up 267.75% * Ascend Comm. (ASND) -- up 817.62% * Edmark Corp. (EDMK) -- up 230.00% * US Robotics (USRX) -- up 505.94% * Zygo Corporation (ZYGO) -- up 302.08%* If you followed my recommendation in the past few months and invested $10,000 in each of the above 5 stocks, you'd have over $262,335 today, a whopping 424.67% profit. Better yet, if you join our exclusive group of readers, you can reap similar gains in outstanding growth stocks which 99% of investors have never even heard about. Click on chart for performance history. HFA Members Click Below Free Sample Top of Page Hot Funds Analyst Click for more details Proven market timing and a powerful fund selection system have yielded brilliant results which have exceeded the S&P 500 by more than 20% per year. Its time you took control of your financial future. Performance is what you want. . . risk is what you want to avoid. Let me introduce to you a service that does both. This unique advisory newsletter combines a MAGNIFICENT market timing system with a DYNAMIC fund selection methodology in order to benefit clients with performance that consistently outdistances the market . . . with LESS risk! Click on chart for performance history. Top of Page Stock Pick of the Week Award Software (NASD: AWRD) Price: $14.50 Click here for a chart Award Software International Inc. (NASD: AWRD) designs, develops and markets system management software for the global computing market. System management software is one of the fundamental layers in personal computer ("PC") architecture and provides an essential interface between a PC's operating system software and hardware. The Company's principal system management software products include a suite of Basic Input/Output System software ("BIOS"). Award's customers include designers and manufacturers of motherboards, PC systems and other microprocessor-based (or "embedded") devices. The Company believes that its products and engineering services enable customers to rapidly develop new motherboard designs for state-of-the-art computer systems. The Company markets and licenses its products and services worldwide and has established itself as a leading provider of desktop system management software in Asia, which accounts for approximately 40% of worldwide desktop motherboard production. Revenues increased 50% from $2.3 million to $3.4 million in the three months ended September 30, 1995 and September 30, 1996, respectively. Net income increased from $220,000, or $0.03 per share, to $608,000, or $0.10 per share, in the three months ended September 30, 1995 and September 30, 1996, respectively. For the 9 months ended September, net income was $0.28 per share. Earnings for the fourth quarter ending in December and for Fiscal Year 1996 are expected to be released this week with earning estimates for the year at $0.44. Estimates for FY97 are $0.73. Needham & Co.'s analyst, Barr, said he's encouraged by Award's position in desktop systems management software, particularly its BIOS product; its strength in the Asian markets; and its frequent new product offerings. Award Software is covered with a Buy Rating by JP Morgan, Prudential Securities and Needham & Co. Add your name to the Stock Pick of the Week Mailing List Hot Stocks Digest * Growth Stocks Report * Hot Funds Analyst Questions and Information * Member Support * Home WT03-B26-190IA055-000922-B003-199http://www.vital-info.com:80/spow.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208004338 text/html 563HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 00:54:59 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 393Last-modified: Mon, 03 Feb 1997 15:41:33 GMT Vital Information's Stock Pick of the Week WT03-B26-191IA055-000922-B002-181http://www.vital-info.com:80/form.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208003949 text/html 5003HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 00:51:10 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4832Last-modified: Tue, 04 Feb 1997 20:53:24 GMT Vital Information - Stock Pick Stock Pick of the Week Mailing List And/Or The Saxena Stock Challenge Fill Out TheForm Below: To be added to theMailing List for the Stock Pick of the Week To enter your BestStock Pick for the Saxena Stock Challenge Or Both Think you have a good stockpick? Take the Saxena Stock Challengefor a chance to win a complimentary one year subcription to thetop-performing Hot Stocks Digest, a $999.00value. To win, your pick must be the BEST-performing stock for themonth of all entries. The winner for each month and his/her pickwill be posted on our home page. One entry per person per month,please. RULES: Stock must be traded domestically (U.S.) and be pricedover $5. If there is a tie between entries, a random drawingamong the winners will determine who is awarded the prize. Entrymust be received by the close of the last business day of themonth for eligibility the next month. Name: First Last Address: (required) Street City STZip Phone: Daytime Number Fax Email: (required) Internet Email Stock Pick: Stock Name Stock Symbol You may only enter one stock selection per month. Good Luck! Stock Pick Of The Week Mailing List: YesNo Please Tell Us How You Found Us: Investors Business Daily Telescan Lombard Quote.com The SmallCap Investor By E-mail US Postal Mail Friend Just Browsing Note: There is no cost for this contest or mailing list. WT03-B26-192IA055-000922-B005-331http://www.vital-info.com:80/mfbhow.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208010314 text/html 7363HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 01:14:34 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7192Last-modified: Fri, 20 Dec 1996 03:35:13 GMT Vital Information - Mutual Fund Bulletin FAQ How to Use the MutualFund Bulletin Don't be fooled by theelegant simplicity of the Mutual Fund Bulletin. As you can see,it is clear, concise and easy to use. Yet it generates enormousprofits when followed correctly and with proper discipline. Our research and computer analysis are designed to select andchoose mutual funds for at least a four-week period. Our systemis not designed to trade intra-week or inter-day. Remember, allthe funds on our Top 50 list are technically very strong. Wedon't sell a fund based solely on a few good or bad days oftrading. However, we will send you a SPECIAL FLASH UPDATEanytime our Best intermediate Term Timing System (BITS) signals amajor change in stock market direction. We also have a telephone hotline that is updated everyMonday by 9:00 am eastern time. This hotline will give you thecurrent position of BITS and any portfolio changes. The Mutual Fund Bulletin features 4 Model Portfolios. The firstportfolio uses the Rydex Family Of Funds (1-800-820-0888) inconjunction with our BITS market timing system. This is known asour INDEX FUNDS PORTFOLIO. By using these funds (Nova, OTC andUrsa) we can go both long and short depending on the signal fromthe market timing system. Rydex Nova is an S&P500 index fund.Rydex OTC is a NASDAQ index fund. Rydex Ursa is an index fundthat is short the S&P500. BITS was developed in late 1988 and was tested on historicaldata from 1963 to 1988. The Nasdaq and the S&P500 index wereused to generate the buy/sell signals and compute the returns. Since 1989,BITS has been in use real-time and it has proven itself in bothbacktesting and actual trading. On average it signals a tradeevery 4 months. The accuracy rating is over 80%, with every 4 outof 5 winning trades. The compounded annualized return is over 24%per year. There are a number of reasons why we are using the Rydexfamily of funds for trading BITS signals. Rydex Nova is an S&P500index fund with a beta of 1.5. This means when BITS is correct inits long signal, you make 50% more than the S&P500index itself. Rydex OTC is the an index fund that tracks theNasdaq index. The combination of Rydex Nova and OTC lets usparticipate in both the large and the small-cap stocks. Rydex is the only family that offers a fund that is short theS&P500. This makes Rydex Ursa a rather unique fund. It goesup when the S&P500 goes down and vice-versa. This means when BITSis correct in its cash/short signal you can make money as theS&P goes down. If you are able to find other similar funds,you may be able to substitute them for the Rydex funds. JackWhite & Company (1-800-233-3411) offers all three Rydex fundswhile Charles Schwab offers only the Nova fund. The second portfolio consists of no-load funds that canbe bought and sold through Charles Schwab (1-800-2-NO-LOAD) orJack White (1-800-233-3411). This is known as our NO-LOAD FUNDS PORTFOLIO andit consists of funds from excellent families like Twentieth Century,Janus, Invesco, Berger, Oakmark, Strong, Steinroe, Founders,Montgomery, Lexington, Cappiello-Rushmore, IAI, Dreyfus, Kaufmannand many others. These funds are also available through theFidelity Funds Network (1-800-544-7777). The third portfolio is called the FIDELITY GROWTHPORTFOLIO and it consists of 4 diversified Fidelity funds. The fourthportfolio is called the FIDELITY SECTOR PORTFOLIO and itconsists of 4 Fidelity Select sector funds. FidelitySelect funds have a one time 3% sales load. Afterthat you may switch to other funds within the family without anyloads. There is also a $7.50 redemption charge which can beavoided by using their automated telephone touch-tone tradingsystem. Fidelity can be reached at 1-800-544-8888. How To Get Started 1. Choose One Or More Model Portfolios 2. Invest In Those Mutual Funds That Have A BuyRating. 3. Sell When A Sell Signal Is Given Once you have decided on a portfolio to follow, you can decidewhat to buy. For each portfolio, an allocation percentage islisted next to each fund. Use this allocation to decide how manyshares to buy depending on your personal portfolio/accountsize. Every portfolio gives you a specific percentage for eachmutual fund. Just multiply this percentage by the total amountof money you have to invest. This way any size investment can beaccommodated. You'll then see the individual funds in every issue of theMutual Fund Bulletin. You simply invest in the mutual funds that arein your selected portfolio. Whenever there is a change, just callyour broker or mutual fund and ask them to switch your money tothe recommended fund. By keeping your money in a winning fund,you automatically win. When you get the next issue of the Mutual Fund Bulletin, checkyour selected model portfolio and look at the Status of yourfund. Sell your fund when a sell signal is given. Then purchasethe new recommendation. It is as simple as that. Please remember ... patience and discipline arethe two most important cornerstones of successful investing.Don't expect miracles or think you'll get rich overnight. Also,don't let the day to day market volatility and ups and downs botheryou. That is all part of investing in the stock market. Focuson the longer-term. Look at the bigger picture. Think where youwant to be 3, 5 or 10 years from now. Jumping around from one investment program to the next can bedetrimental to your wealth building efforts. Once you have founda good system, like the Mutual Fund Bulletin, try it for at least2-3 years before passing judgment on it. We at the Mutual Fund Bulletin hope to make your investingprofitable and enjoyable. VITALINFORMATION 107 EDINBURGH SOUTH, SUITE 207, CARY, NC 27511,TEL: 919-461-3960, FAX: 919-461-3964. To send us mail, please click here: info@vital-info.com Copyright (c) 1996, Vital Information, Allrights reserved.WT03-B26-193IA055-000922-B004-245http://www.vital-info.com:80/gsrord.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208005344 text/html 1663HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 01:05:05 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1492Last-modified: Thu, 09 May 1996 18:48:21 GMT Growth Stocks Report : How To Subscribe You can print the order form on your local printer, fillin the information and fax it back to us,or you can fill in an on-line order form and the order willbe processed by email. Select which you would like to to now. If you select the PRINT option, a printable order form will be presented,and you can then print it by clicking on "FILE" and "Print" at yourbrowser. If you select the ORDER ONLINE option, you will be presented with anorder form which you can fill in right now with your name, address,and credit card information. This information will be emailed tous and we will process your order and notify you by email. I Would Like To Print The Order Form I Would Like To Order Online Via Email VITAL INFORMATION 107 EDINBURGH SOUTH, SUITE 207, CARY, NC 27511, TEL: 919-461-3960, FAX: 919-461-3964. To send us mail, please click here:info@vital-info.com Copyright (c) 1996, Vital Information, All rights reserved. WT03-B26-194IA055-000922-B005-175http://www.vital-info.com:80/gsrordpr.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208010219 text/html 2299HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 01:13:39 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2128Last-modified: Sat, 15 Jun 1996 18:53:26 GMT Growth Stocks Report Order Form 50% OFF Special Savings Certificate YES! I want to startdoubling my money every 2-3 years with the help of thetop-performing GROWTH STOCKS REPORT. Please enter my subscriptionas I have checked below. Name_______________________________________________________ Phone______________________________________________________ FAX________________________________________________________ Address____________________________________________________ ___________________________________________________________ City/State/Zip_____________________________________________ Delivery Option (check one) : ____FAX  ____US Mail  ____Internet Email Address______________________________________________ _____ 3 months trial offer at $49 (Please note: no refunds and no bonuses with trial offer) _____ 1 year at $199 (regularly $399) plus 4 parts of 7 part Investors Wealth Kit _____ 2 years at $349 (regularly $699) plus 7 part Investors Wealth Kit Payment Method: (Pick/Circle one) _____Check  _____VISA  ____Master Card  ____AMEX Credit Card #______________________________________________ Exp. Date__________________________________________________ Signature__________________________________________________ If paying by check, please make it payable to : Vital Information For Faster Service, Call 1-800-237-8400Ext. 115 or FAX to 919-461-3964 VITAL INFORMATION, 107 EDINBURGH SOUTH, SUITE207, CARY, NC 27511. (919) 461-3960, FAX: 919-461-3964WT03-B26-195IA055-000922-B005-159http://www.vital-info.com:80/gsr-ordf.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208010200 text/html 2949HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 01:13:16 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2778Last-modified: Sat, 15 Jun 1996 18:51:03 GMT Vital Information - Growth Stocks Report Application Growth Stocks Report Subscription Application 50% OFF SpecialSavings Certificate YES!Sign me up so I can start doubling my money every 2-3 years. Name: First, Last Address: Street City ST Zip Phone: Daytime Number Fax Email: (required) Internet Email Credit Card: Visa Mastercharge American Express Check Number Expires (mm/yy) You may also call in your Credit Card number (1-800-237-8400 Ext 115) If paying by check, please make checks payable to Vital Information. Delivery Option: (check one) Fax Internet First Class Mail Subscription Option: (pick one) 3 month trial for $49. (Please note, there are no refunds and no bonuses with the trial offer) 1 year at $199 (regularly $399) plus 4 parts of 7 part Investors Wealth Kit 2 years at $349 (regularly $699) plus 7 part Investors Wealth Kit WT03-B26-196IA055-000922-B006-48http://www.vital-info.com:80/mfbord.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208010332 text/html 1527HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 01:14:53 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1356Last-modified: Thu, 09 May 1996 18:48:47 GMT Mutual Fund Bulletin : How To Subscribe You can print the order form on your local printer, fillin the information and fax it back to us,or you can fill in an on-line order form and the order willbe processed by email. Select which you would like to to now. If you select the PRINT option, a printable order form will be presented,and you can then print it by clicking on "FILE" and "Print" at yourbrowser. If you select the ORDER ONLINE option, you will be presented with anorder form which you can fill in right now with your name, address,and credit card information. This information will be emailed tous and we will process your order and notify you by email. I Would Like To Print The Order Form I Would Like To Order Online Via Email To send us mail, please click here: info@vital-info.com Copyright (c) 1996, Vital Information, All rights reserved. WT03-B26-197IA055-000922-B004-154http://www.vital-info.com:80/gsrhow.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208004637 text/html 18808HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 00:57:37 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 18636Last-modified: Fri, 20 Dec 1996 03:32:15 GMT Vital Information - Growth Stocks Report FAQ How to Usethe GrowthStocks Report Don't befooled by the elegant simplicity of the Growth Stocks Report. Asyou can see, it is clear, concise and easy to use. Yet itgenerates enormous profits when followed correctly and withproper discipline. Our Alpha()-RSM System is designed toferret out those stocks that have a high alpha as well as high relativestrength & momentum. Alpha is that measure of the return thatis not explained by the general market. For example, if the S&P500has an average monthly return of 1.5% and a stock has an averagemonthly return of 8.5%, then the stock has an alpha of 7%. This7% is the excess return that the stock generates over the generalmarket. Once we have selected our list of 400 highalpha stocks, we run them through our proprietary mathematicalmodels that rank them based on their relative strength andmomentum. We want to buy only those high alpha stocks that alsohave high relative strength and are going up at the present time. Wehave no interest in stocks that are going sideways, or worse, aregoing down. The top 100 stocks are then presented in eachissue of the Growth Stocks Report. Their percent change over thepast 1, 3 , 6 and 12 months is also shown. Stocks from the top ofthe list are added to the model portfolios as space becomesavailable in them, i.e., when we sell some stocks. We do not necessarilysell a stock in the model portfolio when it falls out of the top100. Our research and computer analysis are designedto select and choose growth stocks for at least a one monthperiod. Our system is not designed to trade intra-week orinter-day. Remember, all the stocks on our Top 100 list are technicallyvery strong. We don't sell a stock based solely on a fewgood or bad days of trading. Therefore, we will not issue a buyor sell signal on individual stocks between issues. How Do I Start? Each portfolio is designed to provide adifferent level of diversification ranging from 10 stocks to 40. Onceyou have decided which level of diversification you wish tofollow, you can decide what to buy. As a new subscriber you have threeoptions when you start building your portfolio. 1. The aggressive option is to go aheadand buy all stocks in your selected model portfolio at their currentprices. This way you'll be fully invested instantly. Even thoughsome of these stocks may be up 100-200% since we bought them, it doesn'tmean that they cannot go up another 100% or more from theselevels. 2. The more conservative option is tobuy only those stocks that have a new buy recommendation for thatmonth and leave the rest of your portfolio in cash. This way,it'll take you a few months to get fully invested, but you'll bebuying each stock at the most appropriate time and price. 3. If you decide not to follow one ofour model portfolios, you may use this list of 100 most attractive stocksto pick and choose and build your own personal portfolio. Onestrategy is to buy stocks that appear close to the top ofthat list. Hold a stock as long as it in the list of 100. When a stockdrops out of the list, sell it and then buy again from the top ofthe list. This is just one way of using the list. You mayprefer to use it differently and tailor it to suit your personal taste. For each portfolio, the number of shares islisted next to each stock. Because we are perpetuating a portfolio,you should adjust the number of shares to accommodate yourpersonal portfolio. When first starting, is preferable to invest equaldollar amounts into each of your new buys rather than overweightingany one particular issue. When you get the next issue of the GrowthStocks Report, check your selected model portfolio. You'llnotice that the new sells and new buys in each issue are highlightedin italics. Sell a stock when a sell signal is given. Thenpurchase the new recommendation. It is as simple as that. Set Realistic Expectations -Discipline Is Your Key To Success Can we expect 100% plus returns every year. Itwould be great, but it just isn't realistic. In fact 100% returnshappen once only 4 or 5 years. We don't know when that is goingto happen. That is why we need to fully invested in the best high-alpha,high-RSM growth stocks. Many investors, particularly those with lessthan 5 years experience with their own money in the market, have unrealisticallyhigh expectations regarding returns. This is perhaps the biggestsource of frustration for newer investors. Over a 10-year period,stocks will be up only about 65 percent of the time on average.The rest of the days are spent drifting sideways or falling.These negative periods can last months or even years. The goodnews is that our Alpha()-RSM System can find the best stocks evenwhen the general stock is going down. Successful investing requires a mentaldetermination and emotional commitment to stay invested for at leastone market cycle, which usually lasts four to six years. Ofteninvestors lack the stamina to hold out through high period ofvolatility. They bail out, usually at the worst possible moment, forgettingthat the extraordinary returns generated by small-cap stocks willeventually compensate them for the risk or volatility. Please remember ... patience and disciplineare the two most important cornerstones of successful investing.Don't expect miracles or think you'll get rich overnight. Also,don't let the day to day market volatility and ups and downs botheryou. That is all part of investing in the stock market. Focus onthe longer-term. Look at the bigger picture. Think where you wantto be 3, 5 or 10 years from now. Generally, the longer you can leave your moneyin the market, the more risk you should be willing to take. Youalso need a proven investment strategy. Without a plan, investorsoften jump from one idea or philosophy to another. Jumping around from one investment program tothe next can be detrimental to your wealth building efforts. Onceyou have found a good system, like the Growth Stocks Report,try it for at least 2-3 years before passing judgment on it. Don't expect to make money each and everymonth. When faced with the inevitable down periods, don't losepatience and throw in the towel. Hang in there. Wait for theright opportunities, because sooner or later, they will surelycome. We at Growth Stocks Report hope to make your investing profitableand enjoyable. Frequently Asked Questionsabout the Growth Stocks Report Q. When is the newsletter published? A. The Growth Stocks Report is published by the5th of every month. The prices in the newsletter are as of thelast business day of the previous month. We finish our analysisby the 4th of the month, and then the newsletter is faxed or mailedby the 5th. Like any other monthly service, there will always bea lag of 4-5 days from last months close. In fact, some of thetime this lag may work in your favor. Q. Is there a telephone hotline? A. Yes, we have a telephone hotline that isupdated by the 5th of every month. This hotline was establishedso that we may be able to bypass mail delays. It contains ourlist of top 10 stocks for the month and any new buys or sells foreach of the model portfolio. A second hotline has been added to provideinformational updates on stocks that have had significant moveseither up or down. This second hotline is updated weekly by 9 amevery Monday. Both hotlines were included on a brightly coloredcard included with your kit and are available 24 hours a day,seven days a week. Q. Do I buy at the market or at the pricelisted in the newsletter? A. When you get the newsletter via mail or FAX,and decide to buy a stock, just buy it at the market. In somecases you will get a worse fill than the price listed in thenewsletter and in other cases you will get a better fill. Overtime, your fills should average out. A good rule of thumb to followis to not purchase a stock 30% higher than our buy price and to notbuy it 30% lower than our buy price. Q. Do you use stops or time the market? A. No market timing or stops are used in theGrowth Stocks Report. All portfolios remain fully invested 100%of the time. If you wish to use stops, you must be responsiblefor determining at what price you wish to implement them. Thesestops would be based upon your own personal tolerance for risk. Q. How do you select stocks? A. Our stock selection process incorporatesboth fundamental and technical criteria. Every month, we screenthousands of stocks looking for the handful that have thepotential for spectacular stock price increases. We are welooking for emerging companies poised for enormous growth or established onesthat are about to make major advances. We want companies whoseproducts are in such demand that they can't make them fastenough. Ones with entrepreneurial leadership that is taking advantageof technological breakthroughs to create new, super-fast growingbusinesses. And we want to find them before they're discovered bythe financial media and hordes of investors. So we can buy them aheadof the pack and take full advantage of the run-up in theirstocks. We set very strict risk/reward guidelines and whittle thepossibilities down to a handful of companies with superior balancesheets and liquidity and little or no debt. Then we take thisshort list and subject it to a rigorous proprietary system basedon cutting-edge computerized technical analysis. This system ranksthe stocks according to their short-term momentum and relativestrength. We list the top 100 in every issue of the Growth StocksReport and when there is space, we add the ones at the top of thislist to our model portfolios. Q. Are these stocks risky? A. On an individual stock basis, thesesmall-cap stocks are quite volatile and most people would characterizethem as being very risky. That is why you must diversify overat least 10-15 stocks, preferably more. If you have 15 stocksin your portfolio and if four of them lose 25% each, your total portfolioloss is only 6.66%. Furthermore, its quite possible that some ofthe other stocks in the portfolio will go up thereby making upfor the small loss. That is why it is imperative that you diversify yourholdings over a number a stocks. Q. My stock is down 5 points in 2 days. Areyou going to sell the stock? A. We don't sell a stock based solely on a fewgood or bad days of trading. Therefore, we will not issue a buyor sell signal on individual stocks between issues. Our researchand computer analysis are designed to select and choose growthstocks for at least a one month period. Our system is not designedto trade intra-week or inter-day. Remember, all the stocks on ourTop 100 list are technically very strong. Q. My stock is up 250%. Should I takeprofits and sell? A. No. Wait till the next issue comes out. Ifwe deem it to be a sell, it'll be sold. But till we ask you to sellit, don't sell just because it is up substantially. Q. A certain stock is down 4 points. Are youstill recommending it? A. Yes. Recommendations on a stock can onlychange once a month. If a stock is not rated a sell, then it israted a buy. Q. As a new subscriber, should I buy all thestocks in my chosen portfolio, or should I go with only the new buys? A. Either strategy if fine. The aggressiveoption is to go ahead and buy all stocks in your selected modelportfolio at their current prices. This way you'll be fullyinvested instantly. Even though some of these stocks may be up100-200% since we bought them, it doesn't mean that they cannotgo up another 100% or more from these levels. The more conservativeoption is to buy only those stocks that have a new buyrecommendation for that month and leave the rest of yourportfolio in cash. This way, it'll take you a few months to getfully invested. Just make sure that you divide your portfolio in theright proportion. For example, if you are following the $75000model portfolio and there are 3 new buys this month, then youwill buy $5000 worth of each of these stocks (total $15000) and leavethe rest of the $60000 in cash. Q. Why are you recommending or buying XYZstock? A. The answer to a question like this is alwaysthe same -- "because our computer models rank it as anexcellent buy at this time". Q. How do I use the list of top 100 stocksranked in order of attractiveness based on relative strength? A. If you decide not to follow one ofour model portfolios, you may use the list of 100 most attractive stocksto pick and choose and build your own personal portfolio. Onestrategy is to buy stocks that appear close to the top of thatlist. Hold a stock as long as it in the list of 100. When a stockdrops out of the list, sell it and then buy again from the top of thelist. This is just one way of using the list. You mayprefer to use it differently and tailor it to suit your personaltaste. Q. A stock does not appear in the list oftop 100. Why are you are still holding it in the model portfolio? A. We do not necessarily sell a stock in themodel portfolio when it falls out of the top 100. Our sell disciplineis such that we only sell a stock when it falls into the lowerhalf of our rankings. Remember, the ranking provided in the newsletteris only a partial listing of approximately 400 stocks we rank. Q. The 1, 3, 6 and 12 month % change in thelist of top 100 stocks is projected or actual? A. That is the actual % change for each stockin the last 21, 63, 126 and 252 trading days. Q. I expect the market to have a correction.Should I sell my stocks? A. Since we are not trying to time the marketand have a long-term time horizon (5 years or more), we intend toremain fully invested at all times. The stocks in our rankingsand model portfolios are very strong both fundamentally and technically.Even if they do go down with the general market, they are alsolikely to rebound faster. Q. What other services do you provide? A. We provide newsletter services with the GrowthStocks Report and Mutual Fund Bulletin (MFB). The MFB seeksto provide magnificent market timing to dramatically reduce riskwhile earning spectacular returns with mutual funds. Our sistercompanies, Select Sector Research Management (SSRM) and SaxenaCapital Management (SCM), offer professional money managementservices. SSRM manages individual commodities accounts and SCM managesa hedge fund called the Index Timing Fund, LP. Please call if youhave an interest in any of the above services. Q. Can I call you with questions? We are not in a position to give individualized investment advice. Everything you need to know is contained in the newsletter. The purpose of the newsletter is tell you what to buy, when to buy and when to sell. The newsletter subscription price does not include telephone consultation. We would like to spend our time researching new investment opportunities rather than answering questions that pertain to just one individual. You should consult a financial planner for your specific needs. However, if you have a question of a general nature that other people may also be interested in, please write or fax it to us and we will try to answer it in subsequent issues of the newsletter. VITALINFORMATION 107 EDINBURGH SOUTH, SUITE 207, CARY, NC 27511,TEL: 919-461-3960, FAX: 919-461-3964. To send us mail, please click here: info@vital-info.com Copyright (c) 1996, Vital Information, Allrights reserved.WT03-B26-198IA055-000922-B004-77http://www.vital-info.com:80/hsdord.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208004451 text/html 1666HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 00:56:02 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 1495Last-modified: Thu, 16 Jan 1997 21:31:19 GMT Hot Stocks Digest : How To Subscribe How To Subsribe To The HotStocks Digest Print The OrderForm Order Online ViaEmail HOME VITAL INFORMATION 107 EDINBURGH SOUTH, SUITE 207, CARY, NC 27511,TEL: 919-461-3960, FAX: 919-461-3964. To send us mail, please click here: info@vital-info.com Copyright (c) 1996, Vital Information, Allrights reserved.WT03-B26-199IA055-000922-B005-95http://www.vital-info.com:80/hsdordpr.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208005926 text/html 4844HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 01:09:08 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 4673Last-modified: Thu, 16 Jan 1997 22:59:56 GMT Hot Stocks Digest Order Form Hot Stocks Digest                Order Form Fill out the form below, print, and return by: Fax to: (919) 461-3964 Mail to: Vital Information 107 Edinburgh South Suite 207 Cary, NC 27511 Name: First, Last Address: Street City STZip Phone: Daytime Number Fax Email: Internet Email Credit Card: Visa MasterCard American Express Check Number Expires (mm/yy) You may also call in your Credit Card number (1-800-237-8400 Ext 114) If paying by check, please make checks payable to Vital Information. Delivery Option: (check one) Fax E-mail Subscription Option: (pick one) I prefer to have $49 drafted from my credit card each month, knowing that I may discontinue monthly billing at any time. (no refunds for monthly subscriptions) 26 weekly issues for just $299 (regularly $599) and save $300 52 weekly issues for just $499 (regularly $999) and save $500, locking in these low rates If paying by check, please make it payable to : VitalInformation For Faster Service, Call 1-800-237-8400 Ext. 114 or FAX to 919-461-3964 VITAL INFORMATION, 107 EDINBURGHSOUTH, SUITE 207, CARY, NC 27511. (919) 461-3960, FAX:919-461-3964 HOMEWT03-B26-200IA055-000922-B005-128http://www.vital-info.com:80/hsd-ordf.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208010026 text/html 2931HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 01:11:33 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2760Last-modified: Thu, 24 Oct 1996 22:13:37 GMT Vital Information - Hot Stocks Digest Application Hot Stocks Digest Subscription Application 50% OFF Special SavingsCertificate YES! I wantto make even more money with the help of the top-performing HOT STOCKSDIGEST. Please enter my money-back guaranteed subscription as checkedbelow. Name: First, Last Address: Street City STZip Phone: Daytime Number Fax Email: (required) Internet Email Credit Card: VisaMasterchargeAmericanExpressCheck Number Expires (mm/yy) You may also call in your Credit Card number (1-800-237-8400 Ext 114) If paying by check, please make checks payable to Vital Information. Delivery Option: (check one) Fax Internet Subscription Option: (pick one) I prefer to pay as I go by having $49 drafted from my credit card eachmonth (no money back guarantee for monthly subscriptions) I prefer 26 weekly issues for just $299 (regularly $599) and save $300 I prefer 52 weekly issues for just $499 (regularly $999) and save $500,locking these low rates WT03-B26-201IA055-000922-B005-22http://www.vital-info.com:80/hfahow.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208005410 text/html 7339HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 01:05:30 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 7168Last-modified: Fri, 03 Jan 1997 21:42:32 GMT Vital Information - Hot Funds Analyst FAQ How to Use the Hot FundsAnalyst Don't be fooled by theelegant simplicity of the Hot Funds Analyst. As you can see, itis clear, concise and easy to use. Yet it generates enormousprofits when followed correctly and with proper discipline. Our research and computer analysis are designed to select andchoose mutual funds for at least a four-week period. Our systemis not designed to trade intra-week or inter-day. Remember, allthe funds on our Top 50 list are technically very strong. Wedon't sell a fund based solely on a few good or bad days oftrading. However, we will send you a SPECIAL FLASH UPDATEanytime our Best intermediate Term Timing System (BITS) signals amajor change in stock market direction. We also have a telephone hotline that is updated everyMonday by 9:00 am eastern time. This hotline will give you thecurrent position of BITS and any portfolio changes. The Hot Funds Analyst features 4 Model Portfolios. The firstportfolio uses the Rydex Family Of Funds (1-800-820-0888) inconjunction with our BITS market timing system. This is known asour INDEX FUNDS PORTFOLIO. By using these funds (Nova, OTC andUrsa) we can go both long and short depending on the signal fromthe market timing system. Rydex Nova is an S&P500 index fund.Rydex OTC is a NASDAQ index fund. Rydex Ursa is an index fundthat is short the S&P500. BITS was developed in late 1988 and was tested on historicaldata from 1963 to 1988. The Nasdaq and the S&P500 index wereused to generate the buy/sell signals and compute the returns. Since 1989,BITS has been in use real-time and it has proven itself in bothbacktesting and actual trading. On average it signals a tradeevery 4 months. The accuracy rating is over 80%, with every 4 outof 5 winning trades. The compounded annualized return is over 24%per year. There are a number of reasons why we are using the Rydexfamily of funds for trading BITS signals. Rydex Nova is an S&P500index fund with a beta of 1.5. This means when BITS is correct inits long signal, you make 50% more than the S&P500index itself. Rydex OTC is the an index fund that tracks theNasdaq index. The combination of Rydex Nova and OTC lets usparticipate in both the large and the small-cap stocks. Rydex is the only family that offers a fund that is short theS&P500. This makes Rydex Ursa a rather unique fund. It goesup when the S&P500 goes down and vice-versa. This means when BITSis correct in its cash/short signal you can make money as theS&P goes down. If you are able to find other similar funds,you may be able to substitute them for the Rydex funds. JackWhite & Company (1-800-233-3411) offers all three Rydex fundswhile Charles Schwab offers only the Nova fund. The second portfolio consists of no-load funds that canbe bought and sold through Charles Schwab (1-800-2-NO-LOAD) orJack White (1-800-233-3411). This is known as our NO-LOAD FUNDS PORTFOLIO andit consists of funds from excellent families like Twentieth Century,Janus, Invesco, Berger, Oakmark, Strong, Steinroe, Founders,Montgomery, Lexington, Cappiello-Rushmore, IAI, Dreyfus, Kaufmannand many others. These funds are also available through theFidelity Funds Network (1-800-544-7777). The third portfolio is called the FIDELITY GROWTHPORTFOLIO and it consists of 4 diversified Fidelity funds. The fourthportfolio is called the FIDELITY SECTOR PORTFOLIO and itconsists of 4 Fidelity Select sector funds. FidelitySelect funds have a one time 3% sales load. Afterthat you may switch to other funds within the family without anyloads. There is also a $7.50 redemption charge which can beavoided by using their automated telephone touch-tone tradingsystem. Fidelity can be reached at 1-800-544-8888. How To Get Started 1. Choose One Or More Model Portfolios 2. Invest In Those Mutual Funds That Have A BuyRating. 3. Sell When A Sell Signal Is Given Once you have decided on a portfolio to follow, you can decidewhat to buy. For each portfolio, an allocation percentage islisted next to each fund. Use this allocation to decide how manyshares to buy depending on your personal portfolio/accountsize. Every portfolio gives you a specific percentage for eachmutual fund. Just multiply this percentage by the total amountof money you have to invest. This way any size investment can beaccommodated. You'll then see the individual funds in every issue of the HotFunds Analyst. You simply invest in the mutual funds that are inyour selected portfolio. Whenever there is a change, just callyour broker or mutual fund and ask them to switch your money tothe recommended fund. By keeping your money in a winning fund,you automatically win. When you get the next issue of the Hot Funds Analyst, checkyour selected model portfolio and look at the Status of yourfund. Sell your fund when a sell signal is given. Then purchasethe new recommendation. It is as simple as that. Please remember ... patience and discipline arethe two most important cornerstones of successful investing.Don't expect miracles or think you'll get rich overnight. Also,don't let the day to day market volatility and ups and downs botheryou. That is all part of investing in the stock market. Focuson the longer-term. Look at the bigger picture. Think where youwant to be 3, 5 or 10 years from now. Jumping around from one investment program to the next can bedetrimental to your wealth building efforts. Once you have founda good system, like the Hot Funds Analyst, try it for at least2-3 years before passing judgment on it. We at the Hot Funds Analyst hope to make your investingprofitable and enjoyable. VITALINFORMATION 107 EDINBURGH SOUTH, SUITE 207, CARY, NC 27511,TEL: 919-461-3960, FAX: 919-461-3964. To send us mail, please click here: info@vital-info.com Copyright (c) 1996, Vital Information, Allrights reserved.WT03-B26-202IA055-000922-B002-317http://www.vital-info.com:80/hsdperf.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208004117 text/html 1109HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 00:52:36 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 939Last-modified: Thu, 16 Jan 1997 21:12:28 GMT Hot Stocks Digest Hot Stocks Digest Performance Comparison Clickhere to view the WINNERS LIST! WT03-B26-203IA055-000922-B004-196http://www.vital-info.com:80/gsr-trk.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208005037 text/html 125555HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 00:59:13 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 125382Last-modified: Fri, 20 Dec 1996 17:00:00 GMT GROWTH STOCKS REPORT TRACK RECORD AS OF 11/96 GROWTHSTOCKS REPORT TRADE RECORD 1/95 THRU 11/96 Below you will see all positions taken since January 1995. Thelisting includes both winners and losers with all information thatpertains to the individual trades. Closed positions are inchronological order according to their sell dates, while open positionsare in alphabetical order. CLOSED POSITIONS Stock Symbol Buy Price Buy Date Sell Price Sell Date Return Metrologic Instruments MTLG 19.50 1/31/95 16.75 12/28/95 -14.10% Pediatric Services PSAI 19.25 1/31/95 16.75 3/31/95 -12.99% UNO Restaurants UNO 15.00 1/31/95 11.25 3/31/95 -25.00% Alantec Corporation ALTC 34.50 1/31/95 38.38 4/30/95 11.25% VTEL Systems VTEL 10.38 1/31/95 9.63 4/30/95 -7.18% Ciber, Inc. CIBR 12.63 1/31/95 13.75 5/31/95 8.91% Pairgain Tech PAIR 16.38 1/31/95 22.88 5/31/95 39.73% Esmor Correctional ESMR 13.25 1/31/95 12.50 6/30/95 -5.66% Avert, Inc. AVRT 5.13 1/31/95 6.06 6/30/95 18.24% Prins Recycling PRNS 9.13 1/31/95 15.88 7/31/95 74.03% Manhattan Bagel Company BGLS 11.75 3/31/95 11.88 7/31/95 1.11% Madge NV MADGF 13.13 1/31/95 24.13 7/31/95 83.85% Medic Computer Systems MCSY 34.50 1/31/95 44.50 7/31/95 28.99% Asyst Technologies ASYT 25.25 1/31/95 45.25 8/31/95 79.21% Boca Research BOCI 12.25 1/31/95 23.75 8/31/95 93.88% Electronics for Imaging EFII 33.25 1/31/95 56.50 8/31/95 69.92% First Team Sports FTSP 17.17 1/31/95 21.00 8/31/95 22.33% Scientific Technologies STIZ 9.00 5/31/95 16.50 8/31/95 83.33% Tekelec TKLC 15.88 1/31/95 23.25 8/31/95 46.46% Kulicke & Soffa KLIC 21.19 4/28/95 36.50 9/29/95 72.25% Mattson Technology MTSN 37.25 5/31/95 42.50 9/29/95 14.09% Microcom, Inc. MNPI 20.69 7/31/95 18.88 9/29/95 -8.75% Retirement Care Assoc. RCRE 9.00 1/31/95 10.63 9/29/95 18.11% S Three, Inc. SIII 16.63 1/31/95 34.88 9/29/95 109.80% Wholesale Cellular USA CELL 15.75 1/31/95 16.69 9/29/95 5.97% Alcide Corporation ALCD 17.00 6/30/95 23.00 10/31/95 35.29% Diehl Graphsoft DIEG 8.63 8/31/95 7.25 10/31/95 -15.99% Game Financial Corp. GFIN 4.63 1/31/95 11.13 10/31/95 140.65% Helix Technology HELX 32.75 4/28/95 37.50 10/31/95 14.50% Ii-vi, Inc. IIVI 4.81 1/31/95 11.88 10/31/95 146.99% Sierra Online SIER 36.50 7/31/95 37.25 10/31/95 2.05% Sierra Semiconductor SERA 8.88 1/31/95 17.88 10/31/95 101.35% Symmetricom SYMM 14.63 1/31/95 18.56 10/31/95 26.91% Datastream Systems DSTM 22.75 9/29/95 18.25 11/30/95 -19.78% Edmark Corp. EDMK 12.50 1/31/95 41.25 11/30/95 230.00% Lone Star Steakhouse STAR 24.50 1/31/95 39.25 11/30/95 60.20% Microdyne MCDY 11.88 1/31/95 20.75 11/30/95 74.74% Micron Tech MU 38.06 3/31/95 54.25 11/30/95 42.54% Olympic Financial OLYM 7.13 1/31/95 20.75 11/30/95 191.23% Optical Data Systems ODSI 16.00 1/31/95 20.75 11/30/95 29.69% VTEL Systems VTEL 17.88 7/31/95 20.00 11/30/95 11.86% Applebees APPB 17.06 1/31/95 22.75 12/29/95 33.33% Cohu, Inc. COHU 13.00 1/31/95 25.50 12/29/95 96.15% Computer Telephone CPTL 9.81 9/29/95 13.50 12/29/95 37.61% Hadco Corporation HDCO 24.88 6/30/95 28.13 12/29/95 13.09% Steris Corporation STRL 42.13 9/29/95 32.25 12/29/95 -23.45% Three Com Corp COMS 46.13 10/12/95 6.63 12/29/95 1.08% Trident Microsystems TRID 35.13 11/30/95 23.50 12/29/95 -33.10% Zygo Corporation ZIGO 6.25 1/31/95 25.13 12/29/95 302.08% Chantal Pharmaceutical CHTL 27.25 12/29/95 8.63 1/31/96 -68.33% Cyanotech Corp. CYAN 7.38 10/31/95 8.50 1/31/96 15.25% Data Translation DATX 9.25 1/31/95 13.25 1/31/96 43.24% Macromedia MACR 12.25 1/31/95 40.00 1/31/96 226.53% PC Quote, Inc. PQT 15.88 12/29/95 9.56 1/31/96 -39.78% Quality Systems QSII 19.50 10/31/95 19.50 1/31/96 0.00% Quarterdeck Software QDEK 32.00 11/30/95 16.00 1/31/96 -50.00% Xeta Corp. XETA 11.50 11/30/95 7.25 1/31/96 -36.96% American Physicians Svc AMPH 9.625 12/29/95 7.75 2/29/96 -19.48% Cambridge Technology CATP 24.50 1/31/95 51.25 2/29/96 109.18% Casino Data Systems CSDS 8.33 8/31/95 17.75 2/29/96 113.09% Computer Products CPRD 3.94 1/31/95 11.75 2/29/96 198.37% Conso Produts CNSO 18.25 12/29/95 16.13 2/29/96 -11.62% Cytotherapeutic CTII 17.00 1/31/96 14.75 2/29/96 -13.24% Educational Development EDUC 18.00 9/29/95 25.00 2/29/96 38.89% Valujet, Inc. VJET 7.22 2/28/95 23.13 2/29/96 220.36% Analytical Surveys ANLT 13.63 1/31/96 13.63 3/29/96 0.00% Bay Networks BAY 38.13 12/14/95 30.75 3/29/96 -19.35% C-Cube Microsystems CUBE 34.56 10/31/95 52.50 3/29/96 51.91% Cable Design Tech CDTC 29.33 12/29/95 36.75 3/29/96 25.30% Coherent, Inc. COHR 20.25 1/31/95 42.50 3/29/96 109.88% Daig Corporation DAIG 12.38 1/31/95 24.13 3/29/96 94.99% Security Dynamics SDTI 31.50 10/31/95 53.00 3/29/96 68.25% Wind River Systems WIND 18.50 8/31/95 30.75 3/29/96 66.22% Applix, Inc. APLX 20.44 11/30/95 39.00 4/30/96 90.80% EPIC Design EPIC 33.38 2/29/96 34.25 4/30/96 2.62% Physician Comp Netwrk PCNI 10.88 1/31/96 11.25 4/30/96 3.45% Project Software & Dev PSDI 28.75 8/31/95 35.00 4/30/96 21.74% Sierra Semiconductor SERA 23 2/29/96 16.38 4/30/96 -28.78% TCSI Corp. TCSI 32.75 2/29/96 32.75 4/30/96 0.00% Target Therapeutics TGET 54.75 1/31/96 54.25 4/30/96 -0.91% APAC Teleservices APAC 15.81 11/30/95 39.50 5/31/96 149.84% Business Object. BOBJY 37.38 2/29/96 46.50 5/31/96 24.40% Chronimed Inc. CHMD 20.88 2/29/96 20.50 5/31/96 -1.80% Employee Solutions ESOL 17.00 12/29/95 31.75 5/31/96 86.76% Manhattan Bagel Co. BGLS 19.25 11/30/95 27.63 5/31/96 43.53% McAfee Associates MCAF 14.62 8/31/95 37.00 5/31/96 153.08% Quintiles Transnational QTRN 66.00 2/29/96 76.00 5/31/96 15.15% Uniforce Services UNFR 18.50 3/29/96 17.75 5/31/96 -4.05% ABR Information Services ABRX 29.33 12/29/95 50.25 6/28/96 71.33% Accustaff ASTF 7.41 10/31/95 27.25 6/28/96 267.75% Ascend Communications ASND 6.13 1/31/95 56.25 6/28/96 817.62% Brooktrout Tech BRKT 13.87 1/31/96 28.00 6/28/96 101.87% California Amplifier CAMP 13.50 10/31/95 23.00 6/28/96 70.37% Career Horizons CHZ 29.75 3/29/96 35.00 6/28/96 17.65% Computer Horizons CHRZ 50.50 4/30/96 39.50 6/28/96 -21.78% Fore System FORE 29.13 11/30/95 36.13 6/28/96 24.05% HMT Technology HMTT 24.00 5/31/96 15.75 6/28/96 -34.38% IMP Inc. IMPX 15.375 4/30/96 11.25 6/28/96 -26.83% Medcath MCTH 11.75 10/31/95 12.00 6/28/96 2.13% Orthologic OLGC 10.34 1/31/96 12.75 6/28/96 23.31% Prepaid Legal Services PPD 19.38 4/30/96 18.50 6/28/96 -4.52% Presstek PRST 94.50 12/29/95 64.50 6/28/96 -31.75% Vitesse Semiconductor VTSS 19.25 2/29/96 24.00 6/28/96 24.68% Zoltek Companies ZOLT 12.25 2/29/96 34.25 6/28/96 179.59% ABR Information Services ABRX 29.33 12/29/95 50.25 7/1/96 71.33% Accustaff ASTF 7.41 10/31/95 27.25 7/1/96 267.75% Ascend Communications ASND 6.13 1/31/95 56.25 7/1/96 817.62% Brooktrout Tech BRKT 13.87 1/31/96 28.00 7/1/96 101.87% California Amplifier CAMP 13.50 10/31/95 23.00 7/1/96 70.37% Career Horizons CHZ 29.75 3/29/96 35.00 7/1/96 17.65% Computer Horizons CHRZ 50.50 4/30/96 39.50 7/1/96 -21.78% Fore System FORE 29.13 11/30/95 36.13 7/1/96 24.05% HMT Technology HMTT 24.00 5/31/96 15.75 7/1/96 -34.38% IMP Inc IMPX 15.375 4/30/96 11.25 7/1/96 -26.83% Medcath MCTH 11.75 10/31/95 12.00 7/1/96 2.13% Orthologic OLGC 10.34 1/31/96 12.75 7/1/96 23.31% Prepaid Legal Services PPD 19.38 4/30/96 18.50 7/1/96 -4.52% Presstek PRST 94.50 12/29/95 64.50 7/1/96 -31.75% Vitesse Semiconductor VTSS 19.25 2/29/96 24.00 7/1/96 24.68% Zoltek Companies ZOLT 12.25 2/29/96 34.25 7/1/96 179.59% ACT Networks ANET 22.13 3/29/96 29.25 7/15/96 32.20% AML Communications AMLJ 10.25 4/30/96 10.88 7/15/96 6.15% Iomega Corp. IOMG 12.81 3/29/96 26.25 7/15/96 104.92% ETEC Systems ETEC 35.00 5/31/96 21.00 7/15/96 -40.00% MRV Comm. MRVC 67.25 5/31/96 38.00 7/15/96 -43.49% Rational Software RATL 39.50 3/29/96 44.81 7/15/96 13.44% Ancor Automation ANCR 23.38 5/31/96 13.50 7/15/96 -42.25% Pediatrix Med PEDX 33.50 1/31/96 34.00 7/15/96 1.49% Jones Medical JMED 17.00 1/31/96 28.00 7/22/96 64.71% Uniphase UNPH 17.63 9/29/95 25.75 7/22/96 46.10% US Robotics USRX 12.13 1/31/95 73.50 7/22/96 505.94% Osicom Technologies FIBR 16.38 6/28/96 12.25 7/22/96 -25.19% Zytec ZTEC 9.50 3/29/96 15.25 7/22/96 60.53% Dura Pharmaceuticals DURA 12.88 7/31/95 25.25 7/22/96 96.12% Spectran SPTR 19.50 6/28/96 13.88 7/29/96 -28.82% Comforce CFS 25.25 5/31/96 19.00 7/29/96 -24.75% JLG Republic Environmntl IASI 9.00 5/31/96 8.25 7/29/96 -8.33% Industries JLGI 15.25 3/29/96 17.88 7/29/96 17.25% U.S. Diagnostic Labs USDL 12.13 6/28/96 9.56 7/29/96 -21.15% Cryolife, Inc. CRYL 15.25 4/30/96 13.25 7/29/96 -13.11% A.S.V., Inc. ASVI 17.38 5/31/96 15.75 8/1/96 -9.35% Digicon Inc. DGC 15.38 4/30/96 11.50 8/1/96 -25.20% EIS International EISI 25.50 6/28/96 20.25 8/1/96 -20.59% Fabri Centers of America FCAA 16.50 6/28/96 14.88 8/1/96 -9.82% Interpoint Corporation INTP 14.00 6/28/96 11.63 8/1/96 -16.93% Optical Coating OCLI 18.00 6/28/96 14.50 8/1/96 -19.44% Proxymed PILL 14.88 5/31/96 12.25 8/1/96 -17.65% Urban Outfitters URBN 25.25 6/28/96 18.75 8/1/96 -25.74% Syncor SCOR 13.00 6/28/96 11.50 8/9/96 -11.54% Anchor Gaming SLOT 60.25 6/28/96 59.00 8/19/96 -2.07% Chesapeake Energy CHK 47.16 4/30/96 44.38 8/19/96 -5.89% Children's Compre KIDS 21.50 6/28/96 15.88 8/19/96 -26.14% PMT Services PMTS 8.96 10/31/95 20.00 8/19/96 123.21% Infodata Systems INFD 14.00 6/28/96 13.50 8/19/96 -3.57% Theragenics THRX 15.50 6/28/96 16.00 8/19/96 3.23% Olympic Steel ZEUS 29.63 7/31/96 24.50 9/1/96 -17.30% Flores & Rucks FNR 33.75 6/28/96 32.88 9/1/96 -2.58% Avant Corp. AVNT 32.00 8/30/96 30.00 10/1/96 -6.25% Cityscape Financial CTYS 33.00 7/31/96 26.50 10/1/96 -19.70% Whole Foods Mkt WFMI 33.50 8/30/96 26.50 10/1/96 -20.90% ACC Corp. ACCC 47.50 8/30/96 42.50 10/21/96 -10.53% Aames Financial AAM 48.88 8/30/96 50.50 10/21/96 3.32% Nice Systems Ltd NICEY 24.75 8/30/96 22.38 10/21/96 -9.58% Noram Energy Corp. NAE 14.63 8/30/96 15.38 10/21/96 5.16% PCI Services PCIS 24.38 8/30/96 28.09 10/21/96 15.24% CDW Computer Ctrs CDWC 65.00 8/30/96 70.00 10/21/96 7.69% Central Garden & Pet CENT 18.00 6/28/96 23.25 10/21/96 29.17% Shaw Group SHAW 27.13 7/31/96 31.75 10/21/96 17.05% Wet Seal Inc. WTSLA 12.75 3/29/96 32.38 10/21/96 153.96% Systemsoft Corp. SYSF 34.25 9/30/96 28.25 10/21/96 -17.52% American Science & Engg. ASE 14.00 8/30/96 12.50 11/1/96 -10.71% Cascade Communications CSCC 29.08 11/30/95 72.63 11/1/96 149.76% DSP Communications DSPC 46.63 7/31/96 38.00 11/1/96 -18.50% Dura Pharmaceutical DURA 36.88 9/30/96 34.50 11/1/96 -6.44% FPA Medical Management FPAM 20.88 8/30/96 18.63 11/1/96 -10.75% Legato Systems LGTO 39.50 8/30/96 35.50 11/1/96 -10.13% NBTY Inc. NBTY 16.50 9/30/96 15.63 11/1/96 -5.27% Vitesse Semiconductor VTSS 31.88 8/30/96 31.88 11/1/96 0.02% Brooktrout Tech BRKT 36.50 9/30/96 32.13 12/1/96 -11.97% Encad Inc. ENCD 29.00 8/30/96 37.50 12/1/96 29.31% Fresh America Corp. FRES 19.31 9/30/96 16.88 12/1/96 -12.60% Inacom Corp. INAC 27.00 8/30/96 31.00 12/1/96 14.81% Manugistics MANU 23.25 7/31/96 37.25 12/1/96 60.22% PMR Corporation PMRP 23.75 8/30/96 26.50 12/1/96 11.58% Ultrak Inc. ULTK 27.50 9/30/96 30.63 12/1/96 11.38% Viasoft Inc. VIAS 42.00 9/30/96 45.25 12/1/96 7.74% Open Positions Stock Symbol Buy Price Buy Date Price 11/29/96 Return American Travellers ATVC 33.13 9/30/96 35.31 6.60% Comstock Resources CMRE 9.63 7/31/96 12.63 31.22% DT Industries DTII 33.75 9/30/96 34.63 2.61% Dell Computer DELL 77.75 9/30/96 101.63 30.71% Eagle Hardware & Garden EAGL 22.25 8/30/96 24.38 9.57% Fairfied Communities FFD 15.25 7/31/96 24.50 60.66% Gateway 2000 GATE 44.88 8/30/96 53.63 19.51% Hadco Corp. HDCO 32.00 9/30/96 46.44 45.12% Leasing Solutions LSSI 22.13 8/30/96 28.88 30.53% Medicis Pharmaceutical MDRX 27.50 6/28/96 43.88 59.56% Pacific Sunwear Calif. PSUN 21.92 9/30/96 27.00 23.18% Radisys Corp. RSYS 37.13 8/30/96 45.75 23.23% Vantive Corp. VNTV 22.00 8/30/96 34.50 56.82% Veritas Corp. VRTS 35.38 9/30/96 46.38 31.09% Innovex, Inc. INVX 40.63 12/02/96 40.63 New Buy Cymer Inc. CYMI 33.25 12/02/96 33.25 New Buy UTI Energy UTI 31.13 12/02/96 31.13 New Buy American Power Conversion APCC 23.69 12/02/96 23.69 New Buy MacDermid Inc. MACD 35.00 12/02/96 35.00 New Buy Market Facts MFAC 30.00 12/02/96 30.00 New Buy Warrantech Corp. WTEC 14.38 12/02/96 14.38 New Buy Tripos Inc. TRPS 16.00 12/02/96 16.00 New Buy Marine Drilling MDCO 15.88 12/02/96 15.88 New Buy Herbalife Intl HERB 25.88 12/02/96 25.88 New Buy Cliff's Drilling CLDR 52.00 12/02/96 52.00 New Buy MasTec Inc. MASX 47.25 12/02/96 47.25 New Buy Centenial Technologies CTN 35.63 12/02/96 35.63 New Buy Zitel Inc. ZITL 22.88 12/02/96 22.88 New Buy Paul Harris Stores PAUH 18.25 12/02/96 18.25 New Buy Tarrant Apparel Group TAGS 13.75 12/02/96 13.75 New Buy Chips & Technologies CHPS 21.06 12/02/96 21.06 New Buy Herley Industries HRLY 12.88 12/02/96 12.88 New Buy US Air Group U 23.25 12/02/96 23.25 New Buy Applied Magnetics APM 27.38 12/02/96 27.38 New Buy ENSCO International ESV 43.88 12/02/96 43.88 New Buy Genrad Inc. GEN 22.00 12/02/96 22.00 New Buy Lattice Semiconductor LSCC 44.75 12/02/96 44.75 New Buy Clayton Williams Energy CWEI 16.13 12/02/96 16.13 New Buy Zygo Corp. ZIGO 39.75 12/02/96 39.75 New Buy Clarify Inc. CLFY 45.00 12/02/96 45.00 New Buy PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE Cumulative: 201.11% YTD: 29.28% WT03-B26-204IA055-000922-B004-137http://www.vital-info.com:80/gsr-br3.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208004529 text/html 60696HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 00:56:21 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 60524Last-modified: Fri, 20 Dec 1996 03:42:31 GMT THE BEST GROWTH STOCKS OF 1995-96 THE BESTGROWTH STOCKS OF 1996-97 An open letter from Jay Saxena,editor of the top performing GrowthStocks Report Dear Fellow Investor, Imagine a portfolio filled with winners likethese : Accustaff (ASTF) up 267.75% Ascend Communications (ASND) up 817.62% Edmark Corporation (EDMK) up 230.00% US Robotics (USRX) up 505.94% Zygo Corporation (ZYGO) up 302.08% If you followed my recommendation in the past few months andinvested $10,000 in each of the above 5 stocks, you'd have over $262,335 today, awhopping 424.67% profit. Better yet, if you join our exclusivegroup of readers, you can reap similar gains in outstandinggrowth stocks which 99% of investors have never even heard about. In this letter, I'll show you how you can use my C-A-N-S-L-I-M based Alpha-RSMSystem, the best stock-picking system on theplanet, to turn $5000 into $10,000, even $20,000 and over time, into $100,000or more. I have developed, tested and fine-tuned this system overthe last eight years with remarkable success. You're invited to learn about the growth stock newsletter thatturned a $25,000 investment into $73,857, a gain of 195.43%, in1995-96 -- easily outdistancing all other stock investmentletters. PLUS : Get Our Fax or E-Mail Service and Weekly Telephone Hotline & the 7-Part "Stock Investor Wealth Kit" -- FREE! In 1995, my Growth Stocks Reportmodel portfolios were up a whopping 143.73%.So far in 8 months of 1996, even after the sharp mid-yearcorrection, they are up another 21.17%. If you'd invested $10,000 in Accustaff (ASTF) in November 95,as I advised, you'd have turned your initial investment into$42,510. Your $10,000 investment in US Robotics (USRX), which I pickedin January last year, would have turned into $60,594 by July 96. And in just 17 months, a $10,000 investment in AscendCommunications (ASND) would have put $91,762 in your pocket. How have I been able to do this, particularly when mostadvisors and mutual funds are having such a tough time just keepingup with the broad market averages like the S&P 500 and theNasdaq. And how can I make my systems yield speedy, significantgrowth of your capital? Let me tell you... In a moment, I am going to reveal a remarkable, time-tested,system I've developed that will : Keep you invested at all times in the best performing Growth Stocks. Give you the discipline to stay invested for double, triple digit profits. Let your profits keep running, while immediately cutting your losses. Signal when to sell your weaker stocks and replace them with the strongest. Make your stock investing easier and more successful than you ever imagined possible. How successful? Here are some of my most recent winningrecommendations : Dura Pharmaceutical (DURA) grew by 96.12% in 12 months Iomega Corp. (IOMG) appreciated 104.92% in 4 months Jones Medical (JMED) ballooned 64.71% in 6 months Uniphase (UNPH) gained 46.10% in 10 months Zytec (ZTEC) rocketed 60.53% in just 4 months MOST STOCK MARKETINVESTMENT ADVISORS DON'TMAKE YOUR MONEY GROW FAST ENOUGH My name is Jay Saxena, and I, like you, enjoy makingmoney. I mean big money. Not 10 or 20 %. But 50% or more - and Ican help you achieve this goal, too. Ever since I first became fascinated with the stock market,I've made it a habit to study every conceivable method for pickingwinning stocks. Like most new investors, when I first got interested in tryingto increase my wealth, I looked at the results professional advisorsand newsletters were getting with their stock and mutual funds portfolios. You've probably done much the same thing I did. I checked outvirtually all the stock investment newsletters. Zweig and TheMoneyletter. Value Line, The Chartist, Standard & Poors.Dozens and dozens of them. I wasn't impressed. The vast majority of them either lostmoney or posted gains that didn't even keep up with inflation. That'snot the way to make money grow. If you want to achieve the goodlife and the financial security that lets you do what you want todo, you've got to find a better way. THERE HAD TO BE ABETTER METHOD THAN WHAT THEY WEREUSING... So, being an engineer by training (I have a Master's Degree inComputer Science), and having an analytical mind, I thought Icould do better on my own. And I was sure I could improve uponwhat were then state-of-the-art computer trading systems. So I started developing a stock selection methodology thatwould find the stocks with the highest probability of explosivegains in the shortest time. And I very quickly realized that the blue-chip stocks likeXerox, GM, GE, IBM and AT&T were not going to put me -- oryou, or anyone else -- on the fast track to wealth. The really big gains that can turnyour small investment capital into a large fortune come fromthe small cap growth stocks. So that's where I concentrated my efforts. And they've paidoff handsomely. In fact, in 1995-96 the average gain of the 6stock model portfolios featured in our Growth Stocks Report is anastounding 262.82%. WHY SHOULD YOU INVESTIN SMALL COMPANY GROWTHSTOCKS Quite simply, you should invest in small company growth stocksbecause they are hands down the mostsuccessful investment category in the 20th century.They offer an excellent way to grow a portfolio faster than moretraditional methods. In 1940 , $1000 invested in the stocks of the large-cap stocksof the S&P500 would have turned into about $330,300 by 1991,with all interest and dividends reinvested. But the same $1,000put into small company stocks would have netted a total of $1,965,000. That is almost 6 times better than the S&P500. These figures are based on investing in all publiclytraded small firms listed on the exchanges or the over-the-counter market.If you had carefully researched the most promising smallcompanies and placed your capital only with them, you wouldalmost certainly have done even better -- a great deal better. In my newsletter, the Growth Stocks Report, I will share my expertise with you onthe growth stocks market and show you how to best profit from it.With this newsletter, you can set yourself apart from themajority of other investors, and your willingness to walk adifferent path can result in much greater gains. You're probably also going to have a more interesting,exciting, and involving time than you would with a portfolio composedonly of blue chips, bonds, and mutual funds. INVESTMENT RETURNS:1940 - 1991 ASSET CATEGORY ANNUAL RETURN VALUE OF $1000 Small-Cap Stocks 15.7% $1,965,000 Large-Cap Stocks 11.8% $330,300 Corporate Bonds 5.1% $13,300 Government Bonds 4.8% $11,400 Treasury Bills 4.3% $8,900 Source: Roger G. Ibbotson and Rex Sinquefield, Stocks,Bonds, Bills and Inflation: 1992 Yearbook. (Chicago: IbbotsonAssociates). 4 POWERFUL REASONS :THE FACTS VS. MYTHS Here are 4 powerful reasons why small cap stocks are such bigwinners... 1. SIZE! "Small cap" companies are those with low (usuallyunder $500 million) capitalization. They have only a limitedamount of common and preferred stock outstanding." And right there is the major reason why they have so muchpotential to make explosive gains -- they're small. Let's face it: a company with $200million in sales has a much better chance of doubling to $400 millionthan a $2 billion company has of doubling to $4 billion in sales. And a small cap stock priced at $10 a share can much moreeasily go to $20 than a blue chip stock at $100 a share can go to$200. Hey -- just look at the recent performance of some of thesmall cap stocks I've picked in my newsletter, the Growth StocksReport, and you can easily see this principle in action : Brooktrout Technology (BRKT) up 101.72% in just 5 months Cascade Communications (CSCC) up 134.28% in 10 months PMT Services (PMTS) up 123.21% in 11 months Wet Seal, Inc. (WTSLA) up 182.35% in just 5 months Zoltek Companies (ZOLT) up 179.59% in just 4 months What are the chances of GE or AT&T or other blue chips ever showing gains like that? 2. SPEED! Small Cap Companies Can Move Fast! Small cap companies are flexible, nimble. They represent thebest of the American entrepreneurial spirit. They find and quicklyexploit niches in the marketplace. And they can shift directions fast to take advantage of newopportunities, unlike some lumbering giant of a corporation filledwith bureaucrats and super-conservative accountants. The best small companies have aggressive management andmotivated employee teams. They are hungry and quick to capitalizeon technological change. Quick to adapt to changing markets.Quick to seize the day! That means that if you're in the rightplace -- where my stock selection system in the Growth Stocks Reportwill put you - you can capture gains of 20%... 30%... 50%... even100%-plus! in a very short time. If we have periods of higher inflation, the share prices ofsmall stocks will rise much faster than blue chips. That means a $10stock can quickly jump to $20, or even $50 in a matter of months.That's the beauty of the small stocks. The best ones can hand youa small fortune practically overnight. But that's not all : 3. EARNINGS! These Stocks Are Earnings-Driven! When you look at historical growth rates, you quickly see thatsmall cap companies' earnings rise much faster than largercompanies'. Earnings of small cap companies with less than $500 million insales, in fact, typically grow 10 to 12 times faster than bluechip stocks. Think about it -- there's not much room for thelikes of GM and IBM to grow, and they certainly can't growrapidly. On the other hand, there is plenty of room for smallcompanies to grow -- and they will grow rapidly! According to Ibbotson &Associates, a market research firm, thesmallest 10 percent of the NYSE stocks outperformed the largest10 percent by more than 30 times over the past 67 years. And this translatesinto explosive stock price increases. In fact, in 1993 the NASDAQcomposite of small cap growth stocks had better than 2 times the growthrate of the DOW and S&P 500 for that year! Plus, They've Got 1 More Advantage : 4. GREAT LEVERAGE! When a small cap company's earnings grow, the earnings-per-share aren't diluted... and that makes the stock more attractiveand more valuable. Then the basic laws of supply and demandtake over: with a limited number of shares available, a relativelysmall amount of stock purchased can quickly push up the price ofthe rest. Small-cap stocks provide you with true ground flooropportunities. By now, I'm sure you understand why I look to the smallcap stocks to build my wealth -- and why they can build your wealth,too! ONLY SMALL CAP STOCKSCAN GENERATE GAINS LIKE THESE If you're truly interested in making your money multiplyquickly, my Growth Stocks Reportis just what you're looking for. I make no bones about it. My growth stock recommendations notfor everyone. If you are happy to see your money grow at lessthan 10% per year, there's no need to venture into growth stocks. But if you are seeking dramatic, even spectacular growth onyour stock investments... if you are seeking relentless gains ontop quality stocks... you need the Growth Stocks Report and myproven Alpha-RSM System.I am talking about gains like, ABR Information Services (ABRX) up 71.33% APAC Teleservices (APAC) up 149.84% California Amplifier (CAMP) up 70.37% Employee Solutions (ESOL) up 86.76% Applix, Inc. (APLX) up 90.80% You would have learned about all those stocks -- plusrecommended buy points and exit timing -- in my Growth StocksReport. And in upcoming weeks andmonths, you'll find a lot more -- and they could make youextremely wealthy. By using your Growth Stocks Report over the last 10 months, I've made up for all of my mistakes from the prior 5 years of investing. - G.B. of Stuart, FL I must admit, I am thoroughly impressed with your ability to pick stocks. - C. H. of Bethesda, MD May I take this opportunity to inform you that your Growth Stocks Report is the most accurate and profitable one among over 60 different stock newsletters I have subscribed since early fifties, almost forty five years. Congratulations and best wishes for your continued success. - Dr. S.W.Y., San Francisco, CA THE REVOLUTIONARYALPHA - RSM SYSTEM I mentioned earlier that my method uses a proprietary systemI've developed for identifying high-potential small cap stocksthat will yield explosive gains in a short time. Let me tell youmore about this... I've already explained why I look to the small cap stocks formy winners. Every week, my staff and I screen thousands of them,looking for the handful that have the potential for spectacularstock price increases. I want to invest only in the top 1% of allgrowth stocks. To me, the other 99% are simply not acceptable. Iknow from experience that only the top 1% will beat the market by100% or more. That's where I want to put my money, and I imagineyou'd want to do the same. What are we looking for?Emerging companies poised for enormous growth. Or establishedones that are about to make major advances. We want companieswhose products are in such demand that they can't make them fastenough. Ones with entrepreneurial leadership that is takingadvantage of technological breakthroughs to create new,super-fast growing businesses. And we want to find them beforethey're discovered by the financial media and hordes ofinvestors. So we can buy them ahead of the pack and take fulladvantage of the run-up in their stocks. I employ a combination of fundamental and technical approachesto investing and have a rigid risk management system to keep myreward to risk ratio high. I determine my trading ideas based on fundamentalanalysis and time my purchases using technical analysis torecommend the most promising small-cap growth stocks that showstrong technical patterns and evidence of accumulation. Some of the fundamental and technical characteristics I lookfor are accelerating earnings, positive earnings surprises, acceleratingrevenues, high relative strength, high relative industrystrength, a low PE relative to the projected earnings growthrate, innovative products in a market that is rapidly expanding,rising order backlogs, and expanding profit margins. I sell whena stock breaks down technically or violates my screening rules. Part of this stock selection process uses the C-A-N-S-L-I-M methodology developed byWilliam O'Neil, which has proven highly successful. We set verystrict risk/reward guidelines and whittle the possibilities downto a handful of companies with superior balance sheets andliquidity, and little or no debt. Then we take this short list and subject it to a rigorousproprietary system based on cutting-edge computerized technical analysis.This incorporates both fundamental and technical factorslike : Valuation Indicators -- P/E Ratio, Relative P/E Ratio,Projected P/E Ratio, Price/Book Value Ratio, Price/Cash FlowRatio, Price/Capital Spending Ratio, Price/Sales Ratio Earnings Indicators -- Earnings Per Share, EarningsGrowth Rate, Projected Earnings, Earnings Velocity, EPS Increase,EPS Consistency, Return on Assets, Return on Equity Debt Risk Indicators -- Current Ratio, Debt/EquityRatio, Interest Coverage, Debt Service/EPS Balance Sheet Indicators -- Book Value Growth Rate,Capital Spending Growth Rate, Cash/Price Ratio, Inventory Turnover,Receivables Turnover, Asset Turnover Volume Indicators -- Volume/Share, 30-Day AverageVolume, Vol/30-Day Average Volume Ratio, 5-Day/30-Day AverageVolume Ratio, Short Interest Performance Indicators -- Relative Strength, PriceGrowth Rates, Least Squares Deviation, EPS Rank, Price Rank, GroupRank, Accumulation Distribution Background Indicators -- Number and Percentage ofInstitutional Holdings, Number of Outstanding Shares, Market Capitalization,Insider Trading and Exercise of Options Technical Indicators -- Moving Averages, MACD,Momentum, Stochastics, Wilder's RSI, Daily Range, High/Low, Beta,Volatility, McClellan Oscillator and many more Forecasting Indicators -- Next 5 Weeks, Next 4 Months,Next 1 Year and Next 3 Year % Probability of Increase and % Gain I realize that's a staggering number of factors to take intoaccount. It's only possible because of the advanced computer systemI've developed. The bottom line is that the Alpha-RSMSystem works. It works like crazy! Here are afew more examples of the gains this system has won : Asyst Technologies (ASYT) up 79.21% Boca Research (BOCI) up 93.88% Electronics for Imaging (EFII) up 69.92% Madge NV (MADGF) up 83.85 Prins Recycling (PRNS) up 74.03% Now, my approach may be simple, but making sure my recommendedstocks are truly the top 1% takes a great deal of work. But don'tlet that scare you. If you take advantage of my service, my staff andI will do all the hard work for you. Your job will be to simply duplicate my model portfolio, ormake up your own custom portfolio from my TOP 100 list. I'llprovide guidelines on how to construct a balanced portfolio foryour objectives. But whichever stocks you choose, you can be surethey're among the top 1% of all growth stocks. Once you make the investments, you'll just sit tight untilit's time to take your profits. Each month I'll give you buy orsell advice on every recommendation in our model portfolios. Wehold a stock anywhere from a few months to a couple of years.Today's market is one of rapidly changing conditions, ofopportunities coming and going, of fortunes rising and falling ina fast-paced, highly competitive global marketplace. Today, a growth stock may do very well for a one, two, orsometimes three years, but after a while its performance fallsoff. That's when we take our profits and move on. The idea is toown the best growth companies during their greatest growthperiods. EIGHT UNIQUE BENEFITSTHAT CAN LEAD YOU TO SPECTACULAR,LONG-TERM PROFITS WHY SHOULD YOU CONSIDER USING MY ALPHA-RSMSYSTEM? You'll only invest in the strongest stocks, even in weak markets. My system screens thousands of stocks, rejecting most of them, even so-called popular stocks. I am really only interested in stocks that can bring 100%, 200%, 500%, even 1000% gains over the long term. You'll be in an enviable position, letting your profits run on stocks with virtually unlimited growth potential. At the same time you will be able to ruthlessly eliminate the weaker stocks, immediately cutting your losses. By doing just these two things, you would rise far above the average investor, who typically does just the opposite. You'll know exactly what to do -- buy, hold or sell, and when to do it. No need to even worry about the stock market on a day-to-day basis. You can relax peacefully, comfortable with the fact that since your money is invested in the best possible stocks, you'll make money over the long term, regardless of what the market does. You'll discover relatively unknown companies, with spectacular growth patterns. These are the kind of stocks that most people hear about only after they have gone up 2000%. But you'll be able to get in early and reap substantial profits. You'll have the revolutionary Alpha-RSM System on your side -- by following recommendations generated by our breakthrough stock selection techniques, you'll be racking up profits in virtually any kind of market. Our system is able to find good stocks even in tough markets. For example, our portfolio was up almost 110% in 1994, when the S&P500 gained barely 1.3% and the Nasdaq actually lost money. You'll know exactly when to sell your stocks -- This is one of the most critical things that some newsletters neglect. They tell you when to buy, but forget to tell you when to sell. While I firmly believe in a patient, disciplined approach to stock investing, I also believe in selling when it's time to sell. There's no place for emotion here. You'll NOT be required to trade extensively -- I believe that long-term investors make money for themselves while short-term traders just make money for their brokers. In fact, the Alpha-RSM System is so easy to use that you probably won't have to devote more than 15 minutes a month to your investments. You'll have a choice of 6 model portfolios to help you properly diversify your investment dollars. All you have to do is select the portfolio that's right for you and then each month just follow your lead, adding a few new stocks and selling those that have reached their peak. Please accept my compliments for your wonderful and practical approach to stock selection. At present time I am receiving four advisory newsletters, but I must be honest with you. Although I just subscribed to your Growth Stocks Report, I find it very helpful and promising. - P.E. of New York, NY Thank you for faxing your recommendations for this month's Growth Stocks Report. I have indeed made enough in returns for November and so far in December to pay for your service. Keep up the good work!! - Dr. J.S. of Reedsburg, WI Your Growth Stocks Report newsletter is one of the best on the market today. I say this simply not because of the stock picks (although that's a big part of it) but also because of the fantastic customer support. Keep up the good work and thanks for your help with my investing. - M.C. of Ellicott City, MD NO OTHER STOCKADVISORY LETTER EVEN COMES CLOSE TO MYGAINS! 143.73% IN 1995, 21.17% YTDIN 1996! There is a real difference between the GrowthStocks Report and all the other stock investment advisories.I don't waste your time. My letter is just six pages long -- you can read it and getthe information you need in a matter of minutes. I don't believe youwant a lot of wordy explanations for my recommendations, or "philosophy"about the markets and the general economic climate, or carefullyhedged predictions. You know the type: "such and such a stock may climb ifthis happens, but could also decline under this other scenario, etc.,etc." You won't find that in the Growth Stocks Report. Instead, you'll find a no-nonsense listing of recommendedinvestments. Specific BUY or SELL recommendations.A running tally of current returns for each and every stock inthe portfolio. And cumulative model portfolio returns. While every complete investment strategy contains a number ofconservative vehicles, one that hopes to build wealth quicklymust take advantage of the opportunities in small cap stocks. And that'swhere The Growth Stocks Report excels. Itis a well researched and easy-to-follow newsletter devoted exclusivelyto the best growth stocks in America today. Each month, we'll give you a list of "100 Most AttractiveGrowth Stocks." Out of those 100, we'll tell you which ones tobuy in the model portfolios. We will add up to 5 stocks that havethe greatest potential to explode with 20%...50%... 100%... andeven higher gains. STOCKS THAT DOUBLEREALLY TURN ME ON! Even I am amazed by my newsletters outstanding record. Justlook at the performance of our past recommendations. Gains of100% or more are NOT rare! Time and time again, I've selectedstocks for the model portfolios that have doubled in justa few short months: Accustaff (ASTF) in at 7.41, out at 27.25 up 267.75% in 8 months APAC Teleservices (APAC) in at 15.81, out at 39.50 up 149.84% in 7 months Ascend Communications (ASND) in at 6.13, out at 56.25 up 817.62% in 17 months Brooktrout Technology (BRKT) in at 13.88, out at 28.00 up 101.72% in 5 months Cambridge Technology (CATP) in at 24.50, out at 51.25 up 109.18% in 13 months Cascade Communications (CSCC) in at 29.08, now at 68.13 up 134.28% in 10 months Casino Data Systems (CSDS) in at 8.33, out at 17.75 up 113.09% in 6 months Coherent, Inc (COHR) in at 20.25, out at 42.50 up 109.88% in 14 months Computer Products (CPRD) in at 3.94, out at 11.75 up 198.37% in 13 months Edmark Corp. (EDMK) in at 12.50, out at 41.25 up 230.00% in 10 months Game Financial Corp. (GFIN) in at 4.63, out at 11.13 up 140.65% in 9 months Ii-vi, Inc. (IIVI) in at 4.81, out at 11.88 up 146.99% in 9 months Iomega Corp. (IOMG) in at 12.81, out at 26.25 up 104.92% in 3 months Macromedia (MACR) in at 12.25, out at 40.00 up 226.53% in 12 months McAfee Associates (MCAF) in at 14.62, out at 37.00 up 153.08% in 9 months Olympic Financial (OLYM) in at 7.13, out at 20.75 up 191.23% in 10 months PMT Services (PMTS) in at 8.96, out at 20.00 up 123.21% in 11 months S Three, Inc. (SIII) in at 16.63, out at 34.88 up 109.80% in 8 months Sierra Semiconductor (SERA) in at 8.88, out at 17.88 up 101.35% in 8 months US Robotics (USRX) in at 12.13, out at 73.50 up 505.94% in 18 months Wet Seal, Inc. (WTSLA) in at 12.75, now at 36.00 up 182.35% in 5 months Zoltek Companies (ZOLT) in at 12.25, out at 34.25 up 179.59% in 4 months Zygo Corporation (ZYGO) in at 6.25, out at 25.13 up 302.08% in 11 months All prices are adjusted forstock splits. The best newsletter I've seen in my 30 years of investing. - J. P. of Scottsdale, AZ Your FAX letter is very good. I have subscribed to a good number of financial newsletters. I currently subscribe to several which I consider top notch and you are included in this group. I wish you well and trust that you will continue your success. - D.L.D. of Mount Dora, FL Just wanted to drop you a note to tell you again how pleased I am with your Growth Stocks Report newsletter. I have reviewed and followed the performance of dozens of newsletters. The Growth Stocks Reports is by far the best. My portfolio is up 41% in just the last two months. Keep up the good work! It is a pleasure working with you. - J.O. of Havana, FL IT'S TIME TO TAKECONTROL OF YOUR INVESTMENTS Regardless of your investment objectives, you've got toinclude some of these stars in your portfolio. No other investmentswill do nearly as well in the next few years. These super stockshave all passed my rigorous analysis. They all have explosivegrowth potential! If you are retired, I suggest you allocate a portion of yournest egg -- 20% or 25% -- to as many of these future blockbustersas you can buy, since no other stocks will grow so quickly. Thatcould mean a much bigger nest egg for you in just a couple ofyears. If you are 5 years from retirement, using these stocks is thebest way to triple, and even quadruple, your nest egg in just thisshort time. Imagine what a difference that can make for you. Ofcourse if you're 10, 15, 20, or even 25 years away fromretirement, you can't afford not to take advantage of these veryprofitable small-cap growth stocks. You'll get the Growth Stocks Reportby FAX or E-mail on the first business day of every month.If you don't have a fax machine or Internet e-mail, you'llreceive your Growth Stocks Report by first class mail, usually bythe 7th of every month. You will also have 24-hour access to ourtwo telephone hotlines -- one is updated monthly for new buys andsells while the other is updated weekly to bring you the latestnews about the stocks in our model portfolios. Thesenumbers are changes periodically to prevent any unauthorized use. Whether you take delivery by fax, e-mail or first class mail,you'll discover the Growth Stocks Report gives you greater controlover your profits. SMALL RISE IN SHAREPRICE EQUALS HUGE GAIN This is your chance to dramatically increase your wealth in avery short period of time. Again, that's the beauty of small stocks-- the share price can climb dramatically, so fast. Remember, a$5 jump on a $10 stock can give you a much higher percentage gainthan a $5 increase on a $100 stock. Let's see how this works. If you buy a stock selling at $10,and it climbs $5, to $15 a share, you have a 50% gain. But thesame $5 upmove in a stock selling at $100 is just a 5% gain. Andof course for the same investment, you can buy a lot more sharesof the $10 stock than you can of a $100 stock. If you invest $5,000 in a stock selling at $10, you can buy500 shares. Then if the share price climbs $5, your profit is $2500(5 x 500 = 2500). That's a 50% gain on your original investment. On the other hand, if you invest $5,000 in a stock selling at$100, you can buy just 50 shares. Here, a $5 gain gives a profitof just $250 (5 x 50 = 250). SAFETY FIRST -- GOWITH QUALITY You don't have to be a mathematical genius to see the enormousadvantage in small stocks. That's why I am so excited. For thenext several years, these explosive investments will post thebiggest gains! But again, you have to know which ones to buy. Not every smallstock is going to do well. In fact, most of them aren't worthyour trouble. I can't stress this point too much. To achieve bothhigh gains and safety, you must invest only in the highest-qualitysmall stocks. The problem is, you can't get timely and reliable informationon quality small-cap growth stocks. And yet, without such information,you will not know which growth stocks to buy, nor when to sell themfor the highest profit. You need The GrowthStocks Report... If you want to turn your investment capital into a substantial fortune over the next decade... If you want to be able to afford the kind of spacious home your family would love... the vacation home that would give you all so much pleasure... If you want to know you can afford to let your children attend any college they want... If you want the financial security to retire in a comfortable lifestyle, with the freedom to travel and enjoy the finer things... If you want to put fun into your investing and see results then you owe it to yourself to get The Growth Stocks Report and start making it all happen! Here are a few more winners picked by my Alpha-RSM System : C-Cube Microsystems (CUBE) up 51.91% Cohu, Inc. (COHU) up 96.15% Daig Corporation (DAIG) up 94.99% Kulicke & Soffa (KLIC) up 72.25% Lone Star Steakhouse (STAR) up 60.20% Microdyne (MCDY) up 74.74% Scientific Technologies (STIZ) up 83.33% Security Dynamics (SDTI) up 68.25% Wind River Systems (WIND) up 66.22% You were right. I had no problem making up my subscription cost. Keep up the good work! - T. R. of Cherry Hill, NJ I don't usually write letters like this one. I just must tell you how much I look forward each month to receiving the Growth Stocks Report. I have only been taking it since October, 1995 ... and I have been making money consistently ever since then. You certainly do pinpoint good stocks. I even carry around a Quotrek now. I would have never heard of these particular stocks, if it wasn't for the newsletter. Several of my friends also take your newsletter now. Thank you so much ...You are the Best!!!!! - C.H. of Encino, CA HERE'S HOW TO GET THEGROWTH STOCKS REPORT -- PLUS MY FREE 7-PART"STOCK INVESTOR WEALTH KIT" You could get your first Growth Stocks Report within the week-- and be on your way to big gains from my Small-Cap GrowthPortfolios the very next day! All you need to do is either Order online or, Print and mail the 50% Off Special Savings Certificate or, Call Toll Free 1-800-237-8400 Ext. 115, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, or, FAX to 919-461-3964 any time. I'm sure that once you've read your first letter and put myrecommendations into effect, you'll become a long time subscriber.So I'll make you a special, dollars-off offer up front inanticipation of our long-term, mutually profitable relationship: Take a one year introductory subscription to the Growth StocksReport for just $199. That's 50% OFFor a savings of $200 off the regular subscription price! And,when you subscribe for 1 year, I'll send you the first four partsof my "Stock Investor WealthKit", FREE! This Kit is not available for sale at any price. It's filledwith confidential information and tips that can make youwealthier than you've ever imagined! Let me give you some detailson the first four parts of this Kit... Part l : How to Become aMillionaire Through Smart Investing In this confidential report, I'll show you the secrets ofmaking your money grow steadily, month by month and year after year.You'll see my proven strategy for turning a small $10,000 yearly investment intoover $1.3 million in just 15 years, and over $4 million in a meretwo decades. Easily worth $19.95 if you could buy it. Part 2 : How to Retire Rich If you're anything like the other subscribers to my GrowthStocks Report, you're not about to settle for a merely comfortableretirement. You want to retire in luxury... live in the climateyou most enjoy, surrounded by conveniences... travel first class,where and when you want... and leave your children andgrandchildren a comfortable nest egg to assure their futurewell-being. Also worth $19.95 if you could buy it. In this fascinating report, you'll find out how to accomplishall those goals. Part 3 : Powerful Tactics ToSave Thousands How would you like to convert $25 into a savings of $800 or$2500 into $80,000? Financial security can be available to anyonewho uses these tactics. With this simple strategy, you'll keep moneyin your pocket, cut years off your mortgage, and save literallyhundreds of thousands of dollars in the process. A $19.95 value,unavailable else-where at any price. Part 4 : Active InvestorsGuide to Technical and Fundamental Analysis In this unique report, equal in value to any $29.95 investmenthandbook, you'll see why past analytical techniques will fail inthe current market. And you'll learn how you can make a fortune throughas few as a dozen trades a year. THAT'S A COMBINED VALUE OF $489 FOR JUST$199, A TOTAL SAVINGS OF $290! SAVE MORE -- AND GETMORE! -- WITH A 2-YEAR SUBSCRIPTION Since I'm so sure you'll love -- and profit from -- The GrowthStocks Report, I strongly urge you to subscribe for two years. Your 2-year subscription costs just $349 -- a full $350 offthe regular price. And, when you subscribe for 2 years, you'llget 3 more parts of my confidential 7-part "StockInvestor Wealth Kit" : Part 5 : How To SpotProfitable Timing Signals Everyone needs to know when danger lurks in the market. Yet somany overlook the obvious. This guide brings to light the signsof profitability and of danger, which are so generously given bystocks and the market. Capture opportunities! Bypass pitfalls! Noinvestor should be without this guide. Unavailable at any priceuntil now -- a $29.95 value -- yours free! Part 6 : The Investment Playof the Decade Here's a confidential, easy-to-follow plan that can easilyyield 50-100% profits in the next 12 months. Based on my provensystem, this is an extraordinary play -- with built-in safeguards-- for making profits in stocks and mutual funds. This is worth$50? $100? It could make you thousands of dollars. Part 7 : The #1 Small CapStrategy of 1996 Get ready to make a ton of money! Even if you only dedicate afraction of your capital to aggressive investments, this is thestrategy that will make you rich. Only in this confidential report will you discover myeasy-to-follow strategy for turning $25,000 into $50,000 or even $100,000in the next 12 months! Yours free only if you fax or phonenow! THAT'S A COMBINEDVALUE OF $859 FOR JUST $349, A TOTAL SAVINGS OF $510! The sooner you receive your first issue of the Growth StocksReport, the sooner you can start making big gains on your investmentsfrom my portfolio recommendations. That's why I urge you to mail or fax your 50% Off Special Savings Certificate.Next month's edition of The Growth Stocks Report could recommendthe next stock that will perform like my previous big winners In the past few months I have subscribed to your Growth Stocks Report. I have been extremely pleased with the recommendations and with your system. You obviously have put together something that is highly successful. - R.S. of Denver, CO I must commend you on the stock selection process. - Dr. S.A. of Bloomfield Hills, MI Today I received your letter reminding me about my subscription expiring. I filled out the renewal certificate and am going to mail it tomorrow. I just wanted to thank everybody at the Growth Stocks Report for doing a great job. I appreciate all the hard work you people are doing to make this the best newsletter among all investment letters. Thanks again for a job well done. This time I am going to extend my subscription for 2 years. - K.S. of Minneapolis, MN YOUR SATISFACTION ISABSOLUTELY GUARANTEED! I'm so confident that you'll profit from my recommendations inthe Growth Stocks Report that I'll absolutely guarantee yoursatisfaction : MY PERSONAL, NO-RISK, 100% MONEY-BACK DOUBLEGUARANTEE After examining your first issue of the Growth Stocks Report, if you do not like it or feel that it will not help your investing, just cancel within 30 days and get a full 100% refund with no questions asked and no further obligation. And, even after the first 30 days, if you are not totally satisfied with the Growth Stocks Report, simply cancel your subscription and receive a full 100% refund of all undelivered issues. In any case, all free bonuses are yours to keep. WHY PUT OFF STARTINGON YOUR PATH TO RICHES? If you are satisfied with 5% or 10% gains on your stocks, youdon't need the Growth Stocks Report. But if you are seeking dramatic, even spectacular growth onyour stock investments... if you are seeking relentless gains ontop quality stocks... you need the GrowthStocks Report and my proven Alpha-RSM System. You could be using the Growth Stocks Report to make big-profitinvestments as early as next month -- if you act now to startyour subscription! Usually our subscribers make up their subscriptioncost within a month. Consider this... if youhave a $75,000 portfolio and our advice makes you 40% return,that's $30,000 profit. Would you pay $199 to make $30,000,perhaps more? Our stock picks are making our subscribers alot money. Make sure you are one of them. To subscribe, simply fill out and return the enclosed 50%Off Special Savings Certificate in the postage-free envelope.Or for even faster service, call TOLL FREE 1-800-237-8400Ext. 115, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, or FAX to919-461-3964 any time. There are profit-making opportunities out there right now, andthey won't wait! No question about it. Stock profits of 50%,100%, 200%, 500%, even 1000% will be made in the next few years.Let the Growth Stocks Report help you be on the receivingend of those profits. Don't delay. Subscribe today! Sincerely, Jay Saxena P.S. Do you want to buystocks that go up? Buy our stocks... they go up. Justlook at the examples below. There are many more small cap stockswith the potential to return profits of that magnitude -- and myproprietary stock selection system will spot them for you. Have already made some money on your stock picks. My small portfolio has been going up almost $1000.00 per month, with no trading. Actual brokerage statements are enclosed. - C.L.E of Dallas, TX I am a new subscriber to your Growth Stocks Report. I just received the November issue and am very impressed with your format and stock selection process. - R.W. of Burlington, NC I am very pleased with the Growth Stocks Report each month. I hope that you will go on forever. - H.R. of Hazlehurst, MS SUBSCRIBE FOR2 YEARS AND GET ALL 7 PARTS OF THE "STOCK INVESTORSWEALTH" KIT : How to Become a Millionaire Through Smart Investing . . . a$19.95 value How to Retire Rich -- $19.95 value Powerful Tactics To Save Thousands -- $19.95 value Active Investors Guide to Technical & FundamentalAnalysis, worth $29.95 How To Spot Profitable Timing Signals, worth $29.95 The Investment Play of the Decade... potentially worththousands to you! The #1 Small Cap Strategy of 1996 is priceless... and yoursfree only if you fax or phone now! With my 100% money-back double guarantee, you risknothing by subscribing today. If you are not absolutely delightedwith the newsletter, you can cancel your subscription within 30days and receive a prompt and complete refund. So pick up thatphone and call right now! FOR FASTER SERVICE, USE YOURCREDIT CARD AND ORDER TOLL FREE 1-800-237-8400 Ext.115 24 hours a day, 7 days a week Growth StocksReport Vital Information 107 Edinburgh South, Suite 207 Cary, North Carolina 27511 919-461-3960, 919-461-3964 (Fax) http://www.vital-info.com/gsr-page.htm e-mail: info@vital-info.com WT03-B26-205IA055-000922-B003-69http://www.vital-info.com:80/gsrperf.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208004238 text/html 1167HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 00:53:56 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 997Last-modified: Fri, 20 Dec 1996 17:01:44 GMT Growth Stocks Report Growth Stocks Report 1995 - 1996 Total Return for Growth Stocks Report (GSR) Model Portfoliosversus Market Indices through September Clickhere to view all portfolio trades since January '95 WT03-B26-206IA055-000922-B004-28http://www.vital-info.com:80/hsd-how.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208004407 text/html 15191HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 00:55:26 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 15019Last-modified: Thu, 16 Jan 1997 20:37:23 GMT Hot Stocks Digest - FAQ How To Build Your InvestmentPortfolio Using The HOTSTOCKS DIGEST Dear Valued Subscriber, Welcome to the Hot Stocks Digest. Let mecongratulate you on your wise decision to become a chartersubscriber. Don't be fooled by the elegant simplicity of the Hot Stocks Digest. As youcan see, it is clear, concise and easy to use. Yet it generatesenormous profits when followed correctly and with properdiscipline. Our Alpha-RSM Systemincorporates the C-A-N-S-L-I-Mapproach developed by William O'Neil. It is designed to ferretout those stocks that have a high alpha as well as high relativestrength & momentum. Alpha is that measure of the return thatis not explained by the general market. For example, if theS&P500 has an average monthly return of 1.5% and a stock hasan average monthly return of 8.5%, then the stock has an alpha of7%. This 7% is the excess return that the stock generates overthe general market. Once we have selected our list of 500+ high alpha stocks,we run them through our proprietary mathematical models that rankthem based on their relative strength and momentum. We want tobuy only those high alpha stocks that also have high relativestrength and are going up at the present time. We have nointerest in stocks that are going sideways, or worse, are goingdown. The "200 Most Attractive HotStocks" are then presented in each issue of the Hot Stocks Digest.Their percent change over the past 21 and 50 days is also shown.Since we are not day traders or very short-term traders, the 21and 50 day % change and the 21 and 50 day moving average numbersgive us a better feel for each stock. Intermediate-term tradesusually last from 2 weeks to 6 months. For these kind of trades,the 50 day moving average serves as an excellent support level.If it is penetrated and the stock decisively closes below it, thestock becomes an outright sell. Our $100,000 model portfolio can have between 0 and 30 stocks.The allocation in the portfolio is dependent upon prevailingmarket conditions and the buy/sell signals from our market timingand asset allocation models. A 50% invested position will have 10stocks and a 150% invested position (using margin) will have 30stocks. That is the maximum leverage we'll be using in thisportfolio. You can also use the list of the 200 most attractive hotstocks to pick and choose and build your own personal portfolio. Onestrategy is to buy stocks that appear close to the top of thatlist. Hold a stock as long as it in the list of 200. When a stockdrops out of the list, sell it and then buy again from the top ofthe list. This is just one way of using the list. You may prefer to useit differently and tailor it to suit your personal taste. Anotherway to use the list is to buy any stock that makes it to the top20. To make room in your portfolio, you may have to sell somestocks. We recommend you sell the lowest ranked stocks and buythe top ranked ones. This way you will be rotating out of weakerstocks into stronger ones. As a new subscriber you have two options when you startbuilding your portfolio. The aggressive option is to go ahead andbuy all stocks in the model portfolio. This way you'll be fullyinvested instantly. Even though some of these stocks may be up50-100%, it doesn't mean that they cannot go up another 100% ormore from these levels. The conservative option is to buy onlythe new stocks added to the portfolio each week and leave therest of your portfolio in cash. This way, it'll take you a fewmonths to become fully invested. You'll get the Hot Stocks Digestevery Sunday via fax, e-mail or on our internet world wide website. When you start trading using our recommendations,you'll discover the Hot Stocks Digestgives you greater control over your profits. And triple-digitgains are NOT rare! Time and time again, I've selected stocksthat have realized over-100% gains in just a few short months You don't have to be a mathematical genius to see the enormousadvantage in small stocks. That's why I am so excited. For thenext several years, these explosiveinvestments will post the biggest gains! But again, you have toknow which ones to buy. Not every small stock is going to dowell. In fact, most of them aren't worth your trouble. I can'tstress this point too much. To achieve both high gains andsafety, you must invest only in the highest-quality small stocks. SET REALISTIC EXPECTATIONS Can we expect 100% plus returns every year. It would be great,but it just isn't realistic. In fact 100% returns happen onceonly 4 or 5 years. We don't know when that is going to happen.That is why we need to fully invested in the best high-alpha,high-RSM growth stocks. Many investors, particularly those with less than 5 yearsexperience with their own money in the market, haveunrealistically high expectations regarding returns. This isperhaps the biggest source of frustration for newer investors. Over a 10-year period, stocks will be up only about 65 percentof the time on average. The rest of the days are spent driftingsideways or falling. These negative periods can last months oreven years. The good news is that our Alpha-RSMSystem can find the best stocks even when thegeneral stock is going down. Successful investing requires a mental determination andemotional commitment to stay invested for at least one marketcycle, which usually lasts four to six years. Often investors lack the stamina to hold out through highperiod of volatility. They bail out, usually at the worstpossible moment, forgetting that the extraordinary returnsgenerated by small-cap stocks will eventually compensate them forthe risk or volatility. Please remember ... patience anddiscipline are the two most important cornerstones ofsuccessful investing. Don't expect miracles or think you'll getrich overnight. Also, don't let the day to day market volatilityand ups and downs bother you. That is all part of investing inthe stock market. Focus on the longer-term. Look at the biggerpicture. Think where you want to be 3, 5 or 10 years from now. Generally, the longer you can leave your money in the market,the more risk you should be willing to take. You also need aproven investment strategy. Without a plan, investors often jumpfrom one idea or philosophy to another. Jumping around from one investment program to the next can bedetrimental to your wealth building efforts. Once you have founda good system, like the Hot StocksDigest, try it for at least 12-18 months beforepassing judgment on it. Don't expect to make money each and every week. When facedwith the inevitable down periods, don't lose patience and throwin the towel. Hang in there. Wait for the right opportunities,because sooner or later, they will surely come. We at HotStocks Digest hope to make your investing profitable andenjoyable. FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS Q. When is the newsletter published? A. The Hot Stocks Digest is published everySunday and is available on our web site by 6:00 p.m. easterntime. The fax is usually sent around the same time. The prices inthe newsletter are as of the last business day of the previousweek, usually a Friday. Q. Is there a telephone hotline? A. No. Since this is exclusively an on-line and faxnewsletter, there is no telephone hotline. Q. Do I buy at the market or at the price listed in thenewsletter? A. When you get the newsletter and decide to buy a stock, justbuy it at the market or at the bid price. In some cases you willget a worse fill than the price listed in the newsletter and inother cases you will get a better fill. Over time, your fillsshould average out. Q. How do I use the list of top 200 stocks ranked in orderof attractiveness based on relative strength? A. You may use the list of 200 most attractive stocks to pickand choose and build your own personal portfolio. Onestrategy is to buy stocks that appear close to the top of thatlist. Hold a stock as long as it in the list of 200. When a stockdrops out of the list, sell it and then buy again from the top ofthe list. This is just one way of using the list. You mayprefer to use it differently and tailor it to suit your personaltaste. Another way to use the list is to buy any stock that makes itto the top 20. To make room in your portfolio, you may have tosell some stocks. We recommend you sell the lowest ranked stocksand buy the top ranked ones. This way you will be rotating out ofweaker stocks into stronger ones. Q. How do you select stocks? A. Our stock selection process incorporates both fundamentaland technical criteria. Every month, we screen thousands ofstocks looking for the handful that have the potential forspectacular stock price increases. We are we looking for emergingcompanies poised for enormous growth or established ones that areabout to make major advances. We want companies whose productsare in such demand that they can't make them fast enough. Oneswith entrepreneurial leadership that is taking advantage oftechnological breakthroughs to create new, super-fast growingbusinesses. And we want to find them before they're discovered bythe financial media and hordes of investors. So we can buy themahead of the pack and take full advantage of the run-up in theirstocks. We set very strict risk/reward guidelines and whittle thepossibilities down to a handful of companies with superiorbalance sheets and liquidity and little or no debt. Then we takethis short list and subject it to a rigorous proprietary systembased on cutting-edge computerized technical analysis. Thissystem ranks the stocks according to their short-term momentumand relative strength. We list the top 200 in every issue of the HotStocks Digest. Q. Are these stocks risky? A. On an individual stock basis, these small-cap stocks arequite volatile and most people would characterize them as beingvery risky. That is why you must diversify over at least 15-20stocks, preferably more. If you have 15 stocks in your portfolioand if four of them lose 25% each, your total portfolio loss isonly 6.66%. Furthermore, its quite possible that some of theother stocks in the portfolio will go up thereby making up forthe small loss. That is why it is imperative that youdiversify your holdings over a number a stocks. Q. My stock is up 250%. Should I sell? A. That depends on your sell strategy. We, however, believe inletting our profits run while cutting our losses short. Q. A certain stock is down 4 points. Are you stillrecommending it? A. Yes. Recommendations on a stock can only change once aweek. If a stock is still in the top 25, then it is rated a buy. Q. As a new subscriber, should I get fully investedimmediately or should I invest gradually? A. Either strategy if fine. The aggressive option is to goahead and buy all stocks in the model portfolio. This way you'llbe fully invested instantly. Even though some of these stocks maybe up 50-100%, it doesn't mean that they cannot go up another100% or more from these levels. The more conservative option is to buy only the new stock buysadded each week and leave the rest of your portfolio in cash.This way, it'll take you a few weeks to get fully invested. Justmake sure that you divide your portfolio in the right proportion.For example, if you have $75000 to invest and you buy 5 newstocks this month, then you will buy $5000 worth of each of thesestocks (total $25000) and leave the rest of the $50000 in cash. Q. Why are you recommending or buying XYZ stock? A. The answer to a question like this is always the same --"because our computer models rank it as an excellent buy atthis time". Q. The 21 and 50 day % change in the list of top 200 stocksis projected or actual? A. That is the actual % change for each stock in the last 21and 50 trading days. Q. I expect the market to have a correction. Should I sellmy stocks? A. Since we are not trying to time the market and have along-term time horizon (5 years or more), we intend to remainfully invested at all times. The stocks in our rankings are verystrong both fundamentally and technically. Even if they do godown with the general market, they are also likely to reboundfaster. Q. Can I call you with questions? A. We are not in a position to give individualizedinvestment advice. Everything you need to know is containedin the newsletter. The purpose of the newsletter is show the bestof the best growth stocks in America today. The newslettersubscription price does not include telephone consultation. Wewould like to spend our time researching new investmentopportunities rather than answering questions that pertain tojust one individual. You should consult a financial planner foryour specific needs. However, if you have a question of a generalnature that other people may also be interested in, please e-mailit to us and we will try to answer it in subsequent issues of thenewsletter. HOMEWT03-B26-207IA055-000922-B003-179http://www.vital-info.com:80/hfaperf.htm 204.69.248.245 19970208004330 text/html 2649HTTP/1.0 200 OKDate: Sat, 08 Feb 1997 00:54:52 GMTServer: Apache/1.1.1Content-type: text/htmlContent-length: 2478Last-modified: Fri, 03 Jan 1997 21:39:46 GMT Hot Funds Analyst HotFunds Analyst The Best Intermediate-Term Timing System (BITS) 1986 through 1996 Using my BestIntermediate-Term Market Timing System, BITS, over the past tenyears, you would have outperformed the Nasdaq by 278%. Amazingly, overthe 33 year period the Nasdaq has been in existence, BITS wouldhave improved your overall investment return by 4331%.Just think of what a powerful timing system like this could dofor your portfolio! BITS Signals July 1, 1963 to Present ANALYSIS SUMMARY Start Date: 07/01/63 Start OTC Value: 33.63 End Date: 10/31/96 End OTC Value: 1221.51 OTC Gain: +3532.20% Annualized OTC Gain +11.50% BITS Gain: +163830% Annualized BITS Gain: +25.14% Total Trades: 52 % Winning Trades: 80% Largest Gain: +94.1% Largest Gain: +94.1%